@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Ergonomics and comfort in lawn mower handle positioning: An evaluation of handle geometry

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
User-centric handle position defined for a lawn mower control system (MCS).Required forces were higher with larger grip spans.Forces in a nontraditional position were lower than vertical and pistol positions.The MCS must reduce force requirements or grip spans for user health and comfort.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Lawn mowing,Grip force,Grip span,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Hand operation accompanied with any combination of large forces, awkward positions and repetition may lead to upper limb injury or illness and may be exacerbated by vibration. Commercial lawn mowers expose operators to these factors during actuation of hand controls and therefore may be a health concern. A nontraditional lawn mower control system may decrease upper limb illnesses and injuries through more neutral hand and body positioning. This study compared maximum grip strength in twelve different orientations (3 grip spans and 4 positions) and evaluated self-described comfortable handle positions. The results displayed force differences between nontraditional (X) and both vertical (V) and pistol (P) positions (p < 0.0001) and among the different grip spans (p < 0.0001). Based on these results, recommended designs should incorporate a tilt between 45 and 70°, handle rotations between 48 and 78°, and reduced force requirements or decreased grip spans to improve user health and comfort.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Repetitive high grip force exertions have been related to fatigue, discomfort, and injury to the hand and wrist. It has been shown that factors such as force, exertion angle and grip span greatly affect comfort and maximum exertion (Shivers et al., 2002). Manual hand actuation may seem trivial; however, in combination with high forces, non-neutral positions, and/or high multiple repetitions, along with exacerbation from vibration, musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs) become a very serious risk (Garg and Kapellusch, 2011; Ma et al., 2009; Adamo et al., 2002). More specifically, work-related musculoskeletal disorders (WRMDs) have been an area of great concern in the industrialized world (Bernard, 1997). Not only can these conditions cause discomfort or pain to the user but they can result in lost time and profit for the employer. Discomfort and fatigue are often considered predictors or early warning symptoms for WRMDs (Garg and Kapellusch, 2011; Ma et al., 2009). It has been shown that factors such as force, exertion angle and grip span greatly affect comfort as well as maximum exertion (Shivers et al., 2002). Similarly, wrist posture in the flexion/extension plane (Hallbeck and McMullin, 1993) and the radial ulnar deviation plane (Lamoreaux and Hoffer, 1995) can alter potential maximum grip forces. If maximum exertion is decreased, the amount of force comfortably generated may proportionately decrease. Therefore, it is crucial that steps are taken to minimize fatigue by reducing the ratio of high maximum exertion to lower required force and through designs that ensure user comfort (Kong et al., 2011; Kuijt-Evers et al., 2004). Investigation into the effect of work piece orientation and hand tool interface is important for the evaluation of hand tool utilization and in the designing of a work environment (Lin and McGorry, 2009; McGorry and Lin, 2007). Through these investigations, designers should be able to reduce user fatigue and discomfort.Designers often strive for a neutral wrist position (Estill and Kroemer, 1998; Drury et al., 1985). One study by Gustafsson and Hagberg reported that a neutral wrist position during computer mouse work resulted in less productivity and lower perceived comfort (2002). This investigation indicated that comfort is dependent on more than just a neutral wrist position and that the activity at hand may dictate a different position that is more comfortable and therefore preferred. For example, the height of the work space may alter wrist angles for individuals of different heights. Investigations in the garment industry on discomfort in the upper extremities of workers reported that a simple adjustment in seat height through adjustable chairs could not only reduce pain in the upper extremity but it could decrease occurrences of non-neutral positioning of both the right elbow and wrist (Herbert et al., 2001). Handle grip spans have also been shown to affect both comfort and grip strength and researchers found the most comfortable grip spans lie between 50 and 55 mm (Lee et al., 2009). These examples describe the different factors that affect the comfort and maximum forces. Garg and Kapellusch stated that even gripping that occurs on and off over a period of time should not meet or exceed 17% of a user's maximum voluntary contraction (MVC) (2011).Commercial lawn care employees, which we will refer to as landscapers, spend a major portion of their day operating lawn mowers. Commercial mowers used by professional landscaping companies often subject the users to hours of awkward grip forces five days a week for the duration of the mowing season. Many mowing sites are filled with numerous landscaping obstacles, varying terrain, and tight spaces. Therefore, companies provide walk-behind machines in order to give the employee more precision and control. Walking behind a mower is slower than riding on stand-on or seated mowers. Therefore an attachment, known as a sulky, allows the operator to ride behind the mower increasing the speed without sacrificing maneuverability. The attachment is designed with one or two wheels, a platform for standing, and a simple hitch which attaches to the walk-behind machine. The sulky allows the operator to run the lawn mower at a higher speed than walking; however, it also slightly confines the position of the operator.Although the lawn care industry has improved the efficiency of the employee's work, there remain some areas of improvement for user health and comfort. One of these areas is in the handle control systems. There have been several research papers covering the correlation of hand size, wrist angle, and grip span on grip strength; these studies however are not sufficient for the factors that affect the professional mowing system in this study. Most of these studies have been conducted on hand dynamometers (Edgren et al., 2004; Sancho-Bru et al., 2003; DiMartino et al., 2004; Fiebert et al., 1998; Pazderka et al., 1996; Hansen and Hallbeck, 1996; Ramakrishnan et al., 1994; Ayoub and Lo Presti, 1971). Previous studies have explored specific hand tools and their ergonomic design specifications (Kuijt-Evers et al., 2004). However, none have been aimed at lawn mowing hand controls or similar tasks. Traditionally, these machines have been designed with the focus on the mechanics and not the operator. For example, the lawn mowers are designed to move quickly for faster task completion, but the resultant vibration experienced by the operator is not ideal (Thrailkill et al., 2013). Without the user-centered design focus, the operator works in non-neutral body postures, which are uncomfortable and could lead to WRMDs.Since lawn mowing employees spend large amounts of time performing these repetitive tasks, it is crucial that measures are taken to reduce discomfort and minimize fatigue during operation in order to prevent WRMDs. A local manufacturing company contracted the researchers for an ergonomic analysis of their current commercial lawn mower handle geometry. This handle geometry was very different than traditional commercial lawnmower. Based on a search of other commercially available lawn mowers, the common control systems are currently a straight bar or a pistol position (Fig. 5). The manufacturing company specifically cited pistol position as their main competitor. Since the pistol position is the most similar to the nontraditional control system (NCS), this research aimed to determine a significant postural and comfort differential between the systems. There is no formal ergonomic comparison of handle geometries. The lawn mower under investigation allows landscapers to set a speed and release the control bar to accelerate. By engaging the control bar, the landscaper can brake (by engaging both control bars on the right and left), turn left (by engaging the left control bar), turn right (by engaging the right control bar), or reverse (by engaging the control bar past the neutral zone). The neutral zone is 6.3 mm and full speed acceleration is 9.0 mm. Two different forces are required while operating the nontraditional handle system. Based on the drivetrain of the mower the manufacturing company measured the required grip force to be about 88 N for engaging the handles (squeezing). In order to release the handles in a controlled manner, the manufacturing company measured the required force to be about 44 N of force.The purpose of this study was to evaluate different conditions under which a commercial lawn mower may provide optimal comfort, help promote neutral wrists and incorporate injury prevention through ergonomic handle geometry. This study specifically aimed to evaluate the physical requirements and ergonomic geometry of the commercially available NCS position of the local manufacturer compared to a commonly used pistol-grip position and a completely vertical position in order to better understand the strength capacity required in job performance and highlight areas in this field that may require attention and future innovation. This was pursued through the evaluation of maximum grip forces in various handle configurations and an investigation of chosen comfortable handle positioning. The goal of this study was to evaluate the ergonomics and comfort of the nontraditional lawn mower handle geometry based on the postures and physical force required to operate the machine. The hypothesis of this research group is that the nontraditional handle will provide better user conditions than other commercially available geometries due to a relatively neutral user posture during operation.The study on grip force compared four different handle geometries along with three different grip spans. The handle geometries were chosen based on the NCS (X), the commonly used pistol position (P), an average comfortable position (C) which was measured in the comfort study later in this text, and a vertical position (V) that potentially allowed for more neutral wrist angles.Following IRB approval, participants were recruited and consented. For this grip force study, 72 participants were recruited ranging from 19 to 54 years of age from the population of students the University of Nebraska-Lincoln (63) and employees of the contracting manufacturing company (9). The manufacturing company employees increased our age range and had experience with lawn mowers. Of the participants, 46 were male, and 26 were female. These participants voluntarily completed the study and each individual was informed that his/her standing at the company or the university would not be affected by his/her willingness to participate, and told that they could withdraw at any time.Instrumentation used for the force and comfort studies included a mock-up apparatus that simulated lawnmower handle bars as seen in Fig. 1. This stationary simulation device could be adjusted to various heights, grip spans, handle angles, handle spreads, and tilt (Figs. 3–5). This mockup (Fig. 1) was made of a camera tripod with a bracket mounted at the center of a horizontal piece of steel that allowed the handles to slide in order to achieve a desired handle spread. The handles rotated to the various angles with a pin rotation using a wingnut. The camera tripod allowed the angle and the height of the handle to adjust for maximum comfort. The two handle grips were made of PVC pipes and covered by the rubber grips from the NCS. A weight was suspended from the bottom of the mockup. This allowed for users and researchers to move the handles up and down without lifting the entire mockup or without someone holding down the mockup.This device allowed for measurement of the grip forces exerted by the participant's hands when extended to various grip spans and arranged in different geometries. The handle bars of the device were instrumented with Sensotec 250lb load cells (Honeywell International, Morristown, NJ) that were connected to an A/D converter (U12 LabJack, LabJack Corporation, Lakewood, CO) using a power source (Model DMD-465WB, Omega Products, Inc., Stamford, CT) which sent the information into a LabVIEW program that displayed a graph of the forces applied by each hand during the force data collection for instant feedback and error detection (noisy signal or no signal) as well as for future data analysis. Participants squeezed the red handle (Table 2) toward the black handle and activated the load cell that was at the end of the PVC pipe. The metal screws at the top and the bottom of the handle helped keep the red and black handles parallel and therefore reduce shear force which would cause noise in the force readings.The one-wheeled sulky from the NCS lawnmower system was used in this study to constrain foot placement. As shown in Fig. 1, the wheel was removed and the sulky was placed on the ground in front of the handle mock-up during testing.For the testing, the device handles were set to the specific position (Table 1, Figs. 3–5) and grip span (Table 2) based on a complete randomization, and the participant was asked to grasp the handles with his/her maximum force for six seconds. After six seconds the participant was informed that he/she could relax. Each grip span and position combination was only tested once and the participant was given time to rest for at least two minutes between each trial to reduce effects of fatigue. The participants were blinded to the positions that were tested. This was especially important with the manufacturing employees and their familiarity with the NCS. The forces were measured for four different positions: the nontraditional geometry of the commercially available mower under investigation (X), the position that was determined to be the most comfortable in initial comfort testing described in section 2.2.3 (C), the pistol-grip position (P), and the vertical position (V). P and V consisted of handles that were parallel to each other and 90° angles from the horizontal attachment bar. The difference was that P was parallel to the ground and V was perpendicular to the ground. Each position (X,C,P,V) was repeated at three different spans (Table 2) which represented the largest (90 mm), middle (80 mm) and smallest (63 mm) grip span widths for the required for actuation with the NCS for a total of 12 grip force maximums collected on each participant.The Caldwell Regimen was used to test the maximum forces exerted in each configuration (Caldwell et al., 1974). Using this method the participant was allowed approximately three seconds to build up to his/her maximum force, and then he/she held this force for three more seconds.After the force data were collected, it was all compiled and cropped into a two second section for each exertion (starting 3 s from the beginning and ending 1 s from the end). The average over the two second sections was calculated for an average maximum force for each participant.For the comfort evaluation, two different groups of participants were recruited. IRB approval was obtained for all groups. Informed consent was obtained for the participants in the student group. However, the landscapers were orally consented in order to keep interference with their workday to a minimum and to ensure their data were completely de-identified leading to reduced stress regarding potential reporting to a supervisor since names were not collected through written consent. Landscapers using the commercial mower with the nontraditional handle geometry in the field, along with three additional landscapers who do not regularly use this machine (total of 14 participants from the field), placed the mock-up of the NCS handles in their most comfortable position for mowing. Anthropometric and demographic data were not collected for these participants in order to prevent any negative repercussions to the participants. The researchers did not want any chance of the employers identifying their employees in the data we collected due to their vulnerable status as employees. For the more rigorous evaluation students were recruited for total of 62 (42 male) participants to provide comfort evaluations.The same apparatus from the force study (Fig. 1, Section 2.1.2) allowed users to move the handles in each of the different adjustable directions in order to locate their most comfortable position.This study was performed in three phases. The first was performed out in the field with commercial mowers, the second at a local manufacturing company and the third was a laboratory study employing students with a more rigorous controlled procedure.Using the stationary mock-up (Fig. 1), participants were asked to adjust the mock-up handle system into a comfortable position. Researchers then measured the height in which participants set the mock-up, the spread between the two handles, the tilt of the handles forward from the user, and the angle of the handles (Fig. 2). Participants from the field simply provided researchers with their comfortable position and then continued working. The average of these measurements resulted in the comfortable position (C) tested in 2.1.3.Before the different positions were assessed with the second and third groups, participants took a short general survey to define the participant population. This survey consisted of demographic questions to determine their lawn mowing experience, stature, weight, body side dominance (handedness), age, and gender. Next, anthropometric data were collected for each subject with a full GPM anthropometer (Seritex). The dimensions collected were standing eye height, acromial height, and elbow height.While the participants from the first and second groups were simply asked to adjust the mock-up handle system into a comfortable position, the subjects in the third group completed a more rigorous controlled study. They were randomly assigned an order in which to evaluate three different handle positions. Position 1 was the NCS experimental (X) position that began with the mock-up in the starting geometry of the investigated machine. Position 2 was an extreme (E) starting position for the same apparatus. See the dimensions for the starting positions X and E in Table 3. Starting with each position in a randomized order, the subjects adjusted the height and tilt of the apparatus, as well as the angle and distance between the handles. The foot position of the participants was limited by the sulky and the distance between the sulky and the apparatus was fixed as these are constraints of the current mower and sulky design. This distance was set to mimic the actual distance from the sulky to the handles on the machine. Grip force was not tested simultaneously, allowing the participant to focus on postural comfort.The subjects were helped into a comfortable standing position in front of the apparatus and on the sulky. Next each subject was asked to, “Move the apparatus into a comfortable position for mowing”. The dimensions of the comfortable position chosen by the participant were measured by the researchers.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
