@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Partly visible periods in posture observation from video: Prevalence and effect on summary estimates of postures in the job

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We compared observation of fully and partly visible working postures from video.Postures were rated to differ between fully and partly visible video frames.Postural angles tended to be lower for fully visible frames than partly visible.Findings were consistent for both trunk and arm postures.Including partly visible postures resulted in different daily exposure summaries.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Observation,Posture,Exposure assessment,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper investigated the extent to which observers rated clearly visible postures on video differently from partly visible postures, and whether visibility affected full-shift posture summaries. Trunk and upper arm postures were observed from 10,413 video frames representing 80 shifts of baggage handling; observers reported postures as fully or only partly visible. Postures were summarized for each shift into several standard metrics using all available data, only fully visible frames, or only partly visible frames. 78% of trunk and 70% of upper arm postural observations were inferred. When based on all data, mean and 90th percentile trunk postures were 1.8° and 5.6° lower, respectively, than when based only on fully visible situations. For the arm; differences in mean and 90th percentile were 0.7° and 8.2°. Daily posture summaries were significantly influenced by whether partly visible postures are included or not.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Observation has been called “probably the most often used approach to evaluate physical workload”, and there are many different observation protocols available for use in realistic working conditions, on real workers performing real work tasks within the real industrial context (Takala et al., 2010). For example, observations may be made based in real time using a paper-based (Village et al., 2009) or computer aided system, on running video (Liv et al., 2012), on video still images, or using a multi-camera system. Posture values may be recorded into broad categories (McAtamney and Nigel Corlett, 1993; Callaghan et al., 2004), or narrow ones that can be treated as continuous variables (Bao et al., 2007; Trask et al., 2013). However, one challenge that field-based observation protocols have in common is that the view of the observed worker is not always clear, as the workplace setting does not always make for ideal observation conditions, i.e. an unobstructed, sagittal view of the relevant body part (SeeFig. 1). In addition to skew introduced by oblique viewing angles or far distance, the body segments in question may be obstructed by equipment, other workers, or the worker's own body segments (Sutherland et al., 2007). Situations when postures are only partly or not at all visible may arise for instance when workers are in machinery-operation cabs; under conditions of heavy rain, fog, or dust; when the observer has inadequate safety training or security clearance to enter a worksite; and when workers are occupying a small space that would not accommodate the observer (Trask et al., 2007).Past studies have quantified the potential errors in observation introduced by: oblique camera angles (Sutherland et al., 2007, 2008; Qu et al., 2012); expert vs. novice observers (Weir et al., 2007; Andrews et al., 2008); the size of body parts and range of motion (Bao et al., 2009); and category resolution and ability of observers to identify detailed categories (Weir et al., 2007; Andrews et al., 2008; Lowe, 2004). These aspects are important for understanding how to arrive at the best possible validity and efficiency when assessing postures by observation. However, questions remain regarding the degree of inference and estimation involved in typical work posture observation under realistic working conditions. Although some estimation and inference are required by the nature of any workplace observation, studies rarely report the degree to which postures are assumed or approximated when they are only partly visible; for example, situations where evidence from other body parts or inference based on the task are still at hand to guide the observer. Even validation studies that describe the observation protocol and training practices in depth rarely describe the procedure for posture estimation in such cases (Village et al., 2009; Paquet et al., 2005). If estimation of partly visible postures is required for significant parts of the total observation period, and if postures differ between fully and partly visible periods, including the approximations (or not) may substantially influence the overall summary results on postures in the job.Thus, there is a need to determine the extent to which periods with partly visible postures influence daily exposure summary statistics. If overall results are influenced by whether partly visible periods are included or not, the ergonomist faces the trade-off between increasing the amount and completeness of data by including such periods, and taking the risk of posture estimates in partly visible periods being less correct than those in fully visible periods. Using video data collected from aircraft baggage handlers, this paper addresses two questions: 1) how often are observers required to approximate postures during dynamic work due to the worker being only partly visible?; and 2) to what extent do estimates of overall summary variables of postures in the job differ depending on whether such approximations are included or not? We hypothesize that partly visible postures are commonplace in video-based observation, which in turn influence summary exposure estimates.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
