@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Age-related differences in dynamic balance control during stair descent and effect of varying step geometry

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Longer run length and shorter riser height reduces forward upper body tilt angles.Longer run length provides larger margins of stability for young and older adults.Results explain biomechanical factors underlying increased falls risk on shorter steps.Results highlight need for safer stair standards to minimize risk of falls.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Stair ambulation,Kinematics,Dynamic balance,Ageing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The incidence of stairway falls and related injuries remains persistently high; however, the risk of stair injuries could be reduced through improved stairway design. The current study investigated dynamic balance control during stair descent and the effects of varying the step geometry. Data were collected from 20 healthy young and 20 older adults as they descended three staircases (riser heights of 7, 7.5 and 8 inches (178, 190 and 203 mm, respectively)). At each riser height, the tread run length was varied between 8 and 14 inches (203 mm and 356 mm) in one-inch (25 mm) increments. Kinematic data provided measures of segmental and whole-body dynamic control. Results demonstrated that older adults had greater lateral tilt of the upper body than young adults, but actually had larger margins of stability than the young in the antero-posterior direction as a result of their slower cadence. Nonetheless, for both age groups, the longer run lengths were found to provide the largest margins of stability. In addition, increase in run length and decrease in riser height tended to reduce forward upper body tilt. These results help to explain the underlying biomechanical factors associated with increased risk of falls and the relationship with step geometry. Considering the importance of stair ambulation in maintaining independence and activity in the community, this study highlights the definite need for safer stair design standards to minimize the risk of falls and increase stair safety across the lifespan.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Each year, approximately one out of three older adults will experience a fall and of those, approximately 50% will experience repeated falls (Tromp et al., 2001). Additionally, over 50% of older adults who have previously fallen will also develop a fear of falling (Arfken et al., 1994; Howland et al., 1998; Tinetti et al., 1994). This fear leads individuals to avoid many fundamental activities of daily living, contributing to decline in physical function, independence, level of activity and health-related quality of life (Tinetti et al., 1994; Brouwer et al., 2004; Cumming et al., 2000). Although a fall can occur in many types of natural and built environments, research consistently identifies stairs as a primary location of serious fall-related injury (Startzell et al., 2000), underscoring stairs as one of the most hazardous locations of any home (Roys, 2001; Soriano et al., 2007). Serious falls on stairs can happen across the lifespan; however, they are most prevalent in advanced age, when the consequences are most likely to be injurious, disabling or fatal (Startzell et al., 2000). For an older adult, a stair-related fall can lead to hospitalization, admission to a long-term care home, or death (Startzell et al., 2000; Soriano et al., 2007).Stair negotiation is a complex locomotor task that imposes significant challenges to movement control in persons of all ages (Bosse et al., 2012; Hamel et al., 2005; Nadeau et al., 2003; Novak and Brouwer, 2011; Novak et al., 2011; Reid et al., 2010, 2011; Simoneau et al., 1991; Zachazewski et al., 1993). Compared to level walking, stair ambulation demands greater balance control. Stair descent is a particularly dynamic process compared to ascent (Startzell et al., 2000; Reid et al., 2011), as descending stairs involves the forward acceleration of the large upper body mass with each step. This forward motion must be arrested before a toppling occurs by applying a sufficient moment in the legs or through the handrail to counteract the movement. Greater inherent instability during descent has been indicated by larger maximum divergence of the centre of mass (COM) beyond the centre of foot pressure (COP) (Zachazewski et al., 1993) as well as faster COP velocity when compared to ascent (Reid et al., 2011). Age-related differences in gaze behaviour during stair descent have also demonstrated that older adults spend more time looking at the next stair tread (Zietz and Hollands, 2009), and it has been hypothesized that this behaviour may be associated with a forward flexed position of the upper body and an anterior shift of the body's COM during stair descent (Bosse et al., 2012). More recently, assessment of the margin of stability during stair descent has indicated that older adults are at a greater risk of falls during stair descent than young adults due to a reduced ability to safely control the body's COM (Bosse et al., 2012). This is mainly a result of higher velocity of the COM leading to a more anterior position of the vertical projection of the COM. Bosse et al. (2012) have also shown a significant correlation of COM velocity with joint angular impulse of the ankle and knee extensors, indicating that a greater amount of mechanical work is required to arrest the motion. This suggests that age-related declines in lower limb strength and muscle power (Novak and Brouwer, 2011, 2012) may limit the ability of older adults to safely control the body's COM while walking down stairs, and places them at greater risk of falls than young adults during stair descent.It has been emphasized that the risk of stair injuries can be substantially reduced by improved stair design (Roys, 2001; Tse, 2005), which includes features such as riser height (the vertical distance from one step to the next), nosings (horizontal protrusion beyond the edge of the run) and tread run (the horizontal distance between adjacent nosings or in the absence of a step nosing, between the edges of adjacent steps) (Fig. 1). For example, a large injury surveillance study in the United Kingdom estimated that increasing the minimum run length several inches could reduce stair-related falls by a factor of four (Wright et al., 2008). Despite the available evidence, there is still debate amongst decision makers regarding the appropriate step geometry design to minimize falls during stair ambulation. This is likely attributable to the lack of comprehensive studies aimed at understanding step dimensions and falls. In the few studies that have investigated the role of step geometry, the focus has been limited to studying the effect of varying step geometry on foot placement, energy costs or joint demands during stair ascent and descent (Roys, 2001; Wright et al., 2005; Riener et al., 2002; Templer, 1992), with no inclusion of older adults or investigation of balance. For example, to support recommendations for safer riser heights and run lengths, Wright et al. (2005) reported that with runs of 300 mm and above, a greater proportion of the foot is placed on the step. Higher risers also results in forward placement of the foot on the tread, regardless of the length of the step, suggesting an optimal riser height of 190 mm or less to minimize risk of the foot slipping/pivoting off the step (Wright et al., 2005). Step geometry must facilitate gait and adequate footing. However, the minimum recommendations to support safe stair ambulation are difficult to provide without understanding the impact of step geometry on one's ability to also maintain balance. Although it has been shown that a steeper stair results in large variability in vertical loading of the stance leg during descent, leading to a less stable gait pattern (Stacoff et al., 2005), no study has directly investigated dynamic balance control related to variations in step geometry and the effects of age. The lack of comprehensive studies investigating the effect of stair geometry is likely the reason that stair standards internationally vary to such a great extent at the possible expense of safety. For example in Canadian homes, the minimum run length is 210 mm and maximum riser height is 200 mm, whereas the ICC's (International Code Council) International Residential Code stipulates a minimum run length of 255 mm and maximum riser height of 196 mm.Stair descent is unique compared to other activities of daily living due to the constraints on the base of support (BOS). Specifically, since an adult's forefoot placement will typically extend beyond the edge of the stair tread (Wright et al., 2005), the anterior BOS limit is often defined by the edge of the tread. It follows that a positive change to the BOS (ie. by increasing the length of the step run) would permit greater margins of stability in the older group without the need to alter individual behaviour. In addition, a reduction in the riser height is expected to reduce variability of movement (as has been shown with vertical loading (Stacoff et al., 2005)), suggesting improved stability during stair descent. The purpose of the current study was to investigate age-related differences in dynamic balance control during stair descent and the effect of varying step geometry, i.e. riser height and run length.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
