@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Safety challenges of medical equipment in nurse anaesthetist training in Haiti

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Performance obstacles of nurse anaesthetists in training in Haiti are described.Various environment-related problems hinder safety of use of medical equipment.Coping strategies are a key characteristic of practice in low-resource settings.Using a systems approach is relevant in technology transfer.Human Factors research in low-resource settings requires adjusted methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Human factors and ergonomics,Medical equipment,Low-income countries,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Safety challenges related to the use of medical equipment were investigated during the training of nurse anaesthetists in Haiti, using a systems approach to Human Factors and Ergonomics (HFE). The Observable Performance Obstacles tool, based on the Systems Engineering Initiative for Patient Safety (SEIPS) model, was used in combination with exploratory observations during 13 surgical procedures, to identify performance obstacles created by the systemic interrelationships of medical equipment. The identification of performance obstacles is an effective way to study the accumulation of latent factors and risk hazards, and understand its implications in practice and behaviour of healthcare practitioners. In total, 123 performance obstacles were identified, of which the majority was related to environmental and organizational aspects. These findings show how the performance of nurse anaesthetists and their relation to medical equipment is continuously affected by more than user-related aspects. The contribution of systemic performance obstacles and coping strategies to enrich system design interventions and improve healthcare system is highlighted. In addition, methodological challenges of HFE research in low-resource settings related to professional culture and habits, and the potential of community ergonomics as a problem-managing approach are described.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The value of using Human Factors and Ergonomics (HFE) to study medical environments is well described in literature (Carayon, 2007). The HFE discipline is an expanding field in healthcare and has contributed significantly to a holistic understanding of user-medical device relationships and interventions, related to medical infrastructure and services. HFE is divided into subdomains that focus on different scales of the interface between people and other elements of the healthcare system. Macroergonomics is the subdomain focused on the overall work system at an organization scale (Carayon et al., 2013). The aim of macroergonomics models of healthcare quality is to integrate the entire system of an organization, guiding its integral analysis and redesign. The Systems Engineering Initiative for Patient Safety (SEIPS) model, complemented in this study, defines healthcare services composed of a work structure and care processes (Carayon et al., 2014). The work structure is a system of interrelated elements that influence each other and that are complementary for the safe functioning of the entire system (Rasmussen, 1997; Vincent et al., 2004). The arrangement of system elements can be either hierarchical or functional, but generally includes the following elements: Organization; Environment (physical and external); Tasks; Individual/Team; and Tools/Technology (Carayon, 2007; Rasmussen, 1997). These elements are involved in dynamic and non-linear care processes and their combination results in determined outcomes for patients and the healthcare institution.Sensitization and understanding of these system elements and their relationship is of particular importance to obtain a safety culture and manage the quality of healthcare provision (Vincent et al., 2004). A safety culture - or context - in healthcare promotes the continuous reduction and prevention of risks and medical incidents that result in patient harm and can have profound impact on the outcome of healthcare (Mitchell, 2008; Group of WHO Patient Safety, 2009). Medical incidents result from a sequence of associated failures in different system elements and care processes, and often lead practitioners or technicians to error (Reason, Jun. 2000; Vincent, 2004; Mahajan, Jul. 2010). Therefore, many efforts are made to understand and breakdown the systemic reasons behind medical incidents (Spath, 2011).The identification of performance obstacles is an effective way to study the accumulation of latent factors and risk hazards and to understand its implications in practice and in the behaviour of healthcare practitioners (Carayon et al., 2014). Similar to what Tucker and Edmondson (2003) call a “problem”, performance obstacles are factors related to the work structure of healthcare practitioners that disturb the execution of particular activities or tasks (affecting to a certain degree time, comfort or result), leading to a deviation from the safety standards (Carayon et al., 2014). Investigating performance obstacles is a proactive way to look at healthcare safety since it allows getting a rich understanding of the accumulating causes, not only of accidents but also of decreased quality of working life of healthcare practitioners (Gurses and Carayon, 2007; Holden et al., 2012). These performance obstacles are associated with either system limitations or incompatibilities (e.g. infrastructure, staff, and management) or with problem-solving mechanisms triggered by the impediment of treating patients and complying with the standards in the first place. Problem-solving mechanisms are named coping strategies in HFE literature and can include safety violations and workarounds (Carayon et al., 2014).Healthcare provision is not homogeneous worldwide. Low-income countries are generally characterized by an uneven distribution of quality of healthcare services (public versus private, urban versus rural) and the prevalence of low-resource settings. These characteristics make healthcare management more complex and challenging. In low-resource settings, both healthcare structure and care processes are typically characterized by significant shortcomings, or functioning gaps, that result in worse healthcare outcomes and in a higher chance for medical incidents to occur.The concept (theory and practice) of Community Ergonomics (CE) stems from the macroergonomics subdomain, and extends the application of HFE theories to complex societal systems (Taveira and Smith, 1997; Smith et al., 2002). CE focuses on distressed community settings where certain groups of people have disadvantaged access to resources and participation in their surrounding (societal) environment, for example due to inequities created by power hierarchies or social rules. CE offers a people-centred design approach of community–environment interfaces, bringing contextual relevant aspects to the integrated design of community (capabilities) and environment as a whole. Although it was not specifically formulated for healthcare in low-resource settings, its application is rather flexible to accommodate the uncertainty and unpredictability, inherent of such distressed settings. Fig. 1illustrates the relation between the HFE domains, models and tools referred in this introduction. Given the potential offered by CE to address macroergonomic problems, the approach will be further discussed in Section 5.5.Haiti offers an interesting opportunity to study healthcare safety due to the prevailing poverty and socio-economic challenges that impact the healthcare system. Haiti has a long history of conflict and natural catastrophes and ranks as the poorest country in the Western Hemisphere and one of the 15 most susceptible countries to the impact of a natural disaster in the world (Guly, 2004; World Risk Index, 2011; United Nations Development Programme, 2014). After a devastating earthquake in 2010 and the following cholera outbreak, recovery is slow. Until today the main public hospital in the capital of Port-Au-Prince has not been rebuilt and there is limited information regarding existing healthcare infrastructure. Generally, the access of the population to healthcare is low due to a combination of financial affordability, remoteness, lack of functional services and cultural aspects (Guly, 2004).The gaps in both healthcare structure and care processes in Haiti affect anaesthesia outcomes negatively. Regarding the healthcare structure in Haiti (i.e. expertize, tasks, technology, environment and organization) there is a large shortage of experienced medical staff. The existing staff is disproportionally concentrated in healthcare facilities in the Port-Au-Prince metropolitan area (United Nations Development Programme, 2014; Pan American Health Organization, 2012) resulting in a strong dependency of rural hospitals on the presence and donations of numerous international aid organizations. This contributes to a lack of standardization and reliability regarding skills and techniques (e.g. frequent exchange of visiting staff, short working week), but also of medical equipment and drugs (e.g. differing drug concentrations, recurrent supply shortages). Gaps in infrastructure include insufficient facilities and accessibility and lack of diagnostic and therapeutic means, or even basic resources (e.g. fuel, telephone). The distinction between care processes, such as emergency and elective cases is in the given context, largely undefined due to, for example, delays in seeking care. The lack of coordination resources also contribute to an uncertain planning, record-keeping and follow-up of medical procedures.HFE show that innate human factors influence work performance on a daily base and that the most effective way to overcome this potentially negative influence is to systemically minimize the chances of human error to occur, through the design of user-friendly, fail-safe medical devices, implementation of standard operating procedures and improvement of workspace layout (Shah and Alshawi, 2010; Martin et al., Jan. 2012; Buckle et al., 2006). In HFE, medical devices and supplementary medical equipment make up the ‘Technology’ system element. The study of technology in healthcare is important, because medical equipment have become essential in modern healthcare for the diagnosis, treatment, monitoring and follow-up of patients (European Commision, 1994). Furthermore, studying medical equipment is an effective vehicle to evaluate the performance of a system, especially if the interrelationship of micro- and macro-ergonomic aspects are considered (e.g. infrastructure, maintenance and supply inventorization) (Mittermeyer et al., 2011; Liem and Brangier, 2012). However, the application of HFE in healthcare in low-resource settings has been rather poorly explored (O'Neill, Dec. 2000; Shahnavaz, 2009; World Health Organization, 2010). In low-resource settings, the reliance on donated medical equipment of various origins is one of the factors determining the extent to which care is delivered. There is evidence that ergonomic guidelines are not followed in this context and that a large amount of donated medical equipment is not functioning. Studies are lacking that focus on the safety of the remaining functional medical equipment (World Health Organization, 2010; Dzwonczyk and Riha, Apr. 2012; Rice et al., Dec. 2010).This study focuses on understanding the safety contexts of human interaction with medical equipment in low-resource settings from an HFE perspective. The aim is to identify concrete safety challenges of medical equipment use, by identifying performance obstacles related to medical equipment during the training of nurse anaesthetists in Haiti.This study is a follow-up of a study about the dynamics of medical emergencies (Santos et al., 2013). This case study was conducted in the hospital L’Hôpital Bon Sauveur in Cange (HBSC), Haiti during a training program of nurse anaesthetists (Rosseel et al., 2009). This hospital is administered by the Haitian subsidiary organization of Partners in Health in collaboration with the Haitian Ministry of Health Care (MOH). The training program was organized in cooperation with Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF).HBSC though being a peripheral hospital situated in a remote area, has built a high reputation and has well known and attended surgical and obstetrical services (Ivers et al., Apr. 2008). The hospital has offered surgery since 1993 and has seen a fast increase in number and variety of surgical procedures. At present, the surgical service of HBSC has been transferred to the new Hôpital Universitaire de Mirebalais in a small village, half way between Cange and Port-Au-Prince, also administered by Partners in Health and MOH. At the time of this study approximately 50–70 surgical cases were performed each month, with a variety of cases, with hernial repairs and caesarean sections being the most frequent. There were two operating complexes, one for general surgery, incorporating two operating rooms (OR) and another separate OR in the maternity ward building. There was no recovery room or Intensive Care Unit. The hospital's infrastructure included inpatient wards, an outpatient clinic, an infectious disease unit and complementary services (e.g. women's health, dental, radiology and ophthalmology clinics, laboratories, pharmacies and a blood bank).In Haiti there is a shortage of midwives, intensive care nurses and nurse anaesthetists (Hoyler et al., 2013). A universally accepted solution for the severe lack of specialized staff, in particular in rural settings, is task shifting. In task shifting nurses from varying background are trained to substitute anaesthesiologists (Rosseel et al., 2009; Ivers et al., Apr. 2008). While the official training program of nurse anaesthetists in Haiti was not functional anymore MSF implemented a comparable training program because of (local) staff shortage. And although training is often performed by international aid organizations, it is not their core task and therefore their training programs do not necessarily comply with international standards. The aim of the nurse anaesthetists training program by MSF (performed in HBSC) was to select and train registered nurses to become nurse anaesthetists capable of practicing autonomous anaesthesia without the regular presence of anaesthesiologists. Seven training cycles of 18 months each were held between 1999 and 2012 and 40 nurse anaesthetists have been successfully trained by a full time expatriate anaesthesiologist. Each training comprised of theoretical and practical training in pre-, per- and post-operative anaesthesia care, including handling medical equipment and aspects of quality control and teamwork. During the seventh training program, at the time of this study, a total of 238 procedures involving different types of anaesthesia were administered by 11 nurse anaesthetists.Given the exploratory nature of this case study, and in order to get a rich understanding of the performance context in real settings, a qualitative approach was used. The SEIPS model was chosen amongst several tools available from the HFE toolbox that could be suitable to this purpose (e.g. contextual inquiry, event tree analysis, walkthrough or cognitive task/work analysis, timeline or critical path analysis) (Stanton et al., 2005; Cacciabue, 2004). The SEIPS model was chosen because of its flexibility to be used as a tool and as a framework, because it is a thoroughly validated tool and because of its distinct visual simplicity (Gurses and Carayon, 2007; Carayon et al., Dec. 2006; Holden et al., 2013). As such, the SEIPS model allowed 1) a practical application to guide observations and interviews as well as structuring the data analysis, 2) acknowledging the dynamics of the system rather than a time-based or retrospective approach and 3) communication with participant healthcare practitioners.So a tool called Observable Performance Obstacles (OPO) was developed to systematise the collection and analysis of information about the systemic relations of medical equipment (Fig. 2a). The OPO tool is a complementation to the SEIPS (Fig. 1) focussing exclusively on the technical subsystem (Technology and Tools) and the respective relations with the elements of the work structure (Person, Task, Environment, and Organization) (Carayon et al., 2014). According to the suggestion of Waterson (2009) to research cross level relationships in HFE, the exclusive focus on the technical subsystem should contribute to enrich the understanding of the healthcare system. In addition, the principle behind the Input-Transformation-Output model (Karsh et al., 2006) was used to categorize the ways in which the performance of healthcare practitioners is affected by the relations of medical equipment with the system elements during the process of care.The categories of performance obstacles in the OPO tool are amenable to be addressed by ergonomists and designers, because they relate to needs and capabilities of users, providing information about medical equipment embedded in activity rather than in isolated functions. Observation logs, photographic records or surveys may be used to collect information. Fig. 2b illustrates the used format for data collection, derived from the original OPO tool (Fig. 2a). The OPO categories were iteratively defined after a previous case study (Santos et al., 2013) where the OPO tool was used and discussed with participant experts. The definitions of the OPO categories were further revised by the first two authors until consensus was reached. During its use, the OPO tool is useful to provide a clear and effective way of communicating the research purpose and process. In the previous case study, “Improvisation” has been discussed in the authors' earlier study as a mechanism of problem-solving in which temporary solutions are created to work around a problem (e.g. insufficiency of medical supplies or poor condition of medical equipment) and are systematically adopted by healthcare practitioners and the organization (Gosbee, 2002; Tucker and Edmondson, 2003; Spiess et al., 2014). In this paper, coping strategies and improvisations are discussed separately from performance obstacles and some modifications of the tool are introduced.The study was performed over a period of six days and consisted of observations and photographic recordings during evaluation sessions in the ORs. Three consecutive days were dedicated to observations of surgical procedures in which different nurses were shadowed in their activities. The observations, made by the first author, included the activities occurring during a full day in the OR (i.e. defined by the time the patient is in the room) and excluded the remaining activities (i.e. call of patients and assistance in recovery room).Data collection focused on identifying the origin of performance obstacles (as defined in Section 1.1) occurring in the independent relations of the elements user, task, environment and organization, with medical equipment. Systemic relations not including medical equipment were excluded, such as organization-task or user-environment relations. Furthermore, context variables, such as type of procedures, type of anaesthesia, the number and type of devices per procedure, the age and experience of the nurse and the number of team members were not retrieved and are only mentioned if relevant for the description of a performance obstacle.Authorization was required by both MSF and Partners in Health in which the ethical aspects of the research and visit were clarified and approved. A human ethics approval was not requested since no patient or staff information were recorded and patients remained anonymous. Furthermore, inquired nurses or other professionals were asked permission for inquiry and observation. In case of disagreement, they could refuse answering or participating in the study.Data analysis was targeted at the categories of the performance obstacles from the OPO tool. The tool has been iteratively designed and was subjected to some modifications (Table 1) since the previous study (Santos et al., 2013).A distinction between procedure-specific and general OPOs was made. Procedure-specific OPOs include issues that were identified once during a specific procedure and general OPOs include issues that were identified more than twice or reflect therefore a common practice in the hospital. The final OPO tool is depicted in Fig. 2a and b and a full description of the OPOs can be found in Table of Observable Performance Obstacles (Appendix A). The OPOs registered in observation logs and photographic records were categorized according to the existing table of OPOs using a coding technique (Saldaña, 2013). Each OPO was coded in the most prominent category. In case of diverging opinions regarding the association of OPOs to different work system elements, the definitions of each category and code were reviewed by the first two authors and the options were discussed until consensus was reached. All categorizations were reviewed and approved by all authors.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This study attempts to be an original contribution to the literature related to safety in healthcare. Performance obstacles, specifically focused on medical equipment, were observed and reported during the training of nurse anaesthetists in Haiti. The results show how the safety of medical device use is affected by the relationship between medical equipment and other elements of the work structure, in particular Environment and Organization. In addition, the results illustrate the vulnerable healthcare working environment in low-resource settings. Finally, several opportunities were uncovered for future research within the field of application of HFE in low-resource settings, namely in regard to the coping strategies and the concept of Community Ergonomics.