@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Self-rostering and psychosocial work factors – A mixed methods intervention study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Implementing self-rostering has a potential to improve the psychosocial factors at work.There were large differences of implementing self-rostering on the effects of psychosocial factors at work.The effect on psychosocial factor seemed to be dependent on the aim and content of intervention.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Flexible working hours,Social support,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study aims at 1) examining the effect of self-rostering on emotional demands, quantitative demands, work pace, influence, social community at work, social support from leaders and colleagues, job satisfaction, and negative acts, 2) examining whether this effect was mediated through increased influence on the scheduling of working hours, and interpreting the results in light of the different implementation processes that emerged in the study and by including qualitative data. We conducted a 12 months follow-up, quasi-experimental study of self-rostering among 28 workplaces out of which 14 served as reference workplaces. We also interviewed 26 employees and 14 managers about their expectations of introducing self-rostering. In the present study implementation of self-rostering had a positive effect on job demands and the social environment of the workplace, especially if the intervention does not comprise drastic changes of the organisation of the employees' work and private life.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
During the last years at least two reviews concerning the effect of work-time influence or related concepts have been published. In 2010, Joyce et al. stated that self-scheduling can have beneficial health, social and organizational effects (Joyce et al., 2010). Likewise, in 2012, Nijp et al. concluded that for theoretical and empirical reasons, work-time control is a promising tool for the maintenance of employees' work–non-work balance, health and well-being, and job-related outcomes (Nijp et al., 2012). However, there is relatively little knowledge about the mechanisms through which, work-time influence affects health and well-being.It has been suggested that work-time influence affects health through the adjustment of the working hours to the individual's needs and preferences, e.g. personal resources, demands from private life and need for restitution (Ala-Mursula et al., 2004; Garde et al., 2012). An alternative hypothesis is that the effect of work-time influence on health is mediated through improved psychosocial working environment. Indeed, in the previously mentioned 2010-review, Joyce et al. suggest that future research focuses on the effect of self-scheduling on psychosocial work factors, e.g. job satisfaction, worker performance, and employee morale (Joyce et al., 2010).A few previous intervention studies have investigated the effect of work-time influence and psychosocial work factors with contradictory results: When implementing an open-rota system in a Danish psychiatric hospital, job satisfaction, social support and sense of community at work increased (Pryce et al., 2006). In a Danish intervention study of the effect of work-time influence among eldercare workers, supplementary analyses showed that the degree of social support increased in the intervention group (Nabe-Nielsen et al., 2011). Also, in Swedish retail the implementation of self-scheduling improved satisfaction with colleagues but at the same time there was a decrease in job satisfaction and in the perception of a calm and pleasant work climate (Lowden and Åkerstedt, 2000).In spite of the sparse empirical evidence it seems possible that interventions aiming at increasing employees' work-time influence, e.g. by the implementation of self-rostering, may affect both job satisfaction, the social climate (e.g. social support and social community at work), and the intensity and demands of work (e.g. the amount to be accomplished and the speed of work). Regarding the intensity and demands of work, some self-rostering systems imply that the leader provides information about the required number of employees with specific skills on duty at different time points and thus optimizes the balance between staff demands and staff on duty. Hypothetically, such an improved balance might eliminate the efforts associated with understaffing – and thereby reduce work pace – at some time points. Alternatively, potential breaks and surplus of resources associated with overstaffing may be reduced – and thereby increase work pace. Thus, we did not have an a priori assumption about the direction of the effects of self-rostering on work pace as both a positive and negative effect could be anticipated.Furthermore, previous research showed that the work tasks, i.e. exposures in the working environment, differ between day, evening, and night shifts and it is also likely that exposure differs between weekend and weekdays. Compared to day workers, night shift workers were more exposed to low influence, low social support, and more conflicts, harassment, bullying, or violence at work (Bøggild et al., 2001; Mohren et al., 2002; Nabe-Nielsen et al., 2009). In general, night shift workers also reported lower job demands, although Bøggild et al. (2001) found that female night workers were more exposed to cognitive demands, and Mohren et al. (2002) found that night shift workers of both genders were more exposed to emotional demands. Self-rostering may provide the individual employee with the opportunity to composite a work schedule that take preferences for (or against) certain work tasks into account and that balances job demands with (fluctuating) individual resources. The consequence may be that work demands are perceived less strenuous, even if the overall demands at the workplace are unaltered. Additionally, some self-rostering systems offer the employees the possibility to see their colleagues' preferred working hours, and, thus, they have the possibility of taking their preferences for (or against) specific colleagues into account, when they schedule their own working hours. This may lead to an improved social climate at work (e.g. higher social support, higher social community at work, and fewer experiences of negative acts) for the majority but also to social exclusion of some individuals. Thus, self-rostering may have positive effects on the social climate at work, but also unintended negative effects.Indeed, in a previous paper, we showed that when employees schedule their own working hours, 36% considered the professional challenges, 26% considered the type of work tasks, 17% considered colleagues that they wanted to work together with, 7% considered colleagues that they did not want to work together with, and 6% considered the risk of violence (Nabe-Nielsen et al., 2013). Thus, although family life and leisure-time activities were among the top-priorities, employees also considered factors which eventually may lead to changes – positive as well as negative – in the psychosocial working environment.Even if work-time influence can be improved by interventions such as the implementation of self-rostering this is not always the case (Lowden and Åkerstedt, 2000; Nabe-Nielsen et al., 2011). Actually, it is likely that interventions aiming at increasing employee work-time influence – but do not succeed – will have an adverse effect on the psychosocial working environment due to disappointment and dissatisfaction.On this background, our overall aim was to investigate whether computerised self-rostering (i.e. the systematic involvement of the individual employee in the planning of his or her own work schedule by use of a computer program) has an effect on the psychosocial factors at work. More specifically, we first aimed to investigate the quantitative effect of self-rostering on job demand (i.e. emotional demands, quantitative demands, work pace), influence, job satisfaction, and social climate (i.e. social community at work, social support from leaders and colleagues, and exposure to negative acts). Second, we investigated to which extent the effect of the intervention depended on changes in the perceived influence on the arrangement of working hours.By including qualitative data we interpreted the results in light of the different implementation processes that emerged in the study.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
