@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Evaluation of four sensor locations for physical activity assessment

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Physical activity measurements vary substantially based on sensor location.Dominant arm measurements displayed the greatest amount of moderate activity.Trunk measurements displayed the least amount of moderate activity.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Musculoskeletal disorders,Posture,Physical activity,Accelerometer,Low back,Shoulder,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Direct measurements of physical activity (PA) obtained with inertial measurement units (IMUs) secured to the upper arms and trunk of 36 registered nurses working a full shift were compared to measurements obtained with a commercially-available PA monitor (ActiGraph wGT3X-BT) worn at the waist. Raw accelerations from each device were summarized into PA counts/min and metabolic equivalent (METs) categories using standard definitions. Differences between measurements were examined using repeated measures one-way analyses of variance (ANOVA) and agreement was assessed using Bland-Altman plots. Statistically significant differences were observed between all sensor locations for all PA summary metrics except for between the left and right arm for percentages of work time in the light and moderate counts/min categories. Bland-Altman plots suggested limited agreement between measurements obtained with the IMUs and measurements obtained with the wGT3X-BT waist-worn PA monitor. Results indicate that PA measurements vary substantially based on sensor location.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Musculoskeletal health outcomes of the low back and neck/shoulder are among the most prevalent and burdensome of all occupational injuries. Estimates from the Global Burden of Disease 2010 study suggest that low back pain causes more global disability than any other condition, accounting for 83 million disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) in 2010 alone (Hoy et al., 2012, 2014a). Low back pain arising from occupational exposure to physical risk factors caused 21.7 million DALYs; an increase of 22% between 1990 and 2010 (Driscoll et al., 2014; Murray et al., 2013). Neck/shoulder pain was estimated to account for 33.6 million DALYs in 2010, ranking it the 4th highest in terms of disability and 21st in terms of overall burden (Hoy et al., 2014b).Occupational exposure to non-neutral postures has been associated with musculoskeletal health outcomes of the low back and neck/shoulder (da Costa and Vieira, 2010; van Rijn et al., 2010; Vieira and Kumar, 2004). Methods for assessing exposure to non-neutral working postures in a field setting include self-report, observational, and direct measurement (Burdorf and Van Der Beek, 1999; David, 2005). The standard approach for directly measuring occupational exposure to non-neutral postures of the low back and shoulder is with piezoresistive accelerometers or, more recently, inertial measurement units (IMUs) secured to the trunk and/or upper arms (David, 2005; Li and Buckle, 1999; Teschke et al., 2009).An IMU is a solid-state device that measures and reports an object's spatial orientation and motion characteristics using multiple electromechanical sensors (i.e., accelerometers, gyroscopes, and/or magnetometers). They are considered advantageous to accelerometers for posture assessment as fusion of the components of an IMU may address limitations of each individual sensor component (Luinge and Veltink, 2005; Roetenberg et al., 2007). For example, gyroscope measurements can be used to compensate for accelerometer-based measurements that are known to be negatively affected by dynamic and complex motions (Amasay et al., 2009; Godwin et al., 2009). Several recent studies have indicated that IMUs are reasonably stable and accurate when estimating trunk and upper arm postures in comparison to “gold-standard” optoelectric motion capture systems (Cuesta-Vargas et al., 2010; El-Gohary and McNames, 2012; Kim and Nussbaum, 2013; Schall et al., 2015a) and a field-capable reference device (Schall et al., 2015b). Additionally, the small size and increasing affordability of IMUs make them practical instruments for measuring posture in field-based research.In addition to posture, an IMU's accelerometer may be used to measure other aspects of worker health that are typically difficult to observe, such as intensity of physical activity (PA). Although leisure-time PA is widely considered beneficial to overall health (Haskell et al., 2007; Warburton et al., 2006), and some studies have observed favorable effects of PA on musculoskeletal pain among worker populations (Hildebrandt et al., 2000), high intensity occupational PA has been associated with increased risk of several chronic health conditions and may be deleterious to health (Harari et al., 2015; Heneweer et al., 2011; Holtermann et al., 2012a, 2012b, 2010; Sitthipornvorakul et al., 2011). Moreover, some investigators have suggested a U-shaped relationship between intensity of PA and undesirable health outcomes (i.e. both inactivity and excessive activity may increase risk; Heneweer et al., 2009; Sesso et al., 2000). Recent work has thus emphasized the need for more accurate ascertainment of exposure to occupational and leisure-time PA using objective and validated field measurement instruments to better establish future public and occupational health recommendations (Holtermann, 2015; Prince et al., 2008).Modern PA monitors are portable, electronic devices used to measure and track fitness-related metrics such as energy expenditure, caloric consumption, sleep patterns, and total activity. PA monitors are commonly used in epidemiological research because of their small size, freedom from biases associated with self-report, and accuracy and precision in estimating intensity of activity (Freedson et al., 2012; Matthews et al., 2012). Most PA monitors are worn at the waist or wrist and use single or multi-axis accelerometers to provide summary metrics of the quantity and intensity of movements during set time intervals (Taraldsen et al., 2012; Troiano et al., 2008; Van Remoortel et al., 2012). PA monitors have been used extensively to promote workplace health, with promising results (Bravata et al., 2007; Freak-Poli et al., 2011; Pal et al., 2009; van Sluijs et al., 2006).Because IMUs and commercially available PA monitors incorporate fundamentally identical hardware (accelerometers), the use of small numbers of sensors in anatomic locations to capture both biomechanically meaningful posture information and PA information may be possible. Commercially available PA monitors positioned on the upper arms and on the upper back provide valid inclination data for direct long-term field measurements of upper arm and trunk inclinations in comparison to a magnetic tracking device (Korshøj et al., 2014) and a universal goniometer (Hirschhorn et al., 2015). However, the extent to which PA measurements obtained from sensors located on the upper arms or on the trunk agree with PA measurements obtained from PA monitor worn at the waist is not known. The objective of this study was, therefore, to estimate the agreement between measures of PA obtained with IMUs attached to the upper arms and to the trunk and measures of PA obtained with a commercially available PA monitor worn at the waist.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Efficient estimation of the physical demands of work remains somewhat limited by the need for multiple sensors to capture different aspects of physical demands (e.g., ActiGraph or other commercially available monitors to capture PA and a separate accelerometer or IMU to measure posture). The results of this study indicate that the location of the sensor used to obtain acceleration information may substantially affect PA estimates when compared to estimates from a waist-worn PA monitor. Additional research is needed to better understand how PA measurements obtained from the upper arm and trunk relates to measurements obtained from waist and wrist-worn PA monitors. Specifically, validation studies conducted in controlled laboratory environments or using systematic observation of field-based activities are needed to develop conversion algorithms intended to relate or synthesize PA estimates from various studies (e.g., Brazendale et al., 2015). Standardized, non-proprietary metrics and procedures for using ambulatory sensors such as IMUs in field-based research must also continue to be developed and evaluated (Freedson et al., 2012).While PA measurements obtained from the upper arm and trunk may not agree with measurements obtained from the waist, they may provide more representative PA estimates for demanding work tasks than a waist-worn PA monitor. The existence of a potential interaction between intensity of PA and non-neutral working postures should, therefore, also be further investigated. Such research may provide valuable insight into the association between physical risk factors in the workplace and musculoskeletal health outcomes.