@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Working postures and physical activity among registered nurses

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Nurses spent a small proportion of their work time in extreme postures.Nurses had few opportunities for rest and recovery.Nurses in the high activity group spent more time in extreme postures.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Musculoskeletal disorders,Posture,Physical activity,Low back,Shoulder,Inertial measurement unit,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Nurses report a high prevalence of musculoskeletal discomfort, particularly of the low back and neck/shoulder. This study characterized the full-shift upper arm and trunk postures and movement velocities of registered nurses using inertial measurement units (IMUs). Intensity of occupational physical activity (PA) was also ascertained using a waist-worn PA monitor and using the raw acceleration data from each IMU. Results indicated that nurses spent a relatively small proportion of their work time with the arms or trunk in extreme postures, but had few opportunities for rest and recovery in comparison to several other occupational groups. Comparisons between nurses in different PA groups suggested that using a combination of accelerometers secured to several body locations may provide more representative estimates of physical demands than a single, waist-worn PA monitor. The findings indicate a need for continued field-based research with larger sample sizes to facilitate the development of maximally effective intervention strategies.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A high prevalence of work-related musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs) has been observed among nursing personnel in all settings of patient care, including hospitals, long-term care, and home health care (Alexopoulos et al., 2003, 2006; Bernal et al., 2015; Caruso and Waters, 2008; Choobineh et al., 2006; Davis and Kotowski, 2015; Karahan et al., 2009; Long et al., 2013, 2012; Lorusso et al., 2007; Reed et al., 2014; Smedley et al., 2003; Trinkoff et al., 2002; Waters et al., 2006). Disabling low back and neck/shoulder pain, in particular, is reported more frequently by nurses than by several other occupational groups (Corona et al., 2004; Harcombe et al., 2014, 2009). In 2012, for example, nursing assistants and registered nurses reported the second and fifth highest quantity of nonfatal occupational injuries and illnesses involving days-away-from-work and MSDs, respectively, among all occupations in the United States (BLS, 2013). The low back was injured in 56.2% of the nursing assistant cases and 51.4% of the registered nurses cases, while the shoulder was injured in 12.6% of the cases in both groups.Working in non-neutral postures has been associated with an increased risk of MSDs of the low back and neck/shoulder in many occupations, including nursing (Bernal et al., 2015; Davis and Kotowski, 2015; Karahan et al., 2009; Long et al., 2013, 2012; Lorusso et al., 2007; Reed et al., 2014; Waters et al., 2006). While several studies have characterized the trunk postures of nurses working full shifts using direct measurement methods (Arias et al., 2012; Freitag et al., 2007, 2012; Hodder et al., 2010), the working postures and movement velocities of the upper arms of nurses have not been previously reported. Characterizations of the upper arm postures and movement velocities of nurses are needed to develop maximally effective intervention strategies intended to mitigate MSD risk factors.Complementary to exposure to non-neutral working postures, high intensity occupational physical activity (PA) may contribute to several chronic health conditions, including MSDs (Harari et al., 2015; Heneweer et al., 2009, 2011; Holtermann et al., 2010, 2012a,b; Sitthipornvorakul et al., 2011). While regular, high intensity leisure-time PA is generally considered beneficial to overall health (Haskell et al., 2007; Warburton et al., 2006), and many workplace interventions that focus on achieving “adequate” PA levels result in some benefit (e.g., Anderson et al., 2009; Conn et al., 2009; Rongen et al., 2013), opposing effects of occupational and leisure-time PA have been observed in several other studies (i.e. high intensity PA outside of work appears to be beneficial while high intensity PA at work appears to be harmful; Holtermann, 2012b, Hu et al., 2013). The complex (and seemingly opposing) relationship between occupational and leisure-time PA on adverse health outcomes is further magnified by a reliance on self-reported PA estimates.Low to moderate agreement between self-reported and objectively measured PA estimates has been observed to result in poor predictions of morbidity and health risk (Ekblom et al., 2015; Helmerhorst et al., 2012). Patient care workers, in particular, have been observed to report seven times the number of minutes of moderate or greater intensity PA that they complete during a work week in comparison to direct measurements obtained with a waist-worn PA monitor (Umukoro et al., 2013). One potential reason for the incongruity is that the monitors used to measure PA are typically worn at the waist and may not be sensitive to physically demanding upper body work (e.g., extremes of posture during patient transfers; Matthews et al., 2012). Consistent with this theory is the observation that nursing personnel report their work to be more strenuous the more often they work in non-neutral positions (Freitag et al., 2014).In light of the lack of information on the upper arm postures and movement velocities, and because of the large discrepancy in self-reported and direct measurements of PA obtained from nurses, we conducted a study to assess the full-shift postures and movement velocities of the upper arms and trunk among nurses using inertial measurement units (IMUs). Simultaneous measurement of PA was accomplished using a waist-worn PA monitor and acceleration data obtained from each IMU to evaluate the relationship between occupational PA and postural demands among nurses in greater detail than what is currently available in the scientific literature.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
