@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Exploring implicit preventive strategies in prehospital emergency workers: A novel approach for preventing back problems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A Majority of ambulance professionals had experienced back pain.Ambulance professionals use strategies and tricks of the trade to reduce the chances of back strain.Use of preventive strategies was associated with less back symptoms.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Back pain,Emergency care,Prevention,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
IntroductionBack problems are a major occupational health issue for prehospital emergency care professionals. The goals of this article are to: 1) provide descriptive data about the prevalence and the severity of lower back and upper back disorders in EMTs and paramedics; 2) identify some individual and collective strategies used by EMTs and paramedics to protect their health as they perform prehospital emergency missions; 3) assess the possible effectiveness of strategies in preventing back problems by exploring associations between the use of strategies and the presence and severity of symptoms.Material and methodsThe method includes a questionnaire survey (sample n = 334; paramedics and emergency medical technicians) and ergonomics work practice analysis involving shadowing ambulance crews in 12 medical emergency services (over 400 h).ResultsA majority of ambulance professionals had experienced back pain in the twelve-month period before the survey. Work practice analysis revealed strategies and tricks of the trade used by ambulance professionals to reduce the chances of back strain while working. Multiple regression analyses showed that self-reported use of such strategies was associated with fewer back symptoms.ConclusionsPreventive strategies should be integrated into specialised training programs for prehospital medical emergency professionals. This approach could also be used in other work settings.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
There is evidence suggesting that occupational health problems are a major issue for emergency medical technicians (EMTs) and paramedics. For example, these professions have a high reported rate of retirement on medical grounds (Rodgers, 1998a) which may well be the consequence of deleterious working conditions. Musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs), chiefly chronic back pain, seem to be particularly prevalent in workers providing prehospital emergency care (Maguire et al., 2005). In EMTs and paramedics, they are the cause for 47% of early retirements on medical grounds (Rodgers, 1998b), affect a large proportion of ambulance professionals (Hogya and Ellis, 1990) and are a major reason for seeking medical help (Sterud et al., 2008). Strenuous tasks involving adopting awkward postures, transferring victims from bed to stretcher, or lifting and carrying patients on stretchers, are everyday examples of the work done in these occupations (Doormaal et al., 1995; Lavender et al., 2000a, 2000b). Therefore, the onset of chronic MSDs often entails long absences and high risks of permanent work incapacity for the affected workers. Better understanding the issue of MSDs in EMTs and paramedics is crucial for developing, implementing and assessing the effectiveness of adequate preventive measures. However, recent literature reviews have concluded that little attention has been focused on this topic (Broniecki et al., 2010) and that most studies relied on small or convenient samples (Sterud et al., 2006) implying diverse potential selection biases. Therefore, comparative data about the prevalence and the severity of lower back and upper back disorders in EMTs and paramedics is clearly needed. Providing such data was one of the goals for our article.Health consequences of deleterious working conditions are affected by diverse individual and organizational factors. The mechanisms which lead to these factors having protective effects are not clear and better understanding them might provide key knowledge for the prevention of MSDs. We believe that these mechanisms might be identified through an examination of behavioral strategies developed by workers to best carry out their jobs. These strategies are a common concept in ergonomics and they refer to series of actions or behaviors used by workers to reach a specific goal (Faye and Falzon, 2009). In this article, we investigate the use of such smart practices by EMT and paramedics to protect their health in carrying out prehospital emergency missions, and we explore some quantitative and qualitative evidence supporting the effectiveness of these strategies.In summary, the goals of this article are to:1.provide descriptive data about the prevalence and the severity of lower back and upper back disorders in EMTs and paramedics;identify some individual and collective strategies used by EMTs and paramedics to protect their health as they perform prehospital emergency missions;assess the possible effectiveness of strategies in preventing back problems by exploring associations between the use of strategies and the presence and severity of symptoms.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
