@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Social influence in a virtual tunnel fire – Influence of conflicting information on evacuation behavior

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Virtual Reality (VR) experiment on conflicting social information during a fire emergency in a road tunnel.Actions of a virtual agent (VA) affected participants evacuation destination choice and travel paths.If the VA stayed passive, participants waited longer and moved longer distances until they reached the emergency exit.If the VA stayed passive or moved away from the emergency exit, less participants moved to the emergency exit.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Tunnel evacuation,Social influence,Virtual reality,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Evacuation from a smoke filled tunnel requires quick decision-making and swift action from the tunnel occupants. Technical installations such as emergency signage aim to guide tunnel occupants to the closest emergency exits. However, conflicting information may come from the behavior of other tunnel occupants. We examined if and how conflicting social information may affect evacuation in terms of delayed and/or inadequate evacuation decisions and behaviors. To this end, forty participants were repeatedly situated in a virtual reality smoke filled tunnel with an emergency exit visible to one side of the participants. Four social influence conditions were realized. In the control condition participants were alone in the tunnel, while in the other three experimental conditions a virtual agent (VA) was present. In the no-conflict condition, the VA moved to the emergency exit. In the active conflict condition, the VA moved in the opposite direction of the emergency exit. In the passive conflict condition, the VA stayed passive. Participants were less likely to move to the emergency exit in the conflict conditions compared to the no-conflict condition. Pre-movement and movement times in the passive conflict condition were significantly delayed compared to all other conditions. Participants moved the longest distances in the passive conflict condition. These results support the hypothesis that social influence affects evacuation behavior, especially passive behavior of others can thwart an evacuation to safety.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Road tunnel emergencies are rare yet potentially life-threatening events. After major tunnel fires in European road tunnels, new safety standards were developed (e.g., Directive 2004/54/EC) making road tunnels safer (Amundsen, 1994; Amundsen and Ranes, 2000). Safe tunnel evacuation requires adequate decision-making by tunnel occupants under time pressure and observations from recent tunnel fires document problematic occupant behavior (Burns et al., 2013).Prompt self-evacuation during tunnel fires is very important since tunnel fires can spread rapidly and differ significantly from other fire types in important aspects. Unlike in other open fires, vehicles can burn more vigorously due to heat feedback effects in the confined spaces of tunnels. In addition, the ventilation airflow may alter the ventilation flow pattern which can spread toxic gases and smoke over the tunnel. The ventilation system and other aspects of the tunnel architecture affect the maximum heat release rate, the risk of flashovers, and the development of stratified smoke. Typically, the smoke moves in layers, away from the fire along the tunnel ceiling. Due to the smoke cooling down or to strong ventilation, the smoke may spread down and mix with lower layers of air (For an overview, see Ingason, 2012; Purser, 2008). The formation of smoke influences the visibility in the tunnel, which in turn reduces walking speed and ultimately prolongs the evacuation time of occupants (Fridolf et al., 2013a,b; Ronchi et al., 2011). Furthermore, smoke not only affects the visibility but is also a major threat to occupant safety since it contains large quantities of asphyxiant gases and irritants (Purser, 2008).The recommended behavior for tunnel occupants in case of a fire is to stop their vehicle at a safe distance (more than 50 m away) from the fire source on the side of the carriageway, switch off the engine, switch on the hazard flasher, and leave the vehicle immediately while leaving the keys in the ignition lock. If feasible, occupants should provide first-aid to other occupants and try to extinguish the fire. If the latter is not possible, they should move to the next emergency exit (Egger, 2012). Unfortunately, observations from various tunnel fires show that occupants do not evacuate immediately (Shields, 2012). Interestingly, many occupants are aware of safety installations in road tunnels, but the intention to use them seems to be not internalized (Gandit et al., 2009). Most people have no practical experience of tunnel evacuation and behavioral scripts and routines for such emergency situations are not available. Hence, tunnel occupants have to rely on their appraisal of the situation, their resources (e.g., general knowledge about evacuation), and other sources of information (e.g., behavior of others) they deem credible.Several studies have addressed tunnel evacuation. In a field study, participants were confronted with a simulated tunnel emergency. Results showed that passivity was highly prevalent and some participants waited over 5 min before considering evacuation, including the ones who were situated adjacent to a burning heavy goods vehicle. Safety installations such as emergency exits were not recognized either (Boer, 2002; Boer and van Zanten, 2007). Another evacuation study revealed that many occupants comprehend the threat during tunnel accidents, but do not know how to evacuate properly (Nilsson et al., 2009). Lack of knowledge and practical training about adequate safety behavior in road tunnels has been shown to be associated with passivity (Kinateder et al., 2013). Perceived relative safety inside one's own vehicle compared to the tunnel environment and reluctance to leave property behind are hypothesized to be the underlying causes of passivity (Gandit et al., 2009; Ronchi et al., 2012). Property attachment has been shown to be a predictor of non-evacuation in other fields such as hurricane and flood evacuation (Riad et al., 1999; Siebeneck and Cova, 2012). However, there are no empirical studies that directly investigate the effect of property attachment to tunnel evacuation.How do tunnel occupants navigate toward a place of safety during tunnel emergencies? Occupants have to rely on little accessible information. One study found that participants seem to use emergency signage to find an emergency exit in a smoke filled rail tunnel (Fridolf et al., 2013a,b). However, there is also a tendency to move back toward the tunnel entrance portal and to not use the most efficient evacuation path, for e.g., the closest emergency exit (Sime, 1985). The affiliative model hypothesizes that occupants tend to move toward familiar places during emergencies (Sime, 1999, 2001). Support for this model has been found in several studies. For example, observations from fire drills in a department store showed that many occupants walked back to the main entrance of the stores, passing several emergency exits on their way out (Frantzich, 2001). Such evacuation behavior is inadequate and surprising since most road tunnels are relatively simply designed environments (in comparison to, for e.g., department stores) in which emergency exits as well as signage are generally clearly visible under normal conditions. Thus, finding an emergency exit should be easy (Egger, 2012; Shields, 2012). However, fire emergency conditions, smoke, noise, or vehicles may reduce the visibility of safety installations and make finding an emergency exit more difficult.Why do tunnel occupants have problems evacuating adequately? There are a number of potentially important human factors that affect occupant evacuation from tunnel fires (e.g., occupant characteristics such as familiarity with tunnels; for an overview, see Shields, 2012). Despite the relatively simple architecture of most tunnels, tunnel accidents or fires are complex situations. Information processing and decision making may be limited by ambiguous or conflicting information since the physical environment may become very difficult to interpret (e.g., emergency signage and smoke may be hidden by smoke or other vehicles). In unclear situations, the behavior of other tunnel occupants may be considered as a useful source of information. Since tunnel emergencies are novel and potentially ambiguous situations for most tunnel occupants, diffusion of responsibility may lead to delayed or inadequate evacuation decisions. This was demonstrated in a classic experimental study which showed that passive behavior of others may thwart immediate evacuation (Latane and Darley, 1968). A more recent study also demonstrated that social influence becomes more important if information is limited or ambiguous (Nilsson and Johansson, 2009). In another study, some participants started evacuating spontaneously only after they saw another person doing so (Boer, 2002; Boer and van Zanten, 2007). One VR study showed no effect of passive co-drivers on evacuation decision making in a simulated tunnel fire (Kinateder et al., 2012). However, experimental studies on this topic are still scarce, and it is unclear how exactly social influence affects evacuation behavior.It is ethically and methodologically problematic to expose participants to real emergency situations in a laboratory, and observations from real events lack experimental control. Innovative methods to better understand human behavior in emergencies include hypothetical scenarios (Lawson et al., 2013). Although these hypothetical scenarios have been shown to be useful, they rely on subjective statements and not on actual behavioral data. Virtual reality (VR) is another novel approach in evacuation research. VR allow generation of complex realistic scenarios to collect behavioral data with high experimental control. So far, VR has been used in the context of emergency evacuation to study effects of behavioral training (Kinateder et al., 2013; Ribeiro et al., 2012), general pre-evacuation behavior (Kobes et al., 2010a,b), way-finding installations (Duarte et al., 2014; Kobes et al., 2010a; Tang et al., 2009), and general environmental features (Vilar et al., 2013).Evacuation from tunnel fires can be broadly divided into four phases: 1) Inception of the event, 2) Perception and recognition of fire cues, 3) Decision-making, and 4) Evacuation (Noizet, 2012). The purpose of the present study was to investigate evacuation behavior of tunnel occupants during the evacuation phase. The evacuation phase can be subdivided into a pre-movement and a movement phase. The pre-movement phase is defined as the time occupants need from the beginning of an event until they start evacuating. The movement phase comprises the time in which occupants actually move during evacuation until they reach either an emergency exit, another safe destination, or stop moving (Purser and Bensilum, 2001). The specific goal of the present study was to shed light on the question of how conflicting social cues affect participants' behavior during the pre-movement and movement phases. To address this question, participants were repeatedly situated in varying scenarios in a virtual road tunnel filled with smoke. During the study, the presence and behavior of an animated virtual agent (VA) was systematically varied in order to investigate its social influence on the participants' behavior in the scenario. The following hypotheses were tested in the present study:1.Pre-movement phase: The VA exerts social influence which affects the certainty and speed with which decisions are made in the pre-movement phase. We assume that conflicting information from the VA (passive behavior or running away from the emergency exit) prolongs participants' pre-movement time.Movement phase: In general, tunnel occupants comply with emergency signage and, thus, participants move toward the emergency exit more frequently than in other directions. Social influence affects the destination choice: If the VA moves to the emergency exit, participants are more likely to do so, compared to conditions with no VA present. Similarly, participants are less likely to move to the emergency exit, if the VA moves in the opposite direction of the emergency exit than in conditions with no VA. In addition, we hypothesized that a passive VA or a VA moving away from the emergency exit prolongs the movement time.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
