@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Complex socio-technical systems: Characterization and management guidelines

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A framework to operationalize the attribute view of complexity.Description of attributes and assessment of management guidelines.Attributes can be irreducible/manageable complexity and liabilities/assets.Relationships between attributes are discussed.The case of an emergency department illustrates the use of the framework.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Complexity,Socio-technical systems,Emergency department,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Although ergonomics has paid increasing attention to the perspective of complexity, methods for its operationalization are scarce. This study introduces a framework for the operationalization of the “attribute view” of complexity, which involves: (i) the delimitation of the socio-technical system (STS); (ii) the description of four complexity attributes, namely a large number of elements in dynamic interactions, a wide diversity of elements, unexpected variability, and resilience; (iii) the assessment of six management guidelines, namely design slack, give visibility to processes and outcomes, anticipate and monitor the impacts of small changes, monitor the gap between prescription and practice, encourage diversity of perspectives when making decisions, and create an environment that supports resilience; and (iv) the identification of leverage points for improving the STS design, based on both the analysis of relationships among the attributes and their classification as irreducible/manageable complexity, and liability/asset. The use of the framework is illustrated by the study of an emergency department of a University hospital. Data collection involved analysis of documents, observations of work at the front-line, interviews with employees, and the application of questionnaires.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
While the notion that some socio-technical systems (STSs) are complex is not new (Perrow, 1984), characteristics of contemporary organizations, such as their increasing interdependence, have made the insights from complexity theory of interest to a broader range of systems (ElMaraghy et al., 2012). Moreover, the need for using analytical frameworks and management guidelines aligned with the nature of complexity has been more evident. In ergonomics, the perspective of complexity has gained traction as it has provided insights into a variety of problems, such as in the investigation of accidents (Dekker et al., 2011) and in the design and use of innovative technologies (Dekker, 2012; Walker et al., 2009). Regardless of this importance, the term complexity is often used in a loose manner, and the methods used by practitioners and researchers of ergonomics are not always matched to the complexity of the systems they are dealing with (Walker et al., 2010). Indeed, principles for the design of STSs, such as those associated with complexity, are contingent. This means that is necessary to know under what circumstances they are likely to improve performance (Clegg, 2000).In order to characterize the complexity of an STS, ergonomists may take advantage of a number of methods originated either in ergonomics, such as the Functional Resonance Analysis Method, FRAM (Hollnagel, 2012), or from other disciplines, such as system dynamics (Forrester, 1973). However, these methods do not account for a systematic description of a wide range of complexity attributes22The terms “attributes of CSSs” and “characteristics of CSSs” are used as synonyms in this paper.– e.g. the FRAM focuses on the attribute “variability”. This is a drawback, as complexity is multidimensional, encompassing several inter-related attributes that may exist in different intensities. In fact, the attribute view of complexity is, by far, the most frequently used in ergonomics (Walker et al., 2010). Two other categories of definitions are proposed by Walker et al. (2010): (i) complexity as a quantitative measure, which conveys the notion that some systems are more complex than others; (ii) complexity as emergent phenomena. The attribute view is adopted as a basis in this paper as it accounts for several dimensions of complexity, which is useful when envisioning the use of management guidelines – i.e. as these are contingent it is useful to know which attributes of complexity they match. Furthermore, we assume that the attribute view can partially account for the other two views, while the opposite is likely to be more difficult. The attributes can be quantified, and emergent phenomena are one of the attributes often cited in literature (e.g. by Cilliers, 1998). Of course, partially must be stressed, as quantification and description of emergence are still made in reference to the attributes.In ergonomics, earlier studies about CSSs have not emphasized the operationalization of the attribute view (the same holds for the other two views), and they also have other drawbacks. First, both the characteristics of complexity and the management guidelines are not usually described based on primary empirical data, but rather on secondary data or even on hypothesized situations (e.g. Dekker, 2012; Carayon, 2010; Sweeney, 2006; Perrow, 1984). Of course, this hinders the validation of the characteristics and guidelines claimed by researchers. Second, the relationships among the characteristics, and among the guidelines, are not usually explored. This is ironic, given that the analysis of relationships is a key issue for complexity science (Cilliers, 1998). Such analysis is especially valuable for the attribute view of complexity, which otherwise may be trapped in a reductionist approach of understanding complexity based on the isolated analysis of its sub-constructs (i.e. the attributes). Third, there is no widely accepted framework to analyze the implications of the characterization for management.Given this background, two complementary research questions guide this study: how to operationalize the attribute view of complexity so as to contribute to filling the previously mentioned gaps? How to establish a link between the guidelines and the characterization of attributes? A study of an emergency department (ED) of a University hospital was conducted, setting an empirical basis for the investigation of the research questions. While it is beyond the scope of this paper to discuss the different philosophical views of complexity, it is important to state the view we adopted since it underlies the research questions and the research design. The adopted view is closer to a critical realist view (Archer et al., 1998), which means that it has aspects of both realism and constructivism. While critical realism assumes that there is a reality independent of our thinking (i.e. in line with realism), it also recognizes that all observation is fallible, has error and that all theory is revisable, thus also accepting a constructivist proposition (Trochim, 2006). Therefore, we assume that complexity is real and can be measured (as Hornby, 2007, and others), as well as we recognize (as Cilliers, 2005, and others) that our biases limit the objectivity of the descriptions of complexity. A bias worth mentioning is that we have undertaken research in an industrial engineering program. Thus, concerns with problem-solving and categorizations are possibly more natural than for researchers with other backgrounds. However, as suggested by critical realist philosophers (Trochim, 2006), we used triangulation of methods and data in order to obtain a better account of complexity.The four complexity attributes identified by Saurin and Sosa (2013) are adopted in this study (Fig. 1), as they were the result of a literature review that compared the attributes cited by fifteen papers. Although those authors did not carry out a systematic literature review, they considered studies that adopted a mostly realist view of complexity (e.g. Snowden and Boone, 2007; Perrow, 1984) and others more aligned with constructivism (e.g. Stacey et al., 2000; Cilliers, 1998). Fig. 1 also conveys the interpretation adopted in this paper that emergence is an attribute associated with the characteristic unexpected variability, rather than one of the three types of definitions of complexity, as assumed by Walker et al. (2010).In this study, the guidelines for the management of CSSs identified by Saurin et al. (2013a) are adopted (Fig. 2) and, as with the attributes, they were developed from a conventional literature review. Fourteen studies largely aligned with realism were reviewed, which makes sense as this philosophical view is relatively more concerned with management and problem-solving. The studies were of three kinds: studies that have used insights from complexity theory for designing STSs – e.g. Hollnagel et al. (2011), Hollnagel and Woods (2005), Perrow (1984); reports on experiences of using complexity theory insights to support process improvement – e.g. Stroebel et al. (2005); Kernick (2004); and theoretical discussions on the use of complexity theory to enhance dimensions of organizational design – e.g. Snowden and Boone (2007). It is worth noting that these guidelines are not intended to convey the idea that a CSS can be fully controlled, which would be in conflict with the nature of those systems. However, the impossibility of full control is not exclusive with the idea of influencing the CSS (Axelrod and Cohen, 2000).A case study was conducted to answer the research questions, as it is adequate for understanding complex phenomena embedded in real and contemporary contexts (Yin, 2003), as well as to identify empirical relationships among variables (Flyvbjerg, 2011), such as complexity attributes. Initially, it was necessary to delimitate a relevant STS for the study. This delimitation is arbitrary, and it is up to the research team to define a system that matches the objectives of the investigation (Checkland, 1999). As a CSS is dynamic, the delimitation based on the functions that the system plays is more useful than that based on the structure of the system (Hollnagel, 2012). Thus, the STS chosen for the study was the ED of a major University hospital in Brazil, which was a relevant case since: (i) EDs have been referred to as high complexity systems according to several studies (e.g. Braithwaite et al., 2013); (ii) there has been a push for using human factors systems approaches to understand and improve the outcomes of healthcare processes (Carayon et al., 2014); and (iii) the hospital's directors were interested in management improvement initiatives. Through joint decision between researchers and representatives of the hospital, it was decided that the STS would contemplate the functions performed by physicians, nurses and nurse technicians of the hospital's adult ED. These three categories are strongly related to patient care, which is the primary function to be performed by the system. Functions performed by other agents both in the ED, and in other areas of the hospital were interpreted as part of the external environment. Other major components of the external environment were the functions performed by the public healthcare network, such as mobile emergency services which transport patients from and to the ED. Sources of data were mostly the same for the description of the four complexity attributes as well as for the assessment of the management guidelines. The sources involved interviews, questionnaires, observations of work at the front-line, and document analysis.Interviews were conducted with 18 members of staff, totaling about 21 h of recording. The criteria used to select the interviewees consisted of: (i) representing physicians, nurses, nurse technicians, and top management of the hospital; (ii) time availability for interviews; and (iii) expertise recognized by the chief nurse at the ED, primary operational contact of the researchers. The interviews were carried out in two stages. In the first, a script with 10 questions was used, in order to obtain an overview of the work content (e.g. could you tell me about your work?). In the second, the interview followed the Critical Decisions Method (CDM), which is well-known for providing rich data on informal work practices (Crandall et al., 2006), and thus it could shed light on the complexity of the STS. All interviews were analyzed using the content analysis technique (Radnor, 2001), which allows identification of words, phrases or sentences whose meaning are related to the object under study. Thus, for each transcript, the researchers identified excerpts associated with the attributes of complexity, and the use of the management guidelines.Two types of questionnaires were used. The first had the objective of obtaining perceptions on the intensity of the attributes. It had 23 statements: 22 related to the attributes and one that sought to capture the perceived complexity of the STS as a whole. The second questionnaire was designed to assess the perceptions about the management guidelines. It had 32 statements divided into two parts: the first contained 16 statements regarding to what extent respondents believed a particular guideline should be used; the second part had the same 16 statements re-phrased to assess how much the guidelines were used. Also, two statements at the end of this questionnaire evaluated the perceptions regarding patient safety and employees' safety, in order to analyze the correlations between perceived safety and the use of guidelines.In both types of questionnaires, respondents should mark, on a 15 cm scale, how much they agreed with each statement. The scale had two anchors at the extremes: “strongly disagree” and “strongly agree”. Questionnaires were sent to the whole population (n = 240) and they were considered valid if (Table 1): (a) they had over 90% of questions answered; and (b) they had less than 30% of questions marked at the extremes of the scale. Cronbach's alphas were higher than 0.6 (0.84 for the characterization; 0.85 for the guidelines), which is the acceptable threshold proposed by Hair et al. (2009). Additional statistical analysis involved: (i) calculation of means and coefficients of variation (CV); (ii) calculation of the Pearson's correlation coefficient; and (iii) calculation of the difference between the means for the use and for the applicability of the guideline presented in each statement, referred to as delta (Δ) value. The questionnaires were particularly useful to identify the most salient aspects within each group of attributes, setting a focus for the overall data analysis.Documents related to standard operating procedures (SOPs) and organizational charts, among others, were available on the intranet of the institution. The researchers had intranet access with a login, allowing them to view some of these documents, which were consulted to assist in characterizing complexity and assessing the guidelines. For example, to describe resilience, knowing the SOPs was crucial, for it allowed to check work as imagined against work as done.Furthermore, two researchers carried out observations of work at the front-line during a period of six months, totaling about 110 h on the premises of the ED. The observations had emphasis on understanding the activities performed by staff and on the resulting social and technical interactions. The observations were recorded in a diary, arranged according to date, activities observed and insights associated with the research questions.There were two meetings in which the data collected and their analysis were validated by representatives of the ED: one of these focused on the interviews, while the other focused on the questionnaires. Each meeting lasted about 2 h, involving researchers, members of ED staff, and the nursing director. The ED representatives indicated that the system was properly interpreted, and some aspects that represented doubts to the researchers could be clarified. In particular, clarifications were sought about statements at which the CV was very high.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Although ergonomics has paid increasing attention to the perspective of complexity, methods for its operationalization are scarce. This study contributes to filling this gap, by introducing a framework for the operationalization of the attribute view of complexity. It allows the characterization of attributes and the assessment of management guidelines that fit the nature of CSSs. An instantiation of the framework in an ED was presented, providing empirical evidence to validate the adopted attributes and guidelines.The framework encourages the analysis of the relationships between the attributes, based on Fig. 6 and on the correlations among the statements. The main assumption underlying that figure is that the more complex the system the stronger the correlations should be. However, based on the case study, it seems that some correlations are more desirable than others. For example, resilience had either moderate or low correlations with the large number and wide diversity of elements – such correlations ideally should have been stronger. This conclusion was also supported by interviews and observations, which indicated the lack of organizational measures to support proactive and effective resilient performance.Guidance for what to do with the characterization was also presented. While the separation between irreducible/manageable and liability/asset is ultimately a decision to be negotiated between stakeholders, it raises questions on the assumptions regarding the nature of the STS and on the realistic control measures. For instance, in the analyzed ED, overcrowding is for the time being accepted as a fact of life, and so the measures directed to handle the resulting complexity should be focused on coping with it, rather than on its reduction. Lastly, the results indicated that the guidelines may contribute for a “quality check” of practices being adopted for the management of CSSs. If the practices are adequate for CSSs, they should account for one or more of the guidelines, which can reduce the probability of undesired non-linear interactions. In the case study, that quality check helped to identify a number of positive examples and difficulties of using the guidelines.