@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The validity of the first and second generation Microsoft Kinect™ for identifying joint center locations during static postures

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This study proposed a method to align Kinect sensor with a motion tracking system.The accuracy of Kinect sensor-identified coordinates of joint locations was examined.The accuracy level is posture-dependent and joint-dependent.Standing postures can be identified with better accuracy than sitting postures.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Reference frame alignment,Daily activities,Kinect v2,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The Kinect™ sensor released by Microsoft is a low-cost, portable, and marker-less motion tracking system for the video game industry. Since the first generation Kinect sensor was released in 2010, many studies have been conducted to examine the validity of this sensor when used to measure body movement in different research areas. In 2014, Microsoft released the computer-used second generation Kinect sensor with a better resolution for the depth sensor. However, very few studies have performed a direct comparison between all the Kinect sensor-identified joint center locations and their corresponding motion tracking system-identified counterparts, the result of which may provide some insight into the error of the Kinect-identified segment length, joint angles, as well as the feasibility of adapting inverse dynamics to Kinect-identified joint centers. The purpose of the current study is to first propose a method to align the coordinate system of the Kinect sensor with respect to the global coordinate system of a motion tracking system, and then to examine the accuracy of the Kinect sensor-identified coordinates of joint locations during 8 standing and 8 sitting postures of daily activities. The results indicate the proposed alignment method can effectively align the Kinect sensor with respect to the motion tracking system. The accuracy level of the Kinect-identified joint center location is posture-dependent and joint-dependent. For upright standing posture, the average error across all the participants and all Kinect-identified joint centers is 76 mm and 87 mm for the first and second generation Kinect sensor, respectively. In general, standing postures can be identified with better accuracy than sitting postures, and the identification accuracy of the joints of the upper extremities is better than for the lower extremities. This result may provide some information regarding the feasibility of using the Kinect sensor in future studies.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In 2010, Microsoft released the first generation Kinect sensor (Kinect v1) for their Xbox 360 video game platform. This sensor is composed of one traditional digital camera, one infrared emitter, and one depth sensor. The depth sensor is able to detect the depth information of the objects placed in front of the Kinect unit. When a person stands directly in front of a Kinect sensor (Fig. 1a), the Kinect sensor will first detect the surface of body with the depth sensor (Fig. 1b) and then uses an algorithm to automatically identify the location of 20 joint centers of the body in the 3-D space from the surface of the human body (Fig. 1c). In mid-2014, Microsoft released the computer-used second generation Kinect (Kinect v2) with improved resolution for the traditional camera and the depth sensor. The number of the identified joint centers for Kinect v2 also increased to 25.Compared with traditional opto-electronic or electromagnetic-based motion tracking systems, the Kinect sensor is very low-cost, portable, and without skin markers. Several studies have compared the Kinect-based and motion tracking system-based posture and movement, in various fields of biomechanics including; anthropometry measurement (Bonnechère et al., 2014), spinal loading assessment (Ning and Guo, 2013), clinical foot posture assessment (Mentiplay et al., 2013), body movement during postural control (Clark et al., 2012), gait training (Clark et al., 2013b), gait analysis (Clark et al., 2013a), and rehabilitation tool development (Pastor et al., 2012). In general, the results of these studies indicated that, although the Kinect sensor is not as accurate as more traditional laboratory-based measurement technologies, it does provide good agreement with a motion tracking system in terms of body segment lengths, the major joint angles, and the displacement of the key body joints for those specific body postures being tested.While the body segment length, the joint angles, and the joint displacements can be derived from the Kinect sensor-identified joints coordinates, very few studies have performed a direct comparison between the locations of the Kinect sensor-identified joint centers and their corresponding motion tracking system-identified counterparts. This is probably because the Kinect sensor-identified joints location are, with respect to a coordinate system, fixed with the Kinect sensor, whose orientation is normally unknown within the global coordinate system (GCS) of a motion tracking system. However, the error of Kinect sensor-identified joint center locations can provide more insight to the composition of the error in segment length, joint angles, and joint displacement. In addition, the joint center positions can be important when calculating the joint net moments using the inverse dynamic methods (Faber et al., 2009; Hashish et al., 2014). The goal of the current study is to examine the accuracy of the Kinect sensor-based joint center coordinates during various static postures of daily activities for Kinect v1 and v2. To achieve this goal, a method to align the coordinate system of the Kinect sensor with respect to the GCS of a motion tracking system is also proposed.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
