@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Participatory ergonomics simulation of hospital work systems: The influence of simulation media on simulation outcome

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Simulation media fidelity and affordance impact ergonomics evaluation.Difference in fidelity and affordance show difference in simulation outcomes.Full-scale mock-ups enable evaluation of workspace and technologies & tools.Table-top models enable evaluation of work organization.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Participatory simulation,Hospital work systems,Participatory ergonomics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Current application of work system simulation in participatory ergonomics (PE) design includes a variety of different simulation media. However, the actual influence of the media attributes on the simulation outcome has received less attention. This study investigates two simulation media: full-scale mock-ups and table-top models. The aim is to compare, how the media attributes of fidelity and affordance influence the ergonomics identification and evaluation in PE design of hospital work systems. The results illustrate, how the full-scale mock-ups’ high fidelity of room layout and affordance of tool operation support ergonomics identification and evaluation related to the work system entities space and technologies & tools. The table-top models’ high fidelity of function relations and affordance of a helicopter view support ergonomics identification and evaluation related to the entity organization. Furthermore, the study addresses the form of the identified and evaluated conditions, being either identified challenges or tangible design criteria.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A recognized problem in work system design is the occurrence of ergonomics problems after implementation of system changes, resulting in resource demanding and costly readjustments to comply with the problems (Hendrick, 2008). One way of preventing the ergonomics problems already during the design process is to include the future workers in participatory ergonomics (PE) (Wilson et al., 2005). PE has been defined as “the involvement of people in planning and controlling a significant amount of their own work activities, with sufficient knowledge and power to influence both processes and outcomes in order to achieve desirable goals” (Wilson, 1995).Participatory simulation is a PE method that involves the future workers in design of work systems. A work system can be defined as “… a system in which human participants and/or machines perform work using information, technology, and other resources to produce products and/or services for internal or external customers” (Alter, 2006). Simulation has been defined as “an imitation of the operation of a real-world process or system over time” (Banks et al., 2010), and may have two purposes. The first being a method for identifying and evaluating the future work practices and ergonomics conditions (Daniellou, 2007; Daniellou et al., 2014; Nelson et al., 2013) and the second being a social process mediating mutual learning between workers and designers (Béguin, 2014). This study will concentrate on the first purpose.A key component in participatory simulation is the simulation media (Daniellou, 2007), which represent the work system to be designed. Within the PE field, a variety of different simulation media are applied, all with the purpose of identifying or assessing ergonomics conditions and problems of the work system to be designed. Physical simulation media such as mock-ups and prototypes are applied for assessing work posture (Sundin et al., 2004), muscular discomfort (Paquet and Lin, 2003), physical layout and spatial conditions (Broberg et al., 2011; Steinfeld, 2004; Watkins et al., 2008). Computer based simulation media such as 3D computer animation and mixed reality have been applied for assessing muscular fatigue (Hallbeck et al., 2010; Perez et al., 2014), repetitive work and critical work sequences (Sundin and Medbo, 2003; Sundin et al., 2004).The variation in ergonomics conditions indicates that different media support identification and assessment of different ergonomics conditions, which is a common reflection point in the literature (Hallbeck et al., 2010; Paquet and Lin, 2003; Steinfeld, 2004; Sundin and Medbo, 2003; Watkins et al., 2008). In addition, some studies indicate that the media have certain attributes, but these are not reflected upon in relation to the ergonomics conditions or problems actually possible to identify by applying the media. The media attributes indicated are the ability of the media to represent the reality (Hallbeck et al., 2010; Steinfeld, 2004; Watkins et al., 2008) and the possible actions the media support (Broberg et al., 2011; Steinfeld, 2004). Within the interaction design field, these attributes are recognized as fidelity (Hall, 2001; Lim et al., 2008) and affordance (Norman, 2002; Turner, 2005). Fidelity may be defined as “the level of detail or sophistication of what is manifested” (Lim et al., 2008). Affordance may be defined as “the perceived and actual properties of the thing… that determine just how the thing could possibly be used” (Norman, 2002). How these two media attributes influence the outcome of simulations, in the form of identified ergonomics conditions, has received little attention in the participatory simulation field.The Danish healthcare sector is currently a relevant empirical setting for exploring the influence of the simulation media attributes. At the moment, the sector is in a comprehensive design process of new public hospitals, which includes an extensive application of participatory simulation, involving healthcare professionals in PE design. The design activities may be conceptualized as a matter of designing hospital work systems. This study is based on two case studies of participatory simulation events, applying two different simulation media: full-scale mock-ups and table-top models. The aim is to compare, how the fidelity and affordance attributes of these two types of simulation media may influence the ability to identify and evaluate ergonomics conditions during PE design of hospital work systems.Our basic assumption was that the two simulation media would have different capabilities in supporting identification and evaluation of ergonomics conditions because of difference in the attributes. By adapting the International Ergonomics Association's definition, ergonomics conditions are defined as: (1) conditions influencing the healthcare professionals' well-being in the future work system, e.g. work posture, psychosocial work load, indoor climate, safety and division of labor; and (2) conditions influencing the work system's overall performance, e.g. efficiency, consumption of resources, quality of system output and risk of errors. We refer to identification as the process of simulation participants being able to articulate or visually show possible ergonomics challenges of the future work system. We refer to evaluation as the process of participants being able to formulate tangible design criteria based on discussions of the identified ergonomics conditions.In the following, we first define the key work system concept, followed by the methodological approach, including the introduction of the two cases. We present the results from the analysis in the form of the identified and evaluated ergonomics conditions of the two cases and the influence of fidelity and affordance. In the discussion, the results of each case are compared and related to existing studies on full-scale mock-ups and table-top based models. We end with concluding remarks, including implications for practitioners.In order to analyze the participatory simulation phenomenon, we introduce the work system concept. A work system has been defined as consisting of different interconnected entities (Alter, 2006; Carayon, 2009; Horgen et al., 1999; Kleiner, 2006). We operate with six entities: work practice, participants, information, technologies & tools, space and organization. The work practice is the work activities within the work system (Alter, 2006). The participants are the people who perform the work (Alter, 2006) and have psychosocial, cognitive and physical characteristics (Carayon, 2009). The information is explicit and tacit knowledge, which is exchanged as participants perform their work (Alter, 2006). The technologies & tools are the tools that help participants work efficiently (Alter, 2006; Carayon, 2009). The space is the physical environment and workspace design (Carayon, 2009; Horgen et al., 1999). The organization is the organizational design, the organization of work, coordination of work (Kleiner, 2006), work scheduling and culture (Carayon, 2009). The six entities of the work system concept are applied as an analytical frame to help identify, to what extent the entities are addressed in the two simulation cases.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
