@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Effects of caffeine and menthol on cognition and mood during simulated firefighting in the heat

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We examined changes in cognition and mood during stimulated firefighting in heat.We examined the separate effects of caffeine and menthol on mental efforts.Cognition is well maintained during short duration firefighting.Mood is severely deteriorated even with regular rests.No effects of caffeine and menthol on cognition and mood.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Hyperthermia,Dehydration,Protective clothing,Cognitive performance,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study examined the separate effects of caffeine and menthol on cognition and mood during simulated firefighting in the heat. Participants (N = 10) performed three trials in a counterbalanced order, either with 400 mg caffeine, menthol lozenges, or placebo. The simulated firefighting consisted of 2 bouts of 20-min treadmill exercise and one bout of 20-min stepping exercise in the heat with two brief 15-min rest periods between each exercise phase. Exercise induced significant dehydration (>3%) and elevated rectal temperature (>38.9 °C), for all three conditions. Neither caffeine nor menthol reduced perceived exertion compared to placebo (p > 0.05). Mood ratings (i.e., alertness, hedonic tone, tension) significantly deteriorated over time (p < 0.05), but there was no difference among the three conditions. Simple reaction time, short-term memory, and retrieval memory did not alter with treatments or repeated evaluations. Reaction accuracy from a math test remained unchanged throughout the experimental period; reaction time from the math test was significantly faster after exposure to the heat (p < 0.05). It is concluded that, exhaustive exercise in the heat severely impacted mood, but minimally impacted cognition. These treatments failed to show ergogenic benefits in a simulated firefighting paradigm in a hot environment.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
While the physiological consequences of firefighting have been extensively studied, less is understood about how cognition and mood would be affected during firefighting in harsh and demanding environments. Firefighters are often exposed to multi-stressors, including intense and sustained physical tasks, environmental extremes, anxiety, uncertainty, and obligations of victim rescue. There is considerable anecdotal documentation of these multi-stressors negatively impacting on the ability to process cognitive information and act quickly, effectively, and decisively (Grandjean and Grandjean, 2007; Hancock and Vasmatzidis, 2003). Furthermore, a firefighting job is characterized by shift work which can contribute to episodic sleepiness, and may cause deterioration of alertness and operational efficiency. A recent article highlighted sleep disruption, heat, and smoke on physical and cognitive performance encountered by wildland ﬁreﬁghters (Aisbett et al., 2012). Impaired cognition and mood would likely increase risks of injuries and accidents.Caffeine and menthol might provide a practical intervention to preserve sufficient mental efforts during firefighting missions. The behavioral effects of caffeine as a stimulus are well known. Following crossing the blood-brain barrier, caffeine binds to adenosine receptors and exerts centrally psychostimulant effects through antagonism of adenosine A1 receptors. Caffeine's well-documented stimulating effect on human cognition and mood include increased alertness, attention, vigilance, and memory (Lieberman, 2001; Nehlig, 2010). For shift workers, use of caffeine products are likely to be encouraged for prevention of work errors and possible injuries resulted from fatigue and sleepiness (Ker et al., 2010). The beneficial effects on cognitive information processing likely contribute to the widespread use of this drug. Menthol has a mild arousal effect. When applied to the skin and mucous surfaces, menthol induces subjective sensation of coolness, the underlying mechanism being a stimulating action on peripheral cold receptors (Eccles, 2003). Nasal inhalation or oral administration of menthol brings perceived sensation of breathing cool and fresh air and of improved airflow; it has been suggested this cool sensation influences arousal and alertness levels (Eccles, 2000). Mints and lozenges with menthol additive are frequently used in situations where a mild stimulus is required to maintain alertness. Interestingly, Mündel and Jones (2009) studied swilling menthol solution during exercise in a hot environment and it was found endurance capacity was enhanced by an average of 9% with menthol. They suggested that change in the sense of effort (average of 15% reduction in ratings of perceived exertion) partially accounted for the improvement in heat tolerance. Thus, effects of stimulus such as caffeine and menthol might be expected, especially when individuals experience low arousal and high fatigue levels, or in tasks requiring explicit and sustained cognitive processing, or in situations of high demand on controlled mood. Therefore, for firefighters experiencing dehydrated, hyperthermic, and exhausted states, caffeine and menthol might offer simple solutions for combating fatigue and preserving cognitive information processing and mood.Failure to detect any dangerous situations can be critical and life-threatening. Therefore, this study examined the separate effects of caffeine and menthol on cognition and mood during a simulated firefighting exposure. We hypothesized that in a heat stress prolonged exercise condition, caffeine and menthol would increase cognitive performance and improve mood across time relative to placebo. Administrators need to be aware of the potential for mental efforts deficits in highly stressful situations and seek potential interventions to mitigate adverse effects.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This study examined potential practical interventions for performance deficits in a multi-stressors work environment. Working in a thermal stressful environment dramatically deteriorated mood states and increased perceived exertion. Cognition was minimally altered during exercise-heat exposure. Furthermore, under this challenging multi-stressors environment, no potential ergogenic effects were found with caffeine or menthol. Both physiological and mental efforts are critical for the health, safety, and operational effectiveness for firefighting. Impact of exercise in hazardous environments on mental efforts warrants more attention for planning and preparing firefighters.