@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Ergonomics and sustainable development in the past two decades (1992–2011): Research trends and how ergonomics can contribute to sustainable development

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We review 10,000+ papers in the fields of ergonomics and sustainable development.The frequently researched areas in ergonomics have been identified.Ergonomics can contribute its knowledge in 4 categories of sustainable development.How to contribute ergonomics expertise to sustainable development are discussed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Ergonomics,Sustainable development,Literature survey,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The need for sustainable development has been widely recognized and sustainable development has become a hot topic of various disciplines even though the role of ergonomics in it is seldom reported or considered. This study conducts a systematic survey of research publications in the fields of ergonomics and sustainable development over the past two decades (1992–2011), in order to identify their research trends and convergent areas where ergonomics can play an important role in sustainable development. The results show that ‘methods and techniques’, ‘human characteristics’, ‘work design and organization’, ‘health and safety’ and ‘workplace and equipment design’ are the top five frequently researched areas in ergonomics. Ergonomics has an opportunity to contribute its knowledge especially to ‘industrial and product design’, ‘architecture’, ‘health and safety’ and ‘HCI’ (especially for energy reduction issues) categories of sustainable development. Typical methodologies and general guidance on how to contribute the expertise of ergonomist to sustainable development are also discussed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Defined as “meeting the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs” (WCED, 1987), sustainable development has been becoming the center of attention and concerns for researchers as well as practitioners in various fields such as design, engineering and business over the past few decades (Barbier, 1987; Lele, 1991; Palmer et al., 1997; Wise, 2001; McLennan, 2004; IISD, 2013). Sustainable development is usually considered to have environmental, economic and social dimensions which should be balanced and jointly optimized (Blevis, 2007; Hanson, 2013; Zink, 2014). Ergonomics (or its synonym human factors) is “the scientific discipline concerned with the understanding of the interactions among humans and other elements of a system, and the profession that applies theory, principles, data and methods to design in order to optimize human wellbeing and overall system performance” (IEA, 2010) and it considers both a social goal (human wellbeing) and an economic goal (overall system performance) (Dul and Neumann, 2009), these two goals are corresponding to aforementioned two dimensions of sustainability.Statements above indicate both ergonomics and sustainable development are human centered and concerned with the joint optimization of the elements of complex socio-technical systems (Legg and Brown, 2010; Zink, 2014), implying that ergonomics could play an important role in assisting the transition to sustainable development (Moray, 1995; Dekker et al., 2013; Martin et al., 2013; Zink and Fischer, 2013; Bolis et al., 2014). Even though a few case studies on how ergonomics can help in achieving transition to sustainability have been reported (Wise, 2001; Rodriguez, 2004; Legg and Brown, 2010; Miller et al., 2012; Ryan and Wilson, 2013), a recent literature review conducted by Martin et al. (2013) reported that only seven articles on ergonomics, design and sustainability were in ergonomics journals and thus there is a lack of clear published contributions from ergonomics to sustainable development, showing still very weak sign of ergonomists tacking sustainability issues.Since the demands in dealing with the issues related to sustainable development are increasing (IISD, 2013) and the goals of ergonomics and sustainable development are somewhat congruent, integrating ergonomics into the field of sustainable development might offer promising solutions to solve sustainability related problems (Moray, 1995; Ryan and Wilson, 2013; Zink and Fischer, 2013) and open a window of opportunity for the discipline of ergonomics to devote attention to global problems (Haslam and Waterson, 2013; Martin et al., 2013). A number of efforts have been initiated in recent years to call for ergonomics to become more involved with sustainability. Steimle and Zink (2006) initially applied the term sustainable development to ergonomics (or human factors), and special IEA technical group on “Human Factors and Sustainable Development” (chaired by Professor Klaus J. Zink and Professor Colin G. Drury) has been established afterward in 2008. A special issue titled ‘Ergonomics and Sustainability’ was also recently published in Ergonomics in 2013. However, since the perspective on sustainable development is relatively new for ergonomists, very few publications are available on where and how ergonomics can contribute well to the sustainable development (Thatcher, 2009; Haslam and Waterson, 2013). Following, the main goal of this study is to identify the research trends and the convergent areas of ergonomics and sustainable development through a systematic survey of the relevant research publications over the past two decades (1992–2011). The findings from this study are expected to provide some preliminary answers to the basic question: where and how can ergonomics contribute to sustainable development?

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Even though sustainability has stimulated considerable changes in design, engineering and business professions over the past decades, ergonomics has remained relatively absent from this paradigmatic revolution (Wise, 2001). In this study, instead of providing a complete list of contributions on sustainable development which have been made from ergonomics, we focus on identifying the potential directions for better incorporating ergonomics to the sustainable development in the future through literature survey, paper classification and the trend analysis.The results from the trend analysis have shown where the potential areas in ergonomics can contribute to sustainable development (Fig. 7), another part of the question on how to contribute still remains unanswered. There have been several attempts by scholars and practitioners in the ergonomics field to come up with an appropriate methodology or framework that can possibly contribute to sustainable development (Marsot, 2005; Bucchianico et al., 2012; Marano et al., 2012; Nadadur and Parkinson, 2013; Neumann and Village, 2012; Ryan and Wilson, 2013; Carayon et al., 2014; Davis et al., 2014; Norros, 2014; Zink, 2014).To integrate ergonomics at the industrial and product design stage for sustainability, Marsot (2005) has suggested using quality function deployment (QFD), a method to transform user demands (including ergonomic demands) and sustainability requirements (such as the use of materials friendly to environment and with long life cycles) into engineering design characteristics for a product or system as a general tool. The effectiveness of the QFD for linking ergonomics and product design has been demonstrated by many studies (Tsuda, 1995; Terninko, 1997; Wu, 1997; Haapalainen et al., 2000). Tosi (2012) recently applied User-Centered Design (UCD) approach into the design of everyday use products for environmental sustainability in terms of energy saving and resource conservation. Two examples were introduced in Tosi's study to demonstrate the applicability of UCD approach. The first example involves innovative design solutions for household kitchens regarding the preparation and consumption of food, especially in relation to energy saving and waste reduction; while the second example is related to the design of an easily transportable, folding and ultra-lightweight bicycle (intermodal bike) for sustainable mobility and intermodality. Furthermore, Nadadur and Parkinson (2013) highlighted the role of anthropometry from ergonomics in sustainable development and proposed three ways in which its consideration is relevant to sustainability: reducing raw material consumption, increasing usage lifetimes and ethical human resource considerations. They reported a global case study on workstation seat design, with detail considerations of human anthropometry variability. Aside from the integration of ergonomics with industrial and product design for sustainability, Wise (2001) showed that principles of environmental ergonomics for building occupant benefits can be applied into sustainable building design. The potential of having a magic integration of ergonomics and sustainable design for buildings have been demonstrated through architecture related projects with ergonomic inputs (Cardoso et al., 2006; Remijn, 2006; Hignett and Lu, 2009; Miller et al., 2012).Aside from being applied into ‘industrial and product design’ and ‘architecture’ for sustainability, ergonomics can also be applied into ‘HCI’ for sustainability (Abrahamse et al., 2005; Darby, 2006; Flemming et al., 2008), especially for environmental issues such as energy reduction. Abrahamse et al. (2005) and Darby (2006) showed that feedback about energy usage, a consequence intervention, is successfully encouraging conservation behavior and reducing energy consumption in the developed world. Flemming et al. (2008) reviewed the literature on how reductions in energy consumption can be achieved through behavioral interventions and they demonstrated a need for ergonomics in the sustainability domain. Since ergonomist have the theory and technical expertise to approach the feedback design problem systematically, ergonomics has an opportunity to contribute to better human-machine systems for sustainable development on energy reduction (Harvey et al., 2013; Peffer et al., 2013). Recently, Lockton et al. (2010) developed an innovation tool-Design with Intent (DWI) method to influence the user behavior so that the environmental impact of the products can be reduced efficiently.‘Health and safety’ along with ‘work design and organization’ can contribute to social sustainability by the sustainability of human resources, the most important asset in enterprises and our society. Sustainability of human resources is based on enduring workability and employability, which have been dominant elements in ergonomics ever since (Zink, 2008; IEA, 2010). In this sense, ergonomics can contribute to designing sustainable work systems which not only have to be able to function in their environment and to achieve economic or operational objectives, but also have to preserve or enlarge human and social capital (Maguire, 2001; Neumann and Village, 2012; Zink, 2014). In fact, the sustainability of human and social capital is one of the foundations of economic sustainability and it is needed to secure environmental sustainability (Docherty et al., 2009). A conceptual framework for integrating ergonomics into designing sustainable work systems effectively to eliminate the health hazards at source was recently proposed by Neumann and Village (2012). Broad stakeholder participation (Vink et al., 2008), link between performance and health goals (Dul and Neumann, 2009), and process focused change tools are three essential elements of the proposed framework. The general strategies of ergonomic design for sustainability were discussed by Marano et al. (2012) and Ryan and Wilson (2013). It should be noted that in order for ergonomics to successfully contribute to sustainable development, an interdisciplinary design-driven and systems approach should play very important roles (Bucchianico et al., 2012; Carayon et al., 2014; Norros, 2014; Wilson, 2014; Zink, 2014).This study has some limitations. Firstly, even though more than 8100 articles from ergonomics and over 2600 articles from sustainable development were selected for classification, we can't exhaust all related publications due to the interdisciplinary nature of the ergonomics and sustainable development. For example, the keywords used to describe work in sustainable development may vary across disciplines, and the popularity of using different keywords to describe similar work may change over time, thus three keywords used in this study may bias the search and the findings may not be fully representative for the research publications in the field of sustainable development. Secondly, the classification of an article depends on not only each rater's professional knowledge, but also his/her personal judgments of substantial contribution to each category, thus, subjectivity is unavoidable in this classifying process. More rigorous criterion on article classification should be further studied. Furthermore, most of identified areas for ergonomics contribution to sustainable development should be considered as areas of somewhat mature contribution only, they are not necessarily the most promising areas of research since the most promising areas could be those that are not yet popular. Finally, regarding how to contribute ergonomics expertise and knowledge to sustainable development, this study only suggested typical methodologies and general guidance based on the surveyed literature, the systematic implementation steps remain unknown and should be further studied. Nevertheless, the findings from this study could offer some hints on where and how ergonomics can better contribute to the field of sustainable development.