@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Predicting stretcher carriage: Investigating variations in bilateral carry tests

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
All bilateral carry tests had strong performance correlations to stretcher carriage.Sensitivity and specificity analyses revealed good predictive ability of all tests.Manipulating speed and object had minimal impact on predicting stretcher carriage.Predictive equations are presented to set cut-scores for each test option.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Employment standards,Job fitness test,Physical performance,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Carrying a casualty on a stretcher is a critical task within military and emergency service occupations. This study evaluated the impact of manipulating carry speed and the object type in bilateral carries on the ability to predict performance and reflect the physical and physiological requirements of a unilateral stretcher carry. We demonstrated that three task-related predictive tests; a jerry can carry performed at 4.5 km h−1or 5.0 km h−1 and a kettle-bell carry performed at 5.0 km h−1 were strongly predictive of the physical and physiological demands of an individual participating as part of a four-person stretcher carry team. Therefore, bilateral predictive assessments have the utility for predicting the suitability of employees to effectively and safely conduct a four-person unilateral stretcher carry.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Physical employment standards are developed with the aim of ensuring that an employee's physical and physiological capacities are commensurate with the demands of their occupation. The implementation of scientifically-rigorous physical employment standards can lead to a workforce with increased capability and productivity (Taylor and Groeller, 2003) and have been shown to significantly reduce injuries across a range of occupations (Harbin, 2005; Larsson and Harms-Ringdahl, 2006; Rosenblum and Shankar, 2006). In occupations where tasks may be time-critical, such as military, fire, ambulance and emergency rescue, physically capable employees are paramount in ensuring that such tasks are performed effectively and efficiently. One such time-critical task is a stretcher carry, whereby the efficiency of extricating a casualty may impact on medical-related outcomes. This is exemplified in the Australian Army whereby personnel are expected to be able to extract a wounded soldier using a four person stretcher carry over a distance of 100 m.A range of generic physical assessments have previously been used to predict stretcher carriage, such as grip strength, upright pull, dead lift, isokinetic leg strength, standing broad jump and predictive assessments of peak oxygen consumption (Knapik et al., 1999; Rice and Sharp, 1994). While generic predictive assessments are generally easy to administer, they lack specific job-related characteristics, are susceptible to body mass bias and commonly only test one specific physical construct of a task that may have multiple physical constructs (Payne and Harvey, 2010; Vanderburgh, 2008). Task simulations are considered to be the ‘gold standard’ of assessments as they replicate the actual job task (Payne and Harvey, 2010). However, team assessments introduce poor reliability, lack of standard operation, and remove the ability to accurately assess individual maximal performance. For example, a four person stretcher carry is challenging to assess during large-scale testing and individual performance is dependent on the ability of the other team members. Subsequently, task-related predictive tests provide the opportunity to assess individual performance while still assessing relevant physiological constructs.Task-related predictive tests also provide the opportunity to manipulate test parameters to maximise the predictive ability and the physical and physiological link to the criterion task. A number of studies have reported the impact of test parameters on the physiological demands of carry tasks. Such parameters include the use of a harness (Knapik et al., 2000; Rice et al., 1996) and number of personnel (Rice et al., 1996) in stretcher carriage, as well as the carried mass (Kilbom et al., 1992; McGill et al., 2013). While these studies provide insight into the change in physiological response according to variation of task parameters, they are not conducted with the aim of developing physical employment standards. As such, they do not provide insight into how task manipulation may impact the ability of a test to reflect the physical and physiological demands of a critical task.Our group has previously investigated the impact of carry mass and showed that, at matched carry speeds, a bilateral carry of two 22 kg jerry cans better predicted four-person stretcher carry performance when compared to a bilateral carry of two 15 kg jerry cans (Beck et al., 2015). However, the manipulation of other test parameters, such as carry speed and the object type, may enhance the predictive ability of a task-related predictive test and the physical and physiological link to the criterion task. This study aims to address this gap in knowledge.Given that the stretcher carry involves a deeper squat relative to the jerry can carriage task, it is suspected that even when the carry speed is matched over a set distance, carry speed may be greater in the stretcher carry as a result of the time delay associated with lifting the stretcher from ground level. Similarly, an object that more closely replicates the squat depth required in picking up the stretcher and the handle dimensions of a stretcher may improve prediction of stretcher carriage. Subsequently, we established two hypotheses. The first hypothesis is that a faster carry speed in the bilateral carries will better predict performance and replicate the physical and physiological demands of stretcher carriage at 4.5 km h−1 when compared with the bilateral carries at the same carry speed (4.5 km h−1). The second hypothesis is that an object with a handle that more closely replicates that of a stretcher and requires a squat depth that more closely aligns with picking up a stretcher, such as a kettle bell, will better replicate the physical and physiological demands stretcher carriage compared with the jerry cans.Subsequently, the aim of this study is to understand the impact of manipulating two parameters (object carried and carry speed) in bilateral carries (task-related predictive tests) on the ability to predict performance and reflect the physical and physiological requirements of a stretcher carry.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A stretcher carry is a critical task for a wide variety of occupations including military personnel and emergency services. Given the criticality of this task, it is necessary to ensure that personnel have the requisite physical ability to be able to effectively and safely conduct this task. This study evaluated the impact of manipulating carry speed and the object type in bilateral carries on the ability to predict performance and reflect the physical and physiological requirements of a stretcher carry. The results of this study demonstrated that, aside from measures of back-leg isometric strength in the kettle bell carry (4.5 km h−1), the manipulation of carry speed and the object carried did not impact upon the prediction of performance and the reflection of the physical and physiological requirements of a stretcher carry. All four task-related predictive tests had strong performance correlations to the stretcher carry and correctly classified the performance of the majority of participants. Pre and post-carry back-leg and grip strength measures were shown to be similar between all tests and the stretcher carry, with the exception of the kettle bell carry (4.5 km h−1) in which the decline in post-carry back-leg strength relative to pre-carry measures was significantly less than that of the stretcher carry. In summary, the task-related predictive tests of a jerry can carry (4.5 km h−1), jerry can carry (5.0 km h−1) and kettle bell carry (5.0 km h−1) were all shown to strongly predict performance and reflect the physical and physiological demands of a four-person stretcher carry. Predictive equations have been provided and can be used to determine appropriate cut-scores on each of the tests.