@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multi-stakeholder collaboration in the redesign of family-centered rounds process

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We explored stakeholder experience with collaboration in healthcare system redesign.We proposed a model of stakeholder collaboration in healthcare system redesign.We identified challenges to stakeholder collaboration in healthcare system redesign.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multi-stakeholder collaboration,Healthcare system redesign,Family-centered rounds,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A human factors approach to healthcare system redesign emphasizes the involvement of multiple healthcare stakeholders (e.g., patients and families, healthcare providers) in the redesign process. This study explores the experience of multiple stakeholders with collaboration in a healthcare system redesign project. Interviews were conducted with ten stakeholder representatives who participated in the redesign of the family-centered rounds process in a pediatric hospital. Qualitative interview data were analyzed using a phenomenological approach. A model of collaborative healthcare system redesign was developed, which defined four phases (i.e., setup of the redesign team, preparation for meetings, collaboration in meetings, follow-up after meetings) and two outcomes (i.e., team outcomes, redesign outcomes) of the collaborative process. Challenges to multi-stakeholder collaboration in healthcare system redesign, such as need to represent all relevant stakeholders, scheduling of meetings and managing different perspectives, were identified.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Human Factors and Ergonomics (HFE) principles can be used to redesign healthcare work systems so that patient care is safe and effective and meets the needs of patients (Carayon, 2011; Carayon et al., 2014b; Carayon et al., 2013; Holden et al., 2013; Institute of Medicine Committee on Quality of Health Care in America, 2001; Reid et al., 2005). An overarching HFE principle is to involve “stakeholders,” who affect or are affected by the healthcare work system, in the redesign process (Carayon et al., 2012). Stakeholders have varied values, norms, responsibilities, experience, tasks, skills, and priorities; therefore, they possess heterogeneous perspectives regarding care processes and their quality and safety (Carayon et al., 2012). These different perspectives are invaluable and need to be considered and integrated in any healthcare system redesign process (Manias et al., 2007; Tregunno et al., 2004). In particular, in response to the call for patient/family-centered care (Institute of Medicine Committee on Quality of Health Care in America, 2001), an HFE approach to healthcare system redesign should integrate the perspective of patients and families through their participation in the redesign process (Johnson et al., 2008).We define “collaborative healthcare system redesign” as the involvement of different stakeholders in the process of healthcare system redesign. Based on Patel et al. (2012), we conceptualize collaborative healthcare system redesign as a complex team process in which stakeholders interact in a single event or series of events to redesign healthcare work systems and processes with the goal of improving patient, employee and organizational outcomes. Studies on the impact of healthcare collaboration on quality of care (Horbar et al., 2001) and patient safety (Clemmer et al., 1999) show that the effectiveness of collaborative initiatives is dependent on the quality of collaboration between stakeholders (Hackman, 1987; Kozlowski and Ilgen, 2006). Inadequate or poor collaboration between stakeholders can limit team progress, create bad feelings, and result in either a “safe solution” degenerating to the lowest common denominator or a “biased solution” ignoring certain perspectives, and therefore, impair the quality of the redesign (Eisenhardt et al., 1997; Katzenbach and Smith, 1994; Kyng, 1998; Wilson and Haines, 1997).Stakeholder collaboration in healthcare system redesign can be framed in the input–process–output team model (Salas et al., 2007). In a comparison of two multidisciplinary teams performing healthcare failure mode and effects analysis (FMEA), Wetterneck et al. (2009) found that FMEA team performance was associated with team inputs (e.g., team composition, team objectives, organizational support) and processes (e.g., team dynamics, attendance, team progress). In a similar vein, Gray and Wood (1991) proposed a general model of collaboration consisting of three elements: preconditions, process and outcomes. Understanding these three elements and how they influence each other is important to facilitate stakeholder collaboration in healthcare system redesign.A number of studies have described preconditions of (or input to) collaboration (e.g., Bronstein, 2003; Mattessich and Monsey, 1992). The framework of collaborative work system design by Patel et al. (2012) includes seven categories of factors influencing collaboration: context, support, tasks, interaction processes, teams, individuals, and overarching factors. While the preconditions of collaboration are well documented, the process of collaboration is less understood (Gray and Wood, 1991; Thomson and Perry, 2006). Specifically, no study has examined how multiple stakeholders collaborate in healthcare system redesign. Healthcare involves different groups of stakeholders (e.g., patients and families, healthcare providers, management) who play different roles (e.g., actors, designers, decision makers, influencers) in healthcare system redesign (Dul et al., 2012; Edwards and Jensen, 2014). To optimize collaborative redesign, we need to understand the needs of these stakeholders and the collaborative redesign process through which they can integrate their needs and perspectives (Détienne, 2006; Xie et al., 2012).The objective of this study is to examine the collaboration of multiple stakeholders in a specific project aimed to redesign the family-centered rounds (FCR) process. Specifically, this study aims to understand (1) the process of collaborative healthcare system redesign and (2) challenges to collaboration associated with the participation of multiple stakeholders.FCR are “interdisciplinary work rounds at the bedside in which the patient and family share in the control of the management plan as well as in the evaluation of the process itself” (Sisterhen et al., 2007). During FCR, the healthcare team, consisting of physicians, nurses and other healthcare providers, meets with the hospitalized patient and his/her family to communicate clinical information and, ideally, make joint decisions on daily and discharge care. In the pediatric setting, FCR are recommended as standard practice to engage families in the care of hospitalized children (Committee on Hospital Care and Institute for Patient- and Family-Centered Care, 2012). Various work system barriers (e.g., disruption of workflow, healthcare team size, physical room constraints), however, can hinder family engagement in FCR (Carayon et al., 2011; Mittal et al., 2010). To improve family engagement in FCR, these system barriers need to be addressed and the FCR process and related work system need to be redesigned (Kelly et al., 2013).FCR were implemented at the American Family Children's Hospital (AFCH) in Madison, Wisconsin at its inception in 2007. While AFCH leadership was strongly supportive of family-centered care and committed to FCR, gaps existed in the extent to which families were engaged in FCR and effective interventions to improve family engagement in FCR. To bridge these gaps, a five-year research project funded by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality was initiated, in which a participatory ergonomics approach was used to redesign the FCR process on one hematology/oncology and one hospitalist service at AFCH. An Intervention Implementation Team (IIT) was formed to facilitate the redesign process, consisting of five researchers (four HFE professionals and one pediatric attending physician) and ten FCR stakeholder representatives:•One parent from the AFCH Patient and Family Advisory Council,A medical administrator at AFCH,Two nurse managers,Two nurses,Two attending physicians,Two senior resident physicians.Table 1describes the stages and involvement of researchers and FCR stakeholders in the redesign process. Six IIT meetings were held over a 10-month period (from January to October, 2012). Two researchers (the physician and one of the HFE professionals) facilitated the discussion at each meeting, while the other three researchers recorded meeting notes and managed meeting logistics. In addition, researchers carried out decisions made by the IIT in between meetings and met regularly with the steering committee of the overall research project to report progress and gather feedback. Stakeholder representatives on the IIT were expected to actively participate in the meetings and communicate with their colleagues in between meetings. Other FCR stakeholders who did not participate in the IIT were able to voice their opinions and contribute to the redesign process through different mechanisms, e.g., interviews (Carayon et al., 2011; Carayon et al., 2014a; Kelly et al., 2013), surveys (Xie et al., 2012) and the pilot study of the intervention (Li et al., 2013).A checklist of FCR best practices was developed by the IIT and implemented on the two inpatient services in October 2012, along with training and other implementation activities. An evaluation of the impact of the intervention on care processes (e.g., use of the FCR checklist) and patient outcomes (e.g., family/patient engagement) is being conducted. These data will be reported in forthcoming manuscripts.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
