@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Driver behaviour at roadworks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Road networks around the world are reaching a critical stage in their lifecycle.Transport authorities are planning significant maintenance activities with associated roadworks and traffic management.Traffic microsimulation is used to plan these roadworks but modelled drivers are not behaving in the same way as real drivers.A range of psychological explanations for this difference are reviewed.Guidance for incorporating these psychological factors into future models is proposed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Roadworks,Driver behaviour,Microsimulation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
There is an incompatibility between how transport engineers think drivers behave in roadworks and how they actually behave. As a result of this incompatibility we are losing approximately a lane's worth of capacity in addition to those closed by the roadworks themselves. The problem would have little significance were it not for the fact a lane of motorway costs approx. £30 m per mile to construct and £43 k a year to maintain, and that many more roadworks are planned as infrastructure constructed 40 or 50 years previously reaches a critical stage in its lifecycle. Given current traffic volumes, and the sensitivity of road networks to congestion, the effects of roadworks need to be accurately assessed. To do this requires a new ergonomic approach. A large-scale observational study of real traffic conditions was used to identify the issues and impacts, which were then mapped to the ergonomic knowledge-base on driver behaviour, and combined to developed practical guidelines to help in modelling future roadworks scenarios with greater behavioural accuracy. Also stemming from the work are novel directions for the future ergonomic design of roadworks themselves.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The findings of this research identify the strong influence that social psychological factors have on driver behaviour. The research also shows that roadworks scenarios tend to increase the strength and likelihood of these factors occurring. None of this would be a concern were it not for the fact that it results in significantly different traffic conditions to those that are predicted. In effect, somewhere in the region of an extra lane of capacity is lost due to these ‘soft’ driver behaviour factors alone. With an increasingly pressing need to adequately model the effects of large scale maintenance interventions on ageing infrastructure, these effects have to be captured more accurately.Creating microsimulation models which assume traffic responds to roadworks in the same way it responds to other ‘normal’ situations leads to inaccuracies in the model outputs. Modelled drivers do not differentiate between a roadworks layout and the same layout in ‘normal’ circumstances, whereas drivers in real-life do make this distinction. It is important to understand how these modelled drivers do behave before considering ways to amend that behaviour in real roadworks scenarios. The previous sections have confirmed the presence of this phenomenon and its severity, and the review of the knowledge-base now enables us to put forward concrete guidance for transport modellers based on features of microsimulation which can be adjusted to give the desired effects. All models require calibration but the aim of these ergonomic guidelines is to help transport modellers reach a calibrated state more quickly. This has been confirmed through initial tests.The findings of the literature review and the differences between the observed and modelled flows in the case study, suggest there is a correlation between the reduction in flow per lane and the reduction in the number of lanes as a result of roadworks. One approach to modelling, albeit a blunt one, would be to focus on the reduction in flow and use simple modelling techniques to represent this reduction. For example, a model could assume an additional flow reduction of 21% per lane (as found) and ensure that at the highest flows this reduction was achieved. This method, although crude, would not involve any further software development and would result in a more accurate model.In the Clyde Strategic Microsimulation Model (CSMM), and others based on the same underlying software, each change in the network (e.g. a reduction in the number of lanes available to drivers) is projected upstream. The modelled drivers, therefore, become aware of a change and are able to react to it before they reach it. The distance a change can be projected upstream can be defined by the programmer. When a modelled driver becomes aware of a change in the network they make a decision about what they want to do. In the case of the Arkleston Bridge Strengthening Works, if a driver is in the outside lane and becomes aware that this lane will close further downstream they will decide to move into an open lane on the inside. In uncongested conditions this manoeuvre is relatively straightforward as there is plenty of road space for the driver to complete the manuoevre. In congested conditions a driver may be unable to find the road space which enables them to move to an inside line. This is when the critical difference between the modelled behaviour and observed behaviour in roadworks occurs. In the model, if the driver is unable to move from the outside lane to an inside lane they will carry on in the outside lane and continue to assess whether their desired manoeuvre is possible. This will last until the driver reaches the closed lane and has no choice but to move into an inside lane. In effect, then, the model leads to late merging behaviours which, due to the social psychological reasons dealt with in this paper, do not emerge in practice.In real-life drivers will tend to stop and wait for another driver in the inside lane to let them in, often much earlier than the merge point itself. This illustrates the difference between observed and modelled driver behaviour is not primarily to do with a driver's awareness of the roadworks (and therefore not primarily to do with the roadworks signage itself) but rather how a driver behaves in response to their awareness. The findings of the literature review, and the differences between the observed and modelled flows and speeds approaching the Arkleston Bridge Strengthening Works, both strongly suggest that in congested conditions drivers get into lane significantly in advance of any signs informing them of lane closures. In other words the awareness of the roadworks in congested conditions may come via the observed queue rather than the signage.A concrete way to represent this behaviour in the model would be to assume that drivers were aware of the roadworks before they reached the signage for it. This can be achieved in the microsimulation model by increasing the signposting distance beyond the distance specified in the design of the traffic management. This would result in drivers being aware of the roadworks earlier but would not necessarily result in a change in their behaviour (as it depends on the amount and proximity of other traffic).The most robust approach to modelling driver behaviour at roadworks would be to robustly represent the social psychological factors discussed in this paper. The impact of this in modelling terms would be as follows: if a driver is unable to find the road space which enables them to move to an inside lane they would wait for the opportunity to do so, rather than carry on in the outside lane and continue to assess whether their desired manoeuvre is possible. In future it may also be possible to apply different levels of ‘social resistance’, ‘queuing norms’, and other features dependent on the region the model is representing. This will require further translational results between research in driver behaviour and the software development underlying traffic microsimulation, but the possibilities are potentially significant.