@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Overweight, obesity and work functioning: The role of working-time arrangements

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We examine how obese workers function at work and the role of working-time arrangements.We assesse work functioning with the Work-Role Functioning Questionnaire.Obesity is associated with lower work functioning scores for physical demands in all workers.In shift workers, obesity is also associated with lower work functioning for output demands.In day and on-call workers, obesity is not associated with lower work functioning and work demands.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Overweight,Obesity,Body-mass index,BMI,Work functioning,Work demands,Shift-work,Working-time arrangements,Shift-workers,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundObesity is associated with productivity loss, but little is known about how obese workers function at work and also the role of working-time arrangements on this association is lacking. Therefore, the aim of this study was to examine the association of overweight and obesity with work functioning (WF), and to determine whether the associations differ between workers with different working-time arrangements.MethodsA cross-sectional study was conducted within the sampling frame of the ‘Shift Your Work’ study that examined the effect of irregular working-times in relation to health and functioning at work. We included N = 622 Dutch employees, of which N = 384 (62%) were shift-workers, N = 171 (27%) on-call workers and N = 67 (11%) day-workers. Overweight and obesity were defined as BMI 25–30 and ≥30, respectively. WF was assessed using the Work-Role Functioning Questionnaire.ResultsThe prevalences of overweight and obesity were 48% and 10% in all workers, 49% and 11% in shift-workers, 45% and 10% in on-call workers, and 49% and 6% in day workers, respectively. In all workers, obesity was associated with lower WF scores for physical demands (adjusted estimate, aB = −5.5). In shift-workers, obesity was associated with lower WF scores for output and physical demands (aB = −8.8 and −6.8, respectively). In day and on-call workers, overweight and obesity were not associated with WF.ConclusionsOverweight and obesity are highly prevalent in the working population. Obesity might reduce the executive function performance beyond physical limitations, and limit the ability to accomplish tasks successfully, especially in shift workers.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Obesity is one of the major public health challenges of the 21st century. The prevalence of obesity has tripled in many countries of the World Health Organization (WHO) European Region since the 1980s (World Health Organization, 2015). Currently, 52% of the European adult population is considered overweight or obese (Muller-Riemenschneider et al., 2008; de Mutsert et al., 2013). In 2011, 48% of the Dutch population was overweight, including 11% obese (de Mutsert et al., 2013). In the Netherlands, the annual costs attributable to obesity amount up to 887 million Euros (Muller-Riemenschneider et al., 2008). These costs include direct health care costs and indirect costs, of which most are related to presenteeism (lost productivity at work) (Muller-Riemenschneider et al., 2008). It is also known that the major occupational health problems such as musculoskeletal disorders, mental disorders and cardiovascular diseases, are directly or indirectly associated with obesity (Pandalai et al., 2013), and thus could negatively affect productivity or functioning at work.Work functioning (WF) refers to the ability of a person to meet all work demands (i.e. work scheduling, output, physical, mental-interpersonal demands) for a given state of health (Amick and Gimeno, 2008). Given the increasing prevalence of overweight and obesity in the aging working population, overweight and obesity could influence the ability to meet these work demands. Previous studies suggested that obesity is associated with impaired physical, psychosocial and cognitive functioning (Pagoto et al., 2006). The association of overweight and obesity with productivity loss and sickness absence is also documented (Neovius et al., 2012, 2009; Striegel et al., 2012; Gates et al., 2008). For instance, Neovius et al. revealed that obesity is associated with almost twice as high productivity losses to society as for normal weight over life time (Neovius et al., 2009), and that obesity is associated with longer episodes of sick leave (Neovius et al., 2012). Gates et al. also examined the impact of obesity on workplace productivity using the Work Limitations Questionnaire (WLQ) (Gates et al., 2008), but did not take working time arrangements into account. In the present study, the Work Role Functioning Questionnaire (WRFQ), a similar instrument as the WLQ, was used to measure work functioning. The WRFQ is a cross-culturally adapted and validated instrument with good psychometric properties (Abma et al., 2013a). More studies are needed regarding the association of overweight and obesity with work functioning (i.e. productivity loss at work for a given state of health).Furthermore, growing evidence suggests that working time arrangements (i.e. odd or irregular working times) negatively affect productivity at work and health via disruption of normal diurnal biological rhythms, lifestyle changes and social isolation (Scheer et al., 2009; Di Lorenzo et al., 2003). In modern society, working times are no longer fixed and strictly limited to normal diurnal working days as working hours are extended to evening and night hours, and are becoming more and more variable (Costa, 2003). According to an EU survey on working conditions, around 20% of the European working population is involved in some form of shift work (Parent-Thirion et al., 2007). It has been shown that overweight and obesity are more prevalent in shift-workers compared to day workers (Di Lorenzo et al., 2003). It is possible that shift work increases weight gain or exacerbate the effect of obesity on WF through poor sleep quality and short sleep duration, which are the prevailing problems reported by shift workers (Costa, 2010). Increased fatigue is among the negative consequences of reduced sleep length, disturbed patterns of sleep and impaired sleep quality among shift-workers, thereby affecting the ability to meet the work demands (Di Lorenzo et al., 2003; Costa, 2010). Moreover, sleep disturbances have been associated with an imbalance in appetite hormones that increase feelings of hunger and metabolic changes (Scheer et al., 2009).Hence, the aim of this study was to examine the association of overweight and obesity with WF, and to determine if the associations differ for workers with different working-time arrangements (i.e. shift workers, on-call workers and day workers). We hypothesized that overweight and obesity are associated with poor WF and the associations are stronger in shift workers than in on-call and day workers. The findings could help identify working time arrangements with high-risks regarding WF.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In conclusion, the present study indicates that overweight and obesity are prevalent in the working population, mainly in shift workers. Associations between obesity and WF total and WF for physical and output demands were found in shift-workers, but not in on-call and day workers. There was no association between overweight and WF total and WF subscale scores. Hence, it seems likely that obesity may lead to decreases in WF scores in workers especially in shift-workers. Longitudinal studies are needed to examine the temporal relationship between obesity and subsequent decrease in WF scores, and the role of working-time arrangements.The ‘Shift Your Work’ study was financially supported by a grant of the Netherlands Organization for Health Research and Development (Dutch acronym: ZonMw). The funding agency did not play any part in designing the research protocol, data analyses, data interpretation, or writing of the report.The authors declared no conflict of interest.