@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A comprehensive approach to environmental and human factors into product/service design and development. A review from an ergoecological perspective

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The need of approaching and intervening simultaneously human and environmental problems has been identify. This are the results of a systematic review of design concepts and methods associated with human and environmental factors.It shows conceptual and methodological segregation between human factors and environmental factors in published documents.Hints are giving towards a comprehensive approach based on ergoecology to strengthening decision making processes. The paper contributes to recognize methods for product/service design and development with perspective human-environmental.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Human factors/ergonomics HFE,Sustainability,Design methods,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This article presents the results of a documentary-exploratory review of design methods and concepts associated with human and environmental factors, based on a qualitative-quantitative analysis of coincidences with the fundamentals of ergoecology and in line with sustainable dynamics, with a view to putting the principles of ergoecology into practice in product/service design and development. 61.6% of 696 documents found represent work on conceptual developments, while the remaining 38.4% refer to design methods. Searches were refined using Nvivo-10 software, and 101 documents were obtained about theoretical aspects while 17 focused on the application of methods, and these formed the analysis universe. The results show how little concern there is for working comprehensively on human and environmental aspects, and a trend toward segmentation of human and environmental aspects in the field of product/service design and development can be seen, at both concept and application/methodology levels. It was concluded from the above that comprehensive, simultaneous work is needed on human and environmental aspects, clarity and conceptual unity, in order to achieve sustainability in practical matters and ensure that ergoecology-compatible design methods are applied.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The need to expand the vision of Human Factors and Ergonomics (HFE) and include environmental aspects more directly has been pointed out by various authors since the 90s (Nickerson, 1992; Moray, 1995; García-Acosta, 1996; García-Acosta et al., 1997), but has gained interest during the last decade due to the proposals of Eco-Ergonomics (Brown, 2007); green ergonomics (Thatcher, 2013); HFE and Sustainability (Zink and Fischer, 2013; Zink 2013 iFirst); and Ergoecology (Garcia-Acosta et al., 2012; García-Acosta et al., 2012 iFirst). In addition to offering an overall alternative toward this end, ergoecology provides a validated, evolved method for applying its fundamentals in production processes (Garcıa-Acosta et al., 1999; Saravia, 2005; Barrero et al., 2006; Saravia and Rincón, 2006).Continuing with this line of research, aiming to take ergoecology to be applied practically in product/service design and development with a symmetrical human-environmental perspective, a research project was proposed for examining progress made in terms of the state of the art on matters relating to ergoecology. Within the context of this research project, the present article presents the results of a systematic review between 1996 and 2013, about design concepts and methods associated with human and environmental factors.Ergoecology seeks going beyond the hegemonic notion of ‘sustainable development’ (WCED, 1987) and to orientate itself towards true sustainable dynamics between systems; in other words, system co-existence or co-dependence.Ergoecology is based around three principles: the anthropocentric approach, the systemic focus, and sustainability. Under sustainability, it proposes that two postulates be achieved: eco-productivity and eco-efficiency. Eco-productivity is to be construed as the ability of systems to transform energy, matter and information without generating waste or producing negative impacts on others systems. Eco-efficiency, meanwhile, can only be achieved when any type of negative impact can be generated between human-technological and terrestrial-natural systems (García-Acosta et al., 2012 iFirst). Finally, three axioms have been proposed: energy, matter, and information. These axioms can quantify interactions between built systems – which use resources – and natural systems – from which those resources come –, (García-Acosta et al., 2012). These concepts have also been addressed in other areas related to the economic sciences (Abukhader, 2008; Barbiroli et al., 2008; Dyllick and Hockerts, 2002; Kobayashi et al., 2005; Mauerhofer, 2008; Schaltegger et al., 2012; Villarroel Walker et al., 2009; Wang and Côté, 2011).Previous design-related research aimed at human beings/users/customers (García-Acosta et al., 2011; Puentes et al., 2013) set out to embrace conceptual and methodological trends associated with product design and development, with relation to life cycle, human factors, and context-surroundings. Seven trends were identified, and it was established that while some of them have gradually established their own methods, certain methods are common to some of these seven trends. No proposals were found in the said reviews that were directly related to the fields of environmental management or ergonomic and quality studies.Another systematic review used sustainability, design, and ergonomics as queries (Martin et al., 2013). Only 14 papers were obtained. This study didn't include other environmental aspects, such as ergoecological postulates i.e. eco-efficiency and eco-productivity. Therefore, proposals like ergoecology, take on importance as an innovative vision that can both evaluate processes and intervene in product and service improvement and innovation.It should be stressed that all the aforementioned studies are based on documents that have been published and are accessible in databases. In other words, it is information and knowledge that has been made public. However, when products and services are being designed and developed, much of the knowledge that is developed, including methods and procedures, is classified information that companies treat as a jealously kept secret, as they consider it to be part of the technology that gives them competitive advantages. Any systematic study based on published sources (including this one) will therefore take into account only knowledge that is in the public domain, and which accordingly does not reflect the latest developments in product design and development.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Based on the evidence of published knowledge, this study confirms the trend toward segmentation of human and environmental aspects in studies, reflections and applications in the field of product/service design and development. Similarly, the study shows the limited amount of comprehensive work on human and environmental aspects that has been published. Given that the ratio between conceptual developments and design methods in the documents found was six to one, there is a need for more work to be done and published on integrated, holistic methods that approach human and environmental problems associated with product design and development jointly, with continuity and ontological inseparability.It is imperative to work both on assembling existing methods and on developing new design methods which apply the concepts of eco-efficiency, eco-effectiveness and eco-productivity together, in order to achieve truly sustainable dynamics.Ergoecology expounds the comprehensiveness of the systemic approach, the anthropocentric approach - with an eco-spherical perspective - and sustainability for dealing with human and environmental problems as a whole and guaranteeing ontological continuity. Considering the poor conceptual comprehensiveness of the design methods found, these could be strengthened if they were classified according to their compatibility with the fundamentals of ergoecology, and if strategies were proposed for them to be applied. These strategies would simplify the process of making decisions that are ethical and responsible, with respect to both human beings and the environment.