@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The effects of social interactions with in-vehicle agents on a driver's anger level, driving performance, situation awareness, and perceived workload

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An in-vehicle agent can improve a driver's psychological state and road safety.Participants drove in a simulator with induced anger or neutral affect.Speech-based agents enhanced driver situation awareness and driving performance.Speech-based agents reduced participants' anger level and perceived workload.A driver's situation awareness mediated anger effects on driving performance.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
In-vehicle agent,Road rage,Situation awareness,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Research has suggested that interaction with an in-vehicle software agent can improve a driver's psychological state and increase road safety. The present study explored the possibility of using an in-vehicle software agent to mitigate effects of driver anger on driving behavior. After either anger or neutral mood induction, 60 undergraduates drove in a simulator with two types of agent intervention. Results showed that both speech-based agents not only enhance driver situation awareness and driving performance, but also reduce their anger level and perceived workload. Regression models show that a driver's anger influences driving performance measures, mediated by situation awareness. The practical implications include design guidelines for the design of social interaction with in-vehicle software agents.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With the advance of technology, we are actually living in the ubiquitous and pervasive computing era (Weiser, 1991). The introduction of various robots or intelligent software agents (Jeon, 2010) has accelerated this trend even in the vehicle context (Jeon, 2012). Important (and already prevalent) social interactions between a driver and an in-vehicle agent are expected to lead to better experiences on the road and safer driving (Riener et al., 2013).Emotions play a central role in personal evaluations of, or relationships with, artifacts and systems (Norman, 2005) and thus, many tasks have an affective component, specifically under conditions of stress, workload, and multitasking (Lottridge et al., 2011). Given that driving presents such a context, emotional interaction can have enormous consequences. For instance, road rage is one of the most frequently reported examples of emotions impacting driving safety. How can we calm down an angry driver and make him or her focus on a driving task? If we were a passenger, we might say “forget about it” or tune the radio to a channel that the driver is likely to enjoy. But are these the most effective strategies? What would or should an in-vehicle agent do, then, to help a driver manage or mitigate any negative effects of his or her emotional state? Would such intervention be helpful at all? The current study attempts to tackle this problem.To address that question effectively, we need to identify the underlying mechanisms of anger, and their effects on task driving performance. A considerable amount of research has demonstrated the effects of emotions on various cognitive processes including attention, perception, judgment, and decision making [e.g., Blanchette and Richards, 2010], and the situation awareness model (Endsley, 1995a) heavily depends on those cognitive constructs. However, relatively little research has explored the actual relationship between emotions and operator situation awareness in dynamic situations.The current paper presents an empirical study to investigate the effects of interactions with in-vehicle software agents on drivers' anger level, driving performance, situation awareness, and perceived workload. Young drivers drove in a simulator after anger induction with one of two types of speech-based agents to see whether the in-vehicle agent would increase driver situation awareness and driving performance. In addition, all of these data were compared to a neutral baseline condition without such a system.So far, the concept of situation awareness has been used as an assessment tool to predict a driver's performance, but there has been little research on the use of online (real-time) situation awareness prompts for the improvement of operator situation awareness. This possibility was explored by integrating situation awareness prompts into the software agent's spoken cues used to distract or awaken drivers from an angry state, and make them concentrate on the driving environment. This approach is based on attention deployment, which is one of the strategies in the most widely accepted emotion regulation model (Gross, 1998a). This experiment compares a suggestive/notification style situation awareness (SA) prompt condition to a directive/command style emotion regulation (ER) prompt condition (Lee et al., 1999). Further, we examined users' assessment of system politeness (Nass, 2004) and other subjective characteristics.One of the main research interests regarding recent in-vehicle technologies is the study of natural, intuitive interaction between a driver and a car (Eyben et al., 2010). Indeed, the concept of driving has evolved from an independent task performed by a solo driver, to a collaborative effort involving a passenger [e.g., Forlizzi et al., 2010] or involving an intelligent software agent [e.g., Jeon, 2010]. Obviously, using speech is a natural way to communicate with an in-vehicle system, just as with a human co-driver. Several studies have attempted to identify design considerations for speech-based in-vehicle agents. Some of these tested basic characteristics of the in-vehicle voice. For example, using a young adult voice for the in-vehicle information system made older drivers feel more confident while driving, need less time to complete the driving course, and have fewer accidents than using an old adult voice (Jonsson et al., 2005). Subsequent research (Jonsson, 2009) showed that using a familiar voice (famous TV and radio presenters) yielded better performance (avoiding accidents, following traffic rules, and keeping lane) for angry drivers than using an unfamiliar voice. Moreover, with the familiar voice drivers perceived the in-vehicle system to have a more positive influence and rated themselves as more attentive while driving than with the unfamiliar voice.Others investigated more dynamic aspects of the adaptive in-vehicle agents. For example, Nass et al. (2005) showed that when the in-vehicle agent's emotion matched the driver's emotional state (e.g., energetic to happy and subdued to upset), drivers had fewer accidents and attended more to the road (actual and perceived), and even spoke more with the agent. That result is especially interesting because it is contradictory to a general expectation that a happy system voice would always be rated positively (Grimm et al., 2007). In another study (Jonsson et al., 2004), drivers were given interspersed warnings about their driving performance: driver blame warnings; driver and car blame warnings; and environment blame warnings. According to the results, when the warnings were associated with the environment, drivers felt most at-ease, liked the system more, rated the quality of the car higher, and attended to the road better than with the other conditions.Research has shown that anger negatively influences various driving performance measures, and increases risky behaviors such as violations of signs and signals, lane deviations, speeding, and collisions (Deffenbacher et al., 2003; Jeon et al., 2011a; Underwood et al., 1999). One of the undeniable examples of the effects of anger on driving performance and safety is road rage and aggressive driving (Galovski and Blanchard, 2004). Road rage has become one of the nation's top three highway threats, along with drunk driving and failure to use a seat belt (Bowles and Overberg, 1998). According to research by the American Automobile Association (AAA), aggressive drivers are even more threatening to motorists than drunk drivers (Joint, 1995; Mizell et al., 1997).In its broadest sense, road rage can refer to any display of aggression by a driver (Joint, 1995). Road rage is extremely influential on driving behaviors, and increases the risk of causing an accident (Wells-Parker et al., 2002). Even mild aggressiveness precludes the driver from concentrating on the traffic, increasing the risk of an accident (Deffenbacher et al., 1994). In fact, an average of at least 1500 people are injured or killed each year in the United States as a result of aggressive driving (Mizell et al., 1997).There has not been much research on the cause of road rage. One exception to note is the attempt of Burns and Katovich (Burns and Katovich, 2003) to reveal the various causes of road rage and aggressive driving through a newspaper analysis from 1985 through 1999. They categorized the causes of road rage into two sections: those related to human behavior or actions and those related to the structure of the environment. Human factors (e.g., driving behaviors, aggressive driver actions, etc.: 71.9%, N = 368) seemed more dominant than environmental factors (e.g., traffic/congestion, poor engineering/road design, road construction, etc.: 28.1%, N = 144). Although the preferred approach to dealing with aggressive drivers largely involves punitive sanctions, researchers have been skeptical as to the effectiveness of punitive reactions to control or reform human behaviors (Currie, 1985; Kappeler et al., 2000). An alternative preventative approach might be achieved by real-time interactions with intelligent in-vehicle agents.One of the widely used cognitive models to explain dynamic situations such as driving or aviation is Endsley's situation awareness (SA) model (Endsley, 1995a). SA is, in brief, an understanding of the state of the environment including relevant parameters of the system (Endsley, 1995b).Given that poor SA is a greater cause of accidents than improper speed or improper driving technique (Gugerty, 2011), there have been attempts to try to conceptualize driver SA and develop a driver SA model [e.g., Gugerty, 2011; Ma and Kaber, 2005; Matthews et al., 2001]. To illustrate, Matthews, Bryant, Webb, and Harbluk (Matthews et al., 2001) have tried to propose a model for driver SA that can be used as a basis for understanding the possible impact of the intelligent transportation systems on driving performance.From a driving perspective, SA includes spatial awareness (i.e., an appreciation of the location of all relevant features of the environment), identity awareness (i.e., knowledge of salient items), temporal awareness (i.e., knowledge of the changing spatial picture over time), goal awareness (i.e., the highest goal may be the navigation plan to the destination; at a lower level, the maintenance of speed and direction to conform to the navigation plan; and at a still lower level, the need to maneuver and place the vehicle in an appropriate manner within the surrounding traffic stream), and system awareness (i.e., relevant information within the larger driving environment as a system) (Matthews et al., 2001). These aspects of SA have been integrated into a goal-oriented model of driver behavior that encompasses strategic, tactical, and operational goals of driving (Matthews et al., 2001; Wickens and Liu, 1988).On the other hand, Gugerty (2011) discussed SA in driving with a focus on managing attention. His model involves three cognitive processes to update and maintain SA as knowledge: (1) automatic, preattentive processes that occur unconsciously and place almost no demands on cognitive resources; (2) recognition-primed decision processes that may be conscious for brief periods (<1 s) and place few demands on cognitive resources; and (3) conscious, controlled processes that place heavy demands on cognitive resources. Even though his model seems conceptually different from Endsley's model at first, in practice it compromises with Endsley's in that perceiving the elements of a situation (level 1 SA) is probably highly automated in most situations, whereas comprehension and projection (levels 2 and 3 SA) are more likely to use recognition-primed and controlled processes.In addition to these conceptualizations, there have been several empirical studies that try to engage SA in driving contexts. Walker and colleagues (Walker et al., 2006) evaluated the effects of different forms of non-visual vehicle feedback on driver SA using a probe-recall method. The findings suggest that adding (or using alone) the non-visual vehicle feedback (particularly auditory feedback) increases driver SA compared to vision only feedback. An interesting result is that drivers demonstrated little awareness of diminished SA despite the large changes in vehicle feedback.Other studies identified positive associations between SA and one or more dimensions of driving performance using various secondary tasks (Ma and Kaber, 2005; Johannsdottir and Herdman, 2010; Ma and Kaber, 2007). For example, Ma and Kaber (2005) examined driver SA involving an adaptive cruise control (ACC) system while calling on a cell phone. Results showed that the use of the ACC system improved overall driver SA under typical driving conditions, and reduced driver mental workload. However, the cell phone conversation (i.e., driving-irrelevant dialogue) degenerated driver SA (especially, levels 2 and 3 SA) and increased driver mental workload. The stage of perception (level 1 SA) may place relatively lower demands on human mental resources, as compared to comprehension (level 2 SA) and projection (level 3 SA), and consequently drivers may be able to address such demands even when resource competition occurs (Ma and Kaber, 2005). In a subsequent study, Ma and Kaber (2007) assessed the effects of in-vehicle navigation aids and reliability on driver SA and performance in a simulated navigation task. Results revealed that perfect navigation information generally improved driver SA and performance compared to unreliable navigation information and task-irrelevant information. They concluded that the in-vehicle automation appears to mediate the relationship of driver SA to performance in terms of operational and strategic behaviors.In the current study, we pose a question about whether anger effects on driving performance are due to increased driver workload or reduced SA.SA is a complex process that requires assessment by a variety of online (during driving) and offline (post-driving) measures (Gugerty et al., 2011). Endsley (1995b) reviewed methodologies for the measurement of SA in dynamic systems. On one hand, post-trial subjective rating (e.g., SART: Situation Awareness Rating Technique) (Taylor, 1990) or observer rating techniques can be used as subjective measures. Such measures have shown success in SA assessment by some researchers [e.g., Ma and Kaber, 2007; Jeon et al., 2014a,b], while a few others remain skeptical about the prediction power of such techniques (Walker et al., 2006; Durso et al., 1999).On the other hand, more objective measures can be administered, including freeze probe recall techniques (e.g., SAGAT: Situation Awareness Global Assessment Technique) (Endsley, 1995b; Endsley et al., 2000), real-time probe (e.g., SPAM: Situation-Present Assessment Method (Durso et al., 1999, 1995), and real-time probes based on SAGAT (Jones and Endsley, 2004), process indices (e.g., eye-tracking), or performance measures. The SAGAT (Endsley, 1995b; Endsley et al., 2000) is an online query technique that taps an individual's recent memory of the situation. In the SAGAT, driving information on the display is removed and randomly selected questions are presented to the operator. The more queries correctly answered, the better the operator's SA. Because the SAGAT freezes the display frequently, it might be intrusive to performance and not well suited to actual operation (Jones et al., 2004). Real-time probe techniques have been suggested for objectively and unobtrusively measuring SA in highly dynamic operating environments, such as driving (Durso et al., 2004; Jones and Endsley, 2000). In the SPAM (Durso et al., 1999, 1995), SAGAT-like queries are given to the operator, but information remains in view and response latency is used as the primary dependent measure. Real-time probes based on SAGAT (Jones and Endsley, 2004) only involve natural verbal communications between an experimenter and an operator without any prior warning signal, which is given in the SPAM. Both the SPAM and real-time probes based on the SAGAT are used to access operator's SA on-the-fly under dynamic operation environment [e.g., Kaber et al., 2012] and thus, these techniques would not necessarily interrupt driving behavior. However, these freeze techniques or real-time probes may not be appropriate for the current study. Frequent queries may enable drivers to concentrate more on driving behavior and even to memorize contextual information, which is not the case with an actual affective state. Moreover, the obvious presence of an assessment technique or conversation with an experimenter during driving is likely to distract participants from the affective source and lead to deterioration of the meaning of the current experiment. Therefore, we did not include those techniques in the current experiment.Consequently, as a SA measure, we used an implicit performance measure [e.g., Durso et al., 1999], which is operationally defined as the coping level with hazard events. Hazard perception has been considered to be SA for dangerous situations in the traffic environment (Horswill et al., 2004). Whereas empirical research has shown counterintuitive results stating that driving skill is not an important discriminatory variable for road safety [e.g., Williams and O'Neill, 1974], only drivers' hazard perception has been found to correlate with drivers' accident records. Researchers have widely used filmed traffic situations for a hazard perception test and asked participants to actively respond whenever they detect a traffic hazard, using a lever [e.g., Pelz and Krupat, 1974], button [e.g., McKenna and Crick, 1991], or touch screen [e.g., Hull and Christie, 1992]. However, requiring such an active response from participants is different from the natural driving environment and in the current experiment it might distract participants from their affective source. Therefore, we used implicit performance measure instead of obtaining explicit real-time response. The driving scenario has ten events (see Table 1) that require a driver's special care and each event can be recognizable 3–5 s before it happens, and thus, participants can predict the event in advance and respond appropriately. If participants have good SA at that moment, they are expected to cope with the situation effectively and appropriately.There are several suggestions for emotion regulation that emerge from the road rage literature [e.g., Mizell et al., 1997]: consider altering your schedule; improve the comfort of your vehicle; concentrate on being relaxed while in traffic; and don't drive when you are angry. These, however, look like more general advice on static preparation for driving, but do not provide sophisticated strategies for dynamic driving environments.The most well-accepted emotion regulation model in psychology is the ‘process model’ (Gross, 1998a, 2002, 1998b; Gross and Thompson, 2006), in which emotions and affect may be regulated at five points in the emotion generative process: situation selection, situation modification, attention deployment, cognitive change, and response modulation. For example, based on this model, drivers can select low-traffic routes instead of high-traffic routes (situation selection) or try to minimize its affective impact (situation modification) on driving. However, driving is a complicated, interactive situation and drivers are often not able to control every variable.Diverse empirical evidence has supported the idea that cognitive change (e.g., reappraisal-down) is cognitively and socially more effective than suppression, which is a response modulation at the final regulation point (Gross, 2002). In addition, recent studies have found that engaging in cognitive reappraisal even changes the activity of brain regions involved in the experience of emotion (Ochsner et al., 2002). Harris and Nass (2011) showed that drivers in a reappraisal-down speech condition (e.g., “heavy traffic results from limited routes, not the behavior of other drivers”) had better driving behaviors and reported less negative emotions than participants in a reappraisal-up speech condition (e.g., “the behavior of overly aggressive and inconsiderate drivers leads to traffic congestion”) or a silent condition. However, there are several downsides to using the cognitive reappraisal strategy. (1) The system must be able to precisely know and interpret the dynamic driving situation; otherwise, inappropriate comments can yield worse results. (2) The use of cognitive reappraisal is limited to integral affect, which is coming from the driving task itself, and cannot be applied to incidental affect, such as a driver's anger before driving. (3) It tries to directly change a driver's affective state – depending on a driver's state or characteristics, he or she might be able to accept the system's reappraisal and regulate his or her state, whereas in some serious cases, it might be impossible to change his or her state at all. (4) Reappraisal might require a driver's cognitive efforts even if the cues are given by the speech-based system, which might cause additional workload. In Harris' (2011) subsequent studies, however, there was no measure of drivers' workload with respect to the cognitive reappraisal strategy.Finally, attention deployment, which is one of the five steps in the process model for emotion regulation, can be used. For example, calling out the angry driver's name can sometimes break through to his or her conscious awareness (Moray, 1959). This processing occurs preattentively, similar to low-level stimuli that produce the pop-out effect in auditory tasks [e.g., cocktail party effects Pollack and Pickett, 1957] or in visual search tasks (Treisman and Gormican, 1988). Hence, it can have a direct impact on driving performance and safety. It may work well for taking a driver's attention away from a source of negative emotion, but how the system can make a driver concentrate on the driving environment is another question to answer. In order to identify user needs in the in-vehicle emotion regulation interfaces, Jeon and his colleagues (Jeon et al., 2011b) conducted interviews and focus groups with drivers with Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) (who often have difficulties with emotion regulation as a result of their brain injury), driving rehab specialists, and young (healthy) drivers. Results showed that a system might need to have user-specific specifications depending on target user populations. For example, driving rehab specialists (who are not trained in social psychology) suggested using short, direct commands for drivers with TBI such as “focus on your driving” or “relax your grip on the wheel.” However, researchers found that telling young drivers about driving or their affective states is likely to make them feel that a system is a “back-seat driver”.The present experiment tries to apply attention deployment, using SA prompts provided by the in-vehicle software agent. To date, SA queries have been used as an assessment tool of driver's performance, but SA has rarely been used as a dynamic cue to improve driving performance and safety. This may be a less obtrusive and more direct way to mitigate emotion effects on driving performance. Therefore, in addition to trying to regulate or control a driver's affective state (e.g., “Take it easy”, “Relax your grip on the wheel”)—as rehab specialists suggested (Jeon et al., 2011b)—we also included another condition that enhances driver SA (e.g., “If you see any restaurant, let me know”).Besides the contents of the message, there has been some research on the message style. For example, Lee et al. (Lee et al., 1999) carried out a driving simulator experiment with either command messages (e.g., “Slow down”) or notification messages (e.g., “Icy road ahead”). Command messages promoted greater compliance than notification messages, but might actually reduce overall safety. That result requires further research because in a driving context, safety usually has a priority over a driver's compliance to the in-vehicle system. Moreover, it is still unknown whether the command style messages would yield greater compliance for drivers in a particular affective state (e.g., angry), because traditional literature reports that suggestive styles have been found to lead to greater compliance than directive styles (Crockenberg and Litman, 1990; Lytton, 1977; Rocissano et al., 1987). Based on these backgrounds, the conditions and the hypotheses of the experiment are as follows.Experimental conditions:-The ER condition: induced anger, agent with the directive/command style emotion regulation (ER) promptsThe SA condition: induced anger, agent with the suggestive/notification style situation awareness (SA) promptsThe no-agent condition: induced anger, no agentThe neutral condition: no anger, no agentHypothesis A: Angry stateThe anger rating score after the experiment will be higher or, at least at a similar level, in the ER condition, whereas the anger rating score will be lower in the SA condition.Hypothesis B: Driving performanceDriving performance will be worse in the no-agent condition than in the neutral condition. Driving performance will be better in the two in-vehicle agent conditions than in the no-agent condition.Hypothesis C: Situation awarenessDriver SA will be improved more in the two in-vehicle agent conditions using the attention deployment strategy than in the no-agent condition. SA score in the two in-vehicle agent conditions will not be different from that in the neutral condition. SA score will be more improved in the SA condition than in the ER condition.Hypothesis D: Perceived workloadThere will be no difference between the no-agent condition and the neutral condition in perceived workload. The use of the in-vehicle agents will not add more perceived workload to drivers compared to the neutral or the no-agent conditions.Hypothesis E: Agent assessmentThe in-vehicle agent assessment scores will favor the SA condition over the ER condition. Also, participants will respond more to the in-vehicle agent in the SA condition than in the ER condition.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
