@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Establishing usability heuristics for heuristics evaluation in a specific domain: Is there a consensus?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Analytical review of 70 studies of domain specific heuristics for usability evaluation.There is a deficiency of validation effort following heuristics proposition.It is inconclusive whether domain specific heuristics is better than general ones.Less than 10% of the studies showed acceptable robustness and rigorousness.More than 80% of the studies used similar heuristics as Nielsen's.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Heuristics evaluation,Specific domain,Usability,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Heuristics evaluation is frequently employed to evaluate usability. While general heuristics are suitable to evaluate most user interfaces, there is still a need to establish heuristics for specific domains to ensure that their specific usability issues are identified. This paper presents a comprehensive review of 70 studies related to usability heuristics for specific domains. The aim of this paper is to review the processes that were applied to establish heuristics in specific domains and identify gaps in order to provide recommendations for future research and area of improvements. The most urgent issue found is the deficiency of validation effort following heuristics proposition and the lack of robustness and rigour of validation method adopted. Whether domain specific heuristics perform better or worse than general ones is inconclusive due to lack of validation quality and clarity on how to assess the effectiveness of heuristics for specific domains. The lack of validation quality also affects effort in improving existing heuristics for specific domain as their weaknesses are not addressed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Usability is a key to ensure the success of a system (Markus and Keil, 1994). ISO-9241-11 defined usability as “the extent to which a product can be used by specified users to achieve specified goals with effectiveness, efficiency and satisfaction in a specified context of use”. To identify usability issues and/or measure the degree of usability metrics compliance, usability evaluation is usually performed at different stages of system development (Nielsen, 1994a). While the most robust approach for usability evaluation involves users, usability inspections are also commonly applied, especially at the early stages of a system's development. Heuristics evaluation, due to its simplicity and low cost (Jeffries et al., 1991; Tang et al., 2006; Hwang and Salvendy, 2010), has gained popularity and is frequently employed in usability studies. This method, originally proposed by Nielsen and Molich (1990), requires a number of experts to inspect usability based on a set of “heuristics” which are essentially broad and non-specific rules of thumb.Nielsen's (1994b) ten heuristics are normally used as the heuristics that guide usability evaluation. These heuristics consist of: 1) visibility of system status, 2) match between system and the real world, 3) user control and freedom, 4) consistency and standards, 5) error prevention, 6) recognition rather than recall, 7) flexibility and efficiency of use, 8) aesthetic and minimalist design, 9) help users recognise, diagnose, and recover from error, and 10) help and documentation. While these heuristics could be used to evaluate user interfaces for various domains, heuristics adjustment are needed to ensure that specific usability issues of certain domains' user interfaces are not overlooked (Nielsen, 2015). As a result, a considerable number of studies have attempted to establish domain specific heuristics.The establishment of heuristics for specific domains could take three forms (Ling and Salvendy, 2005): 1) expansion of the heuristics set, 2) alteration of the evaluation procedure, and 3) alteration of the conformance rating scale. This paper focuses on the first form which generally involves two stages i.e. generation of the heuristics sets and their validation. To the extent of the authors' knowledge, there are only two studies that somewhat review how heuristics for specific domains are established i.e. Ling and Salvendy (2005) and van Greunen et al. (2011). However, both studies are limited with respect to the number of studies included in the review and the scope of the review. Only 20 and five studies were included in Ling and Salvendy's (2005) and van Greunen et al. (2011), respectively. Both studies focused on the process related to the generation of heuristics set and overlooked the validation. Furthermore, both studies aimed for a descriptive rather than a critical review.The main objective of this paper is to review and analyse existing heuristics for specific domains in three aspects: 1) the process that were applied to generate and express the heuristics sets, 2) the methods or approach that were applied to validate them, and 3) their effectiveness. This paper also aims to identify gaps with respect to establishing heuristics for specific domains and provides recommendations for future research and area of improvements. This paper is the first paper that performs a thorough review on the three aspects above. It begins by describing how studies that were included in the review were identified and how they were analysed. Next, the results of the review and analysis are explained in detail. The last section of the paper discusses recurrent issues or phenomena from the reviewed studies and identifies emerging issues and future research questions that need to be addressed to advance the contribution of heuristics in specific domains. This paper's main contribution lies on the identification of gaps and how to address these gaps through recommendation for future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
