@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Maintaining knife sharpness in industrial meat cutting: A matter of knife or meat cutter ability

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The ability to maintain the cutting edge sharp is notably individual.The knife quality influence on sharpness is inferior to meat cutters' influence.Knife usage time is a relevant predictor for discomfort and ultimately MSD.Beef cutting may require up to at least six freshly sharpened knives per day.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Steel quality,MSD,Individual skill,Sharpness analyser,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Knife sharpness is imperative in meat cutting. The aim of this study was to compare the impact of knife blade steel quality with meat cutters’ individual ability to maintain the cutting edge sharp in an industrial production setting. Twelve meat cutters in two different companies using three different knives during normal production were studied in this quasi-experimental study. Methods included were measuring knife cutting force before and after knife use, time knives were used, ratings of sharpness and discomfort and interviews. Results showed that the meat cutters' skill of maintaining sharpness during work had a much larger effect on knife sharpness during work than the knife steel differences. The ability was also related to feelings of discomfort and to physical exertion. It was found that meat cutters using more knives were more likely to suffer from discomfort in the upper limbs, which is a risk for developing MSD.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Accidents and musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs) are since long frequent among meat cutters, both in Sweden (Arbetsmiljöverket, 2012; Magnusson et al., 1987) and elsewhere (Conroy, 1989; Coutarel et al., 2004; Tappin et al., 2006). The risk/1000 employees for serious occupational injury were 15.8 for employees in slaughterhouses and meat processing compared to 2.3 for all blue collar workers in Sweden.11Official statistics from the Swedish Work Environment Authority, 2014/12/31. Available on request.The most common accidents among meat cutters are related to the knife (Cai et al., 2005) where the fingers are at greatest risk.Moreover, several studies have shown how knife sharpness affects the meat cutters' work load and thereby risk for MSDs (Bishu et al., 1996; Claudon and Marsot, 2006; Dempsey and McGorry, 2004). Carpal tunnel syndrome and trigger finger are more prevalent among meat cutters than other industrial workers and are suspected to be caused by hand held tools as knives (Gorsche et al., 1998, 1999). Among meat cutters, MSDs regarding other upper-limb joints such as e.g. epicondylitis and tenosynovitis (Kurppa et al., 1991; Viikari-Juntura et al., 1991), tendonitis (Yassi et al., 1996), neck and low back pain (Magnusson et al., 1987) are problematic. For a more comprehensive review, see Tappin et al. (2006).A sharp knife thus means lower grip force, cutting moment and cutting time (McGorry et al., 2003). When the knife is dull, the forces involved are higher which increase the risk for MSDs. In the study of McGorry et al. (2003) the mean cutting moment increased with 25% when the knife was dull. Moreover, the wrist will be pressed to deviate which may lead to epicondylitis (Claudon and Marsot, 2006). Consequently, according to literature a sharp knife is of high importance to avoid accidents and MSDs. It is the sharpness of the knife in use that determines the workload, cutting forces and usability of the knife. So what are then the factors that may influence the sharpness of the knife during cutting?The sharpening itself at a grinding machine determines the initial sharpness of the knife when beginning to cut. Sharpening is however not included in this study as this is not performed during cutting work but as a separate activity that is organized differently depending on size of company and organizational choice.The quality of the steel in the knife blade has an impact: in a test of three different steel qualities the blade material did not have any initial effect on cutting capacity, but the harder the steel the better the knife retained its sharpness during repeated wear by striking the edge to a brass cylinder (Marsot et al., 2007). However, no tests of steel quality impact during real meat cutting have been published and it is thus unclear whether the repeated wear towards a brass cylinder corresponds to the situation in real work.The other possible impact on knife sharpness during cutting is the individual working technique, which in turn can be separated into avoiding dulling the knife and maintaining the sharpness. Regarding the latter, when using a knife, the hair thin cutting edge gets wavy and bent and a technique called steeling is used for retaining a sharp edge. Steeling restores the edge by straightening and re-centring it and this is made by swiping the knife edge along a steel rod or through a steeling device with crossed bars (Dick, 2014; McGorry et al., 2005b; PRIMEdge, 2015; Szabo et al., 2001). Steeling is made during work as a separate activity in between cutting the meat and meat cutters spend up to 10% of their work time steeling their knife (CINBIOSE UQAM, 2008). Being skilful in steeling is considered to be difficult but essential for keeping a knife sharp.The other aspect of the individual meat cutter's impact on knife sharpness is less described in literature. Experienced meat cutters and supervisors claim that cutting in the bones, touching the protective metal mesh gloves or apron with the edge or cutting into the cutting board are typical situations when knives become dull. However, more detailed knowledge about the individually related mechanisms does not exist, nor does knowledge regarding the magnitude of the impact of individual skill in relation to knife steel impact exist. There are however indications from knife manufacturers and people working in the business that the differences between individuals in ability to keep their knives sharp are large. Such indicators are for example how often a meat cutter has to sharpen the knife or how many knives are used during a day.In their study of work training in meat cutting, Ouellet and Vézina (2014) found that cutting quality of the knife was perceived most important by the experienced workers regarding numbers of cuts required to perform a task and the apprentices in the study identified the knife as being the most important factor of 12 regarding pain at work.It is therefore of vital importance to shed more light into the factors that affect the sharpness of the knives used when cutting, not the least in order to find opportunities for reducing the work load of meat cutters. The aim of this study was thus to compare the impact of the quality of the knife blade steel in relation to the impact of the meat cutters' individual ability in maintaining the sharpness of the knife. A further aim was to investigate to what extent the individual ability to maintain knife sharpness can be related to the individual meat cutter's experiences of discomfort, exertion and knife sharpness.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A number of conclusions can be drawn from this study.The initial sharpness of knives is important but cannot necessarily be taken for granted to be the same when different knives have been sharpened in the same process for sharpening. Different steel qualities thus have to be tested for how to achieve the best sharpening procedure and probably also the optimal sharpening angle.Moreover, the ability of the meat cutters to maintain the cutting edge sharp differed significantly between individuals, both concerning edge wear and concerning time each knife was used. These differences were also of a much higher magnitude than the differences between the knives. There is thus room for radical improvement concerning the individual's ability in many cases.Regarding the individual differences, the evaluation of the time the knives were used until considered dull indicates that according to this study a meat cutter cutting beef need at least up to six freshly sharpened knives per day to assure that work all the time is done with a satisfactory sharp knife.The time between changing knives showed a significant relation to the experience of discomfort in the upper limbs. Meat cutters that often change or sharpen knives should thus be considered to be in the risk group for developing discomfort and ultimately MSD.