@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Experimental investigation of personal air supply nozzle use in aircraft cabins

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Passengers' use of individual air supply nozzles in aircraft cabins was simulated.Human thermal and draft sensations change over time in an aircraft cabin.The reasons of opening nozzles and opening adjustment position were illustrated.Nozzle utilization rate and opening degree increased initially and then decreased.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Aircraft cabin,Nozzle air distribution system,Nozzle use behaviour,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
To study air passengers' use of individual air supply nozzles in aircraft cabins, we constructed an experimental chamber which replicated the interior of a modern passenger aircraft. A series of experiments were conducted at different levels of cabin occupancy. Survey data were collected focused on the reasons for opening the nozzle, adjusting the level of air flow, and changing the direction of the air flow. The results showed that human thermal and draft sensations change over time in an aircraft cabin. The thermal sensation response was highest when the volunteers first entered the cabin and decreased over time until it stablized. Fifty-one percent of volunteers opened the nozzle to alleviate a feeling of stuffiness, and more than 50% adjusted the nozzle to improve upper body comfort. Over the period of the experiment the majority of volunteers chose to adjust their the air flow of their personal system. This confirms airline companies' decisions to install the individual aircraft ventilation systems in their aircraft indicates that personal air systems based on nozzle adjustment are essential for cabin comfort. These results will assist in the design of more efficient air distribution systems within passenger aircraft cabins where there is a need to optimize the air flow in order to efficiently improve aircraft passengers' thermal comfort and reduce energy use.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Increasing numbers of passengers spend more and more time in aircraft cabins (Advisory Council, http://www.acare4europe.org/html/documentation.asp.) and are exposed to environmental conditions artificially created by the aircraft's onboard systems. Since the 1970s, commercial aircraft have been flying at heights of approximately 12 km (ca. 39,000 ft), (Gunnar Grün et al., 2012), with the temperature outside of the aircraft cabins at or below −50 °C, the relative humidity between 20% and 100% above ice (Vaughan G et al., 2005), and the absolute air pressure around 195 hpa (Hinkelbein J et al., 2007). Thus, the environmental control system of an aircraft cabin is critical to both passenger safety and comfort.The environmental control system of a typical passenger aircraft comprises two parts. The first is the main air distribution system which controls the thermal comfort and air quality of the overall cabin environment (He L, 2010). This main air distribution system cannot however meet the thermal comfort and health demands of every passenger and an individual air system supply is needed to compensate for such limitations. This, the second part of the system, supplies conditioned air directly to each passenger via an individual air supply system. This type of individual supply air system is widely used in the industry. Aircraft manufacturers such as Boeing and Airbus use this type of individual system because of its ease of use and flexibility of its control. It has become an industry standard.The advantage of the individual air supply system is that each passenger can control both the air flow rate and direction to help achieve their preferred environment. In the past decade, the topic of individualized air supply systems has attracted the attention of several researchers. Jacobs and de Gids (2006) proposed a new concept of aircraft cabin air-conditioning that is built into the seat. Similarly, Zhang and Chen (2007) proposed a personal seatback-embedded air supply system that delivers clean air directly to the inhalation regions of a passenger. Based on these studies, Zítek et al. (2010) considered that each seat in a commercial aircraft should be supplied with a separate individual air flow and a separate exhaust, which could help protect passengers against the possible spread of airborne diseases during flights. Zhang et al. (2012) developed a personal air distribution system with air terminals embedded in chair armrests. This was designed and verified using computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulation and experimental validation. Furthermore, Gao and Niu (2004, 2008) used a CFD model to investigate the personal ventilation of an air supply pipe located in each of the passenger's breathing area and showed that this type of ventilation can improve passenger air quality. Bolashikov et al. (2010) and Melikov et al. (2012) studied thermal comfort and inhaled air quality using a seat headrest system incorporating personalized ventilation.In these studies of personal air distribution systems in aircraft cabins, the main focus has been on the improvement of the seat position and how this may influence air distribution. Most of these studies only consider the influence on the air quality in the breathing zone rather than the overall effect on passengers' thermal comfort. The innovations proposed by these researchers are however far from complete and the traditional individual nozzle air distribution system remains in active use. Only a few of these studies included experimental investigations, most used CFD numerical simulation as the research method. The disadvantage of such simulations is that the results require further validation due to the simplification of the models and boundary conditions in CFD simulations. In addition, the dummy models used in these studies to simulate human heat dissipation and breathing are not fully representative of actual humans.Further research was clearly needed. This led to the decision to design and develop an experimental cabin to carry out an experimental investigation of the influence of the traditional individual nozzle air distribution system on human thermal comfort. To simulate the environment of a real airliner cabin, a three-row aircraft cabin was built to the requirements of ASHRAE161 (2007) in a laboratory building of the Faculty of Urban Construction and Environmental Engineering, Chongqing University. This has led to a range of experimental studies. The focus of the research reported in this paper was cabin occupants' use of the personal air supply nozzles, in particularly the analysis of when the research volunteers decided to open or close the air vents, and the direction selected for the air flow. This was investigated based on volunteers' thermal responses to the overall thermal environment.The design of the cabin was based on the cross sectional size of the Airbus A320. A cabin sized 4.9 m × 3.9 m × 2.35 m was constructed. From the outside, the cabin structure appeared as a half-cylinder and was made of wood with thermal insulation. The cabin was placed in an air-conditioned room to prevent the influence of the external environment. Fig. 1shows the main dimensions of the simulation chamber.The environmental control system comprised both the main air distribution system and the personal air distribution system as shown in Fig. 2. In the design of the system, the main air distribution system followed the requirements of ASHRE161 2007 to create a healthy thermal environment for passengers. The process involved mixing the fresh air and return air before processing it to the set condition. Then, through the pressurization fan, air flowed to the slot outlets on the ceiling of the cabin and into the simulated cabin at a smooth steady speed. The air flowed into the mixer through return air inlets for circulation. The personal air distribution system offered flexible control to meet the individual comfort demands of the volunteers undergoing the experiment. In the system process, after the fresh air from outside and the return air were mixed in the mixer, the air was processed by an air conditioner and flowed into the plenum chamber by a pressurization fan. Then it flowed through pipes to the nozzles above the seats and, when turned on by the occupant of the seat, entered the cabin as a jet flow. The two control systems were independent from each other when the temperature of the air conditioned system ranged from 5 °C to 35 °C with a precision of ±0.5 °C. Common airliner nozzles, with the air supply velocity ranging from 0 m s−1 to approximately 25 m s−1, were controllable by adjusting the knob and pipeline valve. These were used in the personal air distribution system in the simulated cabin as shown in Fig. 3.The volunteers in this experiment were healthy college students and were divided into two groups by gender with equal numbers for each group. They were asked to complete forms to provide relevant information, such as gender, age, height, weight, clothing type, etc. The clothing records were based on the clothes worn by the volunteers on the testing day, and volunteers had been informed that they should wear formal summer clothing with a thermal resistance of about 0.6 clo. Specific information relating to the study participants is provided in Table 1.The simulated cabin had a total of 18 seats. These seats were arranged in three rows each with six seats arranged in two blocks of three, separated by a central isle. Passenger comfort is affected by passenger density so the experiment included three different passenger densities, 100%, 67%, and 33% capacity, which meant that the number of volunteers used was either 18, 12, or 6. Each experimental condition was tested four times with equal numbers of male and female participants. Table 2shows a summary of the experimental conditions.The research focused on the study of nozzle use behaviour and the influence of the thermal environment within the cabin on the volunteers' thermal comfort. Thermal comfort data were collected via a questionnaire survey which included questions about thermal sensation and air flow sensation. The thermal comfort was ranked according to seven levels based on the ASHRAE55 (2010) as shown in Table 3. The experiment was conducted in a simulated aircraft cabin. It is unlikely that the volunteers could feel any draft and therefore vote scales widely used for ASHRAE thermal comfort were introduced to evaluate air movement sensation (Baizhan Li el at, 2010; Tan Meilan, 2012). These are shown in Table 3. The results for nozzle use behaviour, including the reasons for nozzle opening, the extent of nozzle opening, and the body parts to which air was directed are shown in Table 4.The complete experimental procedure lasted for approximately 2 h and 10 min, and the individual steps are shown in Fig. 4.(1)Before the experiment started, the main air distribution system and personal air distribution system commenced working at the same time, while keeping all individual nozzles closed until the volunteers entered the simulated cabin. In accordance with ASHRAE161 (2007), the temperature of the cabin was controlled at less than 26.7 °C, whilst the air speed was kept at less than 0.35 m s−1.The volunteers were informed of the experimental procedure when they arrived at the laboratory room. They all entered the simulation cabin to start the experiment at the same time with a randomly arranged seating plan thus simulating boarding an aircraft.After they had entered the cabin each of the volunteers was asked to complete the questionnaire based on their own thermal sensation every 5 min during the first 30 min and every 10 min during the rest of the experimental period time (90 min).The environmental parameters in the cabin were recorded using a KANOMAX hot wire anemometer with a temperature precision of 0.1 °C and wind speed precision of 0.01 m s−1 during the experiment.Volunteers were allowed to do minor activities such as reading, playing computer games, and chatting without leaving their seats, but strenuous exercises were strictly forbidden. Participant activity can be observed in Fig. 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The results of this study provide a basis for re-evaluating and reducing the energy requirements of the individual air supply system used in aircraft cabins and to improve the thermal comfort of passengers within aircraft cabins. The findings will also assist in the improvement of the environmental control systems of aircraft cabins. The main conclusions are as follows:(1)Stimulated by the thermal environment, more than half of the volunteers opened the nozzle to alleviate stuffiness. The air flow was directed primarily towards the upper body, followed by the lower body, and lastly towards the head. The results showed that the upper body should be the reference point used when determining the influence of a nozzle air distribution system on individual thermal comfort.We evaluated three different occupancy conditions: 33%, 67%, and 100%. The maximum overall average thermal sensation response across each of these three different occupancy conditions occurred when the participants first entered the cabin. Thermal response decreased over time. Meanwhile, the responses for air movement sensation followed the opposite pattern in that minimum responses were reported initially, and then the responses increased over time, stabilizing after some 40 min.This study examined the rate of ‘nozzle utilization rate’, (the opening of the nozzle to permit air flow) and the degree of opening’, (the extent to which the participant opened or closed the nozzle). Both of these parameters increased initially and then decreased until becoming relatively stable some 40 min into the experiment.These findings could be used to assist in the design of air distribution systems within passenger aircraft cabins which need to find a combination of an intelligent automatically controlled system with appropriate individually passenger controls adjacent to their seats. This will demand further research to examine the relationship between individual and group needs and the development of ‘smart systems’ to meet these demands.