@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Driver discomfort in vehicle seats – Effect of changing road conditions and seat foam composition

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Exposure to whole-body vibration accelerates the onset of discomfort when driving.Improving chemical composition of polyurethane foam improves seat comfort when driving for 40 min and exposed to vibration.Cessation of vibration exposure caused an acute improvement in feelings of comfort in a car seat.Discomfort increased with time whilst driving with and without vibration.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Comfort,Vibration,Driving,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Discomfort in vehicle seats is a multi-factorial problem with contributions occurring from effects of sitting duration, seat design, and the dynamic environment to which the occupant is exposed. This paper reports laboratory studies investigating the extent to which reports of discomfort are affected by vibration commencing or ceasing, and whether methods of assessment are sensitive enough to detect small changes in foam composition. Study 1 measured discomfort ratings for two conditions of 60 min each, comprising 30 min of vibration exposure followed by 30 min of static sitting in a car seat, and vice-versa. Study 2 measured discomfort ratings for three conditions over a period of 40 min each, whilst participants were sitting in one of two car seat compositions, and either exposed to vibration or not. In both studies participants operated a driving simulator. It is shown that exposure to vibration increases the rate of discomfort onset in comparison to periods of static sitting. When vibration stopped, there was an acute improvement in comfort but discomfort did not drop to the levels reported by those who had been unexposed. When vibration started after 30 min of static sitting, there was an acute increase in discomfort but not to the levels reported by those who had been exposed to 30 min of vibration. After 40 min of continuous exposure it was possible to detect significant differences in overall discomfort between the two seat compositions, although trends could be observed in less time.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Inevitably, a proportion of the readers of this paper will be doing so whilst travelling, perhaps on a train, aircraft, bus, or being driven by their chauffeur. Some of them might be facing a long journey ahead, during which time they might become conscious of feelings of discomfort. All types of vehicular travel involve a finite duration of movement as the vehicle travels from origin to destination. Depending on basic properties of average speed, route taken and distance travelled, the duration of the movement would typically range from a few minutes to a few hours. In some cases (e.g. work vehicles; vehicles with on-board accommodation such as some ships or trains) the duration of travel could last significantly longer.Many factors could contribute to the feelings of comfort whist sitting in a vehicle seat. Ebe and Griffin (2000a,b) produced a model of seat discomfort comprising ‘static’ and ‘dynamic’ factors. The foundation of the model was the concept that some factors were a result of the overall design of the seat and did not change rapidly, such as stiffness, pressure distribution and shape, but other factors (dynamic) were caused by the instantaneous dynamic environment (vibration) which the seat was experiencing. There could be an intentional trade-off between the static factors and dynamic factors such that some seats could be optimised dynamically and some statically, although large differences in seat design do not always result in significant improvements in vibration exposure (e.g. Jonsson et al., 2014). An additional dimension of the causes of seat discomfort is the time for which an individual has been seated. Previous studies (e.g. El Falou et al., 2003; Porter et al., 2003; De Carvalho and Callaghan, 2011, Smith et al., 2015) have shown analytically that sensation of overall discomfort increases over time. Through a series of studies involving motion and long-duration sitting, Mansfield et al. (2014) showed that discomfort increases both with vibration magnitude and with sitting duration, and that the presence of vibration causes an increase in the rate of discomfort onset. A regression model was proposed that allowed for projection of future overall discomfort depending on short-term ratings of seat discomfort, duration of sitting, and the vibration magnitude.Whilst previous research has shown differences in discomfort ratings between test conditions, the differences between test parameters have tended to be simplified. For example, where different seat designs have been considered, the differences between the designs have been relatively great, such as using seats from different classes of vehicle, therefore changing several design parameters at once. Where motion has been a key independent variable, the characteristics of the motion have usually been kept constant within a trial, rather than replicating the variations in motion that would occur when driving on different road surfaces during a journey or replicating intermittent motion such as could occur in traffic or on public transport. This paper reports two related studies that consider (a) the effects of changing the motion environment half way through a long-term discomfort test, and (b) the effects of changing the composition of the seat construction.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper has shown that there is an acute step change in reported discomfort when exposure to vibration starts or stops. The fatigue effect from long-term sitting and exposure to vehicle motion does not follow the expected responses that would be predicted from vibration-only dose models. Small changes to foam composition were shown to affect the overall discomfort in the seat, but the differences were only significant after 40 min. This highlights the importance of long-duration dynamic testing when developing vehicle seats.