@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Effects of the resting time associated with the number of trials on the total and individual finger forces in a maximum grasping task

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
When resting time was decreased, % reductions of the total/finger grip strength tended to increase.Grip strength reductions exceeded 5% in the 4th trial at all resting time (30s–3min).Grip strength reductions exceeded 15% in the 20th trial at 30s and 1min resting time.A guideline for resting time based on the trial (up to 20th trials) and acceptable grip strength reductions was introduced.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Maximum gripping task,Resting time,Trial,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The repetitive and excessive workload accompanying grip strength- or hand-intensive tasks are often considered to be common causes of work-related upper limb musculoskeletal disorders. For this reason, numerous experimental studies have been performed on maximum grip strength. However, due to an absence of standard guidelines, researchers have adopted different resting times and number of trials suited for their particular research purposes. The effects of resting time and the number of trials on the maximum total grip strength and individual finger forces of 24 participants over 20 trials were investigated. Results showed that the total grip strength and individual finger strengths differed significantly according to the resting time and the number of trials (p<0.05). Overall, grip strength tended to increase with a reduction in resting time (% reduction: 7.8%, 9.1%, 11.1%, and 13.0% for 3min, 2min, 1min, and 30s resting time, respectively) as well as with an increase in the number of trials (% reduction: 8%, 10%, 13%, and 16% for 5th, 10th, 15th, and 20th trials). The effects of resting time and the number of trials also showed statistically significant effects on individual finger forces. Regression equations of total grip strength and finger forces with resting time and number of trials were established. These equations were then applied to formulate guidelines for appropriate resting times in experiments based on the number of trials and acceptable reductions in grip strength. Data from this and future studies regarding decreasing grip strength and the contribution of each finger are expected to form the groundwork for ergonomic hand tool design and development.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Work-related musculoskeletal disorders (WMSDs), which most often occur in industries such as production assembly and auto-repair, have recently drawn considerable attention. According to previous researches, many WMSDs have been reported in industry workers due to tasks that involve high risk activities such as the lifting and carrying of heavy objects, repetitive motions and exertions, insufficient resting time, awkward body postures, and vibrations (Putz-Anderson, 1988; Armstrong et al., 1990; Punnett et al., 1991; Bernard, 1997). Researchers have sought to lower the incidence rate of WMSDs, but it has remained stubbornly high. The incidence rate of WMSDs is greater in the upper limbs than in the lower limbs (Baker, 1995; Macleod, 1999). According to data from the Industrial Accident Examination (KOSHA, 2008), the incidence rate of upper limb WMSDs, relative to occurrences of all WMSDs, has gradually increased from 29.9% in 2005 to 37.6% in 2006 and 42.9% in 2007. Generally, WMSDs affect the upper limbs because workers repeatedly use tools or carry heavy items, often employing their upper limb joints such as the wrist, elbow, shoulder, and neck. Workers can succumb to WMSDs due to unsuitable work environments, for example where workers are required to contort their limbs in unnatural ways (Macleod, 1999). Grip force is used in general tasks and is also needed for repeated handling (Gurram et al., 1993; Dubrowski and Carnahan, 2004). Generally, over-exertion and repetitive grip forces are required in maintenance, fastening and repair activities in which hand tools are used. When using hand tools, WMSDs can be caused by excessive radial or ulnar deviation or bent wrists (Armstrong et al., 1990). It has been reported that the generation of excessive forces, improper posture, extreme temperatures, vibrations, and other variables can also lead to losses of grip force (Kattle et al., 1996). It has been suggested that WMSDs could be reduced if hand tools were ergonomically designed with a focus on the comfort and safety of the tool users (Lewis and Narayan, 1993).The provision of adequate resting time and limitation of repetitions between rest periods are important factors in preventing WMSDs and improving operational efficiency and comfort. However, relatively few studies have investigated the effects of resting time and repetition of force exertions on the total grip strength and individual finger forces in a maximum grasping task. Mathiowetz (1990) and Shechtman et al. (2007) only showed that grip force is reduced as the gripping task is repeated. Caldwell et al. (1974), Trossman and Li (1989), Garg et al. (2005), and Chow and Dickerson (2009) analyzed the reduction of grip force with 1–3min of resting time, which is advised to minimize the consequences of fatigue.There is a lack of research findings addressing the sufficiency of resting times relative to the number of trials in a grasping task. Some researchers have applied different resting times and number of grasping task trials for each set of experiments (Caldwell et al., 1974; Trossman and Li, 1989; Montazer and Thomas, 1992; Shechtman et al., 2007; Kwak et al., 2010). Table 1indicates resting times and the number of trials researchers used for their grip strength measurement experiments, which of course have varying results due to the different lengths of resting time.Accordingly, the objectives of this study were to: (1) analyze the effects of resting time and the number of trials on the total grip strength and individual finger force in a maximum grasping task and, based on the study, (2) provide suggestions on the proper amount of resting time associated with the number of gripping measurement tasks and trials.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The effects of resting time (30s and 1–3min) and the number of trials (1–20) on the reductions in total grip strength and individual finger force were explored in this study, using the MFFM system developed by this research group. In addition, regression curves were developed based on these grip strength data as a function of the number of trials for each resting time. These regression curves were used to establish guidelines for resting times (Table 3) according to the number of trials and acceptable reductions in grip strength.When resting time was decreased, % reductions of the total grip strength and individual finger force tended to increase. The average % reduction of these forces was smallest for the 3min resting time, followed by the % reductions seen after resting times of 2min, 1min, and 30s.The reduction in grip strength according to trial number also showed that as the number of trials increased, % reductions of both the total grip strength and individual finger forces increased.Regarding individual finger force, the reduction rate of the index finger was lowest, followed by the middle, ring, and little fingers. The ring and little fingers are also more likely to tire than the index and middle fingers when the resting time is shortened.