@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Comparative evaluation of six quantitative lifting tools to estimate spine loads during static activities

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Predictions of six lifting analysis tools for the spine loads were compared.26 symmetric/asymmetric lifting tasks in upright/flexed postures were considered.Significantly different spinal loads were predicted by the tools.The potential risk of injury could vary depending on the tool used.The shortcomings of each tool and its domain of applications were identified.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Lifting tools,Biomechanical models,Spine loads,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Different lifting analysis tools are commonly used to assess spinal loads and risk of injury. Distinct musculoskeletal models with various degrees of accuracy are employed in these tools affecting thus their relative accuracy in practical applications. The present study aims to compare predictions of six tools (HCBCF, LSBM, 3DSSPP, AnyBody, simple polynomial, and regression models) for the L4-L5 and L5-S1 compression and shear loads in twenty-six static activities with and without hand load. Significantly different spinal loads but relatively similar patterns for the compression (R2 > 0.87) were computed. Regression models and AnyBody predicted intradiscal pressures in closer agreement with available in vivo measurements (RMSE ≈ 0.12 MPa). Due to the differences in predicted spinal loads, the estimated risk of injury alters depending on the tool used. Each tool is evaluated to identify its shortcomings and preferred application domains.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Epidemiological studies have identified manual material handling and lifting as risk factors in occupational low back pain (LBP) (Garg and Moore, 1992; Hoogendoorn et al., 2000; Manchikanti, 2000; Thiese et al., 2014; Van Nieuwenhuyse et al., 2004). Modelling studies that predict increased compression, shear and moment loads on intervertebral discs (Arjmand and Shirazi-Adl, 2006) along with in vivo investigations that measure higher intradiscal pressures (Nachemson, 1981; Wilke et al., 2001), give support to and identify likely mechanisms for this association. To help manage the risk of work-related LBP, practitioners in occupational biomechanics use different tools to evaluate risk of injury to the spine during lifting activities. The 1991 NIOSH (National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health) Lifting Equation (Waters et al., 1993) recommends weight limits that almost all healthy workers may handle without an increased risk of LBP.On the other hand, there are a number of lifting tools that directly estimate spinal loads using biomechanical modelling techniques with different degrees of complexity; the University of Michigan's 3D Static Strength Prediction Program™ (3DSSPP) software (University of Michigan Center for Ergonomics, 2014), the revised Hand-Calculation Back Compressive Force (HCBCF) equation (Merryweather et al., 2009), the Linked-Segment Biomechanical Model (LSBM) (Potvin, 1997), the simple polynomial equation of low back compression (McGill et al., 1996), the Anybody Modelling System (AnyBody Technology, Aalborg, Denmark) (Damsgaard et al., 2006), and the regression models of Arjmand et al. (2011, 2012, 2013). As expected, the underlying assumptions and simplifications made in these tools influence the accuracy of their predictions and hence their applicability in ergonomic, rehabilitation, and biomechanical applications.For instance, modelling studies often estimate muscle forces and spinal loads based on the balance of net external moments at a single lumbar level (3DSSPP, HCBCF equation, and LSBM). Such consideration of equilibrium, however, yields results in violation of equilibrium at remaining spinal levels (especially so in more physically demanding tasks) (Arjmand et al., 2007, 2009; 2010). Also, earlier models have made simplifications (e.g., on the trunk geometry, muscle anatomy and line of action, passive ligamentous properties, and gravity load distribution) that could adversely influence the accuracy of predictions (Arjmand, 2006; Arjmand et al., 2006). Moreover, some tools have inherent errors due to their regression technique (assumed equations in simple polynomial, regression models, and LSBM) while others may not be as easy to use thus requiring some user training (3DSSPP and AnyBody software). No comparative investigation of the differences in the estimated spinal loads by these tools during various lifting tasks has hitherto been carried out.Hence, the present study aims to compare predictions (L4-L5 and L5-S1 segmental compressive and anterior–posterior shear loads) of the foregoing six lifting analysis tools when applied to identical manual load holding (static lifting) activities in upright and flexed, symmetric and asymmetric, and one- and two-handed conditions. Here, we intend to: 1) assess their respective underlying assumptions, 2) determine differences in the estimated spinal loads, 3) identify the accuracy of each tool in light of the comparison of its predicted compression forces with available in vivo intradiscal pressure measurements, and finally 4) their preferred domains of application. It is hypothesized that the estimates of spinal loads produced by the various tools will show large differences. The current comparative study should benefit researchers in various disciplines dealing with the biomechanical modelling, assessment of risk of occupational injuries, workplace performance improvement, and rehabilitation management.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
