@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Cultural ergonomics in interactional and experiential design: Conceptual framework and case study of the Taiwanese twin cup

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The study proposes a framework for cultural ergonomics in product design.We study the cultural ergonomics of the linnak as a case study.The linnak is used to demonstrate how to design cultural products in the study.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cultural ergonomics,Taiwanese aboriginal culture,Cultural and creative design,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Cultural ergonomics is an approach that considers interaction- and experience-based variations among cultures. Designers need to develop a better understanding of cultural ergonomics not just to participate in cultural contexts but also to develop interactive experiences for users. Cultural ergonomics extends our understanding of cultural meaning and our ability to utilize such understanding for design and evaluate everyday products. This study aims to combine cultural ergonomics and interactive design to explore human–culture interaction in user experiences. The linnak is a typical Taiwanese aboriginal cultural object. This study examined the cultural meaning and operational interface of the linnak, as well as the scenarios in which it is used in interaction and user experiences. The results produced a cultural ergonomics interface for examining the manner in which designers communicate across cultures as well as the interweaving of design and culture in the design process.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Taiwanese culture is a multicultural blend of traditional Chinese with significant East Asian influences, including Japanese, along with Western such as American, Spanish, and Dutch influences. Taiwanese aboriginal people also have a distinct culture. Among Taiwan's aboriginal tribes, each has a unique culture and style that can be identified from its sculpture, textile fabrics, webbing, leather crafts, and pottery. Tribes can also be identified by the applied functions of architecture, everyday objects, tools, ceremonial equipment, weapons, or decorations (Chen, 1961; Lee, 2000, 1982; Liu, 2007; Shu, 1998). Taiwanese aboriginal crafts and products have a primitive style that reveals beautiful and powerful features of both art and utility in daily life. Utilitarian objects are constructed with a primitive form that serves a basic function as well as a natural decorative pattern (Cheng, 2005; Hsiao, 2007; Hsu, 2004). With its beautiful and primitive arts and crafts, Taiwan aboriginal culture has great potential to enhance design value and gain recognition in the global market. To preserve aboriginal culture, it is necessary to study its cultural characteristics and transform them into modern products (Lin, 2007; Lin et al., 2009; Wu et al., 2005, 2004).Recently, user experience has gained popularity and has come to be broadly applied in human product interaction design. Interaction is a design method that constructs relationships between user experiences and product properties to design products that fulfill a user's desired experiences. Desmet and Hekkert (2007) mention that experience is not a property of the product, but rather the outcome of human–product interaction, and the results depend on the temporal characteristics and product experiences that the user brings to the interaction. Interactional design has shifted its focus from usability and cognitive ergonomics to the affective and interactive experiences of users.This study combines cultural ergonomics and interactional design to explore human–culture interaction in user experiences. The linnak (Fig. 1) is a typical Taiwanese aboriginal cultural object that has the potential to be transformed into a contemporary design for the current consumer market. The cultural meanings of “working together” and “sharing with each other” in the design of the linnak are valuable for enhancing its usage in everyday life (Lin, 2007, 2009; Lin et al. 2009). However, the contemporary consumer market may need a new form of linnak suitable for modern lifestyles. Therefore, this study analyzes the cultural meanings and operational interfaces of the linnak, as well as the scenarios in which it is used in interaction and user experiences. The results present an interface for examining the ways in which designers communicate across cultures, as well as how interactional design and culture are interwoven in the design process.The objective of this study is to propose a cultural ergonomics framework and to analyze the linnak as a case study with regard to the conceptual framework. A broad overview of the research process is depicted in Fig. 2. Based on the user-tool-task model and linnak scenarios, a framework for cultural ergonomics in product design is proposed. In addition, this study employs a systematized and scientific method to study the cultural ergonomics of the linnak as a case study. Finally, the linnak is used to demonstrate how to design cultural products.The successful integration of ergonomics and industrial design will produce aesthetically pleasing, functionally superior products. The user-tool-task system design model (Fig. 3) was proposed by Kreifeldt and Hill (1974) (Lin and Kreifeldt, 2001). Fig. 3 details the various influences and interactions in a user-tool system and emphasizes the threefold nature of the design: user, tool (product), and task; the two interfaces of the user-tool manipulation interface and the tool-task engagement interface; and the various interactions between user needs and the design requirements of the system. The user-tool-task model is designed to solve the problem of completing a task with a tool; it focuses first on the manipulation interface between the user and the tool and then on the engagement interface between the tool and the task.Under normal circumstances, the user utilizes the manipulation interface to control the tool, which employs the engagement interface to complete the task. Therefore, the two interfaces determine the fulfillment of user need, which are also affected by the user-tool-task paradigm. Strictly defining the relationship between user, tool, and task limits the appearance and form of a product; in some cases, however, product function must be prioritized (e.g., a space shuttle). If the technological function of a consumer product is not strictly defined (e.g., a television), designers can take advantage of the relationship between the manipulation and engagement interface and develop a product with its own characteristics that is satisfying in both form and function. This is why related products can differ radically in appearance (Lin and Kreifeldt, 2001).Drinking wine is a very common social event in human societies around the world, and it normally involves emotional communication between the participants. Among primitive humans, social events involving wine occurred regularly, and wine-related products became popular everyday items in design fields. Taiwan's aboriginal people often drank rice wine, regarding it as a holy event. They developed a variety of “twin cups” for drinking, and each cup was different in terms of cultural meaning, usability, and beauty (Lin, 2007). Investigation of the equipment and tools of Taiwanese aboriginal tribes reveals that the linnak of the Paiwan tribe displays remarkable usefulness as a cultural resource. The linnak—literally, “twin cup” in the Paiwan language—is a typical object in Paiwan culture, and it represents the value of the connection with Paiwan traditional culture. The linnak is a special container for drinking wine used in the traditional tribal wedding ceremony; it requires two people to smoothly manipulate the object during the act of drinking. The linnak is a wooden sculpture with two cups situated at a suitable distance and a handle on each side. It has social meanings, ergonomic concerns, and functional achievements associated with its status as a cultural object. Previous research on the construction and use of the aboriginal twin cup is described in the book Culture and Art of the Formosan Aboriginal (Liu, 2007).Based on the interaction with and experience of the linnak, a scenario in the development of the linnak is illustrated in Fig. 4. The term “scenario” refers to a specific need for a particular tool in daily life; “factor” refers to the conversion of the need into factors that influence the design of a tool; and “level” refers to a user-tool-task system design model. In the case of a linnak, “scenarios” indicate the need to use a different container to drink wine, particularly by the chief at special events, by a couple at a wedding, or by people participating in festival ceremonies. Furthermore, “factors” include the container function, user experience, usage behavior, using time, and so on. Finally, in the case of “levels,” specific formation, consumer behavior, and cultural meanings of the linnak were developed for special events and particular users. Furthermore, in the user level, an ordinary cup or bowl was used to drink wine before the linnak was developed, with bodily contact revealing the intimacy of the users (top of Fig. 4). In the tool level, then, users developed various drinking containers, and each container was associated with special events and specific meanings. For example, a single cup could only be used in special events by the chief of the Paiwan tribe; two cups or three cups were normally used in wedding or festival ceremonies to emphasize close relationships between drinkers and increase warm feelings (middle of Fig. 4). In the task level, drinking was considered a sacred social contact activity, and each tribe made drinking objects specific to their respective cultures to show differences in social status and cultural meaning. For example, the cock (chieftain) used a single cup, and when the hunter was successful, he would give the meat of the animal's hind leg to the cock; then, the cock would give the hunter a single-cup drink for his valiancy. Double cups were used in ordinary wedding ceremonies for the bride and bridegroom (bottom of Fig. 4) (Lee, 1997; Leong and Clark, 2003; Lin, 2007; Lin and Lin, 2010). The triple-cup linnak was used in special ceremonies for the greatest blessing: a couple would stand on opposite ends of the linnak as the cock stood in middle to witness their love.From the perspective of cultural ergonomics, the development of the linnak includes three cultural levels (Fig. 4): (1) the outer-level (user) focuses on linnak formation associated with user demand, lifestyle, and immediate feeling; (2) the middle-level (tool) focuses on function, usability, and consumer behavior regarding the linnak in everyday life; and (3) the inner-level (task) focuses on cultural meaning, including ceremony, reflection, and emotion (Hsu et al., 2011; Lee, 2000; Lin et al., 2007; Murovec and Prodan, 2009; Norman, 2004). The linnak demonstrates the value of cultural ergonomics in design, which is why it was chosen as a cultural object for this study. The purpose of this study, then, is to explore the cultural ergonomics of the linnak, including ergonomic concerns, appearance, usability, functional achievement, and sociocultural meaning.Along with globalization and technological progress, adding a cultural dimension to ergonomics has become an important issue for exploring interaction and experience in product design. While product design has been user-centered for some time, there is now greater emphasis specifically on user experience, with ergonomics increasingly becoming a part of interactional design. We need an approach that systematizes and codifies cultural influence in ergonomic product design. From the perspective of design, to develop an ideal drinking cup in the form of the linnak, the social and operational interfaces of the linnak both need to be well designed using a user-tool-task approach. Therefore, a framework has been proposed for combining cultural levels, layers, and design features (Fig. 5), thus facilitating an understanding of cultural ergonomics in product design (Desmet and Hekkert, 2007; Kring et al., 2006; Lin et al. 2009). In Fig. 5, the cultural product design model consists of three main parts: the conceptual model, research method, and human system design. The conceptual model focuses on how to extract cultural features from cultural ergonomics and then transfer those features to the design transformation model to design cultural products. The research method consists of three steps: (1) extracting cultural features from original cultural objects (identification), (2) translating these features into design information and design elements (translation), and (3) designing a cultural product (implementation). Based on the cultural product design model, the cultural product is designed using approaches based on scenarios and storytelling. In a practical design process, four steps are used to design a cultural product: investigation (setting a scenario), interaction (telling a story), development (writing a script), and implementation (designing a product) (Lin, 2007).Cultural ergonomics plays an important role in cultural products with embedded information technologies, and translating culture into products will eventually become a design trend. Interactional design has switched focus from usability and cognitive ergonomics to the affective and interactive experiences of users. The interactive experience of the linnak is not only a property of the product, but also an outcome of human–product interaction, and the results depend on the product experiences users bring to the interaction. Therefore, this study combines ergonomic and affective design to explore cultural ergonomics in human–cultural product interaction using the linnak as an example.At the user level, the key issue concerns the manipulation interface, which involves the interaction between the user and the tool. The design features derived from the outer level of the linnak include material, color, form, texture, surface pattern, and detail. These cultural features are illustrated through embossed decorations such as figures, heads, and deer patterns. Based on these cultural features, the visceral design focuses on natural principles, original response, common sense, an attractive appearance, and immediate feeling.In terms of cultural ergonomics, the linnak can enhance a social interactive environment that involves drinking wine. Two people are required to hold the handles of the linnak at the same time and manipulate it with good coordination to drink the wine smoothly. The physical dimensions of the linnak include the body, the cup, and the pitch, which are shown in Fig. 6. The linnak ranges in length from 575 mm (the shortest) to 910 mm (the longest), with an average length of about 688 mm. The height of the body ranges from 55 mm to 145 mm, while the width of body ranges from 80 mm to 140 mm. The average width and height of the linnak are 72 mm and 111 mm, respectively. The pitch (the distance between the centers of two cups) varies from 290 mm to 420 mm, with an average of 324.5 mm. For the cup, the length ranges from 82 mm to 175 mm, the width 70 mm–130 mm, and the depth 35 mm–70 mm (averages = 114.8 mm, 101.0 mm, and 48.8 mm, respectively). The length of the handle ranges from 126 mm to 506 mm, with an average of 286 mm. The volume of the linnak is about 286 ml for each cup. Eighteen types of linnak are shown in Fig. 7.For ergonomic considerations, the requirement in anthropometric design is to determine a value for a design parameter in terms of percentile cutoff for an anthropometric value to meet a certain percentage of the target population. Drinking posture is mainly affected by the length of the pitch between cups (CP length). If the CP length is shorter than the combined length of half the left drinker's shoulder width and half the right drinker's shoulder width, the drinkers' shoulders overlap. However, if the CP length is greater than half the width of the two drinkers' shoulders, both users can drink using a normal posture (top of Fig. 8). When drinkers' shoulders overlap, two postures were found to be most common in using the linnak: face-to-face, showing an intimate relationship, and shoulder-to-shoulder, showing a normal friendship (bottom of Fig. 8). The shortest, the average, and the longest CP lengths were chosen as examples to be simulated to explore drinking situations. Based on the Taiwanese anthropometric database (Wang et al., 2001), three percentiles of shoulder width (fifth, fiftieth, and ninety-fifth), ranging in age from 18 to 65, were used to simulate drinking postures in three situations: man to man, man to woman, and woman to woman. The results for shoulder overlap distance are shown in Fig. 9. Obviously, shoulder overlap distance increased as shoulder width increased or CP length decreased. Increased shoulder overlap distance results in greater discomfort, as drinkers have to use shoulder-to-shoulder postures while preferring face-to-face postures. Thus, a linnak with a shorter CP length would be used in a wedding ceremony since it requires a face-to-face posture, suggesting an intimate relationship. In a normal situation, a longer CP length linnak would be used, creating a shoulder-to-shoulder drinking posture. In terms of cultural ergonomics, the physical dimensions of the linnak indicate the ways in which this cultural object has been used, and the distances suggest an invisible space between two people based on their relationship.For the tool, the engagement interface is needed to complete the task while meeting requirements of the manipulation interface for the user's needs. The design features from the middle level of the linnak should focus on how to operate it smoothly based on ergonomics. Thus, behavioral design concerns function, usability, sense of body, user demands, and recognition. The linnak is a special container for drinking wine used in traditional tribal wedding ceremonies, and it requires two people to smoothly manipulate the object during the act of drinking. The linnak embodies ergonomic considerations as well as cultural meanings. For example, from a usability perspective, the diamond-shaped cup shows that an angular mouth was used for ease of drinking. The handle design and the pitch between the two cups are crucial elements showing the cultural meanings of the linnak; these meanings include working together, sharing, and having close relationships.Based on previous studies, the minimum, average, and maximum sizes of linnak were chosen as examples to build three wooden models (Fig. 10). The cups can be adjusted to the preferred pitch to explore the relationship between the drinker (user) and the linnak (tool). Using these wooden linnak models, an experiment was conducted to explore the operation of user experience. In the experiment, the two cups could be freely moved by the participants to create the most agreeable position for imbibing (Fig. 11). Subjects included 40 students (20 intimate couples) who were told the purpose of the study. A PowerPoint presentation was used to introduce the cultural meanings and use scenarios of the linnak to the participants. The participants were then asked to use the linnak model to simulate drinking situations and explore their preferred postures. Finally, the subjects were asked to complete a subjective questionnaire about their experiences as users. The questionnaire included the following items: (1) What is the most interesting aspect of the linnak? (2) What is the relationship between the linnak's external form and its cultural meaning? (3) What is the relevance of the method of interaction to the cultural meaning? (4) What is the relationship between user experience and the cultural meaning of the linnak? Responses were summarized to study interactions while drinking wine using the linnak. The content of the presentation in the Introduction section might not have such a strong influence on the answers to the questionnaire. This is because, first, both the cultural meaning and use of the linnak are not complicated; in fact, they are easy to understand. Second, all of the participants attended the presentation at the same time, and each participant was asked to briefly interpret the usage behavior and cultural meaning of the linnak in his or her own words after the presentation. Based on the provided interpretation, the authors would again explain the usage behavior and cultural meaning of the linnak until each participant interpreted it correctly. Therefore, the participants answered the questionnaire only after they clearly understood the concept of the linnak. The user-experience responses are summarized below:1.The cultural meaning of the linnak that pertains to “sharing with each other,” “closed relationships,” and “close relationships” was its most impressive aspect.Pleasure during use was also an impressive experience, focusing on use behavior and enhancing the relationship between the linnak and the user.After using the linnak models, the most interesting aspects were not only the form of the linnak but also its “cultural meaning.” While this cultural object could not be easily used in modern society, its cultural meaning made an impression on the participants.The pitch is the distance between the two cups, indicating the closeness of the relationship between the users. The more intimate the users, the shorter the pitch.Most participants thought that cultural meanings and ergonomic considerations would be equally important. Thus, the cultural ergonomics and cultural meanings of the linnak need to be considered for usability and experience design while translating cultural features into a modern product.The relationship between user needs and design requirements plays an important role in the task level. User needs influence design requirements and create the form of the tool, which affects the task representing a cultural ritual. In terms of user needs, the inner-level task contains special content such as stories, emotions, and cultural features, and focuses on the symbolic meanings of the linnak. In terms of design requirements, reflective design focuses on the product's message, cultural meaning, self-image, aesthetics, and delightfulness. However, tasks involving the linnak may have a different emphasis in its spiritual meaning depending on the tool's features and the context of its use (e.g., sharing with friends or drinking for pleasure). For example, the linnak used in the cultural milieu of work has been emphasized in various cases (Kaplan, 1998). Fig. 12shows linnak scenarios involving one to seven cups; scenarios include sharing with friends, intimate couple relationships, and sharing between deer, wild pigs, and snakes.In talking about the linnak, we may speak in terms of the cultural milieu in which it is used. Various customs and people influence the way we think about the linnak. According to Kaplan (1998), however, the ergonomist should ask the following questions and appropriately account for the answers:1.What are the characteristics of the cultural milieu in which the work is performed?What are the implications for conduct of the work?What are the customary ways of behaving and performing the tasks by the individuals involved?What do individuals bring from their cultural background to this cultural/work environment?From a cultural ergonomics perspective, the linnak contributes to a spirit of warmth and sharing during a festival or ceremony—it embodies the cultural meanings of working together, sharing, and having close relationships. When the linnak is a subject of ergonomic work, there is a need to recognize cultural ergonomics. Evidence points to the fact that the cultural meaning of the linnak, which includes cognitive ergonomics in its design, will undoubtedly become a crucial element in cultural product design applications (Hsiao, 2007; Hsu et al., 2013; Hsu, 2004; Kaplan, 2004). Moreover, the beauty of the linnak in Taiwanese aboriginal culture and art demonstrates great potential for enhancing the design value of modern consumer products.The link between the linnak and user interaction and experience has been studied within the framework of cultural ergonomics. There is a central feature of the linnak in cultural ergonomics that applies to both individual performance and group performance. In the user-tool-task model (Fig. 3), the performance of tasks and, when applicable, the human interfacing and engineering engagement that affect performance are susceptible to cultural influence. The framework for applying the user-tool-task model to cultural ergonomics proposed in this study (Fig. 5) provides a different way of thinking about interactive experiences with acculturation. Acculturation is the exchange of traditional culture, cultural features, cultural objects, interface design, interactional experience, user emotion, and user response (Ko et al., 2009). This framework is of value for designers because it can help to incorporate “cultural features” into interactional design, as well as provide users with a valuable reference for understanding interactive experience. Using the interactive experiences of the user, important considerations for design elements are extracted through cultural ergonomics.Three design cases were developed to test the utility of cultural ergonomics in cultural product design. Since cultural objects can be incorporated into cultural design, the three design features can be identified as follows: (1) the inner level, containing special content such as stories, emotion, and cultural features; (2) the middle level, containing function, operational concerns, usability, and safety; and (3) the outer level, dealing with colors, texture, form, decoration, surface pattern, line quality, and details (Edgar and Sedgwick, 2002; Gunew and Rizvi, 1994; Lin, 2007).During the design process, the cultural ergonomics framework and brief information about the linnak were provided to the designers. This information included examples of several types of linnaks and photographs showing various scenarios in which the linnak is used; further, the information included an explanation of the various types of linnak forms based on situational and cultural meanings. For example, “a twin cup linnak, made of wood and fulfill with tattoo, was used in aboriginal ceremonies for drinking wine. Although three types of linnaks exist in the form of a single, double, and triple cup wooden sculpture, a twin cup (i.e., a double cup) linnak is most commonly used. The cultural significance of using a linnak in such ceremonies is to enhance closeness in relationships and friendship by sharing the linnak amongst each other.” A cultural product such as the linnak is created based on the following four stages: investigation (creating a scenario), interaction (narrating a story), development (writing a script), and implementation (designing a product).In cultural contexts, the linnak can enhance social interactive environments such as festivals or wedding ceremonies. During a wedding ceremony, two people are required to hold the handles of the linnak at the same time and manipulate it with good coordination to drink the wine smoothly. In this case, the handle plays an important role as an invisible space implying the relationship between the two people (i.e., a shorter pitch represents a closer relationship). An analysis of different handles can provide the designer with ideas for transferring the usability of the linnak into modern product design; in a nightclub, for example, the cultural meaning of the twin-cup could emphasize friendship.Based on the cultural connotations of the linnak, a friendship-sharing set was designed by combining the idea of “sharing with each other” and the function of “working together” (Fig. 13). The main idea of friendship-sharing is expressed through handles that connect two cups with a cup holder. The set was designed for use by an individual or by two friends at the same time to indicate a relationship and enhance feelings in a nightclub. When the two cups are not in use, the cup holder represents the close relationship between friends (Lin, 2007, 2009; Lin et al. 2007).The middle level of the linnak focuses on consumer behavior and the different scenarios in which people would use the linnak. In addition, for the inner level of the linnak, emotional feeling is a key element of the cultural product design. Thus, the main idea of the “kiss-sharing” design came from the inner meaning of the linnak, using the lips as a metaphor for lovers sharing a kiss (Fig. 14). The main idea of this design is to transmit the romantic meaning of sharing a kiss while touching the “lips” during a toast. A chip with different sounds can be inserted into the lips, thereby providing a new way to make the linnak's traditional cultural meaning relevant to modern society. Fig. 14 shows the designs of these cups. If one cultivates warm feelings in a nightclub, before drinking you can share the feelings with other friends and clearly broadcast the close relationship between you and your partners (Lin, 2007, 2009; Lin et al. 2007).The design features derived from the outer level, which pertain to the visceral design of the linnak, are concerned with material, color, form, texture, surface pattern, decoration, and details. The outer level of the linnak is characterized by embossed decorations such as figures, heads, hooded snakes, and deer. These ancient patterns and figures carry symbolic meanings that can be used as design elements and translated into modern product design. Accordingly, a “memory-sharing” design considered the outer level of form and combined it with the act of sharing rather than drinking. The design can be used to share photos and images, displayed on an LCD screen representing the sharing “cup” (Fig. 15).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
