@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Effects of EVA gloves on grip strength and fatigue under low temperature and low pressure

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Both pressure and low temperature would reduce the strength and fatigue of EVA gloves.The maximum grip strength and fatigue were influenced significantly in low temperature and pressure.For long hours of work, the effect of low temperature is greater than the effect of pressure.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
EVA glove,Low temperature,Pressure,Maximum grip,Fatigue,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectiveTo study the effects of wearing extravehicular activity (EVA) gloves on grip strength and fatigue in low temperature, low pressure and mixing of two factors (low temperature and low pressure).MethodsThe maximum grip strength and fatigue tests were performed with 10 healthy male subjects wearing gloves in a variety of simulated environments. The data was analysed using the normalization method.ResultsThe results showed that wearing gloves significantly affected the maximum grip strength and fatigue. Pressure (29.6, 39.2 kPa) had more influence on the maximum grip compared with control group while low temperatures (−50, −90, −110 °C) had no influence on grip but affected fatigue dramatically. The results also showed that the maximum grip strength and fatigue were influenced significantly in a compound environment.ConclusionsSpace environment remarkably reduced strength and endurance of the astronauts. However, the effects brought by the compound environment cannot be understood as the superimposition of low temperature and pressure effects.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Strength is the source of manual performance, and under the control of the brain it can realise precise manual performance by contraction force from the upper body and muscles of various hands parts. Up to 90% of actions in extravehicular activity (EVA) are performed by the upper body (Zhang et al., 2011). However, astronaut operation strength during extravehicular activity decreased dramatically due to the combined effect of glove pressure, low temperature and glove structure (Ding et al., 2005). Therefore, in the development process of EVA gloves, the major problem is how to maintain necessary strength during extravehicular activity. Endurance and strength are always considered together in the experiments because enough physical strength is the premise to complete the work. A reduction in strength and fatigue will lead to additional energy expenditure and fatigue, and a result could be a serious accident.Scholars have studied various elements affecting hand strength from different perspectives. Geng researched the influence of low temperature on performance from aspects of subjective feelings and finger temperature measurements when in touch with low-temperature objects (Geng et al., 2001); Aldien illustrated the pressure distribution of the hand-handle operation interface by studying hand forces and handle size (Aldien et al., 2005). As far as the study of an EVA glove is concerned, Buhman showed the influence of the glove on maximum grip strength from glove structure, pressure, load, handle structure (Buhman et al., 2000). However, they only conducted single-factor analysis of each element, and the influence of low temperatures was not included. Tsaousidis studied the effects of gloves on maximum force and the rate of force development in pinch, wrist flexion and grip (Tsaousidis and Freivalds, 1998). By low-pressure chamber experiments, Bishu established the maximum limits of strength and fatigue when performing all kinds of tasks with gloves, which was manifest in the relationship between strength and fatigue (Bishu et al., 1995). Francisco studied the relationship between strength and dexterity by dynamic pinch performance (Valero-Cuevas et al., 2003). However, these studies mainly focused on single-factor effects on strength. There has been no definite conclusion on the interaction (addition, subtraction or combination) of glove pressure, low temperature and glove structure on strength, which is the real condition of EVA.Therefore, this article studies hand strength under the combined influence of glove strength and low temperature and takes maximum grip strength and grip fatigue as essential evaluating indicators.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
From the system study of maximum grip strength and grip fatigue of EVA gloves under combined factors (low-temperature, pressurised condition), the following points provide a summary:(1)The major effect of the maximum grip strength was the pressurised state of the glove, while temperature had a lesser effect;Low temperature and pressure might affect the working capacity of the astronauts. However, pressure mainly caused fatigue, while temperature mainly affected the working time;Thermal protective performance of the back-side of hand had a key role enhancing astronauts' working time and their tolerance capacity.