@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Prior schemata transfer as an account for assessing the intuitive use of new technology

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An experiment is conducted for assessing the intuitive use of an interface.Intuitive use relies on the transfer of prior knowledge schemata.Familiar and new features yield distinct patterns of prior schemata transfer and of new schemata induction, respectively.Transfer and induction patterns were moderated by participants' cognitive style.Assessment of these patterns is reported for the evaluation and redesign of interfaces.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Intuitive use,Schemata theory,Transfer,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
New devices are considered intuitive when they allow users to transfer prior knowledge. Drawing upon fundamental psychology experiments that distinguish prior knowledge transfer from new schema induction, a procedure was specified for assessing intuitive use. This procedure was tested with 31 participants who, prior to using an on-board computer prototype, studied its screenshots in reading vs. schema induction conditions. Distinct patterns of transfer or induction resulted for features of the prototype whose functions were familiar or unfamiliar, respectively. Though moderated by participants' cognitive style, these findings demonstrated a means for quantitatively assessing transfer of prior knowledge as the operation that underlies intuitive use. Implications for interface evaluation and design, as well as potential improvements to the procedure, are discussed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Intuition is a mode of effortless thinking in which pre-existing knowledge pre-empts the analysis of new situations (Hodgkinson et al., 2008; Kahneman, 2003; Klein, 1998). In this vein, devices that fit users' prior knowledge and require little effort to use are considered ‘intuitive’ (Blackler, 2008; Hurtienne, 2009; O'Brien et al., 2012). Currently, the means for assessing device use and intuitive use as a function of prior knowledge (a.k.a. prior experience or familiarity) consist of observational analyses of participants using a test device (e.g., a digital camera) and questionnaires to assess their familiarity with technology (for an overview, see Blackler et al., 2011). Observational analysis requires usage sessions to be recorded by video so that an experimenter may manually isolate each feature use (e.g., menu, option) and assign the corresponding performances, behaviors, and verbal protocols11Verbal protocols were obtained concurrently (Blackler, 2008; Blackler et al., 2004), retrospectively (Langdon et al., 2007, 2010), or both (Lawry et al., 2010). For concurrent protocols, participants were instructed to use the device while they ‘talk aloud about what they are doing’ (Blackler, 2008, p. 298). For retrospective protocols, participants were asked to ‘describe and explain their interpretation’ of their performance while a video of their usage is played back to them (Langdon et al., 2007, p.186).to a set of heuristics. A feature use is considered intuitive when it displays at least two of the following heuristics: expectedness, subjective certainty of correctness, latency, (verbalized) relevant past experience, and absence of evidenced (verbalized) reasoning (Blackler, 2008; see also Blackler et al., 2010; Gudur et al., 2013; Lawry et al., 2010). Technology familiarity questionnaires assess participants' exposure to and competence with device types both similar and different to the one being tested (Blackler et al., 2010; Hurtienne et al., 2013; Langdon et al., 2007). Such assessment revealed that features whose function or appearance is familiar from other devices tended to be used correctly, rapidly, and intuitively. Notably, Blackler et al. (2010) showed that a digital camera yielded more intuitive uses from participants who had a broad familiarity with technology, yet little experience with digital cameras, than from participants who had limited familiarity with technology, yet were familiar with digital cameras. In this sense, intuitive use seems to reflect a transfer of knowledge from familiar devices and domains onto new devices (Blackler et al., 2010; Blackler and Hurtienne, 2007; Langdon et al., 2007).The notion of transfer deserves further consideration. First, it is evident from studies of functional fixedness (Duncker, 1945), analogical reasoning (Gentner et al., 2003; Keane, 1987) and multimedia learning (Mayer, 2001) that the availability of knowledge does not imply its transfer (for a review, see Barnett and Ceci, 2002; Bracke, 1998). Thus, the way in which prior knowledge is transferred onto new devices needs to be clarified. Second, assuming that knowledge transfer is the underlying mechanism of intuitive use, it would be pertinent to assess intuitive use in terms of the transfer itself, rather than sets of other descriptors22Examples of these sets: Evalint questionnaire (perceived effortlessness, perceived error rate, perceived achievement of goals, and perceived effort of learning; Mohs et al., 2006); QUESI questionnaire (low subjective mental workload, high perceived achievement of goals, low perceived effort of learning, high familiarity, and low perceived rate of errors; Hurtienne and Naumann, 2010); INTUI questionnaire (magical experience, effortlessness, gut feeling, and verbalizity; Ullrich and Diefenbach, 2010); and coding heuristics (expectedness, subjective certainty of correctness, latency, relevant past experience, and absence of evidenced reasoning; Blackler, 2008).. To date, intuitive use is assessed through observational analyses of participants, a method that is reportedly quite time-consuming (Blackler and Hurtienne, 2007), or through surveys of participants' impressions of a device (Ullrich and Diefenbach, 2010; Mohs et al., 2006; Hurtienne and Naumann, 2010). The major disadvantage of these approaches is their subjectivity, which justifies a search for alternatives. The present study is an effort in this direction: psychology studies are reviewed as a basis for assessing knowledge transfer quantitatively. In Section 2, we argue that transfer requires abstract representations of knowledge called schemata. In Section 3, we specify an experimental procedure, along with the factors and hypotheses for assessing schemata in terms of their operations in human computer interactions (HCI). In Section 4, we detail the experiment for verifying our hypotheses, including materials and experimental conditions. In Section 5, the results of this experiment are presented and discussed. Finally, in Sections 6 and 7, we review implications and future directions of this research.Knowledge transfer is a composite phenomenon. Of the various existing transfer mechanisms, two are directly relevant to the understanding of intuitive use: near transfer and far transfer. These mechanisms have been conceptualized in the field of analogical reasoning by means of a two-stage procedure in which participants study a source problem and its solution, and then solve a target problem. Source and target problems are formulated so as to be similar in terms of surface (near transfer) and/or means-goal structure (far transfer). Transfer is demonstrated if participants, without being told this similarity, spontaneously reuse the source to solve the target. Near transfer has been demonstrated to occur robustly. For example, participants presented with a source problem about a doctor who treats a cerebral tumor by converging low-intensity X-rays were able to transfer this convergence solution to the X-ray treatment of a stomach tumor (Gick and Holyoak, 1980). Transfer even occurred between outwardly similar yet structurally incompatible problems: participants drew superficial analogies that did not result in a conceptually relevant solution, and they repeatedly attempted to reuse the source rather than analyze the target (Holyoak and Koh, 1987; Novick, 1988). Conversely, far transfer could not be obtained between analogous problems in which structure is similar, yet surface attributes differ. For example, consider the above tumor problem presented after a source problem in which a military general converges his troops to attack a fortress (Gick and Holyoak, 1980). In such cases, even when made to summarize, memorize, or recall the source while solving the target, participants did not reuse the convergence solution, instead analyzing alternative solutions to the target (Gick and Holyoak, 1983; Spencer and Weisberg, 1986).The fact that outward similarity promotes transfer and prevents analysis upholds design strategies that consist of replicating the appearance attributes of familiar devices and domains (see Blackler and Hurtienne, 2007). Yet as surface dissimilarity disrupts transfer, it is unclear how devices that depart from replication and skeuomorphism (for reasons of style revitalization, trademarked property, etc.) can still be intuitive. This issue of far transfer was resolved by Gick and Holyoak (1983) with a study in which participants compared, in writing, two problem instantiations of the convergence solution (e.g., the fortress problem and an analogous parade problem) before solving the tumor problem. The tumor problem was solved through transfer by nearly 90% of participants who emphasized the convergence solution in their comparisons, but by none of the participants who focused on details of the source stories in their comparisons. This finding was attributed to the induction of a schema. Schema induction requires that structure common to several instances be encoded as constant and differing attributes be encoded as variables (Gentner et al., 2003). The resulting representation (schema) can be assigned optional values and transferred to instances that are new as well as superficially different (Reeves and Weiberg, 1994).Comparison of just two instances suffices for a new schema to be induced. Even if instances are not fully understood, knowledge gained from one aids in understanding the other (Gentner et al., 2003). Without comparison, exposure to several instances results in the formation of representations that are specific, in that they support near transfer but not far transfer (Catrambone and Holyoak, 1989; Cummins, 1992; Hintzman, 1986; Spencer and Weisberg, 1986). It takes many instances for a schema to be ‘abstracted’ without comparison. Since Reber (1969), it is known that participants who study many character strings from an artificial grammar become able to classify new target strings based on this grammar. The knowledge hence acquired is implicit, as participants fail to explain their judgments or recognize previously studied source strings. Debate occurred as to whether such transfer was due to a schema being abstracted (Reber, 1989; Reber and Allen, 1978) or fragments of the source strings being memorized. Compelling evidence in favor of schema abstraction includes demonstrations of far transfer whereby participants classified strings composed of new letters, and even new stimuli such as aural tones, based on the grammar (Altmann et al., 1995; Gomez, 1997; Kürten et al., 2012; Reber, 1969). Studies from analogical reasoning and implicit learning established the key role of schemata in the transfer of knowledge from known contexts and domains to new ones. Likewise, we posit that schemata mediate the transfer of knowledge onto devices that are new-to-innovative.Many aspects of intuitive use resemble the schema construct. Intuitive use has been described as an application of well-learned knowledge or existing skills that result in chunking, grouping of actions, or automated procedures (Langdon et al., 2007; Lawry et al., 2010; Raskin, 1994). Psychological accounts of expert thinking have established that schemata result in a chunking of information that working memory processes automatically and effortlessly (Chase and Simon, 1973; Chi et al., 1981, 1982; Ericsson and Kintsch, 1995; Gobet et al., 2001; Larkin et al., 1980; Saling and Phillips, 2007; Shiffrin and Schneider, 1977). Intuitive use has also been described as the unconscious application or transfer of knowledge across devices and domains (Blackler et al., 2010; Langdon et al., 2007; Raskin, 1994). In psychological accounts of reasoning, schemata designate abstract knowledge structures that mediate far transfer and allow the unconscious anticipation of an indefinitely large number of situations (Gentner et al., 2003; Gick and Holyoak, 1983; Neisser, 1976).Some accounts of intuitive use have attempted to connect the application of knowledge across devices to either transfer or schemata. According to Blackler and Hurtienne (2007), intuitive interaction ‘at its most complex’ requires that ‘completely new concepts or functions’ be explained through metaphors (p. 39). They posited, in reference to Holyoak (1991), that metaphors allow an analogical mapping of known sources and new target situations. However, it should be noted that analogical mapping (a.k.a. ‘metaphor-based reasoning’ or ‘far transfer’) could not be explained before being connected to the schema construct by Gick and Holyoak (1983). Hurtienne (2009) conceptualized intuitive use in terms of sensorimotor knowledge abstractions called image schemas. Yet Hurtienne et al. (2013) hypothesized that device first-usage should reflect a knowledge that is specific (from similar devices) rather than abstract (from other devices). In the first case, users would possess the skills required to operate the device, and in the latter the amount of transferrable interaction knowledge would be less. This hypothesis was tested by decomposing prior knowledge in terms of competency and prior exposure, at levels of high vs. medium vs. low specificity (i.e., for products similar to the one tested vs. computer-related activities vs. other interactive devices). The largest impact was found to be from medium specificity, meaning that knowledge transfer accompanying first usage was not specific, but rather necessitated a degree of abstractedness. It is also important to note that competency scores were more explanatory than prior exposure scores. This finding suggests that prior exposure questionnaires may not be that relevant for addressing the abstractedness of prior knowledge, which we discuss below.On another occasion, Blackler et al. (2010) chose not to switch from the phrase ‘intuitive interaction’ to ‘transfer’, arguing that the former ‘adds a further dimension than simple knowledge transfer or prior experience – that of non-conscious or implicit knowledge’ (p. 75). However, transfer falls under so-called implicit memory effects (Hintzman, 1990; Richardson-Klavehn and Bjork, 1988; Roediger et al., 1993). In psychology there is a major distinction between direct (a.k.a. ‘explicit’ or ‘episodic’) and indirect (a.k.a. ‘implicit’ or ‘incidental’) memory tests. Direct memory tests (e.g., recall, recognition) ask participants about their past and measure their ability to discriminate between old and new facts. Indirect memory tests (e.g., priming, implicit grammar learning, transfer-based problem solving) engage participants in a cognitive task with no given reference to their past, and measure changes in task performance as a function of prior study. Direct and indirect memory tests display dissociations between their respectively measured episodic and transfer performances. Analogical reasoning and multimedia learning studies showed that participants who read source contents demonstrated good detail recall, yet failed far-transfer tests. Conversely, participants who compared source contents and induced a common schema recalled fewer source details, yet solved far tasks by transfer (Gick and Holyoak, 1983; Gentner et al., 1993; Mayer, 1980). In implicit learning, as participants abstracted underlying grammar schema, their ability to categorize new strings increased while their recognition of studied strings decreased (Reber, 1969, 1989). Such dissociations discredit the adequacy of basic recognition- and recall-based questionnaires for measuring abstract knowledge. Likewise, this may explain why Langdon et al. (2010) did not find the relationship expected between the usage of a microwave oven and a familiarity questionnaire involving recognition of feature labels and positions. Altogether, previous accounts of intuitive use have overlooked the evidence suggesting that far transfer is a memory effect that is implicit when based on schemata.The transfer of schemata across domains suggests that intuitive use can involve schemata from domains other than technology. From this perspective, technological-familiarity questionnaires (Blackler et al., 2010; Hurtienne et al., 2013) cannot fully capture the knowledge responsible for intuitive use because their scope would need to be extended to cover all possible knowledge domains. Schemata exist at all levels of abstraction (Rumelhart and Ortony, 1977), and various sub-theories of the schema construct have been substantiated in psychology (e.g., theories of scripts; Shanks and Abelson, 1977). One such theory, called ‘image schemas’, has recently been applied to design (Loeffler et al., 2013). Previously, Hurtienne (2009) posited that, because they are sensorimotor, universal, and hold higher-order metaphorical extensions, image schemas endorse intuitive use on a broader scale than specialized higher-order schemata (e.g., scripts). An inventory called ISCAT33Available on January 2014 at http://iscat.stefciu.de/.(Image Schema CATalog; Hurtienne, 2009) was developed that links 45 image schemas (e.g., up/down) to 255 metaphorical extensions (e.g., ‘up’ is ‘more’), 197 user interfaces, and 622 instances of image schemas. An ‘image schema expert’ would code users' verbal protocols in terms of image schemas, which are then fed into design improvements (see the IBIS method, named after the German phrase for design of intuitive use with image schemas; Loeffler et al., 2013). However, Hurtienne (2009) observed confusion in the coding of co-occurring image schemas. This presents a difficulty, since schemata fundamentally embed one within another (Rumelhart and Ortony, 1977). While image schemas can improve the intuitive use of sensorimotor design elements (e.g., vertical sliders), there remains the more pressing issue of creating higher design levels (e.g., technical, technological). Yet in a review of 77 papers regarding design abstractions, Hurtienne and Blessing (2007) found that one quarter related to the sensorimotor while the rest related to higher-order abstractions such as culture and expertise. We believe that human activity is specified at such higher levels, and that higher-order schemata (e.g., scripts, skills) override the processing of lower-order schemata (e.g., image schemas) through embedding and chunking (Rumelhart and Norman, 1981; Rumelhart and Ortony, 1977). While schemata are too numerous to be inventoried, their impact on user behavior can nevertheless be assessed through transfer-type tests. The following sections formulate operations of schemata in HCI as a basis for measuring their transfer.Most modern technologies are interfaced through digital screens or displays. Technological features are typically implemented as icons and labels that are grouped into states. A state corresponds to the distinct collection of features displayed on a screen at any given time (see Figs. 1 and 2for examples). As long as a desired feature (goal) is not displayed in the current state, users must move from state to state until the desired feature is found. The distance between the current and goal states is reduced through iterative means-end analyses (Newell, 1980), whereby users judge which of the current state's features (e.g., menu entry) best matches the goal. Typically, users perceive and interpret a current state, determine the feature closest to the goal, and then command its execution (Norman and Draper, 1986).Means-end analysis entails multiple comparisons whose cost and outcomes reflect the compatibility of a state's attributes with prior schemata (see schema theory and its repercussions on cognitive load theory; Chi et al., 1982). Attributes compatible with prior schemata are processed effortlessly through transfer (Chalmers, 2003; Kalyuga et al., 2001). Processing is moderately consuming when prior schemata must be amended, and highly consuming when new schemata must be induced (Chalmers, 2003; Rumelhart and Norman, 1978). This latter operation is difficult to achieve with the few resources left over from means-end analysis (Sweller, 1988, 1994; Sweller and Levine, 1982; Van Gerven et al., 2002), meaning that states for which users should induce new schemata remain resource-demanding at later encounters (Tuovinen and Sweller, 1997). Schemata operations can therefore serve as a criterion for differentiating states deemed intuitive, in that prior schemata transfer suffices, from those detrimental to intuitive use, in that new schemata must be induced (Fischer et al., 2009; Fischer, 2010).Here the question arises: how can transfer and induction be assessed? In HCI, it is customary to translate cognitive constructs into heuristics. Heuristics are inherently qualitative, however, which represents a methodological drawback that the field of psychology attempts to overcome experimentally. Some have expressed doubt that operationalization of isolated processes from psychology may capture said processes' integration in HCI (Newell, 1990). Consider, though, how other fields proceed: the human body is an integrated system, yet physicians ultimately apply component techniques from physiology, pharmacology, and so on. In this vein, it is logical that operationalization of transfer and induction from psychology be considered for characterizing such operations in HCI. Another classic criticism from HCI is that laboratory tasks and materials in psychology do not translate to HCI (Newell and Card, 1985). Such a presumption should be examined through applied research that probes the validity of psychology experiments beyond their initial scope and outlines their translation to HCI.We now examine transfer experiments as a means of assessing intuitive use. Because such experiments typically begin with a study phase, Blackler (2008) has cautioned that the assessed transfer originates from this study phase and not from prior knowledge. Prior knowledge, though, has been controlled in various transfer studies from multimedia learning. Namely, source material is studied by participants with high vs. low knowledge, in learning vs. control conditions, before they solve target tasks. These experimental settings reveal a factor interaction between learning and prior knowledge that is robust: while participants with low knowledge display better target performances in learning than in control conditions, those with high knowledge display equally good performances in both conditions. For example, Peper and Mayer (1986) showed that participants required to take notes while learning an unfamiliar topic were more successful at far transfer problems than participants required only to listen. However, participants familiar with the topic performed equally well in both cases. Similarly, while inexperienced trainees benefited from learning instructions, this advantage disappeared as they gained experience in the domain (Kalyuga et al., 1998, 2000, 2001; Mayer, 2001; Tuovinen and Sweller, 1999). Therefore, one can distinguish between transfer and induction by manipulating schema induction (e.g., induction vs. control study conditions) in a transfer experiment. A pattern of equally good target performances in induction and control conditions indicates that participants' prior schemata sufficed and were transferred. A pattern of improved target performances in induction conditions indicates that participants had to induce new schemata. These patterns, which we call transfer and induction, respectively, should also occur when schema induction is manipulated for an interface consisting of familiar and unfamiliar features.Schema induction is typically not manipulated for materials such as interfaces. However, Mayer (1980) conducted the following series of transfer experiments to outline the induction of schemata relative to the programming of a system. Novices studied nine source commands for database management (e.g., LIST, FOR, AND) from a manual, then used these commands to write target programs. Target programs involved either near or far transfer, depending on whether or not their instructions hinted at the source commands (e.g., ‘LIST the owners FOR all cars weighing more than … ’ vs. ‘find the percentage of cars weighing more than … ’). A control group was required to read the manual. A comparison group was required to write down comparisons of the manual's commands (e.g., ‘how is FOR similar to LIST?’). This group outperformed the control group in writing near-transfer programs. A comparison-plus-elaboration group was required to write down comparisons between each command and a concrete situation supporting elaboration (e.g., ‘how does the COUNT command relate to a basket filled with records?’). This group outperformed the former two in the writing of near and far transfer programs, meaning that comparison and elaboration of new commands resulted in the induction of more versatile schemata. With a few adjustments, we generalized this principle to the induction of interface schemata.Mayer (1980) required that participants study commands from the pages of a manual prior to using these commands to write programs. Similarly, one can capture screenshots of the states of an interface and require participants to study them and the features they display prior to using the interface. Following Mayer's findings, the induction group should study the source screenshots through written comparison and elaboration. Although writing is appropriate in multimedia learning studies that tend to emulate educational settings, it is not appropriate in HCI settings that strive to emulate usage behaviors. Users perform comparisons incidentally when they judge the features of a current state against a goal (i.e. means-end analysis). Thus, we emulated comparison through matching judgments, where participants are presented with a clue, then the screenshot of a state, and must judge whether they match (see Fig. 4).Participants tend to encode source attributes indicated by a clue (Gentner et al., 2003). Thus, the clue allows creation of versions of clue-screenshot matching that tap a desired level of attribute encoding. Blackler et al. (2010) showed that intuitive use is upheld by feature appearance (e.g., symbols, labels) and function (e.g., role on the interface). Accordingly, one can specify two types of clue: word clues, which consist of single words, and function clues, which are sentences that describe, in terms of a concrete task, a function common to two of the screenshot's features. Consider the smart phone screenshot in Fig. 1 (given for illustrative purposes; see Fig. 2 for a screenshot of our test interface).A word clue such as ‘Mail’ would be a match (appears in the screenshot), whereas a word clue such as ‘Notification’ would be a mismatch. A function clue such as ‘Change of notification mode for your incoming messages’ would be a match (corresponds to the functions in the screenshot), whereas a function clue such as ‘Check your inbox for new messages’ would be a mismatch. Function clues differ from the words appearing in the screenshot (e.g., ‘message’ instead of ‘mail’), and the task they describe relates two features (i.e. ‘Mail’ and ‘Settings’).Now consider two groups of participants, each of whom study all possible state screenshots of the smart phone depicted in Fig. 1. A reading group performs ’word matching‘ judgments by matching screenshots with word clues. Word matching requires that screenshots be encoded rather lexically, meaning that function need not be understood. Thus, members of the reading group are not likely to update their prior schemata for functions of the phone that are new44Given that new schemata are not induced when sources are read for comprehension (Gick and Holyoak, 1983; Mayer, 1980), they would not be induced when features are encoded at a rather lexical level.. Similarly, an induction group performs ’function matching’ judgments by matching screenshots with function clues. Function matching causes function attributes from the screenshots being interpreted with respect to the clues (comparison), until the relationship and concrete task depicted by the clue (comparison plus elaboration) are identified. The induction group should thereby induce schemata for functions of the phone that are new to them. At this point, the groups differ strictly in terms of the schemata at their disposal for interpreting the smart phone: prior schemata for the reading group, and newly induced schemata for the induction group. Both groups then complete a target task scenario involving some selection of the smart phone's features55Such usage scenarios are plotted at the experimenter’s discretion. In Mayer (1980), comparison and elaboration indeed enabled participants to write near and far programs, respectively. Similarly, function matching – because it combines elaboration and comparison- should enable participants to translate the smart phone’s features into near and far usage tasks alike. Thus, in principle, the experimenter is free to specify the usage scenario deemed relevant for evaluating the test interface.. In terms of performance, states with previously unfamiliar functions would yield an induction pattern, with more means-end analysis errors committed by the reading group, while states with familiar functions would yield a transfer pattern, with equally few means-end analysis errors committed by both groups.Intuitive use has been shown to depend on prior usage of other devices (Blackler, 2008; Hurtienne et al., 2013). Thus, if transfer underlies intuitive use, prior usage should yield a transfer pattern. Furthermore, intuitive use can be considered to reflect knowledge from other domains (see Section 2.2), which would also result in a transfer pattern. A familiarity questionnaire can address this by asking whether each feature of a test interface has been used in another device (used), has never been used yet its function is known from other domains (cognized), or is not known at all (new). Cognized features are those features whose function is familiar from any activity domain that comes to mind. For example, while a feature labeled ‘sort by key’ may never have been used, its function may still be ‘cognized’ through prior knowledge of ‘sorting’ and music. Used—and likely cognized—features should yield a transfer pattern, whereas new features should yield an induction pattern.Since use of an interface involves comparison of each state encountered with a goal (viz. means-end analysis), users may benefit from familiarity of not only the current state but also the goal. As the goal of a target task is to find and use a certain feature, and the familiarity of each feature is determined by the aforementioned questionnaire, we correspondingly assigned familiarity of the goal as used, cognized, or new. This goal familiarity factor was examined at an exploratory level.Previous work on intuitive use has assumed that, like intuition, intuitive use is available to all and does not depend on personality type (Bastick, 2003; Blackler, 2008; Blackler et al., 2010). Antle et al. (2009) observed the contrary, albeit fortuitously. Their study compared two versions of a responsive audio system. One version, which implemented image schemas (e.g., ‘more’ is ‘louder’), should have met the requirements for intuitive interaction. The other version conflicted with such schemas and required participants to analyze the system's functioning. The results, however, were less clear-cut: many participants did not follow their intuitions, regardless of the system version, and instead strove to interact with both systems ‘analytically’. Antle et al. (2009) thus raised concern over the fact that users may differ in their willingness to approach new systems through either intuition or analysis.It is well substantiated that, independent of task familiarity or demand, people differ in their haste to follow intuition or engage in effortful analysis (Epstein and Pacini, 1999; Kahneman, 2003). This difference can be considered a cognitive style, since performances for explicit tasks, such as judgment and problem-solving - both prominent in the use of a new device - are affected (Langan-Fox and Shirley, 2003; Reber and Walkenfeld, 1991). Performance of implicit tasks designed to objectify intuition (e.g., artificial grammar learning, accumulation clue task) can also be affected to some extent (Kaufman et al., 2010; Pretz et al., 2010). These studies employed the Rational-Experiential Inventory (REI; Pacini and Epstein, 1999; for validation aspects, see also Pretz and Totz, 2007). This self-assessment tool comprises 20 experiential statements that address ability and preference for intuition, and 20 rational statements that address ability and preference for analysis. In contrast to experiential scores, rational scores are associated with the personality trait of conscientiousness, which encompasses deliberation, carefulness, and attentiveness to norms and rules (Pacini and Epstein, 1999). Compared to individuals with high experiential scores (called Experientials), individuals with high rational scores (called Rationals) tend to perform more slowly, exhibit better decision-making skills in problems of logic and mathematics, and are less sensitive to stereotypes, beliefs, and heuristic biases (Shiloh et al., 2002; Witteman et al., 2009).Reber et al. (2007) examined the role of cognitive style in solving state-transformation problems. Their study employed Accumulated Clue Tasks (ACT), in which participants read 15 sequential clue words (e.g., science, gas, …, war, bang) that increasingly relate to a solution word (e.g., explosion). After each clue, participants proposed a hypothesis word and guessed its proximity to the solution on a scale of 1–10. When a hypothesis word rated as ‘10’ matched the solution, the ACT was deemed successful. Analytical thinking was measured by the number of clues a participant studied before rating a hypothesis word as ‘10’. Implicit knowledge was measured as the number of hypothesis words closer to the solution than the participant's rating (for details, see Reber et al., 2007). This study showed positive correlations among ACT performances, analytical thinking, and conscientiousness as measured by the NEO Five Factors Inventory (McCrae and Costa, 1987). These three variables showed negative correlation with experiential scores measured by the REI, and no correlation with implicit knowledge. Reber et al. concluded that state-transformation problems formulated to entail implicit knowledge nevertheless expressed individual differences: people who relied on intuition made quicker decisions, considered fewer clues, and performed poorly compared to those who analyzed. This may be an issue for reducing intuitive use to prior familiarity and for operationalizing schema induction through function matching. In the latter case, if Experientials do not sufficiently compare a function clue to the screenshot, they will induce fewer schemata and display less-pronounced induction patterns than Rationals. This motivated us to control participants' cognitive style with the REI, and examine this factor at an exploratory level.We conducted an experiment to investigate the effects and interactions of schema induction, feature familiarity, goal familiarity, and cognitive style on usage performances. As users advance through an interface, states for which means-end analysis is correct tend to be explored once. States for which means-end analysis is incorrect tend to be re-explored, as users return to try other features. This dependent variable, which we call state exploration, represents the number of times a participant explored an interface state while searching for a goal (i.e., per target usage task).Schema induction and feature familiarity were examined in a hypothetico-deductive manner. By transposing previous interactions of learning and prior knowledge (see Section 3.1) to the role of feature familiarity in intuitive use (see Section 3.3.1), we expected that:•new features would yield more state explorations for the reading group compared to the induction group (induction pattern), andfeatures that are used or cognized would result in equally few state explorations for both groups (transfer pattern).Goal familiarity and cognitive style were controlled for exploratory purposes.Thirty-one Japanese students, aged 18–25 years (mean = 21.9 years), were selected at the University of Tsukuba in Japan based on the following survey criteria: they possessed a driver's license, did not major in computer science or engineering, had no prior experience with on-board computers or GPS navigation systems, and were familiar with computers and phones. Each participant received 820 yen (approximately $9.00) as compensation for attending a 45-min experiment. Although presented here in English, all materials were written and administered in Japanese. The experiment used a mixed factorial design (Table 1).The between-subjects factors were cognitive style (2) and schema induction (2). The within-subjects factors were feature familiarity (3) and goal familiarity (3). The dependent variable, state exploration, was averaged per participant and target task.The tested interface was a prototype of an on-board computer called DoIT#, which we developed in C#. This prototype is a continuation of an earlier version based on automotive reviews (Floudas et al., 2004) and technology blogs (for details see Fischer, 2010). DoIT# contains approximately 160 features (e.g., menu entries, options) gathered into 75 states and grouped into five technology domains: Audio, Air conditioning, Navigation, On-board computer, and Telephone. Feature functions ranged from common (e.g., dial a number, defrost the windshield) to speculative (e.g., wireless retrieval of billboard advertisements). DoIT# was interfaced with a state window and command panel (see Fig. 2).Participants navigated through DoIT#’s states by clicking on the command panel with a mouse. The buttons labeled ‘Audio’, ‘Phone’, ‘GPS’, ‘AirCon’, and ‘Computer’ allow direct access to the corresponding technology domain. Participants could scroll through the list of features by using the ‘UP’ and ‘DOWN’ buttons. The ‘ENTER’ and ‘ESC’ buttons could be used to display the state of a feature and return to the previous state, respectively.Command clicks (e.g., ENTER, ESC) were recorded in a log file as raw data and later formatted to calculate state exploration by means of a tool kit called AMME (Automatic Mental Model Evaluation; Rauterberg, 1993). Using an interface description66Description of the interface is contained in a text file listing its states, commands, and state-command-state triplets. Details available on January 2014 at http://www.idemployee.id.tue.nl/g.w.m.rauterberg/amme.html., AMME automatically formats observable actions collected by the log file into a network description, a set of complexity metrics, and a state matrix. Though Rauterberg provided these three outputs as indicators of mental model, navigation strategy, and solving performance, respectively, only the state matrix output was employed in our study. This output was formatted with complementary VBA (Visual Basic for Applications) macros that counted the number of times each state had been explored per participant and usage task.Participants' cognitive style was characterized according to a Japanese translation of the REI (Naitou et al., 2004). The inventory comprised twenty experiential-oriented and twenty rational-oriented statements. Examples of experiential-oriented statements are ‘I believe in trusting my hunches’, ‘Using my gut feelings works well for me in figuring out problems in my life’. Examples of rational-oriented statements are ‘I enjoy thinking in abstract terms’, ‘I think that it is foolish to make important decisions based on feelings’.Although the REI is typically administered via paper and pencil, we administered it electronically so that participants' scores could be calculated in real-time. Additionally, electronic administration can limit desirability bias such as reluctance to report socially demeaning traits (e.g., being ‘absolutely not good at figuring out complicated problems’). Fox and Schwartz (2002) showed that such bias is attenuated when questionnaires are administered electronically, the order of statements is randomized, or respondents are prevented from adjusting their ratings based on previous responses. Accordingly, the REI was implemented in an Excel template that presented statements in random order and faded out each one immediately after it was rated (Fig. 3).Participants rated each statement of the REI from 1 (completely false) to 5 (completely true). This scale was reversed for experiential ratings, and individual scores were calculated by summing the forty ratings. Participants scoring above 120 were assigned alternately to word or function matching, meaning either the reading or induction group, and likewise for those scoring under 120. Actual cognitive styles were assigned during data analysis (see Section 5) after the median score for all participants had been calculated.Screenshots of DoIT#’s 75 states were arbitrarily placed into two (equivalent) subsets and studied in either matching or mismatching trials. For matching trials, one feature was randomly selected from each screenshot (e.g., ‘driving indices’ in Fig. 4). Word clues corresponded to a single word chosen from the label of each selected feature. Function clues consisted of a sentence that described, in plain terms and as a concrete task, a function common to the selected feature and another feature in the screenshot. For mismatching trials, the word clues corresponded to any word that did not appear in the screenshot, while the function clues corresponded to a function that slightly mismatched those of screenshot's features. Function clues were formulated using a thesaurus and an automotive dictionary, and were then revised by two proofreaders who rephrased any term they found too technical.A Labview module was employed that display a clue for 15 s, or until the participants clicked ‘GO’. The screenshot to be matched was then similarly displayed for 15 s, or until the participants clicked either ‘YES’ or ‘NO’. Fig. 4 illustrates a word-matching trial. To begin the trial, participants read the clue (i.e. ‘Indices’) then clicked ‘GO’ in order to display the screenshot to be matched. Participants responded with either ‘YES’ or ‘NO’, depending on whether or not they found the word clue in the screenshot.A function-matching trial resembles the word-matching trial depicted in Fig. 4, except in place of the word clue (‘Indices’) would be a function clue (e.g., ‘Display the average speed’). Participants would respond with either ‘YES’ or ‘NO’, depending on whether they find the function relationship that matches the clue in the screenshot. In order to avoid bias from their ordering, the 75 clue-screenshot trials were placed into two random orders that were counterbalanced from one participant to the next.The usage phase entailed ten tasks, which we attempted to word differently from DoIT#’s labels whenever possible: (1) display the number of kilometers traveled, (2) request the route to the house of a friend whose contact information is in the address book, (3) request a route that avoids tolls, (4) display the navigation directions in the rear-view mirror, (5) set the temperature to 18 °C, (6) activate sleeping alert, (7) activate assistance for passing cars, (8) activate the internal air filter, (9) set the ventilation to silent mode, and (10) calculate rest time during the trip. Tasks were printed on separate pages of a handout.The labels of DoIT#'s features were copied into the same Excel template used for the REI (Fig. 5). Participants selected either ‘used’ for features they had used in another device, or ‘cognized’ for features they knew from any other context. Features that were new were left unselected. The responses provided a basis for coding the main feature of each state explored during the usage phase, along with the goal of each target task, as used, cognized, or new to the participants.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
