@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Analysis of the most relevant anthropometric dimensions for school furniture selection based on a study with students from one Chilean region

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The Chilean student population has a different body proportion regarding age and gender.The levels of mismatch, especially Seat Height, are influenced by body proportion.Popliteal Height is the most accurate anthropometric measure for the furniture selection purposes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
School furniture,Anthropometry,Mismatch measures,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Most of the worldwide standards used for furniture selection suggest the use of the Stature of the school children, assuming that all the other anthropometric characteristics will also be appropriate. However, it is important to consider that students' growth differ with age. The aim of this study is to determine if Popliteal Height can be used as a better, or more adequate, measure for classroom furniture selection when comparing with Stature. This study involved a representative group of 3046 students from the Valparaíso Region, in Chile. Regarding the methodology, eight anthropometric measures were gathered, as well as six furniture dimensions from the Chilean standard. After assigning the level of school furniture using Stature and Popliteal Height to each of the students, six mismatch equations were applied. The results show that when using Popliteal Height, higher levels of match were obtained for the two more important furniture dimensions. Additionally, it also presents a better cumulative fit than Stature. In conclusion, it seems that Popliteal Height can be the most accurate anthropometric measure for classroom furniture selection purposes.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
School work requires students to spend long hours sitting down. Considering this, as well as the potential inadequate use of school furniture, it is likely that some anatomical-functional changes and problems in the learning process may occur (García-Acosta and Lange-Morales, 2007; Trevelyan and Legg, 2006; Milanese and Grimmer, 2004; Hira, 1980). This situation causes an increased concern about the school classrooms, particularly about the study and design of school furniture suitable to the needs of the students and the appropriate dimensions according to the students' anthropometrics characteristics. Worldwide, it is possible to observe a great number of studies regarding the students' anthropometric characteristics, with the aim of generating safer school furniture (Agha, 2010; Dianat et al., 2013; Evans et al., 1988; García-Acosta and Lange-Morales, 2007; Musa, 2011; Oyewole et al., 2010; Savanur et al., 2007). Furthermore, there is an increase in the number of standards regarding school furniture in different countries, such as: Chile (INN, 2002), Colombia (ICONTEC, 1999), the European Union (CEN, 2012), Japan (JIS, 2011) and United Kingdom (BSI, 2006).Anthropometric information for chair design is mainly concerned with providing data on the Stature of the people for whom the seats are designed (Evans et al., 1988; Kayis, 1991). Furthermore, most of the standards that are published worldwide for furniture selection tend to use, as a reference, Stature (S) as the anthropometric dimension of the school children, assuming that all the other anthropometric characteristics are also appropriate. However, it is important to remember that student growth differ with ages. For example, before puberty, the legs grow more rapidly than the trunk and in adolescents, the growth spurt is largely in the trunk (Bass et al., 1999). Also, Lueder and Berg Rice (2008) recommended that for designing school furniture it may be useful to consider how children develop and mature, as well as to incorporate features that accommodate a wide range of ages in good postures. The body proportion, i.e., the proportions related to the S between different segments of the body, may be helpful for this situation since it is a scaling relation calculated with a ratio of one body dimension to a specific reference dimension. The most common reference dimension is the Stature (Roebuck et al., 1975).Some authors (Cho, 1994; Hibaru and Watanabe, 1994; Molenbroek et al., 2003; Noro and Fujita, 1994) suggest that the furniture selection can be done more efficiently if the Popliteal Height (PH) is used instead of S. Molenbroek et al. (2003), demonstrated, by using ellipses, that the seat height proposed in the standard PrEN 1729 is too high for most of the children with S of 1200 mm. Hibaru and Watanabe (1994) found that the chair size selection was strongly correlated with the PH in 124 students from 4th grade. Another, more complex system was also developed to allocate school furniture by Noro and Fujita (1994). This system is based on the physical images of students and it considered the different variables like PH, S, school grade and physical condition (slim, average and obese). However, there is a controversial point raised between the authors that proposed PH for allocation to the school furniture, namely the fact that, as reported by Noro and Fujita (1994), there is the need to make accurate measurement of PH and this requires experience and skills. On the other hand, Molenbroek et al. (2003) suggested that current knowledge about the use and the measurement of PH in a school class is absent. Nevertheless, the authors assumed that this is not necessarily more difficult and/or time consuming compared to the measurement of S if some measurement strategies are applied, such as the example shown in Fig. 1(Molenbroek et al., 2003).The aim of this study is to determine if PH can be used as a better and most accurate measure for classroom furniture selection rather than using S.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
