@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A methodology using in-chair movements as an objective measure of discomfort for the purpose of statistically distinguishing between similar seat surfaces

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
ICM can compare similar seats.Threshold selection and sitting duration is important.ICM and discomfort appear related.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Discomfort,Comfort,In-chair movement,Sitting,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study presents a method for objectively measuring in-chair movement (ICM) that shows correlation with subjective ratings of comfort and discomfort. Employing a cross-over controlled, single blind design, healthy young subjects (n = 21) sat for 18 min on each of the following surfaces: contoured foam, straight foam and wood. Force sensitive resistors attached to the sitting interface measured the relative movements of the subjects during sitting. The purpose of this study was to determine whether ICM could statistically distinguish between each seat material, including two with subtle design differences. In addition, this study investigated methodological considerations, in particular appropriate threshold selection and sitting duration, when analysing objective movement data. ICM appears to be able to statistically distinguish between similar foam surfaces, as long as appropriate ICM thresholds and sufficient sitting durations are present. A relationship between greater ICM and increased discomfort, and lesser ICM and increased comfort was also found.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Although measuring sitting comfort or discomfort using subjective measures appears to be an intuitive, practical and cost effective method, it does have its limitations. For example, it is difficult to reliably distinguish and rank well designed chairs with subtle design differences with purely subjective feedback. From a chair designer or user perspective, an objective method that could predict the level of discomfort after a period of prolonged sitting would allow for better informed decisions to be made about chair design features, that may in-turn impact on innovation and ultimately user health. In terms of possible objective measures that warranted further investigation, in-chair movement (ICM) appeared to show most potential due to its role within the current models of comfort and discomfort (Vink, 2012).Comfort, as it is currently understood, is a subjective concept that appears to be difficult to measure (Zemp et al., 2015; Vink, 2012). Comfort has been defined as a pleasant state or relaxed feeling of a human being in reaction to its environment (Vink, 2012). Comfort appears to be most influenced by the presence of discomfort, with increased discomfort leading to no or reduced comfort being experienced (Helander and Zhang, 1997). However, a reduction of discomfort does not necessarily bring about feelings of comfort (Kolich, 2008; Vergara and Page, 2002; Helander and Zhang, 1997; Zhang et al., 1996). Softness and firmness may both positively influence comfort, with firmer chairs which incorporate high side supports generating a sporty feel while softer chairs are considered to be more luxurious (Kamp, 2012). Psychosocial factors (e.g. helpful flight attendant) appear to be important drivers of comfort while physical factors appear to drive discomfort, which in turn inhibit comfort (Vink, 2012). Since non-physical factors appear to be able to influence the perception of comfort, it appears that comfort and discomfort are processed via different neurological pathways (Vink, 2012).Discomfort has been defined as a perceived unpleasant state of the human body in reaction to its physical environment (Vink, 2012; Helander and Zhang, 1997). Discomfort is understood to reflect an early noxious perception (perceived as pain) related to the biomechanical load applied to the musculoskeletal system (Madeleine et al., 1998), and be an expression of sensations such as tension, fatigue, soreness, pain and numbness (Søndergaard et al., 2010; de Looze et al., 2003). Discomfort also appears to be related with sitting postural changes, with a positive relationship between discomfort and the frequency of postural changes over time during computer work (Fenety and Walker, 2002; Vergara and Page, 2002; Liao and Drury, 2000). Cushion firmness, pressure distribution and user mobility may modify the perception of discomfort probably as a consequence of increasing tissue ischaemia (Corlett, 2006; Mehta and Tewari, 2000; Zhang et al., 1996; Ng et al., 1995; Gross et al., 1992; Viano and Andrzejak, 1992).Fig. 1outlines a model of comfort and discomfort proposed by Vink 2012 that has been strongly influenced by previous models of comfort and discomfort developed by previous workers in the field (Helander and Zhang, 1997; de Looze et al., 2003 and Moes, 2005). The model illustrates how the interaction between the user, seat, task and environment leads to the perception of sitting comfort and discomfort. This model indicates that, at least from a qualitative perspective, in chair movement may result from either inadequate comfort or excessive discomfort. Interaction (I) with the environment as a result of contact (including non-physical contact such as a visual stimuli) between the human, the product and its usage may result in internal human body effects (H) such as tactile sensations, body posture change and muscle activation. The perceived effects (P) are influenced by the human body effects, but also by expectations (E). These are interpreted as comfortable (C) or you feel nothing (N), or it can lead to feelings of discomfort (D). Discomfort in turn could result in musculoskeletal complaints (M). The circle around E-C suggests that expectations (E) may be linked to comfort (C). If discomfort is too high or the comfort not good enough, there is a feedback loop to the person who could do something like shifting in the seat, adapt the product or to change the task or usage (Vink, 2012).Seat manufacturers appear to still rely strongly on subjective evaluations as the main indicator of seat comfort and discomfort: probably as a consequence of both the subjective and non-quantitative nature of comfort and discomfort and the absence of a proven objective method for their assessment (Kolich, 2008; Helander and Mukund, 1991). Previously assessed objective factors include anthropometry as well as the measurement of postural, biomechanical and physiological parameters. Peak pressure on the seat pan, pressure distribution on the backrest and the pressure pattern changes all appear to be reliable objective measures for quantifying comfort or discomfort, however their validity remains unknown (Zemp et al., 2015). Differences in seat material properties and geometry appear to strongly influence pressure distribution measurements, resulting in the need to re-calibrate pressure mats for each chair when comparing different types (Zemp et al., 2016) making this method commercially less-viable from the economic and sales staff perspective. Although many methods for subjectively assessing comfort and discomfort have been reported in the scientific literature, the use of numerical rating scale (NRS) was chosen primarily for its ease and scope of use, its repeatability, and its parity with the visual analogue scale (Johnson et al., 2010; Morris et al., 2007; Lundeberg et al., 2001).Frequent ICMs appear to reduce the risk of developing discomfort and are considered to be an indicator of sitting discomfort (Hiemstra-van Mastrigt et al., 2015a, b; Søndergaard et al., 2010; Fenety and Walker, 2002; Vergara and Page, 2002; Aaras et al., 2000). Sitting in chairs with obvious design differences (e.g. wooden versus padded) appear to significantly affect ICM in most cases (Fenety et al., 2000; Mark et al., 1985) but not all (Jensen and Bendix, 1992). As chair users subconsciously change posture to minimize discomfort while sitting, discomfort does not seem to be obviously perceived unless the chair severely compromises (e.g. hard flat surface) basic design criteria (Helander and Zhang, 1997). In non-disabled persons, sitting posture appears to change approximately every 9 min in the sagittal plane and every 6 min in the frontal plane (Linder-Ganz et al., 2007) with subcutaneous tissue oxygenation increasing on average by 2.2% with each posture adjustment (Reenalda et al., 2009), highlighting the benefits of ICM on tissue health (Kim et al., 2012) and its potential relationship to neurological activity from receptors in the compromised tissue.Recent literature has highlighted the importance of reducing the reliance on subjective evaluations with respect to vehicle seat design and determining an objective means of quantifying discomfort that is able to statistically distinguish between similar seat surfaces (Le et al., 2014). The purpose of this study was to determine if it were possible to statistically distinguish between different user–seat interfaces (with subtle differences in design and materials) using objectively derived ICM data. In addition, this study aimed to determine any methodological considerations, in particular appropriate threshold parameters and sitting duration selection, when analysing ICM data and how they may affect the outcomes.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
