@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Strengths and limitations of a musculoskeletal model for an analysis of simulated meat cutting tasks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The cutting movements involving arm flexion are preferable in terms of biomechanical loads.The optimal bench height for the meat cutting task should be 20–30 cm below elbow height.Musculoskeletal models can help to minimize the risk of developing WMSD.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Electromyography,Trend analysis,Physical risk factors,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study assessed the capacity of a musculoskeletal model to predict the relative muscle activation changes as a function of the workbench height and the movement direction during a simulated meat cutting task. Seven subjects performed a cutting task alternating two cutting directions for 20 s at four different workbench heights. Kinematics, electromyography (EMG), and cutting force data were collected and used to drive a musculoskeletal model of the shoulder girdle. The model predicted the muscle forces exerted during the task. Both the recorded and computed activation of the muscles was then compared by means of cross-correlation and by comparison of muscle activation trends with respect to the workstation parameters, i.e. cutting direction and workbench height. The results indicated that cutting movements involving arm flexion are preferable to movement requiring internal arm rotation and abduction. The optimal bench height for meat cutting tasks should be between 20 and 30 cm below the worker's elbow height. The present study underlines a beneficial use of musculoskeletal models for adjusting workstation parameters.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The last European Working Condition Survey reports an exposure of 63% of the working population to repetitive hand or arm movement, and 46% of the population mentions painful, tiring positions for at least one quarter of the working time (Fifth European Working Conditions Survey, 2010). Indeed, the prevalence of occupations involving physical labor has not changed over the last 20 years in Europe. The risk factors implicated in the development of work-related musculoskeletal disorders (WMSD) are commonly divided into internal and external risk factors (Sjøgaard et al., 1995). Individual factors like age, gender, fitness level, and personality are known as internal risk factors. The external risk factors are expressed in terms of physical and psychosocial components. A relatively fixed erect posture, repetitive arm movements, heavy work, insufficient rest, vibrations as well as static posture are recognized important physical factors contributing to WMSD (Winkel and Westgaard, 1992; Sjøgaard et al., 1995), which are often reported in the neck-shoulder of butchers (OSHA, 2007). Stress and pain behavior have also been identified as some of the important psychological risk factors. Thus, the presence of internal and external risk factors emphasizes the complex etiology of WMSD. Further, the relationships of the risk factors do not facilitate the evaluation of the impact of ergonomic interventions.Musculoskeletal simulation enables to address this issue as the load over a region of the musculoskeletal system can be evaluated during an ergonomic intervention aiming at reducing the occurrence of WMSD. Musculoskeletal simulation is of particular interest when designing a workstation. Such approach is cost effective as it enables to address most of the physical risk factors without the need for human testing prior to the prototype stage. Moreover, musculoskeletal simulation processes a large number of biomechanical parameters (kinematics, kinetics, muscle forces). In comparison, bipolar surface electromyography (EMG) recordings only provide temporal aspects of the level of activation from the studied muscle. However, EMG recording are still often performed in ergonomics for such purpose (Madeleine et al., 2011). Thus, musculoskeletal simulation offers undeniable advantages when evaluating the design of a workstation. Finally, adjustments of the workstation to the worker can be done easily and may result in a gain of time and money (Weidlich et al., 2009).A pre-requisite for using musculoskeletal models for the workplace evaluations is that the predictions of the internal loads are correct. The validations of musculoskeletal simulations are often made by comparison of EMG signals recorded during the task; see for example de Zee et al. (2007). The qualitative validation is based on comparison of the shape of the recorded and computed activation patterns (Erdemir et al., 2007). In ergonomics, a quantitative evaluation of the internal loads is crucial when the design parameters are changed. A quantitative validation of the loads predicted by the musculoskeletal model can be done with objective criterions such as the difference between the work performed by internal and external forces or curve comparison metrics in magnitude (Lund et al., 2012). The validation can also be done by comparing the trends followed by the computed and recorded activation of the muscles as a function of design parameters (Pontonnier et al., 2011). This latter approach is of particular interest as the trends followed by the muscle activation provide direction to optimize the design of the workstation. To the best of our knowledge, quantitative validation by trend analysis is still rarely used in ergonomics.The present study aimed at filling this gap by validating a musculoskeletal model of the upper limb for standardized meat cutting task. Validation of such models makes it possible to provide ergonomic guidelines in a workstation design process. We opted for a simulated meat cutting task similar to the one presented by Madeleine et al. (1999) to test a musculoskeletal model in relation to workplace design. For that purpose we analyzed and compared the trends followed by computed and recorded activation of the muscles during repetitive arm movement as a function of change in cutting direction and in the height of the workbench. The trend analysis of the recorded EMGs has been previously reported (Pontonnier et al., 2012), but not compared with the computed EMGs.Seven male subjects (mean age ± sd: 29 ± 5 years old, height: 182 ± 8 cm, weight: 77 ± 16 kg) participated in the present study. Informed consent was obtained from the subjects prior to the recordings. All participants reported no pain in the shoulder region prior to the experiment and had no history of neck-shoulder disorders. The study was approved by the local ethics committee (No. N-20070004) and conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.An illustration of the experimental set-up is depicted in Fig. 1. The subjects were standing in front of a workbench. The workbench height was set at 4 different heights: 0, −10, −20, and −30 cm. The 0 cm height corresponded to the subject's elbow height and is the recommended height for light work (McCormik and Sanders, 1987). Two main directions of cutting were used, i.e.: 1) arm flexion, and 2) a combination of internal arm rotation and abduction. These directions were chosen to simulate real slaughterhouse work situations observed in the meat industry (Madeleine et al., 1999). The subjects were asked to perform cutting tasks in these two directions for 20 s at each workbench height. The cycle combined a static postural phase (holding), a cutting phase in direction 1 (diagonal slot), and a cutting phase in direction 2 (horizontal slot). The recordings consisted of 4 sequences over 20 s in each trial. A practice period was performed to teach the subjects to apply a resultant force of approx. 50 N in agreement with the forces measured during a real meat cutting task (Juul-Kristensen et al., 2002; McGorry et al., 2003).The collected data consisted of cutting forces, kinematics data, and surface EMG data. A trigger was used to synchronize the motion capture, cutting force, and EMG acquisition, using an End-of-Frame signal starting from the motion capture markers.The main part of the literature analyzing the cutting force exerted during meat cutting is based on relatively simple force assessment as only a one-dimensional force was measured (Madeleine et al., 1999; Juul-Kristensen et al., 2002). However, assessing the cutting forces in 3D exerted by the worker offers advantages. McGorry (2001) has designed an advanced knife instrumented with strain gauges to record reactive forces and grip moments. In our study, a 3D force registration was necessary to perform a 3D inverse dynamics analysis of the task. Thus, 3D cutting forces were recorded using a newly designed 3D instrumented knife. The design of the knife is based on the instrumentation of a 3D force sensor (FS6-2000, AMTI, Watertown, MA, USA). The reaction forces applied to the transducer were recorded (Fig. 1). The blade had the shape of a real knife considering that only the tip of the blade is used during a cutting event. The blade thickness avoided bending issues during the cutting task. The knife had to be handled as a real knife, i.e. the handle diameter was similar to knives used in the Danish slaughterhouses. A tennis grip was added to facilitate grasping. The knife was approximately 0.5 kg heavier than knives used in Danish slaughterhouses. The mass difference was due to the use of the 3D force sensor and was taken into account in the simulation (see below). Force signals were low-pass filtered (10.5 Hz) and amplified 2000 times. The signals were A/D converted and sampled at 60 Hz (12 bits A/D converter, Nidaq 6024, National Instruments, Austin, TX, USA) and recorded through a custom made program in LabView 8.2 (National Instruments, Austin, TX, USA), which also provided feedback on the applied forces to the experimenter.The motion was captured using an active marker motion capture system (Visualeyez II™ system set up with two VZ4000 trackers, Phoenix Technologies Inc., BC, Canada). Sixteen active markers were used to collect trunk, right arm, and knife motion. Kinematics data were sampled at 60 Hz. The missing markers were interpolated using a rigid body hypothesis. Finally, 3D coordinates were low-pass filtered (5 Hz).Four bipolar channels were used to collect EMG from the deltoideus medialis, deltoideus anterior, biceps brachii, and triceps long head (Fig. 1) with bipolar surface electrodes (Neuroline 720, Ambu, Denmark). A reference electrode was placed on the C7 spinal process. The bipolar surface electrodes were aligned (inter-electrodes distance: 2 cm) on abraded ethanol-cleaned skin along the direction of the muscle fibers. The bipolar electrodes were placed with respect to anatomical landmarks following the recommendations (SENIAM, 1999). The EMG signals were amplified 2000 times (128-channel surface EMG amplifier, LISiN-OT Bioelectronica, Torino, Italy) and sampled at 2048 Hz. The signals were full-wave rectified and low pass filtered (4 Hz) to obtain the absolute linear envelope of the muscle activation profiles.The collected data were processed to drive a detailed musculoskeletal model based on inverse dynamics of the trunk and the right arm similar to the one developed by Rasmussen and de Zee (2010). The model was built in the AnyBody Modeling System (AnyBody Technology A/S, Aalborg, Denmark). The principles and the mathematical details behind the software are described in Damsgaard et al. (2006). The musculoskeletal model has 52 degrees of freedom, 135 muscle actuators, and is based on the data by Van Der Helm (1994). The model is available at the AnyBody Managed Model Repository.11http://forge.anyscript.org/gf/project/ammr/.The musculoskeletal model is scaled to fit the morphology of the subject, and marker positions are optimized to fit real landmarks using an optimization routine described by Andersen et al. (2010). The 3D cutting force was then used to define the external forces applied to the model, and mass and inertia properties of the knife were taken into account in the simulation. Ten s of each trial were simulated, discarding the first and last 5 s.An inverse dynamics method was used to generate the muscle forces from kinematics (Fig. 2). The objective function used for the muscle recruitment step was a standard quadratic criterion:(1)minf=∑j=1n(Fj(t)Fjmax)2Where Fj(t) is the current muscle force of muscle j at the time t, andFjmaxthe maximum isometric force that muscle j can produce. We used the maximum isometric forces reported in Van Der Helm (1994). The muscles are described as simple actuators as shown in this equation:(2)Fj(t)=aj(t)·FjmaxWhere aj(t) is the muscle activation with 0 corresponding to no activation and 1 to maximal activation.The validation process consisted of qualitative and quantitative comparisons of recorded and computed activation of the muscles. The ranges of motion were also computed to assess inter-subject variability. Fig. 3shows the global processing scheme used to validate the simulation.Qualitative comparison of the recorded and computed activation of the muscles was performed by computing a normalized cross-correlation between both the surface EMG signals and the corresponding estimated force trajectories (computed). The cross-correlation function is a measure of similarity of two waveforms as a function of a time-lag applied to one of these. Between recorded and computed activation, contraction and activation dynamics of muscles were considered to introduce a positive time-lag less than 200 ms – global contraction and activation dynamics delay (Cavanagh and Komi, 1979; van Dieën et al., 1991). Therefore, the highest level of correlation obtained from the cross-correlation in a [0, 200 ms] positive time-lag window was considered as the real correlation between recorded and computed signals. The cross-correlation was first applied to the entire simulation sequence (10 s). Then, the trials were divided into two phases: static postural phases, corresponding to an exerted force level equal to the knife weight, and the dynamic phases consisting of cutting events in the two directions. During the cutting events, increases of the exerted force were detected (framed with two minimum points at the beginning and the end of a cutting event). Then a cross-correlation was computed locally for each phase to assess possible discrepancies of the model behavior with respect to the trial phases. The correlations between signals were obtained using the same time-lag as explained above (10 s sequence). Cross-correlation values were then averaged per subject and workbench height.Further, to compare quantitatively computed and recorded activation of the muscles, a trend analysis was conducted associating the cutting phases and workbench heights. The trends computed for the recorded EMG have been previously reported in Pontonnier et al. (2012). In the current study, the trends were computed from the musculoskeletal simulation and then compared with the recorded trends. After division into phases, the recorded and computed activation of the muscles was averaged for each cutting event. Then, the mean+/−SD values corresponding to the two configurations ([Trial Height, Cutting direction 1] and [Trial Height, Cutting direction 2]) were computed for each trial. Thereafter, the averaged activation of the muscles was normalized for each subject with respect to a reference corresponding to a meantasknormalization in agreement with Burden (2010). The chosen reference in this study was [0 cm, direction 1]. The relative variations of activation of the muscles were computed as shown in Equation (3) to account for the differences in terms of duration and exerted cutting forces between the trials.(3){Rcomkji=Acomkji·αji−Acomk10Acomk10Rreckji=Areckji·αji−Areck10Areck10WhereRcomkjiandRreckjiwere the relative variations of the computed activationAcomkjiand the recorded activationAreckjiof muscle k in the [Height i, Direction j] configuration, respectively. The confidence factorαjiallowed the assessment of differences in terms of cutting force and duration, and was computed as:(4)αji=F10·D10Fji·DjiWhereF10was the mean exerted force, andD10was the mean cutting task duration for the configuration [Height 0 cm, Direction 1] (reference condition).The relative variation was computed for each subject and averaged among subjects. Spearman's correlation coefficients were then calculated between series of recorded and computed relative variations for each subject and among subjects.The range of motion (ROM) of elbow flexion, shoulder abduction, shoulder flexion, shoulder internal rotation, and wrist flexion during the cutting phases was extracted from the kinematics data. This provided information on the adopted motor control strategies. Finally, the resultant cutting force and cutting task duration were also computed. The ranges of motion, resultant cutting force, and cutting task duration were analyzed using a full factorial repeated measure analysis of variance with workbench height and cutting direction as independent factors.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
