@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Perspectives on recycling centres and future developments

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Improvement of safety, economic and environmental performance is needed.Sorting quality influences working conditions, environment and system performance.Future needs include industrialization, design and organization of recycling centres.System performance is obtained through a multidisciplinary approach.A checklist for planning/rebuilding recycling centres is included.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Environment,Sustainability,Waste,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The overall aim of this paper is to draw combined, all-embracing conclusions based on a long-term multidisciplinary research programme on recycling centres in Sweden, focussing on working conditions, environment and system performance. A second aim is to give recommendations for their development of new and existing recycling centres and to discuss implications for the future design and organisation. Several opportunities for improvement of recycling centres were identified, such as design, layout, ease with which users could sort their waste, the work environment, conflicting needs and goals within the industry, and industrialisation. Combining all results from the research, which consisted of different disciplinary aspects, made it possible to analyse and elucidate their interrelations. Waste sorting quality was recognized as the most prominent improvement field in the recycling centre system. The research identified the importance of involving stakeholders with different perspectives when planning a recycling centre in order to get functionality and high performance. Practical proposals of how to plan and build recycling centres are given in a detailed checklist.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The importance of a sustainable environment is generally recognized (McKinsey Global Institute, 2011; Radjiyev et al., 2014), considering ecological, economic and social aspects (Josimović et al., 2015). Swedish waste management has undergone radical changes during recent decades. The handling of waste is complex, with many different actors involved. New laws are regularly introduced regarding the treatment of waste; which products are to be recycled; how they should be transported; and who is responsible for collection and storage of the collected material (Schultz, 2000). This leads to ongoing changes in how waste is handled, and has increased the demand for alternatives to landfilling such as material recycling, biological treatment and incineration with heat recovery.At present, most household waste is recycled in Sweden and the share being landfilled has decreased to 0.7% (Avfall Sverige, 2014), compared to 34% on average for EU (Eurostat, 2013). A growing volume of waste, nearly 185 kg per inhabitant per year, is collected at recycling centres. These are manned drop-off facilities, where the users can bring, sort and throw away items e.g. large-sized, hazardous, and electrical waste. The waste is placed in large containers, cages and small containers (Fig. 1). Kitchen waste is not allowed. Well performing recycling centres, being very early in the recycling chain, are key to the subsequent steps in waste processing (Engkvist et al., 2004; Woodard et al., 2004). However, their performance has scarcely been investigated. The rapid growth of recycling, hastened by several new laws (Government Bill, 1993; SFS, 2001; EU Directive, 2002/96, 2003; Eurostat, 2013; European Commission, 2012), has mostly focused on environmental factors, but rarely taken the work environment or economic aspects into consideration. Thus, the work environment has often been shaped without conscious planning, and workers have had to adjust to the situation (Alvarez de Davila and Antonsson, 2001). Sometimes a recycling centre is built in one corner of a landfill, or on a small area with a few containers and no possibilities to expand when needed, e.g. with new laws concerning recycling of products. Due to the rapid expansion of the recycling sector, there are challenges for the recycling system related to the following three fields: working conditions, environment and system performance. The research reported below has integrated social, economic and environmental aspects in order to make recommendations on sustainable systems for recycling in the future.More detailed information about how recycling centres are organised in Sweden can be found in Engkvist (2010), Engkvist et al. (2011) and Sundin et al. (2011).The overall aim of this paper is to draw combined all-embracing conclusions based on a long-term multidisciplinary research programme on recycling centres in Sweden, focussing on working conditions, environment and system performance. A second aim is to give recommendations for the development of new and existing recycling centres and to discuss implications for the future design and organisation.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Recycling centres face challenges regarding working conditions, environment and system performance. One key-factor for this is waste sorting quality, which may be improved in many ways. Layout, design and organisation of the recycling centre strongly influence users' ability to dispose of and sort waste correctly and consequently the working environment for the employees. Further, there are several contradictions between the different performance goals in the recycling chain. The industry has a potential to develop improved tools and equipment at the recycling centres. Industrialisation logic is needed for introducing more rational processes and making use of the potential economic value of the waste. The demands for future recycling centres will be both the primary task of waste disposal for protecting the environment and increased demands to supply materials for the industry. To fulfil these needs, it is necessary to improve efficiency through improvements to: quality of sorting, capacity and flexibility, working conditions for the employees and ease of use combined with safety for the users.