@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Obesity-related changes in prolonged repetitive lifting performance

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Obesity and obesity-by-time interaction effect on lifting performance were studied.The obese had 10° lower trunk flexion angle and 17% lower RMS jerk.Over time, the obese group increased their acceleration.This was observed during the lifting portion with the box in hand.Current psychophysical limits are usable with caution, particularly when fatigued.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Class I obesity,Fatigue,Manual material handling,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Despite the rising prevalence of obesity, little is known about its moderating effects on injury risk factors, such as fatigue, in occupational settings. This study investigated the effect of obesity, prolonged repetitive lifting and their interaction on lifting performance of 14 participants, 7 obese (mean body mass index (BMI): 33.2 kg m−2) and 7 non-obese (mean BMI: 22.2 kg m−2) subjects. To present a physically challenging task, subjects performed repetitive lifting for 1 h at 120% of their maximum acceptable weight of lift. Generalized linear mixed models were fit to posture and acceleration data. The obese group bent to a ∼10° lower peak trunk sagittal flexion angle, had 17% lower root mean square (RMS) jerk and took 0.8 s longer per lift. Over time, the obese group increased their trunk transverse and sagittal posterior accelerations while the non-obese maintained theirs. Although the majority of lifting variables were unaffected by BMI or its interaction with prolonged lifting duration, the observed differences, combined with a greater upper body mass, necessitate a more cautious use of existing psychophysical lifting limits for individuals who are obese, particularly when fatigued.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Manual material handling is identified as a major risk factor for back disorders (Burdorf and Sorock, 1997), with the highest incidence and cost incurred for lower back injuries (Schmier et al., 2006; Woolf and Pfleger, 2003). Lifting, a prevailing form of manual material handling is of particular concern. There is a positive association between lifting and lower back pain and disorder with risk ratio estimates ranging from 1.3 to 4.2 (Kuiper et al., 1999). It has been suggested that trunk kinematics and kinetics during the lifting task play an important role in the development of these disorders (Hoogendoorn et al., 2000; Marras et al., 1993). Since spinal loading is a contributing factor to back disorders (Marras, 2000), further work is needed to understand factors that affect trunk motion and loading during lifting.One factor that may influence trunk motion, and thus the occurrence of resultant low back disorders, is the increased prevalence of obesity in the U.S. workforce (Caban et al., 2005). Obesity is defined by an abnormal or excessive fat accumulation with a body mass index (BMI) ≥30 kg m−2 and is a modifiable risk factor for many health conditions, such as musculoskeletal disorders involving the back, hip, knee, ankle, and foot (Wearing et al., 2006). Employees who are obese have been found to have higher rates of sick leave or disability use along with increased healthcare costs (Østbye et al., 2007). Studies on lower back pain report contradictory results regarding the association between lower back pain and BMI. Bayramoglu et al (Bayramoglu et al., 2001). found that the prevalence lower back pain was significantly associated with high BMI among females. In contrast, Lee et al (Lee et al., 2005). reported no such relation between obese and lean participants in their large-scale Check Bus Project study of over 10,000 employees of two Swiss companies.Obesity has been shown to affect an individual's range of motion (ROM), reducing the ROM for shoulder extension and adduction, lumbar spine extension and lateral flexion, and knee flexion (Park et al., 2010). Consequently, individuals who are obese have reported more limitations during work at varying levels of demands, from office work to occupations requiring high physical demand such as laborers (Gates et al., 2008). Although contradictory results are reported regarding the association of obesity and muscle strength, when corrected for fat-free mass and controlled for age and physical activity, handgrip, knee flexion and extension, and trunk extension strengths were reported to be significantly lower among women who are obese. Trunk flexion, however, was ∼8% stronger with obesity (Hulens et al., 2001). With respect to lifting tasks, the excess load of the trunk, due to excess body weight, increases the biomechanical loading at the low back up to 59% (Blanton, 2004). The greater forces from body segment masses, when added to the load weight, can surpass the recommended weight limits and compressive forces, which may lead to pain and discomfort (Wang et al., 1998).In addition to physical constraints, psychophysical limits play a major role in determining functional capability. Psychophysical lifting tolerance limits are defined as the maximum load weights that workers can handle without perceiving strain, overexertion, discomfort, tiredness, weakness, or breathlessness (referred to as the maximum acceptable weights of lift (MAWL)) (Snook et al., 1970). Although obesity is shown to lower functional capacity in some tasks such as squatting for 10 s, rising from a squat, and kneeling with hands supported on wall bars for 10 s (Evers and Mattsson, 2001), it has been found to not affect MAWLs. When comparing among three obesity levels, Singh, Park, and Levy (Singh et al., 2009) found no significant difference in mean MAWLs. In their study, participants were asked to determine their MAWL values for 18 different task conditions, varying in lifting frequency and lifting height, and were allowed to use self-selected, free-style lifting techniques. After studying the effect of obesity level, gender, lifting frequency, lifting height and their interactions on MAWL, obesity level was not statistically significant and a similar data distribution in terms of quartiles and minimum and maximum MAWL values were observed.While the finding of equivalent MAWL may lead to the conclusion that the traditional manual materials handling guidelines may be sufficient, it only provides evidence for meeting the psychophysical criterion and further biomechanical and physiological justification is required (Waters et al., 1993), particularly with regard to adopted postures and fatigue development. The reduced knee range of motion (Park et al., 2010) and strength (Duvigneaud et al., 2008) and the elevated low back loads due to excess body weight may lead manual material handlers who are obese to adopt a more biomechanically advantageous lifting strategy. Corbeil et al (Corbeil et al., 2013). observed no significant differences in the trunk and knee postures between obese and lean manual materials handling experts while lifting at their preferred handling technique and pace. Frequent rest periods were provided during the task to minimize fatigue, representing a working environment with minimal physical fatigue. Task duration and the level of fatigue induced by the handling activity were observed to be not significantly different between the groups. However, they reported peak moments of force around the transverse, sagittal and longitudinal axes at L5/S1 to be more than double in both lifting and depositing phases for obese compared to lean handlers. The observed phenomena may not be due to different postural strategies, yet different motion time management. Xu, Mirka, and Hsiang (Xu et al., 2008) also reported a significant effect of BMI on trunk kinematics, with the obese group having higher peak transverse and sagittal plane velocity and acceleration compared to the non-obese group during a series of free dynamic lifting tasks performed at two levels of load and two levels of lift symmetry where participants lifted a box six times over 1 min for each task. However, peak sagittal flexion angle and peak transverse position were not observed to be affected by BMI level.In most studies focusing on lifting strategy with obesity, participants were free to lift at their preferred pace and were either provided with ample time to avoid fatigue or the tasks were of short duration. Fatigue, as induced by extended task duration, has been shown to alter kinematics, leading to increased joint loading and consequently increased risk of injury (Potvin and O'brien, 1998; Marras et al., 2006). It also plays a role in the progression of pain and feelings of discomfort (Cote and Hoeger Bement, 2010). However, motor coordination may have different traits between obese and lean groups, leading to distinct kinematics during lifting. Controlling the lifting pace and resting time between lifts can give rise to both muscle-level and whole body fatigue and can potentially uncover the underlying differences between obese and lean manual material handlers working long shifts in a fast paced work environment.Exploring the techniques used by individuals who are obese and are successful at lifting with no greater discomfort than normal weight individuals can support the design of lifting tasks as well as training programs for manual material handlers, not only in production settings, but also in the healthcare industry. Having more obese patients in the healthcare system, who need to be handled by nurses who may be obese is a contributing factor to the prevalence of lower back injury among healthcare staff (Humphreys, 2007). The current study aimed to assess and compare differences in lifting performance of individuals with and without excess body fat, while engaged in prolonged repetitive lifting, similar to an occupational setting. Findings will inform the design of future occupational tasks and training programs.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
With the growing prevalence of obesity in U.S., understanding its impact on work-related functionality is essential. As a chronic health condition with implications beyond excess body mass, the direct study of obesity, rather than relying on modeling approaches, helps form a solid understanding of the effects on performance of prevalent occupational tasks such as manual material handling. While the findings of equivalent MAWLs suggests the usability of existing psychophysical lifting guidelines for obese workforce, our more comprehensive look at the movement patterns that individuals who are obese adopt in order to maintain their MAWL over time suggests needed scrutiny for prolonged durations of repetitive lifting which may induce fatigue. Although subjects who were obese extended the lifting cycle time and adopted a more stooped lifting strategy, possibly to benefit from a more biomechanically and energetically advantageous lifting pattern, over time they accelerated at a higher rate once the box was in hand while non-obese maintained their acceleration. The increase in acceleration that this group experiences is suggestive of some changes in their lifting strategy over time. This acceleration pattern may have been used to minimize the duration of the lifting phase and consequently the overall load. They also experienced a greater loss of coordination between the upper and lower body. Although for short durations of frequent lifting, individuals who are moderately obese may be able to successfully work at the same psychophysical lifting limits as their normal weight counterparts, the observed changes combined with the greater weight of the upper body and lower knee strength may put them at higher risk of injury while engaged in prolonged periods of lifting or when lifting while fatigued due to other occupational tasks. These conditions are common among many occupations such as in the warehouse and light manufacturing industries as well as healthcare. Future research is needed to further investigate the effects of severe obesity on lifting performance while fatigued.The authors declare no conflict of interest.