@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Effects of portable computing devices on posture, muscle activation levels and efficiency

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Slate computers resulted in degraded wrist, elbow and neck postures.Degraded postures were magnified when working on the sofa.Performance on the slate computer was 4 times less than on the laptop or netbook.Muscle activity significantly lower on slate computer due to decreased performance.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Portable computing devices,Typing,Performance,Posture,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Very little research exists on ergonomic exposures when using portable computing devices. This study quantified muscle activity (forearm and neck), posture (wrist, forearm and neck), and performance (gross typing speed and error rates) differences across three portable computing devices (laptop, netbook, and slate computer) and two work settings (desk and computer) during data entry tasks. Twelve participants completed test sessions on a single computer using a test–rest–test protocol (30min of work at one work setting, 15min of rest, 30min of work at the other work setting). The slate computer resulted in significantly more non-neutral wrist, elbow and neck postures, particularly when working on the sofa. Performance on the slate computer was four times less than that of the other computers, though lower muscle activity levels were also found. Potential or injury or illness may be elevated when working on smaller, portable computers in non-traditional work settings.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Eighteen million slate computers were sold in 2010 and it is estimated that over 290 million slate computers will be sold worldwide from 2010 to 2016 (Melanson, 2011; Rotman Epps, 2012). One of the major advantages of slates is their mobility. This provides a distinct advantage to companies that allow their workers to telecommute. Telecommuting is becoming more prominent in the workforce with 89 of the top 100 US companies allowing their workers to telecommute (Telework Coalition, 2010). The Gartner Group estimates that in the US alone, 36.3 million employees telecommuted at least 8h/month in 2008, up from 12.4 million in 1998 (Telework Coalition, 2010). Similarly, there was an approximately threefold increase in people telecommuting more than 8h/week from 1998 to 2008 (4.65 million to 13.65 million, respectively).These changes in consumer behavior are not just limited to the workforce. Students, at all levels, have become less reliant on desktop computers. In 2006, 71% of undergraduate students owned a desktop, and by 2009 the number decreased to 44% (Smith et al., 2009). A study reported that in 2008, 82% of college students owned a laptop and it was their only computer (Chang et al., 2008). Further, it was found that, on average, students used their computers 21.3h a week (Smith et al., 2009). Given these numbers and expected continued growth in portable computer use, it is important to understand the ergonomic risks associated with using these types of data entry devices.Data entry or typing tasks have been the focus of research efforts for a number of years. A number of workstation parameters have been studied including chair design parameters (NIOSH, 1997; Psihogios et al., 1998; Rogers and Thomas, 1990; Sauter et al., 1991; Shute and Starr, 1984; Sommerich et al., 2000), VDT equipment positioning (Psihogios et al., 1998; Rogers and Thomas, 1990; Sauter et al., 1991; Shute and Starr, 1984; Sommerich et al., 2000), and prolonged seating postures (Eklundh, 1967; Kelsey, 1975; Kottke, 1961; Magora, 1972). Results of these studies found implications for low back and neck pain (Psihogios et al., 1998; Rogers and Thomas, 1990; Sauter et al., 1991; Shute and Starr, 1984), carpal tunnel pressure (Gilad and Harel, 2000; Hedge, 1994; Rempel et al., 1997; Weiss et al., 1995), and upper extremity discomfort (Bergqvist et al., 1995; Faucett and Rempel, 1994; Life and Pheasant, 1984; Sauter et al., 1991, among others). Additionally, research shows that participants who typed for two-hour periods experienced low-frequency fatigue (long-term fatigue) in their hands and arms (Lin et al., 2004). While this study was on a desktop computer, it may be indicative of what can be expected from typing on laptop or other mobile computers. Similar literature relating mobile computing devices, particularly newer devices such as slate computers, is extremely limited creating a significant gap in the literature.Most research related to laptop computer usage has been limited to the use of laptops at traditional workstations. Previous research has indicated that laptop computers result in greater neck flexion angles (Price and Dowell, 1998; Straker et al., 1997; Sommerich et al., 2002; Seghers et al., 2003) and reduced range of movement and stress on the neck which could lead to greater discomfort (Straker et al., 1997). A potential reason for these poorer working postures and increased discomfort is the connected keyboard and monitor in laptop designs, reducing the adjustability of these computing elements. With the introduction of slate and laptop computers, these issues are likely further compounded as the keyboard and monitor are now integrated into a single unit, though little to no research is available in the public domain relating to these issues.Only a few studies have attempted to assess the ergonomic risk associated with using laptops in non-traditional work environments (e.g. working with the laptop on the lap) (Asundi et al., 2010; Moffett et al., 2002). When using the laptop positioned on the lap, head-neck and wrist postures were found to be more non-neutral, potentially increasing injury risk to these areas (Asundi et al., 2010; Moffett et al., 2002). Interestingly, performance was not affected by computer use location, lap vs. desktop (Moffet et al., 2002), though this slate computers or other devices that use compact or virtual keyboards may have significant performance decrements.While laptop computers are the most common devices used by the mobile workforce, other, smaller portable computing devices, such as netbooks and slate computers (e.g. iPad), are becoming more popular. Thirty-seven percent of all slate owners take their slate with them to work (Rotman Epps, 2012). Decreases in computer size have led to changes in hardware design features (e.g. smaller key sizes, virtual keyboards, different input methods, etc.) that potentially could impose different demands on the user than other computer designs. A previous study found that slate computers resulted in greater neck flexion than other portable computing devices in common environments (Young et al., 2012), though other literature on ergonomic exposures was not found.Micro-computers (smaller, lighter-weight versions of laptops, e.g., netbooks) and slate computers (e.g., iPads) may impose unique demands on the user, such as a smaller platform (i.e., small keys and monitor), integrated monitor/keyboard (not just connected), and changes in data entry methods (swiping/gesturing, virtual keyboards), among others. However, little to no data is readily available on ergonomic exposures associated with prolonged usage of these devices, particularly in non-traditional work environments. The objective of this research was to quantify the physiological responses and performance impacts of performing traditional data entry tasks on mobile computers in select non-traditional environments. The specific hypotheses tested were:Hypothesis 1: muscle activity and joint posture will be negatively affected by portable computing device and workplace setting. As the device becomes more integrated (e.g., slate type computer), these impacts will be more negative, particularly for the neck.Hypothesis 2: performance on the portable computing devices will be similar to previous studies on typing performance in traditional desk settings, though performance will be degraded on the slate computer.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The objective of this study was to quantify differences in muscle loading, posture, and performance when using three computers (laptop, netbook and slate types computers) on two work surfaces (desk and sofa/lap). It was hypothesized that muscle loading, posture, and performance would be degraded when working on smaller computers and when working on the sofa. These hypotheses were mostly supported by the study findings.The primary computer differences were related to posture and performance. The slate computer was found to result in more non-neutral wrist, elbow and neck postures and reduced performance. These findings are similar to those found in previous studies comparing desktop computers to laptop computers (Straker et al., 1997; Sommerich et al., 2002; Seghers et al., 2003). These findings indicate that using more compact computers, particularly slate computers, may present increased risk for injury or illness development for the neck and upper extremity.Performance differences across computers found that participants were able to type almost 4 times as much on the laptop or netbook than on the slate. Previous research has found no performance differences between desktop and laptop computers (Price and Dowell, 1998; Straker et al., 1997; Sommerich et al., 2002; Seghers et al., 2003), though no data exists currently for performance on slate computers. These findings indicate that slate computer, while appropriate for gaming or other entertainment uses, are not designed for long-term usage as a device for traditional computer work activities.Muscle loading of two forearm muscles and two neck muscles was not found to differ across computers or work surfaces. The forearm muscles selected for this study are those that have been identified as primary muscles in previous computer usage studies (Martin et al., 1998). However, not all participants used a touch typing operation for the slate computer. Many used a single finger operation. Therefore, the muscles that are primary operators may differ, particularly for the slate computer. The neck muscles studied here are similar to those used in other studies comparing desktop computers to laptop computers (Asundi et al., 2010; Moffet et al., 2002) and other data entry studies (Bauer and Wittig, 1998; Szeto et al., 2009). However, since all of the computers studied in this research were of similar or even more compact design, it is likely that the neck muscle studied (the sternocleidomastoid) would not be affected as little neck rotation was observed, though other neck muscles, such as those primarily responsible for neck flexion and extension, may be impacted. A reason that the forearm muscle activity may not have been different across computers is that performance on the slate computer was almost 4 times less than that observed on the netbook and the laptop. Given the increase in resting activity for the forearm muscles, the loading on the forearms during active cycles may actually be much higher than for laptops, so this hypothesis will need to be confirmed in future studies.There were a number of computer by work surface interaction, though not as many as expected. Posture was found to be most significantly affected by this interaction. The slate computer was the primary driver in these interaction effects, with poorer postures associated with the conditions containing the slate computer. This finding is likely due to the integrated monitor/keyboard.