@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Discomfort of seated persons exposed to low frequency lateral and roll oscillation: Effect of seat cushion

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A compliant cushion increased exposure to lateral and roll oscillation.The compliant cushion increased discomfort caused by lateral and roll oscillation.The study reveals frequency-dependence of vibration discomfort from 0.2 to 1 Hz.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Vibration,Seating,Discomfort,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The discomfort caused by lateral oscillation, roll oscillation, and fully roll-compensated lateral oscillation has been investigated at frequencies between 0.25 and 1.0 Hz when sitting on a rigid seat and when sitting on a compliant cushion, both without a backrest. Judgements of vibration discomfort and the transmission of lateral and roll oscillation through the seat cushion were obtained with 20 subjects. Relative to the rigid seat, the cushion increased lateral acceleration and roll oscillation at the lower frequencies and also increased discomfort during lateral oscillation (at frequencies less than 0.63 Hz), roll oscillation (at frequencies less than 0.4 Hz), and fully roll-compensated lateral oscillation (at frequencies between 0.315 and 0.5 Hz). The root-sums-of-squares of the frequency-weighted lateral and roll acceleration at the seat surface predicted the greater vibration discomfort when sitting on the cushion. The frequency-dependence of the predicted discomfort may be improved by adjusting the frequency weighting for roll acceleration at frequencies between 0.25 and 1.0 Hz.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The sensitivity of the human body to different frequencies and directions of vibration, as determined in laboratory experimental research, has been used to define standardised frequency weightings and axis multiplying factors for predicting the discomfort caused by the multi-axis and multi-input vibration of people seated in various forms of transport (e.g., BS 6841, 1987; ISO 2631-1, 1997; Griffin, 2007). The standards suggest how vibration discomfort can be predicted from the acceleration measured at the seat-body interfaces (i.e., between the buttocks and the seat pan, between the back and a backrest, and between the feet and a footrest) for frequencies of vibration in the range 0.5–80 Hz.Discomfort can also be caused by lateral and roll oscillations at frequencies lower than 0.5 Hz. Such motions occur in many forms of transport including road vehicles (Griffin and Newman, 2004), trains (Donohew and Griffin, 2007), and sea vessels (Lawther and Griffin, 1988). The paucity of facilities to simulate such motions has impeded systematic research into how the discomfort caused by low frequency motions depends on the characteristics of the motion (e.g., the frequency of motion, the direction of motion, and the combination of lateral and roll motion). The absence of research has inhibited the development of standardised methods of quantifying low frequency motions in transport and predicting the discomfort caused by such motions. The scarcity of simulation facilities has also impeded research into how the discomfort caused by low frequency motions depends on the characteristics of seating.The optimisation of the design of a seat should include consideration of many factors, including the shape, the width, and the height of the seat pan and the backrest, and the seat cushioning, all of which have the potential to influence both the static discomfort of the seat occupants and their vibration discomfort. For example, increasing the height of a backrest from the level of the seat pan (i.e., 0 mm, no backrest) to neck height (i.e., 700 mm), reduced the relative displacement between the head and the seat during low frequency (0.5–3.15 Hz) lateral oscillation (Brett and Griffin, 1991), showing that the backrest provided greater lateral support with increasing backrest height. During either lateral oscillation or roll oscillation, support from a backrest might be beneficial (by assisting postural stability) or detrimental (by increasing the transmission of motion to the upper body) (Paddan and Griffin, 1988, 1994). With lateral oscillation at frequencies between 0.2 and 1.0 Hz, discomfort was greater without a backrest than with a full-height backrest for both a rigid seat and a cushioned seat (Beard and Griffin, 2012a). However, with lateral oscillation and roll oscillation at frequencies between 0.5 and 1.6 Hz, discomfort was greater with a full-height backrest and a four-point harness than when sitting with no backrest (Wyllie and Griffin, 2007).Seats with firm cushions may be regarded as “sporty”, especially those with high side lumbar support, whereas seats with softer cushions may be viewed as more “luxurious” (Kamp, 2012). Soft cushions tend to reduce the maximum pressure at the seat-buttock interface (Sprigle et al., 1990), which may improve static comfort (e.g., Ebe and Griffin, 2000). The configuration of the seat pan may also affect the ability of seated occupants to maintain postural stability during exposure to low frequency oscillation. For example, the compliance of a soft cushion might be expected to impair lateral stability and increase dynamic discomfort. Understanding the trade-offs between the discomfort associated with static and dynamic seat characteristics is therefore necessary to optimise the overall discomfort of seated passengers (Ebe and Griffin, 2000), but there has been little systematic investigation with non-vertical vibration.The experiment reported here was designed to understand any differences in vibration discomfort between sitting on a rigid seat and sitting on a foam cushion when exposed to lateral oscillation, roll oscillation, and fully roll-compensated lateral oscillation at frequencies between 0.25 and 1.0 Hz. It was hypothesised that reduced stability when sitting on the cushion would increase vibration discomfort. If vibration discomfort can be predicted from the acceleration at the interface between the body and the seat, differences in vibration discomfort between the rigid seat and the cushioned seat should be explained by the transmission of vibration through the cushion.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
