@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Postural stability when walking: Effect of the frequency and magnitude of lateral oscillatory motion

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
When walking, lateral oscillations between 0.5 and 2 Hz cause postural instability.Postural instability cannot be predicted from the unweighted lateral acceleration.Postural instability can be predicted from the unweighted lateral velocity.Magnitudes of lateral vibration causing instability when walking are provided.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Postural stability,Walking,Lateral oscillatory motion,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
While walking on an instrumented treadmill, 20 subjects were perturbed by lateral sinusoidal oscillations representative of those encountered in transport: frequencies in the range 0.5–2 Hz and accelerations in the range 0.1–2.0 ms−2 r.m.s., corresponding to velocities in the range 0.032–0.16 ms−1 r.m.s. Postural stability was assessed from the self-reported probability of losing balance (i.e., perceived risk of falling) and the movements of the centre of pressure beneath the feet. With the same acceleration at all frequencies, the velocities and displacements of the oscillatory perturbations were greater with the lower frequency oscillations, and these caused greater postural instability. With the same velocity at all frequencies, postural instability was almost independent of the frequency of oscillation. Movements of the centre of pressure show that subjects attempted to compensate for the perturbations by increasing their step width and increasing their step rate.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Standing and walking require continuous postural control to counteract the destabilizing effects of gravity and self-induced movements of the body. Maintaining balance is more challenging when there are external disturbances from motion of the floor, such as when standing or walking in a moving train, bus, aircraft or ship.Sudden accelerations or decelerations of a treadmill (Berger et al., 1984) or a moveable platform embedded in a walkway (e.g., Nashner, 1980; Oddsson et al., 2004; Bhatt et al., 2005) have been used to investigate responses to slips, trips, and missteps encountered during walking. Longer duration low frequency oscillations (0.2–0.5 Hz) of a treadmill on a six-axis motion platform (e.g., Brady et al., 2009; McAndrew et al., 2010) have been used to investigate postural responses to perturbations when walking but have not been representative of motions encountered in transport.With instantaneous increases in horizontal acceleration, stationary standing people have been reported to tolerate accelerations up to 0.76 ms−2 in the backward direction, 0.48 ms−2 in the forward direction, and 0.33 ms−2 in a sideways direction (Jongkees and Groen, 1942 – as cited by De Graaf and Van Weperen, (1997)). Similar thresholds were obtained by De Graaf and Van Weperen, (1997), who found that standing subjects were most sensitive to lateral acceleration when standing with their feet almost together. Postural stability when standing still and exposed to narrow-band random fore-and-aft and lateral oscillation has been studied at frequencies between 0.125 and 2.0 Hz with velocities from 0.04 to 0.16 ms−1 r.m.s. (Nawayseh and Griffin, 2006). The displacement of the centre of pressure (COP) and subject estimates of the probability of losing balance increased with increasing magnitude of oscillation and, with the same velocity at all frequencies, stability problems were greatest around 0.5 Hz. Tolerances of walking subjects to sideward oscillations in transport have not been previously reported.Understanding of the physiological and biomechanical aspects of balance has been used to develop active models of postural stability when standing (e.g. Mergner et al., 2006; Peterka, 2003). These models represent the neural, sensory, and biomechanical subsystems involved in human postural control but do not allow the prediction of the probability of falling. People may be expected to be more stable when standing and supported on two legs than when walking and supported on only one leg for 80% of the gait cycle (Woollacott and Tang, 1997), especially when threatened by external perturbations.The main strategy used to maintain balance during locomotion is the stepping strategy (Nashner, 1980; Horak and Nashner, 1986; Hof et al., 2007). Additional strategies (e.g. active hip torque and active ankle subtalar torque) are used for fine tuning (Hof et al., 2007; MacKinnon and Winter, 1993) when the foot position is established. Adjusting the step width by varying the foot placement maintains postural stability in the frontal (i.e., coronal) plane by regulating the trajectory of the centre of mass (COM) (Townsend, 1985) and has a greater influence on postural control during unperturbed walking than either step length or step time (Owings and Grabiner, 2004). It has been suggested that step width is adjusted to compensate for lateral acceleration induced by external perturbation (Oddsson et al., 2004).The overall aim of the study reported in this paper was to determine how postural stability when walking is influenced by the magnitude and the frequency of lateral oscillation of the floor. It was hypothesised that, at each frequency of oscillation, the self-reported probability of losing balance and the movement of the centre of pressure in the lateral direction would increase with increasing magnitude of oscillation. It was expected that the movement of the centre of pressure would vary with the frequency of oscillation in a manner that would explain the frequency-dependence of the loss of balance.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
