@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Quantification of long cane usage characteristics with the constant contact technique

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Cane usage characteristics show deviation from mobility skill training.Grasp type shows large inter-subject variability but low intra-subject variability.Roll angle range of a cane small to integrate a sensor on a long cane.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Long cane usage characteristics,Design guidelines,Visual impairment,Electronic travel aids,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
While a number of Electronic Travel Aids (ETAs) have been developed over the past decades, the conventional long cane remains the most widely utilized navigation tool for people with visual impairments. Understanding the characteristics of long cane usage is crucial for the development and acceptance of ETAs. Using optical tracking, cameras and inertial measurement units, we investigated grasp type, cane orientation and sweeping characteristics of the long cane with the constant contact technique. The mean cane tilt angle, sweeping angle, and grip rotation deviation were measured. Grasp type varied among subjects, but was maintained throughout the experiments, with thumb and index finger in contact with the cane handle over 90% of the time. We found large inter-subject differences in sweeping range and frequency, while the sweeping frequency showed low intra-subject variability. These findings give insights into long cane usage characteristics and provide critical information for the development of effective ETAs.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
According to a recent World Health Organization report (WHO, 2010), about 314 million people worldwide suffer from visual impairments, mainly caused by uncorrected refractive errors such as myopia, astigmatism, cataract or glaucoma. In the 1940s, the modern long cane was introduced to assist people with visual impairments in traveling safely and independently. Several navigation techniques, e.g. constant contact, two-point touch, diagonal and shoreline were proposed for the long cane (De Bruin, 1981; Hill and Ponder, 1976). Among these techniques, the constant contact technique – sweeping the cane side to side with the tip in contact with the ground (De Bruin, 1981), and the two-point touch technique – touching the ground with the cane tip on the opposite side of the forefoot (Hill and Ponder, 1976) are most commonly employed (LaGrow and Weessies, 1994).In addition to the conventional long cane, guide dogs can support safe travel of blind people with visual impairments. However, a guide dog requires a long training period to reliably perform its tasks, generates important costs, and requires care and attention from the blind or ​people with visual impairments. Both methods do not entirely guarantee safe travel as the sensing range remains below that of sighted people, and the information bandwidth is rather limited. In addition, head-level obstacles or distant drop-offs are not easily detected. With the evolution of sensing and display technologies, Electronic Travel Aids (ETAs) were introduced to extend the sensing range beyond that of a conventional long cane and to present enriching information about the environment through auditory or haptic channels. ETAs can be broadly divided into two categories, i.e. navigation aids and mobility aids. Navigation aids provide information for global orientation to find the way from the current location to a desired destination (Chandler and Worsfold, 2013) by means of Global Positioning System (GPS), laser range finders or Radio-Frequency Identification (RFID) tags (BrailleNote GPS; Kulyukin et al., 2004; Sánchez et al., 2007). Mobility aids in return present vicinity information to the user. Some mobility aids indicate the clear path (Ulrich and Borenstein, 2001; Shoval et al., 1998) while others provide location information on static and moving obstacles to prevent collisions (Goldstein and Wiener, 1981; La Grow, 1999; Benjamin, 1971; Hoyle and Waters, 2008; Lee et al., 2014; MiniGuide). While a few hand held (MiniGuide; Bissitt and Heyes, 1980) and wearable mobility aids (iGlasses; Shoval et al., 1998; Meers and Ward, 2005) have been developed over the past decades, the majority of ETAs were designed to be mounted on a long cane (Kim et al., 2015; Wang and Kuchenbecker, 2012; Gallo et al., 2010; Kim et al., 2009b; Hoyle and Waters, 2008; Farcy and Bellik, 2002). Wearable ETAs require donning, and are often bulky. In the case of hand held ETAs, it is possible to fail to detect dangerous obstacles or receive false alarms when holding the ETA with incorrect orientation. To avoid this issue, an auditory alarm was employed to assist users in maintaining correct orientation of a hand held ETA (Bissitt and Heyes, 1980). ETAs mounted on a long cane have the benefit of using a conventional cane which is familiar to long cane users, delivers ground surface information and detects obstacles within the sensing range of the cane.ETAs not only provide additional alarms for obstacles that are not detected by a long cane, but also improve ambulation. Clark-Carter et al. (1986) measured walking speed with the Sonic Pathfinder (Heyes, 1984) with several preview distances (detection range of the ETA). The results showed that the walking speed was significantly increased when obstacle information was provided from up to 3.5 m away in comparison to the conventional long cane, which typically reaches about 1.2 m from the body. ETAs may therefore enhance the perceived level of safety, confidence and efficiency of navigation of blind and users with visual impairments by increasing the speed at which they can walk with confidence. Lee et al. (2014) compared task completion time and number of collisions with obstacles placed along an experimental track in 3 conditions (i.e. using a long cane, using a body-mounted ETA as well as a combination of long cane and ETA). They found that combining the long cane with the ETA resulted in a reduction of both the task completion time and the number of collisions with obstacles.Since the first device was commercialized in the 1960s (Kay, 1964: K-Sonar), numerous ETAs have been proposed, developed and marketed. Despite their advantages,people with visual impairments still rely largely on the traditional long cane, most likely due to the drawbacks of existing ETAs, resulting from an unergonomic interface, overload of sensory channels, non-intuitive or unreliable feedback, excessive weight, long training periods and high cost. Several of these drawbacks can be explained by a technology-driven approach that has been taken in many previous projects, compared to a more user-driven approach, which should be followed in our opinion, and for which this study further paves the way.Deriving meaningful design requirements is a significant step towards the development of efficient ETAs that can complement the conventional long cane and be widely employed. Therefore, understanding navigation strategies and other characteristics of long cane usage can inform the design of efficient ETAs. Previous studies investigated biomechanical parameters related to the navigation of people with visual impairments. Nakamura (1997) analyzed the gait of congenitally blind, late blind and sighted people. The results showed that the congenitally blind have the slowest walking speed, shortest stride length, and longest stance phase compared to late blind and sighted people. Ramsey et al. (1999) explored kinematic parameters (i.e. gait velocity, stride length, and hip flexion velocity), showing that these differ in attention-demanding environments, when approaching drop-offs, or during normal walking. Johnson et al. (1998) found longer mediolateral displacement, and higher mean cane velocity in a group with visual impairments compared to a mobility instructor group. To increase the efficiency and safety of white cane usage in people with visual impairments, some research focused on optimizing the design of the conventional long cane or on improving navigation techniques. Kim et al. (2009a) investigated the performance of detecting drop-offs between the two widely used cane techniques. The results of the experiment showed that the constant contact technique provides a significantly higher drop-off detection rate than the two-point touch technique. To examine the usefulness of tapping sounds generated by a long cane for object detection using semi-active echolocation, different cane types and object sizes were tested (Schenkman and Jansson, 1986). While the size of objects plays an important role in echolocation, the cane type did not affect performance. These findings and measurements of previous studies can be useful to derive guidelines for orientation and mobility (O & M) instructors to select an appropriate cane technique and cane type based on the needs of persons with visual impairments. These are also valuable for engineers wishing to develop effective ETAs.Further studies which are more relevant to the design of ETAs have been carried out. Wall and Ashmead (2002) investigated variable deviation of the two-point touch technique between classical guidelines and actual usage. The hand position was located at the right side of the participant's midline for the right handed. This implies that the angle of sensors on a long cane should be adjusted to the right side to detect forward obstacles. Cane arc width, which is related to the cane yaw angle is greater than the recommended arc width. Wrist angle has a great influence on the roll angle. When a cane rolls, it might detect the ground as an obstacle. It is also necessary to measure the range of roll angles, because not only the wrist roll angle but also the wrist bending angle and cane rotation within hand can affect the cane roll angle. An analogous experiment was carried out by using the two-point touch technique (Bongers et al., 2002). Among several variables, cane tip height has impact on drop-off detection in ETAs (Pyun et al., 2013; Benjamin, 1971). Since the cane was lifted higher than the recommended height while using the two-point touch technique, additional sensors to detect cane height to avoid false drop-off alarm signals could be considered for designing ETAs. The angle between the cane and the ground helps to determine the orientation angle of sensors mounted on the long cane. However, continuous observation of this angle would also be useful for determining and placement of sensors in ETAs. Furthermore, cane orientation or variation of cane height which influence sensing ranges of sensors can vary depending on long cane techniques.There are additional significant variables of cane usage that affect design guidelines for ETAs:-Where do the fingers contact on the cane handle and do they shift during ambulation?What are the mean three cane orientation angles? Do these angles vary while walking with a cane and between subjects?Are sweeping characteristics different between long cane users?To the best of our knowledge, these parameters critical for the design and placement of sensor and display technologies for ETAs, such as cane orientation, sweeping range, grasp types and finger contact locations have so far remained unexplored. Additionally, different long cane techniques result in different variables of cane usage.Therefore, we investigated characteristics of long cane usage with the constant contact cane technique to gain a better understanding of grasping, sweeping and cane orientation variables in order to derive guidelines for the design of efficient ETAs.Ten subjects with visual impairments were recruited through the foundation Access for All, a Swiss nonprofit organization. Subjects voluntarily participated in the experiments and signed a written consent form after receiving a full explanation of the experimental procedure. The study was previously approved by the local research ethics committee. Nine subjects (subjects 1 to 9) took part in experiment I, while seven subjects (subjects 4 to 10) participated in experiment II. Table 1summarizes the subject demographics. Participants were aged from 22 to 65 (mean age: 37.3, Standard Deviation (SD): 15.9), all right handed and held their cane in the right hand. All participants were legally blind with a visual acuity below 20/200 (Koestler, 2004) and were experienced long cane users. All subjects used a folding cane consisting of several segments. The primary cane technique indicates the preferred method when navigating with a long cane, but all subjects responded that they adapted the cane technique depending on the ground condition or other environmental circumstances. Eight subjects reported that they mainly employ the constant contact technique. The other two subjects primarily employ the two-point touch technique, but were also familiar with the constant contact technique.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, usage variables of the long cane focused on cane rotation around the cane axis, sweeping and grasping characteristics with the constant contact technique were investigated. The purpose of our experiments was not only to provide a detailed understanding of long cane usage of persons with visual impairments, but also to derive guidelines for the development of efficient ETAs to complement the conventional long cane, which is still the most widely used navigation tool for blind and persons with visual impairments.The distance between the heel and the cane tip provides a range in which low obstacles can be detected with the long cane. This was found to be limited to below 1.45 m in all participants. With current sensor technology, an ETA can extend obstacle detection ranges and provide obstacle information over different vertical ranges such as at the head level, trunk level, lower extremity level, or detect drop-offs at a distance (Pyun et al., 2013).In order to optimally select and design sensing elements for ETAs, the orientation angles of the long cane can be a crucial factor, especially when the ETA is integrated into the long cane. The mean tilt angle helps determine the ideal position and orientation of sensors of the ETA to be attached to the cane. As the experimental results showed relatively small variation of tilt angle, a fixed sensor on the long cane is able to detect obstacles reliably while employing the constant contact cane technique. Analogous to the tilt angle, the cane roll angle should also be considered when designing sensor elements for an ETA. If this angle shows high variability, the chance that a sensor detects the ground as obstacle or provides wrong information on the height of an obstacle increases. To alleviate this problem, sensors such as a gyroscopes, accelerometers, or tilt sensors can provide additional information about the rotation of the cane. However, the small range (26.34°) of measured mean roll angle may prevent false detection of the ground as a close obstacle. From the sweeping angle, we can infer the minimal field of view required for the sensors of an ETA to allow users to walk confidently. In combination with an IMU, it is possible to detect obstacles along one's walking path and avoid alarming the user about dangerless obstacles that are located to either side.In agreement with the experiment by Nakamura (1997), the walking speed found in our experiments using a conventional long cane is below that of sighted subjects (1.5 m/s). The mean walking speed of the nine congenitally blind subjects in our study was found to lie between the congenitally blind group (0.86 m/s) and late blind group (1.11 m/s). This slight difference may be explained by the navigation skills of subjects, residual vision such as light and color perception, or the small number of subjects. Along with the walking speed, the sweeping frequency can provide a reference for the update rate of the obstacle information and display latency as well as the duration of auditory or haptic stimuli provided by ETAs. There was a large variability among subjects. In other words, there exist interpersonal differences of long cane usage in terms of sweeping characteristics, which need to be addressed by allowing adjustment by the individual user of an ETA. The sweeping velocity can also be useful to automatically estimate the user's intention during navigation. In our previous research (Gallo et al., 2010), a threshold on the sweeping velocity was employed to automatically switch between two ETA modes such as a sweeping mode – simple obstacle distance information provided during walking – and a scanning mode – standing still to explore the environment, in which more detailed information was presented.Several grasp types such as the index finger grasp, thumb grasp, pencil grasp, fingertip grasp, and whole hand grasp have been reported in literature depending on the employed cane technique and situation (Jacobson, 1993). Some orientation and mobility guidelines suggest that the index finger should be extended for improved use (Yamauchi et al., 2003; McConville et al., 1978). When the constant contact or two-point touch technique is adopted, the middle finger, ring finger and little finger are mostly wrapped around the cane to achieve a firm grasp. Similar to the differences between measured and recommended parameters for the two-touch cane technique (Bongers et al., 2002), our results of the grasping analysis also showed deviation from the recommended grasp taught during mobility skill training. Fifty six percent of participants placed the thumb and index finger on the side of the cane and the other subjects placed these two fingers differently. However, they maintained the same grasp during walking with the long cane (84.5% for thumb and 67.8% for index finger). Also, more than 90% of the time the tips of both the thumb and index finger were in contact with the cane handle while walking through an obstacle-free environment. The position of the fingers on the handle is crucial for the design of a haptic display in order to optimize the haptic perception when the ETA is mounted on the handle of the cane and held by the user.Two of the subjects who participated in this study primarily use the two-point touch technique. While this might have affected their performance with the constant contact technique, we are unable to explore this effect statistically due to the small sample size. Nevertheless, both participants stated that they are also familiar with the constant contact technique, and employ it occasionally. We therefore assumed that there was no difference in their performance compared to the other participants. However, this would need to be confirmed in a dedicated study.Based on the results of our experiments, guidelines to develop effective ETAs can be derived by considering the following long cane usage characteristics:•The cane tilt angle is independent of the subject's height and the tilt range shows small variability. Therefore, the position of a sensor on the long cane to detect obstacles can be determined based purely on the sensor characteristics.There are large differences in mean sweeping angle and frequency, but intra-subject variability is low. Additional sensors (e.g. inertial sensors) might be required to trigger obstacle detection in the walking direction, and to offer the possibility of adapting the values to the individual user.Both intra and inter-subject variability of the roll angle range of the cane are rather small, but the initial handle orientation is important to assure that any sensor attached to the cane faces in the right direction. The design of the cane should allow adjustment of the cane rotation, or “enforce” a specific holding orientation through an adapted shape of the handle.The grasp type shows large inter-subject variability. However, fingers are mostly kept in contact with the cane handle during navigation with the long cane and intra-subject variability is low. Therefore, a wearable haptic device such as a thimble or ring type vibrotactile display that can be fixed on the cane handle could cope with the variability in grasp types, allowing individual adjustment by the user during the first use.In persons with visual loss, the long cane plays a crucial role in establishing a link between the user and the environment. The user can detect obstacles via haptic (physical contact) and auditory (semi-active echolocation) channels during conventional long cane usage. In the case of an ETA, this link is replaced with a sensor, which measures the distance to an obstacle and presents obstacle information to the user via an auditory or haptic interface. Therefore, parameters of long cane usage such as the cane orientation, which informs on the optimal sensor location, and the sweeping frequency, which informs on the necessary update rate of the sensors, are crucial parameters for the design of efficient ETAs. Moreover, knowledge about finger positions and cane contact during navigation will inform the design of displays for haptic feedback to deliver rich information about the environment from the cane (respectively the ETA) to the user. Studies with dedicated hardware will need to be carried out to validate the design principles proposed in this paper in the context of an ambulation task with obstacles.The results of our study showed a high inter-subject variability for many of the parameters, but with low intra-subject variability. Therefore, the ideal ETA will consider parameters of white cane usage and allow for a user-specific adaptation. We consider these results to serve as basis for a more user-centered approach to the design of future ETAs.