@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Masking of thresholds for the perception of fore-and-aft vibration of seat backrests

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A component of vehicle vibration may not be easily perceptible to passengers.Thresholds for perceiving a vibration can be impaired (‘masked’) by other vibrations.Masking may depend on whether the vibrations cause sensations at the same locations.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Perception,Whole-body vibration,Masked threshold,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The detection of a vibration may be reduced by the presence of another vibration: a phenomenon known as ‘masking’. This study investigated how the detection of one frequency of vibration is influenced by vibration at another frequency. With nine subjects, thresholds for detecting fore-and-aft backrest vibration were determined (for 4, 8, 16, and 31.5-Hz sinusoidal vibration) in the presence of a masker vibration (4-Hz random vibration, 1/3-octave bandwidth at six intensities). The masker vibration increased thresholds for perceiving vibration at each frequency by an amount that reduced with increasing difference between the frequency of the sinusoidal vibration and the frequency of the masker vibration. The 4-Hz random vibration almost completely masked 4-Hz sinusoidal vibration, partially masked 8- and 16-Hz vibration, and only slightly masked 31.5-Hz vibration. The findings might be explained by the involvement of different sensory systems and different body locations in the detection of different frequencies of vibration.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Fore-and-aft vibration of a backrest is one of the principal sources of discomfort for drivers and passengers in vehicles. For seated people supported by an upright backrest, equivalent comfort contours for vibration applied to the back show greater sensitivity to fore-and-aft vibration than vibration in either of the other two directions (i.e., vertical or lateral) over the frequency range 2.5–63 Hz (Parsons et al., 1982). Over the range from 2 to 16 Hz, thresholds for perceiving fore-and-aft vibration at the back are similar to, or lower than, thresholds for perceiving vibration at the feet or the seat (Gallais et al., 2015). Since backrests amplify some frequencies of vibration (Jalil and Griffin, 2007; Basri and Griffin, 2014), the perception of fore-and-aft vibration can be dominated by vibration of the back.Sensitivity to fore-and-aft vibration of the back depends on the frequency of vibration and contact conditions with the backrest. A frequency weighting for evaluating the severity of fore-and-aft backrest vibration (weighting Wc in BS 6841:1987 and ISO 2631-1:1997) was based on experimental studies that determined the acceleration of a backrest required at various frequencies to cause discomfort equivalent to that caused by 10-Hz vertical vibration of a seat at a magnitude of 0.8 ms−2 r.m.s. The experiment produced an equivalent comfort contour showing greatest sensitivity to acceleration at frequencies between 2.5 and 8 Hz. At higher frequencies, sensitivity to acceleration reduced in proportion to the frequency of vibration, corresponding to similar discomfort with similar vibration velocity (Parsons et al., 1982). Similar equivalent comfort contours have been reported from other studies with fore-and-aft vibration of a full upright backrest (Kato and Hanai, 1998; Morioka and Griffin, 2010; Basri and Griffin, 2011) but with variations dependent on the location of contact with the back (Morioka and Griffin, 2010) and the inclination of the backrest (Kato and Hanai, 1998; Basri and Griffin, 2011). Unlike equivalent comfort contours for vertical seat vibration, it seems that equivalent comfort contours for the back are not highly dependent on the magnitude of vibration (Morioka and Griffin, 2010; Basri and Griffin, 2011).The detection of one type of vehicle oscillation may be expected to be influenced by the presence of other vibrations (e.g., background vibration): a phenomenon known as ‘masking’ (i.e., the detection of one stimulus is ‘masked’ by the excitation associated with another stimulus). With vibrotactile stimuli applied to a small area of the thenar eminence of the hand, masking occurs when the masker stimulus and the test stimulus stimulate the same tactile channel (e.g., Gescheider et al., 1982) and similar masking has been observed in the perception of hand-transmitted vibration (Morioka and Griffin, 2005). There is no known study of the influence of masking on the perception of whole-body vibration. It seems reasonable to anticipate that greater understanding of masking will improve the prediction of the sensations caused by vibration in vehicles.A ‘masked threshold’ is the threshold for the perception of a stimulus determined in the presence of another stimulus. It may be expected that masking will be greatest when the two stimuli are perceived by the same mechanism (e.g., by exciting the same sensory system at the same location in the body). This is sometimes called ‘energetic masking’ (EM), as opposed to ‘informational masking’ (IM) where the detection of one stimulus is impeded by distraction from another stimulus (Durlach et al., 2003). When two vibration stimuli have different frequencies, they may be perceived at different body locations even if they enter the body at the same location (because different frequencies excite different motions in the body). For each of the three translational axes of vibration of a seat with no backrest, the location of discomfort in the body is more dependent on the frequency of vibration than the magnitude of the vibration (Whitham and Griffin, 1978). With fore-and-aft vibration of the back in the frequency range 2.5–25 Hz, discomfort is mostly localised in the upper or lower back at all frequencies, although with increased perception at the head, neck, or shoulders at 20 and 25 Hz (Basri and Griffin, 2011). In part, this reflects the complex biodynamic responses of the body to vibration applied at the back (Jalil and Griffin, 2008).This laboratory study was designed to investigate masked thresholds for sinusoidal fore-and-aft vibration of a backrest. It was hypothesised that thresholds for detecting a sinusoidal vibration stimulus would increase with increasing intensity of a masker stimulus (a random background vibration) but that the threshold shift would depend on the frequency of the sinusoidal stimulus, reflecting the detection of the different frequencies of vibration either by different sensory systems (e.g. somatosensory, vestibular, visual, etc.) or at different body locations. The findings of this study have application to predicting whether a particular vibration of a vehicle will be detected by drivers or passengers when there are other vibrations present.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Absolute thresholds for the perception of fore-and-aft vibration of a backrest depend on the frequency of vibration, with similar acceleration thresholds from 4 to 8 Hz and similar velocity thresholds from 8 to 31.5 Hz. Absolute thresholds for perceiving fore-and-aft backrest vibration have a similar frequency-dependence to equivalent comfort contours for backrest vibration, so the same frequency weighting can be used to predict the discomfort and the perceptibility of fore-and-aft vibration of backrests.The threshold for perceiving backrest vibration at one frequency can be ‘masked’ by another vibration with either the same frequency or a different frequency, with the ‘threshold shift’ reducing with increasing difference between the frequencies of the two vibrations. A narrow band of random vibration centred on 4-Hz will almost completely mask the perception of 4-Hz sinusoidal backrest vibration, partially mask 8- and 16-Hz backrest vibration, but provide little masking of 31.5-Hz backrest vibration. The masking might be explained by the involvement of different sensory systems (e.g. channels of information within the somatosensory, vestibular, visual systems) and different body locations in the perception of vibratory stimuli at different frequencies.