@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The effect of police cruiser restraint cage configuration on shoulder discomfort, muscular demands, upper limb postures, and task performance during simulated police patrol

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We compare current and modified police cruiser restraint cage configurations.Bilateral shoulder discomfort was reduced while typing directly in front of the body.Location of the laptop in front of the user allows more neutral shoulder postures.Reduced discomfort is likely driven by postures, not muscle demands.Reduced discomfort results may have implications for future police car designs.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Police,Mobile data terminal,Upper extremity,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Advances in police-specific technology have led to changes in work layout and physical occupational demands of mobile police officers. This study investigated the influence of police cruiser compartment configuration on perceived discomfort, muscle activation, shoulder kinematics, and typing performance during simulated police patrol. Participants completed a one-hour session including simulated driving and 2-min typing trials in a standard compartment configuration with a fixed mobile data terminal (MDT) location (ST), and in a modified compartment configuration with an MDT in front of the user and a rearward translated seat (MOD). The MOD configuration resulted in reductions of 55–65% in perceived shoulder discomfort, up to 3.4% MVC in shoulder muscle demands, and more neutral humeral orientations (shoulder elevation reduced by 13–25°). These improvements associated with the MOD configuration may have ergonomic implications for future police car designs, particularly as new technology is introduced in the mobile environment and advanced solutions are sought.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Mobile police officers incur not only acute stressors during emergency response situations, but also cumulative physical demands for many of their daily driving and computer-based tasks. These cumulative demands require a combination of static and twisted postures (McKinnon et al., 2011; Brown et al., 2003) and exposure to long-term whole body vibration, a risk factor for back and neck pain (Magnusson et al., 1996). Consequently, mobile police officers have a higher incidence of work absenteeism compared to their colleagues in other departments (Gyi and Porter, 1998; Ovall, 1995). The prevalence of musculoskeletal disorders in law enforcement may be partly attributable to increases in the amount of occupational driving, the rise in administrative tasks completed in the police cruiser, and the non-neutral static postures associated with these tasks (Gyi and Porter, 1998; McKinnon et al., 2011). Since the introduction of in-vehicle laptop computer systems, also called mobile data terminals (MDTs), in police vehicles, many officers have been encouraged to complete nearly all their daily tasks within the cab of the police vehicle in an effort to increase the visual presence of law enforcement in the community. As currently configured, the equipment within this mobile police work environment has minimal adjustability, and officers may require prolonged upper limb and low back loading to perform clerical tasks (McKinnon et al., 2012).Although advances in mobile police technology have improved capabilities and efficiency of in-vehicle data acquisition tasks (Agrawal et al., 2003; Hampton and Langham, 2005), the physical risks of injury associated with this modern technology, particularly the mobile data terminal, have not been extensively quantified or explored (Agrawal et al., 2003; McKinnon et al., 2011). The physical outcomes associated with the increased work time and tasks performed in a mobile police environment have been probed (Brown et al., 2003; Agrawal et al., 2003), but the mechanisms for these outcomes require further investigation. Recent and current investigations have just begun to outline the potential issues with modern in-vehicle technology, and have identified MDT use as potential cause of musculoskeletal pain (Brown et al., 2003; Gyi and Porter, 1998; McKinnon et al., 2011; Gruevski et al., 2013) and as a prominent candidate for ergonomic intervention (McKinnon et al., 2011; Gruevski et al., 2013). Data entry tasks have been noted to account for nearly 35% of in-vehicle activity time, and discomfort surveys (police officers) have indicated a definite need to quantify physical and psychophysical concerns with MDT use in both the current configuration and with modification to the MDT location and/or adjustability (McKinnon et al., 2011).The primary risks of injury from MDT use are to the shoulder and back. MDT tasks require prolonged reaching and twisting (McKinnon et al., 2011), and such prolonged non-neutral upper extremity postures are indicated as musculoskeletal disorder risk factors (Sommerich et al., 1993). These injury risks are tied directly to the location of the MDT within the police vehicle, and could potentially be reduced with an alternative MDT location.Conventional computing and ergonomics guidelines have placed the keyboard directly in front of the user to maintain neutral shoulder, elbow, and wrist postures. While placing the MDT directly in front of the user would expectedly produce similar positive outcomes and limit the noted non-neutral postures, MDT location under the current cruiser design paradigm is severely inhibited by environmental constraints such as the center console, steering wheel, and, most notably the factor examined in the current study, the presence of a rear restraint cage.Removing the restraint cage directly behind the driver is a potential layout solution that would have three primary benefits: 1) it would permit greater seat fore-aft and tilt adjustability, which is essential to achieve the ideal 100° seat back angle and ability for any given driver to reach the pedals (Harrison et al., 2000), 2) it would eliminate the position constraints of the MDT in relation to the steering wheel, and 3) it would eliminate reach and trunk rotation required for MDT use by allowing seat and MDT alignment. The latter benefit is of particular interest in the current study, as more neutral whole body postures associated with seat and MDT alignment could potentially reduce risk of low back and shoulder injury to the mobile police officers.This restraint cage design change may be achieved through a single prisoner transport system. Such systems include a single seat in the rear of the vehicle, and an open compartment directly behind the driver seat. These systems are employed in some fleets and are a commercially available option that also has the benefits of greater prisoner restraint and additional storage capacity for police equipment behind the officer. The Ford Crown Victoria Police Interceptor is the most common North American police vehicle platform, representing over 75% of the market (Anonymous, 2008). Thus, this study focuses on layout and design solutions specific to this vehicle.The purpose of this investigation was to quantify the influence of a police cruiser compartment configuration for a Crown Victoria police vehicle, specifically investigating the influence a combination of increased posterior seat translation and an MDT location in front of the user have on upper extremity posture, user discomfort and muscle activation while typing compared to the currently used seat position and lateral MDT location.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A police cruiser compartment configuration that allowed for a self-selected mobile data terminal location directly in front of the user influenced discomfort, muscular effort and upper limb postures. The physical constraints in the current mobile police environment do not permit positioning of the MDT directly in from of the user. A modified police cruiser configuration (half cage design) is one solution that would achieve such an MDT location by translating the driver seat posteriorly. The largest change in all outcome measures was for the left upper extremity, which is attributed to the reduced across-thorax adduction required to type. Although the muscular activation levels suggest modest risk to the officers while typing in the standard location, providing more adjustability and symmetrical posture for the user is beneficial. A more neutral posture to type, as in the modified cruiser configuration, will make administrative tasks done in the police vehicle less physically demanding than in the currently used configuration, and may further reduce exposure to discomfort and musculoskeletal risk factors. These modifications are particularly important in future designs, as more administrative tasks are performed in the mobile environment. Therefore, the results of this study should be considered when law enforcement agencies are implementing MDTs in future police vehicles or considering redesigns of the cruiser interior.