@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Context adaptable driver information – Or, what do whom need and want when?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
As guideline for design of context adaptive driver information systems or for optimization of display space.As a weight when evaluating future adaptive information systems.When deciding whether a function should be activated automatically or manually.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Adaptable,Driver information,Context,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study deals with a first step towards context adaptive functionality of a Driver Information System.Driving a car is a complex task for which the driver needs appropriate information to fulfil his or her goals. New technologies enable adaptability to driver state, task, personality etcetera and also to the context.The aim of this study was therefore to investigate what information people perceive that they need and want from the car in different contexts and to what extent there is consensus about the function. A new methodology was developed, and 33 private car drivers were interviewed and asked to rate a number of possible abstract functions in a car in different contexts.It was shown that people need and want different types of information in different contexts. It was furthermore indicated that there is sometimes a difference in drivers' opinions about what should be presented by the car and that there is varying consensus over different functions in different contexts. The rating result was illustrated by an easily perceived Context Function Matrix. The results may be used in the design of a context adaptive driver information system.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the near future it will be necessary and expected, as well as possible to better support the driver in driving more safely, environmentally friendly, efficiently (cost and time) and legally, through new technology such as displays, sensor and connectivity (Davidsson et al., 2009). One of the most important and best available ways of doing this is probably to provide the driver with appropriate information.An additional purpose of driver information is to support emotional aspects (comfort, perceived control, fun etc.) (Davidsson et al., 2009), meaning that some of the functions in the vehicle exist also or just because driversperceive a need or desire forthem. They may find that the function is not needed for rational reasons but that it is “enjoyable” or “fun” or perhaps because “it used to be there”.The real “need” of information may be most easily found in driver models such as the strategic, tactical and operational level of control model by Michon (1985), the SRK taxonomy by Rasmussen (1986) or collected from experts such as human factor experts, crash statisticians, safety analysts, green driving or engine experts. However, if a function is given low priority because it is not really needed from an expert point of view, the design or functionality may be experienced as poor. Furthermore, a function perceived as un-needed but that, from an expert's viewpoint, is important may require more design effort to motivate it.These purposes, technology push and the fact that future cars have access to a huge amount of information gathered by car to car (C2C) or car to infrastructure (C2I) can, if not designed in a careful manner, result in a functional growth that may reach beyond drivers' capability. Showing all the information simultaneously would probably create distraction and inattention and make driving less safe, less environmentally friendly and so on because of visual, manual or cognitive distraction. (For a definition, see for instance Regan et al., 2009.)One of the problems with previous and most of the current driver information system hardware is that it is inflexible. However, new display technology has enabled adaptability (and flexibility), and it may therefore be possible to better adapt to drivers' needs and desires.Alfredson (2007) suggests that ideal system development should include a dynamic adaptation of interfaces to different input factors, such as current vehicle status, situational conditions and contextual prerequisites as well as the individual's status, operator performance and historical behavioural data. For instance, a tired driver and an alert driver, a daily trip to work and a holiday trip, a worn car and a new car and drivers with long and short response times may need different information. This dynamic adaptation may either be performed automatically by a dialogue manager with an increased risk for automation induced errors such as mode confusion and increased mental workload, or manually through interaction with the system with an increased risk for visual and manual distraction (Davidsson, 2009).The scope of this study was therefore to take a first step towards dynamic adaptation by studying if and how different contexts require different information. For instance, how needed or wanted is a speedometer when the car is parked in a garage? A natural starting point is therefore to study how context can govern driver information functions. Another issue is of course the level of consensus among drivers about what information should be available and when it should be available.The purpose of this study was therefore to investigate:•whether drivers want or have a perceived need for different functions in different contexts (Q1),what information different drivers perceive to be needed and wanted in different contexts (Q2),the extent to which there is consensus about each function (Q3)And to illustrate and make understandable the functions in the different contexts (Q4).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The first research question was whether drivers want or have a perceived need for different functions in different contexts (Q1), The interviews, function grading and open end answers in the study gave an indication that drivers have different perceived needs and desires in different driving contexts. A function, very important in one context, can be of no or little use in another context.An interview and a rating of abstract functions were carried out to investigate what information different drivers perceive to be needed and wanted in different contexts (Q2). The ratings gave a hint about what functions are needed or wanted and the standard deviation indicated to the extent to which there is consensus about each function (Q3).A CFM was created to illustrate the information needed in different contexts in a simple way for designers (Q4). The CFM can be utilized in the design of new context adaptive driver information interfaces. For instance, in queue driving, an explanation for why there is queue may be a way to solve the problem by perhaps giving re-routing information, while speed is of less importance. Drivers also want to be able to reduce the negative effects of queueing by for instance visual entertainment.It is indicated that there are differences between different persons' opinions about what or who should provide the information for some of the functions. Should it be the car, the road authority or the driver him/herself? Some wanted for the most part to see for themselves and did not believe that a system could help them, and others preferred “systems” for almost everything. Perhaps different ways to enable these kinds of functions for a driver, ranging from option at purchase to a check box in the settings menu, can be an appropriate solution.This phenomenon may be illustrated by the function “help to recognize other nearby vehicles” in the “highway crossing” context. The function received a high grade, a high variance and two participants put the function in the waste bin (M = 4.0, SD = 1.1, W = 20%). It is likely that this function may help some, annoy some and even be found inappropriate by others.One explanation for this difference between participants may be found in the taxonomy for “locus of control” (Rotter, 1966). Locus of control is defined as a personality attribute reflecting the degree to which a person generally perceives events to be under his or her own control (internal locus of control) or under the control of external forces (external locus of control). Research has shown that locus of control is one of the most crucial psychological factors determining drivers' acceptance of new in-vehicle technologies (Rudin-Brown and Noy, 2002).When designing context adaptive information systems, is it important also to have consensus about the contexts. In this study, before and after driving were merged into one context. However, the results showed that the information wanted and needed before driving and after driving is sometimes completely different. This made it difficult for the participants to give a grade that was equal for both before and after. Consequently, the participants used different strategies when they graded functions, such as “average between the two” or “a five – if before”. This indicates that the context is “weak”, and a split of the context may be suggested.The usefulness of the outcome may be divided into two parts: the result in itself and the method.More available information and a higher demand on performance require, and flexible display technology enables, context adaptive driver information. The results can be used as a guideline for design of context adaptive driver information systems or for optimization of display space. For instance, functions that are perceived to be less important can be made less salient and those that are more important more salient in different contexts.The results, and in particular the grades, could possibly also be used as a weight when evaluating future adaptive information systems. For instance, a system that has a high score for the function “show speed” in a parking context still gets a weighted score that is low.In an adaptive driver information interface, when deciding how a function should be activated (automatically or manually) and if the design should be individualized, the system designer may look at the standard deviation. A large standard deviation can indicate low consensus about the function and, consequently, some of the drivers may be surprised or annoyed by receiving this information automatically. Furthermore, a large standard deviation may therefore also put forward that the design should be individualized.The method, changing the level of abstraction in both context and function, was an attempt to make participants think beyond the common functions and specific contexts that may be further developed and used in the development of, for instance, future In-Vehicle Information Systems (IVIS). Methodological considerations are further discussed below.It was necessary to be somewhat creative in designing this study in terms of the balancing act between being too user centred and being too expert oriented. The following section considers the challenges and describes the solutions.A previous CWA was used to identify and formulate the functions in the interview. Normally, when performing a CWA, the designer of the system has to move outside the user community to get input for the design (Burns and Hajdukiewicz, 2004). The idea is to provide the user with a greater level of support than if the data collected came from users solely via, for instance, surveys, as in a User Centred Design (UCD) approach. In this study, the safety and HMI experts defined the different physical functions and the different contexts, but real users were used to grade and give comments. The reason for this mixture was that real users may have more than rational reasons, wants, perceived needs or desires, for ranking a function high or low, while experts are perhaps better at judging real needs. This dimension needs to be considered, since private cars are consumer products and purchase involves emotions that are not always rational.To make the test participants better decision makers, it was important to support them in identifying central attributes, such as safety or environment friendliness (Wickens, 1992). Furthermore, it was important to make the participants think of what they do, how they do it, what they find difficult and what their feelings are, to make the grading of the functions better.There are of course more possible contexts than the few that were chosen and, depending on the use of the results, other contexts could have been included. This study's contexts were decided by HMI and safety experts, and the contexts are thus possibly more important from a safety perspective. However, the pictures on the board were as unbiased as possible and did not show anything particularly problematic or hazardous. The reason for this was that the study was about the drivers' own experience. For instance, if a picture was shown of someone in an accident, the participants may have increased their acceptance for an accident avoiding system.As this was a first study regarding context dependant information it was natural to start in Sweden. However, the between subjects design allow for other contexts and other regions.The reasons for showing pictures, and showing them simultaneously, were threefold: first, in order to get a grading from a generic context rather than from one specific one, it was necessary to present several examples of the family of one context; second, we wanted to avoid serial position effects (e.g. Wickens, 1992) that may occur if the contexts are presented in sequence, such as in a movie; third, the pace at which a driving task is performed may be important. If the participant is presented a movie in which someone else is driving, the pace could be different from the participant's own, and this may well have an effect on the result.There are indications that this worked as intended. The participants browsed the board and did not seem to favour any of the pictures. They discussed the whole sequence of the context, they mentioned events in their own experience that could be applied to the pictures and they discussed their own pace in similar situations.An important challenge was how to illustrate the functions to reduce bias from well-known functions. An approach was needed that gave the less used, very new or more complex functions a reasonable chance. Shifting the representation from a low, detailed level (physical form) to a higher level of abstraction with less resolution can make complexity look simpler. Put metaphorically, moving up one or two levels allows drivers to “see the forest for the trees” (Vicente, 1999). In addition, when creating a CAT, the abstraction is on the general function level (GF). However, this level seemed to be too abstract for the users to understand.It also seemed that the participants lost their ability to judge their “wants” the more abstract the function became; they became experts.The trade-off between being too abstract to be understood, bias of well-known systems and how the CAT is usually carried out amounted to choosing the abstraction level, physical function (PF).Using the abstract level of physical function rather than physical form or general function also seemed to have worked as intended, but it is difficult to see how well. One indicator was that, instead of just grading the function without much thought, the participants gave the impression of thinking twice before giving their grade and they moved sometimes up and sometimes down one level of abstraction, just as intended. A second indicator was that very common functions such as “show speed” showed great differences in how they were graded in the different contexts.Nevertheless, a more extensive comparison between the two ways of presenting the functions would be appropriate.One constraint when designing driver information is that some functions are mandatory from a legal perspective. In this study, however, participants were able to rate even “legally necessary” functions low.The participants were interviewed in only one or two contexts (between subjects design). The reason for this test design was threefold: first, to keep the time spent on each interview within reasonable limits and, secondly, to be able to add contexts afterwards. Finally, the pilot study showed that participants, if interviewed in more than two contexts, also included the transition between the different contexts, which was not intended. The transition between two sets of information may be regarded as an automation challenge; this is discussed for instance by Davidsson (2009).The effect of the test design and the limited project resources resulted in a small number of participants in each context, which of course poses limitations to the statistical analysis when comparing the contexts.A scale from 1 to 5 (1 = not important, 5 = very important) without a waste bin would not have worked since a function could be worse than “not important”. A function could also be not applicable, inappropriate or dangerous, and the waste bin was added for this reason. For instance, “show speed” may be considered not to be applicable before driving and after driving and “ability to surf on the Internet” may be inappropriate and dangerous while driving in an intersection.As a consequence, the size of the population varied in almost every function, which makes it more difficult to calculate different statistical measures. However, the statistics and the open ended answers may together give an answer about whether and how well a function suits a particular context.The question “show average speed” was repeated (functions 14 and 77) to judge whether the participants were able to give a similar grade twice. The difference between the mean values is small with one exception: HC. However, this indicates that the respondents reason in much the same way. Details also reveal that only one participant had a greater difference than one grading step between the two questions in HC.The number of respondents was limited to ten persons in each context. To validate the methodology further, it is recommended that at least one context category be repeated with a greater number of participants.Driver Information that adapts to current vehicle status, situational conditions and contextual prerequisites etcetera may be a future dream. This study aimed to get beyond drivers' current needs and describes a perhaps new approach to represent functions and contexts and a new way to grade functions. The study resulted in a context function matrix and a zoom metaphor useful for future context adaptive driver information. The novel approach, limited number of participants, number of contexts and that the research only took place in one country implies that further research is needed.