@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Feedback has a positive effect on cognitive function during total sleep deprivation if there is sufficient time for it to be effectively processed

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We examined performance on the psychomotor vigilance task—a serial simple reaction time test—during 28 h of sustained wake.The provision of feedback and the length of the inter-stimulus interval (ISI) interacted to affect performance.Feedback after each response resulted in better performance when the ISI ranged from 2–10 s.Feedback after each response did not affect performance when the ISI ranged from 1–5 s.When the ISI is long, it is possible that feedback provides motivation.When the ISI is short, it is likely that there is not time to both attend to feedback and prepare for the next stimulus.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Fatigue,Sustained wake,Psychomotor vigilance task,Inter-stimulus interval,Response time,Lapse,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study examined whether the provision of feedback and the interval between successive stimuli interact to affect performance on a serial simple reaction time test during sleep deprivation. Sixteen participants (9 female, 7 male, aged 18–27 yr) completed four versions of the 5-min psychomotor vigilance task for a handheld personal digital assistant (PalmPVT) every 2 h during 28 h of sustained wakefulness. The four versions differed in terms of whether or not they provided feedback immediately after each response, and whether the inter-stimulus intervals (ISIs) were long (2–10 s) or short (1–5 s). Cognitive function was assessed using reciprocal response time and percentage of responses that were lapses (i.e., had a response time ≥ 500 ms). Data were analysed using repeated measures ANOVA with three within-subjects factors: test session, feedback, and ISI. For both measures, the only significant interaction was between feedback and ISI. Cognitive function was enhanced by feedback when the ISIs were long because it provided motivation. Cognitive function was not affected by feedback when the ISIs were short because there was insufficient time to both attend to the feedback and prepare for the subsequent stimulus.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the 1970s, Wilkinson (1975) argued the need for portable devices that could be used to assess the impact of stressors, such as sleep loss and circadian disruption, on basic cognitive function. In an early version of one such device, Wilkinson and Haughton (1982) built a serial simple reaction time test with a visual stimulus into a battery-powered cassette tape recorder, and a few years later, Dinges and Powell (1985) developed software for this device to simplify the process of generating performance metrics. This reaction time test, which has become known as the psychomotor vigilance task (PVT), has been shown to be sensitive to total sleep deprivation (Doran et al., 2001; Jewett et al., 1999), partial sleep restriction (Belenky et al., 2003; Van Dongen et al., 2003), and circadian misalignment (Wyatt et al., 1999; Zhou et al., 2011).The PVT is commonly used to assess sustained attention in laboratory studies (Lim and Dinges, 2008). However, the standard handheld version (PVT-192; Ambulatory Monitoring Inc., Ardsley, NY) has a 10-min duration, which makes it impractical for use in workplace studies in industries in which free time during shifts is scarce, such as long-haul transportation, natural resource extraction, and primary health care. In response, 3- and 5-min versions of the PVT that operate on the standard handheld hardware have been developed and validated (Basner et al., 2011; Basner and Rubinstein, 2011; Loh et al., 2004; Roach et al., 2006). In addition, a 5-min version of the PVT that operates on a handheld personal digital assistant (PalmPVT; Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Silver Spring, MD) has also been developed and validated (Lamond et al., 2005, 2008; Thorne et al., 2005). The 5-min version of the standard PVT has been used in some workplace studies (e.g., Baulk et al., 2007, 2009), but the PalmPVT has been favoured in most cases (e.g., Ferguson et al., 2011; Gander et al., 2013; Lamond et al., 2006; Petrilli et al., 2006; Roach et al., 2012; Smith et al., 2007), probably because the hardware on which it operates is smaller, lighter and less expensive than the standard PVT's hardware.The PalmPVT can be configured to provide feedback immediately after each stimulus presentation or not, and to have a longer or shorter interval between successive stimulus presentations (i.e., inter-stimulus interval). There is some evidence that performance on cognitive tasks is enhanced by feedback (Eckner et al., 2011; Wilkinson, 1961, 1963), and impaired if the inter-stimulus interval is too long or too short (Los et al., 2001), but the relationship between these two factors has not previously been considered. It is critical to determine whether or not these factors interact to influence cognitive function, because there are important implications for theory, such as an improved understanding of the nature of motivation, distraction, and preparedness; and for practice, such as the determination of a preferred configuration of the PalmPVT for use in workplace settings. Consequently, the aim of this study was to examine the interactive effects of feedback and inter-stimulus interval on cognitive function when participants are fatigued.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
