@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Healthcare workers' perceptions of lean: A context-sensitive, mixed methods study in three Swedish hospitals

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Hospital workers' perceptions of lean vary by hospital, unit, and role.Perceptions in Hospital A were unique compared to those in Hospitals B and C.Higher-acuity units typically reported more favorable perceptions.Nurses typically reported more favorable perceptions than physicians.Implementation differences explained some of the context-specific effects.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Lean healthcare,Mixed methods,Macroergonomics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
As the application of lean in healthcare expands, further research is needed in at least two areas: first, on the role of context in shaping lean and its consequences and second, on how healthcare workers perceive lean. Accordingly, this context-sensitive, mixed methods study addressed how hospital workers' perceptions of lean varied across contexts in three Swedish hospitals. Registered nurses and physicians at the hospitals and across units differing in acuity completed standardized surveys (N = 236, 57% response rate) about their perceptions of hospital-wide lean implementation. Perceptions varied by: hospital context, with one hospital's employees reporting the least favorable perceptions; unit acuity, with higher-acuity units reporting more favorable perceptions; and professional role, with nurses reporting more favorable perceptions than physicians. Individual interviews, group interviews, and observations provided insight about these dissimilar contexts and possible explanations for context-specific variability. Findings are discussed with respect to strategies for implementing lean in healthcare; the importance of attending to levels, context, and worker consequences of lean; and directions for future research.Lean is a tool set, a management system, and a philosophy that can change the way hospitals are organized and managed. Lean is a methodology that allows hospitals to improve the quality of care for patients by reducing errors and wait times. Lean is an approach that can support employees and physicians, eliminating roadblocks and allowing them to focus on providing care. Lean is a system for strengthening hospital organizations for the long term—reducing costs and risks while also facilitating growth and expansion. Lean helps break down barriers between disconnected departmental “silos,” allowing different hospital departments to better work together for the benefit of patients.-Graban, 2012, p. 1

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
As the opening quote implies, the application of a lean approach is widely purported to improve performance in a wide range of industries, including healthcare. Lean is a set of philosophies, principles, and methods for (re)designing organizations to maximize value and minimize waste, thus improving performance (Womack et al., 2007; Liker, 2004). Despite having originated and matured in car manufacturing, lean has been implemented in the service industry, public sector, and product development (Radnor and Walley, 2008; Morgan and Liker, 2006; Womack and Jones, 2005). In healthcare, specifically, there are abundant case summaries of lean implementation globally (Graban, 2012; Miller, 2005; Aherne and Whelton, 2010). In the US, a 2009 survey of hospitals found that 53% of responding hospitals had implemented lean (American Society for Quality, 2009). A recent systematic review identified 33 scholarly studies of lean in healthcare between 1998 and 2008 (Mazzocato et al., 2010) and another showed a steady annual increase in such studies (Brandao de Souza, 2009).The dissemination of lean in healthcare has raised a number of questions that research has not yet resolved (Vest and Gamm, 2009; Holden, 2011). The present study of lean in Swedish hospitals is designed to address two major gaps in the literature on lean in healthcare: limited attention to contextual differences and inadequate measurement of workers' perceptions of lean.A foundational principle of human factors, and of macroergonomics in particular, is the need to attend to context, or those factors and interactions in the sociotechnical work system that occur at levels of analysis beyond the individual (Moray, 2000; Carayon, 2006; Wilson, 2014). For example, Vincent's “seven levels of safety” in healthcare include team, work environment, organization and management, and institutional context factors (Vincent et al., 1998; Vincent, 2010). Recent discourse on mesoergonomics has also emphasized examining connections across multiple levels (Karsh et al., 2014). From accumulating evidence, it is known that lean has been applied in diverse contexts, including hundreds of hospitals, clinics, and other units differing in size, location, and clinical function (Graban, 2012; Vest and Gamm, 2009; Brandao de Souza, 2009). However, despite this contextual heterogeneity, there has been almost no systematic research on how lean is implemented across dissimilar contexts within and between organizations (Mazzocato et al., 2010) or whether contextual differences are associated with variability in results (Holden, 2011). For example, Holden (2011) found that among 18 studies of lean in emergency departments, only Dickson et al. (2009) compared hospitals implementing lean, although numerous studies mentioned the importance of factors that hypothetically vary from context to context such as readiness for change and management support. The inattention to context is problematic because healthcare organizations and units can vary considerably and may therefore respond differently to lean (Brandao de Souza, 2009). Furthermore, the nature of lean itself appears to vary considerably from place to place, with its scope ranging from single unit to whole health system, its design ranging from the use of a single lean tool to building a transformational lean culture, and its implementation occurring in both bottom-up participatory and top-down management-driven ways (Poksinska, 2010; Mazzocato et al., 2010). Radnor and colleagues argue that “such variations call for more attention to the ways Lean is translated and implemented” (Radnor et al., 2012, p. 366).Another central principle of human factors is the dual goal of improving both human performance and wellbeing (Dul et al., 2012). The dual-goal orientation is strongly embedded in dominant models of human factors in healthcare (Holden et al., 2013; Karsh et al., 2006; Carayon et al., 2006, 2014). However, in the literature on lean in healthcare, the main—and in almost every case, the only—consequences of lean studied are those on the process and outcome of patient care (Holden, 2011; Mazzocato et al., 2010; Poksinska, 2010). There are few studies that consider the consequences of lean on healthcare workers' perceptions of lean, wellbeing, or working conditions; those that do report either anecdotal evidence or general satisfaction scores from annual employee surveys (Holden, 2011). To our knowledge, no study has quantitatively and systematically assessed workers' perceptions of lean in healthcare. This is a major limitation for two reasons. First, as Poksinska (2010) points out in her review, “the first barrier that needs to be overcome in Lean implementation is to convince staff that Lean can work in a healthcare setting” (p. 324). Indeed, at least one recent qualitative study reported some employee resistance to lean in a UK hospital surgical unit (Waring and Bishop, 2010). It is possible that lean's ultimate success is greatly influenced by frontline staff perceptions and acceptance, much as is the case for other healthcare innovations such as new technology (Holden, 2010; Holden and Karsh, 2009). Second, the effect of lean on workers and working conditions has for a long time been of concern in human factors/ergonomics (Genaidy and Karwowski, 2003; Landsbergis et al., 1999; Delbridge, 2005). This is partly because several studies report that lean increases workload and decreases worker control (Conti et al., 2006; Parker, 2003; Sprigg and Jackson, 2006) or produces mixed worker effects (Jackson and Mullarkey, 2000).To address the gaps identified above, the present study investigated the implementation of lean in three Swedish hospitals. To address prior inattention to context, this study examined differences between the hospitals, as well as unit characteristics and professional roles within hospitals. Hospital, unit type, and role were chosen as the context factors of interest because they represent distinct, recognized divisions ubiquitous in the healthcare domain. These variables are also commonly studied in organization research because they produce variability and prior studies of lean in and outside healthcare have identified differences in how lean is implemented in, adopted, and perceived by workers across organizational, work unit, and professional boundaries. For example, Dickson et al. (2009) found hospital differences and Mazzocato et al. (2014) found differences between units differing in process complexity. Furthermore, our early qualitative observations of notable hospital, unit, and professional differences at the study sites led us to hypothesize the importance of these three context variables (Dellve et al., 2013, 2012; Eriksson et al., 2012).To address the gap in knowledge about healthcare workers' perceptions of lean, this study assessed physicians' and nurses' early post-implementation attitudes and commitment toward lean, perceptions of the justice of lean implementation, and perceptions of the extent to which lean improved workflow.Our primary research question was: How do hospital workers' perceptions of lean vary across contexts, namely, across hospitals, unit types, and professional roles? A secondary research question was: What characteristics of lean's implementation account for context-specific variability in workers' perceptions? We hypothesized based on Mehta and Shah’s (2005) and Holden’s (2011) models of lean that worker perceptions would vary depending on context because in different contexts lean would be differently implemented, for example, using top-down vs. bottom-up approaches, using smaller- vs. larger-scale projects, and dedicating more or less resources to lean.Swedish hospitals make for a uniquely appropriate setting to address these research questions. In Sweden, lean has been mandated throughout the public sector, including hospitals. By 2011, 90% of Swedish public hospitals had implemented lean to some degree (Weimarsson, 2011). However, the Swedish government did not mandate specific methods for implementing lean in its hospitals and there is no universal model of lean that can be directly applied (Pettersen, 2009; Hines et al., 2004). Moreover, Swedish hospitals are noted for taking pride in developing their own models of lean (Dellve et al., 2013). Thus, it is likely that how lean is implemented will vary between and even within Swedish hospitals, making them ideal cases for studying variability across contexts.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
If researchers and practitioners acknowledge what Wilson (2014) called “the primacy of context” (p. 7), then they must continue to examine how lean implementation and the impact of lean vary across settings, at higher (regional, hospital) and lower (unit, role, team) levels of analysis. Our study confirms that context matters and sheds some light on how specific lean implementation strategies in specific contexts might influence employees' initial perceptions of lean. Future research on lean in healthcare should also examine national differences, given that hospitals and clinics all over the world are implementing lean but likely under different conditions and constraints. A second essential future direction is to use rigorous designs, measures, and analyses to understand how lean impacts healthcare workers, for better or for worse, as well as demonstrate why lean's impact on workers is an important outcome. Lastly, while the literature on lean in healthcare has grown in volume and has unearthed several excellent success cases, the next step in the evolution of research on lean in healthcare must be to go beyond confirming success and move into the realm of explaining, predicting, and replicating success. This will require careful theory building, hypothesis testing, and attention to both patient and worker outcomes: in short, a more principled, scientific, and human factors-based approach to understanding lean healthcare.