@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Rasmussen's legacy in the great outdoors: A new incident reporting and learning system for led outdoor activities

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Rasmussen's risk management framework and Accimap method are popular in academic circles.However, widespread adoption in practice has not yet been achieved.We present a new incident reporting and learning system underpinned by the framework and Accimap.An analysis of the data from the first 3 months use of the system is presented.The analysis shows contributory factors and relationships across 5 out of the 6 levels of the framework.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Incident reporting systems,Rasmussen,Accimap,Accident analysis,Injury,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Jens Rasmussen's seminal risk management framework and accompanying Accimap method have become highly popular in safety science circles. Despite this, widespread adoption of the model and method in practice has not yet been achieved. This paper describes a project involving the development and implementation of an incident reporting and learning system underpinned by Rasmussen's risk management framework and Accimap method. The system was developed for the led outdoor activity sector in Australia to enable reporting and analysis of injuries and near miss incidents, with the aim of supporting the development of more effective countermeasures. An analysis of the data derived from the first 3 months use of the system by 43 organisations is presented. The outputs provide an in-depth Accimap-based analysis of all incidents reported by participating organisations over the 3 month period. In closing, the importance of developing usable domain specific tools to support translation of Ergonomics theory and methods in practice is discussed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
As evidenced by the topic of this special issue, there is no question that the seminal work of Jens Rasmussen is currently having a major influence on the discipline of ergonomics. This influence is extant both in research and practice, although the impact in practice is arguably less significant. In the research context, many are applying his theories, such as his risk management (Rasmussen, 1997) and skill-rule-knowledge-based behaviour frameworks (Rasmussen, 1979) to investigate system and human performance issues. Likewise, the last decade has seen many publications describing applications of his methods, such as Accimap (Svedung and Rasmussen, 2002) and Cognitive Work Analysis (Rasmussen et al., 1994), for systems design and evaluation purposes. These theoretical and methodological applications cover multiple domains and a range of issues (e.g. Karsh et al., 2014; McIlroy and Stanton, 2011; Rechard et al., 2015; Salmon et al., 2014; Stanton and Bessell, 2014; Walker et al., 2014).The impact of Rasmussen's work in academic circles is therefore without question; however, there is little evidence that his models and methods are achieving the same impact on practice. This is not unique to Rasmussen's work, however, and reflects the widely discussed ‘research practice gap’ whereby advances in ergonomics theory and methodology are not readily translated by practitioners (Chung et al., 2014; Salmon et al., 2012; Underwood and Waterson, 2013). It is these authors opinion that a key driver of the research practice gap is the lack of guidance on how to translate ergonomics models and methods into practical, usable tools that organisations can implement as part of safety management systems. This is particularly so in the context of accident reporting, analysis and investigation, where contemporary models such as Rasmussen's risk management framework are often overshadowed by older models that have practical methodologies associated with them. For example, Reason's Swiss Cheese model (Reason, 1990) is widely adopted in many areas in part due to the associated Human Factors Analysis and Classification System (HFACS; Wiegmann and Shappel, 2003) methodology and its various derivatives (Chauvin et al., 2013; Olsen and Shorrock, 2010; Walker, O'Connor et al., 2011).A critical component of organisations' accident prevention activities is the provision of an appropriate incident reporting and learning system. This article outlines a recently developed incident reporting and learning system that is intended for use in practice and is directly underpinned by Rasmussen's risk management framework and associated Accimap method. The aim is to demonstrate how organisations can translate and use models and methods from Rasmussen's legacy in practice and to showcase the power of implementing systems underpinned by Rasmussen's seminal work. To achieve this, an overview of the new incident reporting and learning system is presented, along with the findings from an analysis of the incidents reported during its first 3 months of use. In closing, further areas in which this legacy can make a significant contribution are proposed.The research described in this article was undertaken in the area of led outdoor activities. Led outdoor activities represent one important educational form of active recreation, and have been formally defined as facilitated or instructed activities within outdoor education and recreation settings that have a learning goal associated with them (Salmon et al., 2010). Examples of led outdoor activities include school and scout camping, hiking, harness sports, marine aquatic sports and wheel sports.Like all sociotechnical systems, the led outdoor activity sector experiences adverse events that can cause injury, and in the worst cases, multiple fatalities. Examples of recent major incidents in this sector include the Mangatepopo gorge incident in which six year 12 students and their teacher drowned during a gorge walking activity in the Tongariro National Park, New Zealand (see Brookes et al., 2009) and 12 year old Kyle Vassil's drowning in a waterhole whilst on school camp in Toolangi, Victoria. Analyses of fatal incidents in this area have identified multiple contributory factors related to various different actors, equipment, processes, and organisations (e.g. Brookes et al., 2009; Salmon et al., 2010). Further, research examining a series of more common everyday injury-causing incidents has revealed similar findings, showing that these too can involve multiple contributory factors from across the led outdoor activity system (e.g. Salmon et al., 2014). As a corollary, the need for a systems thinking-based approach to incident data collection and analysis has been emphasised (e.g. Salmon et al., 2010, 2012).To prevent future injury causing incidents it is critical to learn from past near misses and adverse events (Lindberg et al., 2010; Reason, 1997; Jacobsson et al., 2011, 2012). Incident reporting systems are used to collect and store data regarding such incidents. They are now widespread in most organisations (Jacobsson et al., 2011, 2012; Nielsen et al., 2006) and are used in most safety critical domains, including aviation (e.g. Aviation Safety Reporting System, NASA), healthcare (e.g. Critical Incident Reporting System, Staender et al., 1997) and heavy industry (e.g. MARS, Lindberg et al., 2010). Moreover, the use of an incident reporting system is one of the demands specified in the international occupational health and safety management system OHSAS18001, one of the world's most widely utilised OHS and safety management system standards (Nielsen et al., 2006).The point of reporting is to facilitate organisational learning and to help prevent recurrence of similar incidents by informing changes that redress the circumstances that went wrong (Dekker, 2007). Early incident reporting systems were criticised for failing to collect sufficient data to support prevention efforts (Jacobsson et al., 2010). More recently, criticism has focused on the fact that incident reporting systems have not been developed in line with the systems thinking approach to accident causation (e.g. Salmon et al., 2010; Reason, 1997; Dekker, 2011). In particular, the importance of using an appropriate accident causation model to underpin the incident reporting system has been discussed (Salmon et al., 2012). Accident causation models consist of a set of assumptions regarding how accidents happen and the causal factors that lead to them (Lundberg et al., 2009). In the case of incident reporting systems, they influence the type of data collected, the method used to analyse the data, and the remedial actions proposed (Underwood and Waterson, 2013).‘Systems’ models of accident causation are now widely accepted as the most appropriate for understanding and preventing accidents and injury in most domains (Hollnagel, 2004). One of Rasmussen's seminal contributions in this context is his risk management framework (Rasmussen, 1997) and associated Accimap method (Svedung and Rasmussen, 2002), both of which are arguably becoming dominant in the accident causation and analysis literature. The risk management framework argues that accidents and safety are emergent properties arising from the interactions between components within a particular system (Rasmussen, 1997). Accidents are created by decisions and actions made by people at all levels of the system (e.g. politicians, CEOs, managers, safety officers and work planners), not just those working at the so-called ‘sharp-end’. Therefore, accidents are caused by multiple, interacting, factors beyond the immediate context of the accident. The accompanying Accimap method provides a methodological framework for investigating and representing accidents from this perspective; its explanatory power lies in the ability to describe contributory factors across all levels of the system in question along with the relationships between them. Recent applications by researchers have seen Accimap used to represent accident scenarios in areas ranging from led outdoor recreation (Salmon et al., 2012) and rail (Underwood and Waterson, 2014) to public health (Vicente and Christoffersen, 2006; Karsh et al., 2014) and space travel (Trotter et al, 2014). It is notable, however, that there are few organisations using Accimap formally to drive accident analysis and investigation activities.The nature of Rasmussen's model and method has implications for incident reporting systems. Both suggest that, to be effective, incident reporting systems need to collect data on contributory factors from across the overall work system in addition to factors relating to the workers, environment, and equipment involved (Salmon et al., 2012). In addition, data regarding the interactions or relationships between factors both within and across different system levels needs to be gathered. Finally, there is a need to provide practitioners with an appropriate methodological framework with which to analyse and represent incidents from a systems perspective.Unfortunately most of the incident reporting systems implemented in practice do not satisfy these requirements. Typically they do not provide the capability to gather data on contributory factors across the overall system or on the interactions between them, even in domains with mature safety management systems. For example, although the popular Aviation Safety Reporting System provides a text box for reporters to describe the event in question, there is no taxonomy of contributory factors, it asks the reporter to consider the ‘chain of events’, and the prompts provided focus on human performance issues (e.g. perception, judgement, decisions). Linear chain of event accident causation models (e.g Heinrich, 1931) are now widely considered to be inappropriate and human performance prompts may inadvertently keep the focus on those closest to the incident (e.g. pilots). In fact, most systems tend to focus on individuals close the event (e.g. workers at the sharp end) and even the most well developed systems do not look beyond the organisational level for contributory factors. This is in contradiction to Rasmussen's risk management framework, which argues that the decisions and actions made outside of work organisations also play a role in influencing behaviour (e.g. regulatory bodies, government). In the led outdoor activity context, a review of existing systems used in Australia revealed that existing incident analysis systems and databases focused on identifying contributory factors related to instructors, participants, and the environment (Salmon et al., 2010).Acknowledging the need to better understand and prevent injury incidents, the led outdoor activity sector in Australia recently embarked on a major program of research aiming to develop and implement an incident reporting and learning system and national incident dataset underpinned by contemporary models of accident causation. Through this research, the authors have developed and implemented an incident reporting and learning system that is directly based on Rasmussen's risk management framework and uses Accimap to analyse the data reported. The resulting system, known as UPLOADS (Understanding and Preventing Led Outdoor Accidents Data System), provides led outdoor activity providers with a means of reporting and analysing adverse outcomes (e.g. injuries, illnesses, equipment, environmental damage and psychological impacts) and near miss incidents from a systems perspective.UPLOADS includes: 1) a standardised reporting tool for collecting detailed information on incidents; 2) a classification scheme for coding the system-wide contributory factors involved in incidents, such as factors relating to government policy and funding, regulation, company management and supervision, as well as factors relating to the workers, equipment and environment; and 3) a tool for coding the relationships between the contributory factors involved in incidents. The resulting data is used to produce Accimap diagrams for single or multiple incidents, which are supported by tables with descriptions of the contributing factors and relationships identified. This allows users to investigate incidents from a systems perspective and identify trends emerging in different activities. UPLOADS also enables users to contribute de-identified data to a national dataset. This goal of this is assist professional associations and government agencies to make evidence-based decisions about issues that affect those involved in the provision of led outdoor activities.Development of UPLOADS involved a range of research activities that were designed to develop a practical and valid tool that maintained the key elements of Rasmussen's thinking. These included literature reviews on accident causation and incident reporting systems, accident analysis methods comparison studies (Salmon et al., 2012), end user requirement studies (Goode et al., 2014a,b), mapping Rasmussen's framework to the led outdoor context (Salmon et al., 2010), analyses of existing accident data (Salmon et al., 2014), the development and inter-rater reliability testing of incident causal factor taxonomies (Goode et al., 2014a,b; Taylor et al., 2015), a six month trial, and end user usability studies (Grant et al., 2015). The focus was on developing a practical and usable tool that remained true to Rasmussen's risk management framework and Accimap method whilst also achieving acceptable levels of reliability and validity.UPLOADS provides users with an incident reporting form that enables them to enter detailed data regarding participation and incidents and near miss incidents, including data related to the activity, leaders and participants, injury outcome and severity, the nature of the incident, and the system of contributory factors involved. The focus of this paper is on the incident reports surrounding injury incidents and the identification of the network of contributory factors that played a role in them. Once users enter an incident report, they then identify contributory factors and any relationships between them. UPLOADS supports this process by providing users with a classification scheme comprising contributory factor categories from across the led outdoor activity system.The classification scheme was developed based on an Actor Map depicting the key led outdoor activity actors, organisations and artefacts at each of Rasmussen's six system levels (modified for the led outdoor activity context), an analysis of led outdoor accident data, and subject matter expert review. The Actor Map, showing the modified system levels and key actors and organisations operating within the led outdoor activity system, is presented in Fig. 1. Developing the classification scheme involved identifying contributory factors associated with each of the actors, organisations and artefacts listed within the Actor Map. Extensive reliability testing was then undertaken during testing of the classification scheme (Goode et al., 2014a,b; Taylor et al., 2015). The current classification scheme is presented in Fig. 2. Taylor et al. (2015) examined levels of inter-rater reliability when using the current version of the classification scheme and reported substantial agreement across codes at both levels of the classification scheme. Overall, there was a significant improvement in agreement over and above that found by Goode et al. when examining the original classification scheme.After incident reports have been entered into the software, the users are prompted to classify the contributing factors, and relationships, identified in the report. Classifying the contributing factors involves picking the relevant factor from Fig. 2 and then entering a description of the factor in relation to its role in the incident in question. For each description, users select a Level 1 code from a drop down list that best described that factor, and if possible, a corresponding Level 2 factor. Classifying the relationships also involves entering a description of the relationships identified between contributory factors. For each description, users choose a pair of codes (identified when classifying the contributing factors), that best describe that relationship.An example is presented in Figs. 3 and 4, whereby screenshots are presented from the software showing the classification of contributory factors and the relationships between them.UPLOADS was recently implemented in Australia for the purposes of a 12 month national study of led outdoor activity adverse and near miss incidents. The study involves led outdoor activity organisations contributing participation and incident data to UPLOADS at 3 monthly intervals over the 12 month period. The remainder of the paper focusses on the data reported at the first 3 month interval.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
