@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Factors affecting the risk of developing lower back musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs) in experienced and inexperienced rodworkers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Inexperienced preferred raising to upright more frequently, possibly increasing the risk of back muscle fatigue.Experienced preferred to remain in full trunk flexion for longer periods, potentially putting them at risk of ligament creep.Both groups seemed to be at risk of decreased back stability by different means.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Rodwork,Low back,Prolonged trunk flexion,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Injury and dropout rates during rodwork training appear to reflect difficulties encountered by apprentices adapting to increased physical demands of tying on slab, one of the rodworking tasks with the highest injury risk. Because experience influences work strategies, and consequently the risk of developing musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs), this study aimed to identify differences in work practices associated with tying rebar on slab, potentially relevant to back MSD development, in experienced and inexperienced rodworkers.Fourteen male rodworkers were recruited from either experienced (>2 years experience post apprenticeship), or inexperienced (<6 months experience) groups. Both tied an area with rebar laid on the ground. Trunk flexion/extension angles were measured. L4/L5 moments were estimated from T9 Erector Spinae EMG.Experienced workers were found to spend longer periods of time in trunk flexed postures, with lower peak L4/L5 moments. Our findings revealed practices associated with each group might have different implications on back health.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
“Musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs)” is an umbrella term used to describe disorders of the musculoskeletal system, which may involve damage to the muscles, nerves, ligaments, joints, cartilage, and spinal discs (OHSCO, 2007). MSDs are important in the workplace because they are prevalent and costly. Rodwork is the construction trade responsible for building the rebar matrices for concrete reinforcement prior to pouring concrete. It is very physically demanding, and has previously been associated with upper limb and lower back discomfort (Shanahan et al., 2013); thus it is noteworthy to investigate the work strategies specific to the trade, which may pose risks for to develop MSDs.Tying rebar at ground level is a commonly performed task in the rodworking trade. During tying, workers are required to work below the knee height, typically while standing on rod structures. The task consists on wrapping the wire around perpendicular rod intersections, grasping it with pliers, twisting it tightly, and then cutting it. This task usually involves prolonged trunk flexion to cover large areas of rebar on the ground. Continuous trunk flexion and tool use can pose a risk to develop back and upper limb MSDs (Buchholz et al., 2003; Paquet et al., 2005; Shanahan et al., 2013; Wickstrom et al., 1985).Currently, high injury and dropout rates during rodwork training appear to reflect difficulties encountered by apprentices in response to the increased physical demands of this particular task. Evidence has shown that experienced individuals tend to employ safer work practices, thus reducing the risk of injury (Villanueva et al., 2007; Gagnon, 2005). Differences in motor strategies are important because they can influence considerably the level of risk to develop MSDs.In an attempt to help improving training strategies to reduce the incidence of injury and dropouts from training, the purpose of this study focused on identifying movement differences and concomitant musculoskeletal demands, between apprentices and experienced rodworkers when tying rebar.We investigated measures potentially relevant to upper limb and low back health, however the data presented on this paper are limited to variables directly associated with back health.It was hypothesized that during the tying task inexperienced workers will 1) Maintain longer periods of trunk flexion without standing up, resulting in fewer incidents of upright posture; and 2) Experience higher loads on the spine, increasing EMG at the T9 level, thus the moment at the L4/L5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
