@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Ecological interface design and system safety: One facet of Rasmussen's legacy

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The focus of this manuscript is on CSE/EID and the role that it may play in improving system safety.The decision making and problem solving literatures are reviewed for insights regarding effective decision support design.Analytical tools (i.e., abstraction and aggregation hierarchies) for conducting work domain analyses are described.Concrete examples are used to illustrate the need for ecological displays to span all levels of the abstraction hierarchy.The role of graphical displays in supporting decision making, problem solving and system safety is explored in detail.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Safety,Ecological interface design,Work domain analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The focus of this manuscript is on cognitive systems engineering/ecological interface design (CSE/EID) and the role that this framework may play in improving system safety. First, the decision making and problem solving literatures are reviewed with an eye towards informational needs that are required to support these activities. The utility of two of Rasmussen's analytical tools (i.e., the abstraction and aggregation hierarchies) in conducting work domain analyses to identify associated information (i.e., categories and relationships) is discussed. The importance of designing ecological displays and interfaces that span the informational categories in the abstraction hierarchy is described and concrete examples are provided. The potential role that ecological interfaces can play in providing effective decision making (i.e., preventing accidents) and problem solving (i.e., dealing with accidents) support, thereby improving the safety of our socio-technical systems, is explored.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In Gibson's terms, the designer must create a virtual ecology, which maps the relational invariants of the work system onto the interface in such a way that the user can read the relevant affordances for actions. (Rasmussen et al., 1994, p. 129)Advances in computer interface technologies (e.g., high-resolution, bit-mapped screens and input devices) have provided system designers with the capability to develop effective decision making and problem solving support. These technologies are inexpensive, powerful, and very mature. Furthermore, they complement the exquisite perception-action skills (e.g., spatial reasoning and pattern recognition) of the human in the control loop. As such, these interface technologies provide the very real potential to provide computerized support that leverages human strengths and improves overall human-machine system performance and safety. However, “… this potential is rarely realized; interfaces that are both intuitive and efficient (and therefore pleasurable to use) are the exception, rather than the rule.” (Bennett and Flach, 2011, p. 10).The pioneering work of Jens Rasmussen has provided a powerful legacy for realizing this potential on a more regular basis. His early work on cognitive systems engineering (CSE) at RISO (see Rasmussen, 1986, for a summary) laid the foundation. Subsequent collaborations with Vicente on ecological interface design (EID) crystallized these ideas in terms of decision making and problem solving support (Rasmussen and Vicente, 1989, 1990; Vicente and Rasmussen, 1990; Vicente and Rasmussen, 1992). This seminal work has been expanded upon by a number of researchers in the interim (e.g., Bennett and Flach, 2011; Burns and Hajdukiewicz, 2004; Flach et al., 1995; Hancock et al., 1995). Overall, the CSE/EID framework provides a principled, integrated approach to the analysis, design and evaluation of socio-technical systems.We (Bennett and Flach, 1992, 2011) have characterized the CSE/EID framework as a “triadic approach” (see Fig. 1). Today's work is often “computer mediated”: the “virtual ecology” (see the quote at the beginning of this section) of the interface stands between the worker and the work domain. From the CSE/EID perspective, the ultimate success or failure of an ecological interface will depend upon the quality of two sets of mappings. One set of mappings occur between the work domain (i.e., the ecology: the physical, social, and technical environment) and the interface (left and middle of Fig. 1): does the interface contain all of the information that is necessary for accomplishing work in that work domain? The second set of mappings occur between the interface and the worker (middle and right of Fig. 1): 1) have the representations have been designed to allow the worker to pick-up information about the work domain easily? (i.e., perception), 2) has the worker learned to appreciate what these patterns mean? (i.e., expertise), and 3) have the controls been designed to allow the worker to execute control input effectively? (i.e., action). Thus, the goal of EID is to design computational tools (i.e., controls and displays) that support (rather than replace) workers in their decision making and problem solving activities by leveraging their powerful perception/action/cognitive capabilities. In the present manuscript we explore selected aspects of Rasmussen's legacy: the CSE/EID framework and some implications for system safety.Increasingly, the primary reason people are present in complex sociotechnical systems is to play the role of knowledge worker by engaging in adaptive problem solving. (Vicente, 2002, p. 62)Decision making and problem solving are activities that have a direct relationship to system safety. In this section we consider the corresponding research literatures to identify the defining characteristics of these activities and the associated informational needs.Under normal operating conditions a worker is functioning as a decision maker. Historically, researchers have theorized that decision making involves optimization, a process that produces a single best outcome. The various dimensions of the decision are evaluated, specific values of these dimensions are weighted, all alternative responses are considered, and the most appropriate response is chosen. Decision making was viewed as a largely analytical process and the role of perception was essentially ignored.In contrast, recent theories of decision making have emphasized, at least implicitly, the role of perception. For example, naturalistic decision making (e.g., recognition-primed decision making, Klein, 1989) places a premium on recognition (i.e., perceptual processes and the critical role that they play in decision making). Initially, experts utilize perceptual cues, in conjunction with their prior experience, to determine the prototypicality of a particular case (e.g., how is this case similar or dissimilar to those that I have encountered before?). Later, in the evaluation stage, visual or spatial reasoning (e.g., mental imagery) often plays an important role.In contrast to classic decision making, proponents of naturalistic decision making view experts as generating and evaluating a few “good” alternatives with the potential to work, rather than the “optimal” solution. In Rasmussen's terms, workers are involved in skill-based (i.e., activities that engage the high-capacity, sensorymotor systems associated with perception and action) and rule-based (i.e., activities that involve the recognition of stereotypical situations and the execution of effective procedures that have been developed through prior experience) behaviors.Workers in complex dynamic domains experiencing abnormal operating conditions are best characterized as problem solvers: a set of circumstances are present that have not been anticipated in the preparation of pre-planned guidance, training, or operating experience. Workers must detect the presence of an abnormality, diagnose its cause and consider a wide range of objects and properties in the system to remediate it. In Rasmussen's terms (1983), workers are engaged in knowledge-based behavior (i.e., activities that involve problem solving and reasoning based on internal and external models of the work domain); they are reasoning symbolically about how various aspects of the system might be used in novel or creative ways to address the problem at hand.Much like decision making, seminal approaches to problem solving placed a premium on perception. The Gestalt psychologists (e.g., Duncker, 1945; Wertheimer, 1959) viewed successful problem solving as requiring the application of “productive” thinking, which involved the “sensible” modification of previously successful solutions. A critical factor is the formation of an appropriate “Gestalt” (a term that roughly translates into “configuration” or “form”) that transforms the problem into a good “form” for which a solution is known. This early emphasis on perceptual considerations constitutes a foreshadowing of perhaps the fundamental lesson from the problem solving literature as a whole: the representation of a problem can have a profound influence on the ease or difficulty of its solution. The implications for system design are that the quality of representations in the interface (i.e., analogical graphical displays) will have a particularly profound impact during abnormal events, when time is short and the stakes are high.A second common theme to emerge from the problem solving literature is the importance of understanding the structure of a problem in successful solutions. For example, Newell and Simon's (1972) work on problem solving emphasized the need for a detailed understanding of the task environment and the state space: the problem “states” (including the initial and goal states), the “operators” that allowed movement from one state to another, and the “constraints” (i.e., rules) on application of those operators. Similarly, the classic work of Wertheimer strongly emphasizes that achieving a proper Gestalt (i. e., successful problem solving) requires a detailed understanding of the underlying “structure” of a problem (Wertheimer, 1959, p. 235–236, emphasis added):[Productive] Thinking consists in envisaging, realizing structural features and structural requirements; preceeding in accordance with, and determined by, these requirements; thereby changing the situation in the direction of structural improvements, which involves;that gaps, trouble-regions, disturbances, superficialities, etc., be viewed and dealt with structurally;that inner structural relations----fitting or not fitting---- be sought among such disturbances and the given situation as a whole and among its various parts;that there be operations of structural grouping and segregation, of centering, etc.;that operations be viewed and treated in their structural place, role, dynamic meaning, including realization of the changes which this involves;realizing structural transposability, structural hierarchy, and separating structurally peripheral from fundamental features --- a special case of grouping;looking for structural rather than piecemeal truth.In summary, the decision making and problem solving literature yields some valuable insights about how we might improve the ability of workers to avoid and deal with abnormal events, and thereby improve the safety of our socio-technical systems. First, the representations chosen for a display are important, since they will critically impact how a worker thinks about an accident, which in turn, will have a direct impact on the likelihood that the accident is dealt with effectively. Second, workers will be capable of preventing and dealing with accidents only when the inherent structure of the work domain has been captured (and represented well) in the interface.First, the environment must be described, since what there is to be perceived has to be stipulated before one can even talk about perceiving it. (Gibson, 1979, p. 2)Although research on decision making and problem solving has yielded useful insights, it has typically focused on very simple problems and there has never been any real need to devise analytical tools that help researchers understand the structure of these problems. However, simplicity is not a characteristic of our complex, dynamic socio-technical systems and there is a real need for these tools. To paraphrase Gibson's quote above: First, the work domain must be described, since its structure has to be stipulated before one can even talk about designing support systems.The development of suitable tools in this regard constitutes one of Jens Rasmussen's most important legacies. The abstraction and aggregation hierarchies (Rasmussen, 1983, 1986) provide a principled framework for modeling work domains and thereby determining the information content that is required for effective control. These two analytical tools will now be described in detail.The aggregation hierarchy (see the top row of Fig. 2) is an analytical tool that is used to provide models of the “part-whole” structure (e.g., entire work domain, major subsystems, components, parts) of a work domain. Modeling along this dimension provides descriptions that vary in the grain of resolution that is provided (i.e., the level of detail, ranging from coarse to fine). These descriptions are needed to support domain practitioners in changing their focus of attention (e.g., transitioning from a global overview down to details of a part).The second analytical tool, the abstraction hierarchy, provides a complementary dimension for modeling domain constraints in terms of “means-ends” relations: the goals (i.e., ends) that need to be achieved and the functional and physical resources (i.e., means) that can be used to achieve them. The abstraction hierarchy typically has five levels (see the left side of Fig. 3); each level represents different categories of work domain properties and associated information. To understand the rationale about why something is done, the worker moves to higher (more abstract) levels of analysis. To explore how something can be accomplished, the worker moves to lower (more concrete) levels of analysis. The worker.Fig. 3 provides three sets of labels (left side) and verbal descriptions (right side) of the properties for each of the five levels in the hierarchy. Each set of labels and descriptions reflect the conceptual refinements in Rasmussen's terminology that occurred over time (Rasmussen, 1983, 1986; Rasmussen et al., 1994). The bottom-most labels within each level represent the most recent, and preferred, descriptions. The primary impetus for these changes was to broaden the applicability of this analytical tool: they facilitate its use in analyzing work domains that are characterized by intent-driven constraints (e.g., information retrieval) as well as those characterized by law-driven constraints (e.g., process control, its original conception). Each level of the abstraction hierarchy will now be considered in greater detail, starting with the top level and working down.The top level of the abstraction hierarchy describes the goals, purposes, and constraints of the system. This is the level at which the system interacts with the external world. The descriptions here include what the system is ultimately designed to accomplish (i.e., Goals) and the usefulness of that system in terms of the external world (Purposes). It also describes restrictions (Constraints) on how the system may achieve those goals.The next level down in the hierarchy describes the intended proper functioning of the system. The description at this level involves the flow of resources (e.g., information, money, energy, mass) through the system in terms of a “general causal network” that is governed by physical or conventional laws (e.g., conservation of mass, energy, or wealth). This can be thought of as a measure of internal consistency: when the system is functioning properly domain resources do not just disappear inexplicably, they enter into, flow through, and exit the system in an orderly fashion.The middle level of the hierarchy provides descriptions of the general functions or activities that must be accomplished by the system. These functions are independent of the physical mechanisms through which they are implemented. They are the fundamental defining aspects of the system: general descriptions of the functional capabilities that allow the system to do what it is supposed to do.This is the highest level in the hierarchy that describes actual physical properties of the system. The description at this level comprises the physical characteristics that are needed to implement the general functions of the system. It is the level at which control of the system is accomplished, the level at which the measurement of system variables occurs and the level at which the causal structure of the system is described (e.g., what is connected to what?).The lowest level in the abstraction hierarchy provides information about the physical make-up of the system. What are the physical measurements of a system component? What is the color of a component? Where is the component located in space? What is the thread size and diameter of a certain pipe?Each level of abstraction or category of representation depends upon a special set of concepts and relationships. Shifting the level of modeling can be very effective in a problem situation, since data processing at another level can be more convenient, the process rules can be simpler or better know, or results can be available from previous cases. (Rasmussen, 1983, p. 263).Using the abstraction and aggregation hierarchies to model a work domain produces a description of the informational content that is required for a practitioner to think productively about complex problems. Each level in the abstraction hierarchy provides a different category of information (i.e., a different type of description) that describes the work domain. At the same time, there are inherent and systematic relations between each level. Rasmussen et al. (1994) describe the relationships between any three contiguous levels as relationships of “Why,” “What,” and “How.”These inherent relationships allow system events to be mapped in terms of reasons, causes, and effects. For example, aberrations at the level of physical form (e.g., a fault) will produce effects that propagate upwards through the hierarchy. Thus, a broken component (physical level) will subsequently appear as a function-related problem (system function is not being provided) and ultimately as a goal-related problem (system purposes will eventually not be met). Conversely, the “reasons why” propagate downward through the abstraction hierarchy: “… the intentional features, that is, the objectives that govern the control of the system functions, dominate at the higher levels....changes in these objectives (e.g., company goals, management policy, or general market conditions) will propagate top-down through the levels, as reasons or rules of rightness …” (Rasmussen et al., 1994, p. 38). As a simple example, the worker notices a goal is not being met, reasons about how it can be resolved functionally, and implements the physical control input required for remediation.In summary, the product of work domain analyses conducted with the abstraction and aggregation hierarchies is a model of the structure of a work domain, referred to as its “behavior shaping constraints,” “relational invariants,” or “sources of regularity.” In the terminology of ecological psychology (Gibson, 1979), these are conceptually similar to the “affordances” of an ecology: “what it offers the animal, what it provides or furnishes, either for good or ill” (p. 127).In the context of the CSE/EID framework (see Fig. 1), the term “content mapping” is used to refer to the quality of the relationship between these domain constraints (circle on the left side) and the contents of the interface (circle in the middle). Specifically, does the interface contain all meaningful aspects of the work domain that might need to be considered by the worker to understand system state (e.g., understand the significance of a display reading that is unusually high or low) and to determine effective control input? The quality of this content mapping is one determinant of the “specificity” of the interface (i.e., one determinant of how effective it is likely to be).Several studies have empirically evaluated the impact of integrating information from various levels of the abstraction hierarchy into representations (Burns, 2000a, 2000b; Ham and Yoon, 2001a; Ham and Yoon, 2001b). In general, representations that integrated information across the abstraction hierarchy were found to be more effective than representations that were either missing levels or had levels displayed separately.There are no a priori neutral representations.... (Woods, 1991, p. 175)The second set of mappings implied by the CSE/EID framework is referred to as “format mapping” (see Fig. 1): the relationship between the constraints of the human as a system component (circle on the right side) and the constraints imposed by the interface (circle in the middle). One very important aspect of this mapping is the relationship between the visual appearance of the representations (i.e., the specific graphical tokens used to encode domain information) and the capability of the human visual system to “decode” or “pick up” that information (i.e., visual attention and form perception).The problem is that representation must be considered as the proverbial “double-edged” sword. For example, Marr (1982, p. 21) once observed that representation is “… a fascinating and powerful idea. But … there is a trade-off; any particular representation makes certain information explicit at the expense of information that is pushed into the background and may be quite hard to recover.” Mullet and Sano (1995, p. 171) maintain that “The dominant position of imagery in human communication confers both the greatest opportunity for success and with [it] the greatest risk of failure.” Thus, for the same reasons that a good representation can make a problem easier to solve (thereby improving system safety), a poor representation can make a problem much more difficult to solve (thereby degrading system safety). Please note that the quality of format mapping is orthogonal to the quality of content mapping (i.e., alternative representations of the exact same information can impact performance substantially).Part of the format-mapping problem is psychophysical in nature (e.g., Cleveland, 1985). A variety of physical encodings may be chosen (e.g., color, linear extent, area, etc.) to represent the exact same information; the visual system may be more, or less, sensitive to each of these encodings (i.e., the representation will be more or less effective). Also, the physical dimensions may interact, thus producing higher-order perceptual properties (e.g., symmetry, parallelism) which are often referred to as “emergent features” (e.g., Pomerantz, 1986). Ultimately it is very difficult to predict exactly how these various dimensions interact to produce the degree of perceived visual salience (i.e., conspicuity in the psychophysical sense).In the end, the design of effective visual displays is dependent upon very specific interactions between all three of the primary components illustrated in Fig. 1 (work domain, visual displays, worker). Thus, displays must be tailored to simultaneously match both the specific work demands and the powerful perceptual skills of the user (i.e., specificity). When this occurs one can say that goal of “direct perception” has been achieved: the worker can perceive the behavior shaping constraints of the work domain, or its affordances (i.e., the potential for action) directly. A comprehensive description of these triadic interactions are beyond the scope of the present manuscript; other research that discusses these issues in greater detail includes Bennett and Flach (1992, 2011), Bennett et al. (2012), and Bennett et al. (2015).The descriptions thus far have been very abstract in nature; it will be instructive to provide some concrete examples of displays where multiple levels of the abstraction hierarchy are represented simultaneously. The following displays are taken from an ecological interface (Bennett et al., 2008; Hall et al., 2012) designed for military command & control (see Fig. 4for an overview). Please see Bennett et al. (2012), Pawlak and Vicente (1996), Reising and Sanderson (2002) and Vicente (1991) for other concrete examples of displays that simultaneously span the abstraction hierarchy in other work domains.The land-based nature of Army tactical operations places a premium on spatial considerations: the physical characteristics of the terrain (e.g., mountains, rivers, gorges, etc.) place critical constraints on a variety of activities (e.g., where tanks can go). The physical characteristics of the battlefield terrain are represented in the ecological interface by the contour map (i.e., the contour lines represent changes in elevation) in Fig. 5. The physical characteristics (e.g., location) of a wide variety of relevant information (weapons envelopes, barriers, unit locations, synchronization points and travel routes, etc.) is also portrayed in the spatial synchronization display (see Fig. 5).Land-based tactical operations are ultimately “controlled” by commanding a unit and its vehicles (and associated weaponry) into positions that allow them to deliver military force during an engagement. Some of the measured variables that determine what types of control will be feasible include the number and type of tanks and Bradleys (armored personnel vehicles), how fast and how far they can go, the types of weapons they have and their lethality, and the levels of ammunition that each unit currently possesses. Good examples of information at this level are the friendly combat resource displays, which represent a unit's tanks, Bradleys, ammunition, fuel, and personnel (see Fig. 6). The level of each resource for each of the four companies in the battalion is represented simultaneously by horizontal bar graphs, digital values, and color codings.Please note that these displays are a more detailed version of the force icon displays that illustrate the categorical resource levels (and physical location on the battlefield) of the four companies (see Fig. 5). Note also that the granularity of the information (i.e., changes in the level of the aggregation hierarchy) being portrayed by the combat resources displays in the primary and secondary slots (see the right middle section of Fig. 4) can be changed by pointing at and clicking on the nodes in the control tree (see the upper right section of Fig. 4). Thus, with a click of the mouse the user can change the aggregation levels of the information being portrayed in these displays from an overview (i.e., combined resources for the battalion) all the way down to low level details (i.e., resources for an individual soldier). See Bennett et al. (2008) for additional details.The ultimate purpose of land-based tactical operations is to achieve mission objectives via the application of military “force” at a particular location in space and at a particular point in time. These three general functions correspond to three general areas of the ecological interface (see Fig. 4): spatial (upper left), temporal (lower left), and combat resources (right). As Fig. 4 illustrates, these general functions are perceptually grouped by color-coded background mattes.The work domain analyses revealed that a fundamental consideration in tactical operations is “force ratio”: the relative amount of combat power that exists between two opposing forces. Force ratio is a primary consideration during both the planning (e.g., do we have sufficient combat power to execute this offensive maneuver?) and the execution (e.g., are current resource expenditures commensurate with planned values?) of tactical operations. This is essentially the intended proper functioning of the system; it is the flow of resources through the system. Thus, force ratio is a critical piece of information that testifies with regard to decisions to initiate, continue, alter, or abort a mission. Priority measures obviously come into play at this level of the abstraction hierarchy. What is the probability of success? Are the resources that need to be expended worth the value of the mission objective?The graphical display developed to illustrate force ratio is illustrated in Fig. 7. There are two bar graphs, aligned on the left hand side with the origin of the axes. These bar graphs represent the current combat power of friendly (top) and enemy (bottom) forces. The relative lengths of these two bar graphs represent the higher order property of force ratio. In Fig. 7 the force ratio is a little over 3 to 1 in favor of the friendly forces. This relationship is emphasized by the force ratio reflecting line that connects the lower left (friendly) and upper right (enemy) corners of the bar graphs via graphical “ball” joints (Vicente, 1991). Changes in the horizontal extent of the smaller bar graph (the enemy bar graph in Fig. 7) push (or pull) the endpoint of the line, thereby changing its orientation. The geometries of the displays are devised so that the reflecting line intersects the scale of the force ratio trend display at the exact spot that corresponds to the current value of force ratio.There is a wide variety of goal-related information presented in RAPTOR. The discrepancy between goal and actual values for force ratio over time is represented by the distance between the two trend lines in the force ratio trend display (see the two blue (in the web version) lines in Fig. 7). The discrepancies between goal and actual spatial routes of travel are represented by the location of a unit's icon relative to its planned route (see Fig. 5). The discrepancies between goal and actual activity completion times are represented by the location of the current time line relative to synchronization points in the temporal synchronization display (see Fig. 4). Additional goal-related information (e.g., planned versus actual resource expenditures) becomes available when a special “review” mode is entered.When viewed through the lens of the abstraction hierarchy … the goal for an ecological interface is to make the constraints at all levels of the abstraction hierarchy visible in the representation. (Bennett and Flach, 2011, p. 103)The potential benefits to system safety that arise from ecological interfaces will now be described. The discussion will initially be framed broadly, in the context of “visual momentum” (Woods, 1984). This concept refers to the need to support a worker in transitioning between various information-seeking activities that are required for understanding and exploring work domains. The “functional overlap” technique increases visual momentum “By identifying relationships between data and user tasks and by paralleling those relationships in the structure of the display system …” (Woods, 1984, p. 237). Designing displays/interfaces that simultaneously integrate information from all five levels of the abstraction hierarchy (see examples in previous section) is an excellent example of the functional overlap technique. Doing so eliminates the requirement to navigate between screens while remembering and mentally integrating information. Instead, these structural relationships will be represented simultaneously and graphically, and therefore will be available to be perceived directly. The displays serve as “external models” of the work domain (i.e., a virtual ecology).If the quality of the two mappings (i.e., content and format) depicted in Fig. 1 are high, then the integrated displays will produce spatio-temporal patterns (i.e., display geometries) that are specific to (i.e., reflect) the ongoing events in the work domain. These patterns will be “picked up” easily by the worker and they will provide analog “signals” (Rasmussen, 1983) that support direct perception. Similarly, rather than typing commands or selecting items from menus, workers will be able to execute control input by manipulating objects on the screen; these are the control actions (e.g., point, click, drag, drop, swipe, pinch, unpinch) that are typical of modern graphical interfaces. In Rasmussen's (1983) terms, these signals support skill-based behavior; in Gibson's (1966; 1979) terms, the perception-action loop is intact. The end result is that a well-designed ecological interface will produce the feeling that workers are observing and acting upon the work domain directly.The previous section emphasizes that there will be a one-to-one mapping between work domain constraints and the geometrical constraints produced by the displays. For example, a break in normal geometrical constraints of the display (i.e., a particular asymmetrical configuration) will specify a break in work domain constraints (i.e., a particular abnormality). As workers interact with the system (including training) they will develop expectations about the spatio-temporal perceptual patterns that are produced by the graphical displays. For expert workers the perceptual cues produced by the displays will trigger pre-learned associations (i.e., rules) about which actions should taken. In Rasmussen's (1983) terms, these perceptual cues are now serving as “signs” that support rule-based behavior. Thus, domain practitioners will literally be able to see current system states and appropriate actions directly in the interface, rather than reasoning about them.Collectively, multi-level ecological displays will support skill- and rule-based behavior, as illustrated by the shortcuts in the lower and middle levels of Rasmussen's decision ladder. These shortcuts reflect the smart, frugal heuristics that allow experts to “see” good options without exhaustive searches or intense cognitive computations. Note that these observations are conceptually very similar to the tenets of naturalistic decision making (e.g., recognition primed decision making, Klein, 1989). In fact, allowing workers to interact in skill- and rule-based modes of behavior is a fundamental goal of ecological interface design. They are also conceptually very similar to the tenets of situation awareness (e.g., Endsley, 1995): effective ecological interface design will promote effective situation awareness (see the outer-most labels in Fig. 1).Dynamic systems are particularly difficult to explain in language, in part, because of the serial nature of language. However, … a graphical interface can operate as a continuous explanation … a graphical description of the plant's behavior … (Hollan et al., 1984, p. 20–21).Hollan and his colleagues (Hollan, Hutchins, McCandless, Rosenstein and Weitzman, 1987; Hollan et al., 1984; Hollan, Hutchins and Weitzman, 1987) were among the first researchers to understand the vast potential of graphics technology for complex socio-technical systems. Specifically, they were interested in exploring how this technology might be used to develop more effective training systems. They believed that the continuous explanation provided by graphical displays in the interface could teach workers about how complex systems operated more effectively than verbal descriptions.The very same qualities of continuous, integrated graphical explanation will be critical, perhaps even more important, in supporting expert workers as they attempt to cope with accidents. Catastrophes occur when pre-planned guidance fails, when the ongoing events have not been encountered before, and when those aspects of the complex work domain that are relevant to the invention of a solution are hidden behind an opaque interface. During accidents workers are reasoning symbolically about the system and its possibilities, the “… objectives, priorities, functions, processes, people and parts … from which the relevant subset has to be drawn …” (Rasmussen et al., 1994, p. 110). Under these circumstances the experts are, in a very real sense, much like novices; they literally need to discover how various aspects of the system can be used in novel ways to deal with the problem at hand.Thus, the expert who is engaged in problem solving will benefit from viewing the continuous graphical explanation provided by a well designed ecological interface. The product of a work domain analysis conducted with the abstraction and aggregation hierarchies is a specification of the critical structural relationships (affordances) in the work domain. The inherent “Why-What-How” relationships between levels of the abstraction hierarchy will allow system events to be mapped in terms of reasons, causes, and effects. Achieving the EID goal of direct perception means that the constraints at all levels of the abstraction hierarchy (i.e., the affordances of the work domain) are simultaneously visible in the interface. Essentially the displays will serve as external models of the “deep” structure of the work domain that are needed to support effective problem solving.EID has consistently improved performance compared with the industry state of the art … the value added by EID seems to be in situations requiring adaptive problem solving.(Vicente, 2002, p. 64)It has been roughly one half century since Jens Rasmussen began building the foundation of CSE and roughly one quarter of a century since the tenets of EID were first formally outlined (Rasmussen and Vicente, 1989, 1990; Vicente and Rasmussen, 1990; Vicente and Rasmussen, 1992). The framework has fostered a great deal of interest in the interim. Several recent literature reviews have been conducted on CSE/EID. For example, both Read and her colleagues (Read et al., 2012; Read et al., 2015) and McIlroy and Stanton (2015) have identified numerous analysis and design projects where the tools and principles of EID have been applied. The sheer number of projects identified and the wide variety of work domains that are spanned are a testament to the general interest that CSE/EID has generated. It should also be pointed out that these reviews neglect a substantial literature on “semantic mapping” or “configural” display design (e.g., Bennett and Flach, 1992, 2011; Bennett et al., 2012) which are synonyms for ecological display design.The majority of this manuscript has been devoted to a detailed analysis of the theoretical reasons why CSE/EID might be expected to improve the safety of our sociotechnical systems. How well do the results of empirical evaluations of ecological interfaces meet these expectations? Vicente has provided two literature reviews (Vicente, 1996, 2002) that summarize the empirical evidence regarding the effectiveness of ecological interfaces. In the majority of the reviewed studies performance with an ecological interface was compared to performance with a standard interface (e.g., often employing a single sensor, single display philosophy with analog meters or alpha-numeric displays). A reasonably clear pattern of performance has emerged.Both standard and ecological interfaces were found to generally produce effective performance for simple, routine tasks; a typical finding is that no statistically significant differences are obtained between interfaces. These results suggest that workers can develop learned sequences of behaviors (in some cases over learned to the point of being automatic) that are effective with standard interfaces, provided that they are given sufficient training. These learned sequences are sufficient to close the “degrees of freedom” that are available in these complex systems during normal, anticipated events.However, standard interfaces were generally found to be less effective than ecological interfaces under abnormal operating conditions. The learned sequences fail and workers must act in novel/creative/intelligent ways to meet the functional goals of the system. The information needed to detect, diagnose and correct abnormalities is either NOT available in the interface or NOT easily obtained (i.e., standard interfaces are inherently “opaque”). Instead, the worker is forced to rely on analytical reasoning that is dependent upon knowledge inside the head (often incomplete or incorrect) and limited capacity cognitive resources (e.g., working memory).In contrast, well-designed ecological interfaces (i.e., effective content mapping including simultaneous integration of information across multiple levels of the abstraction hierarchy and format mapping) were found to improve the worker's ability to detect, diagnose, and remediate abnormal events, relative to standard interfaces. The continuous graphical explanation provided by the interface is used to leverage worker expertise and innate capabilities.At one level, the spatio-temporal behavior of display geometries serve as signals and signs. Because of the one-to-one mapping between domain constraints and geometric constraints, breaks in display geometries (e.g., emergent features such as asymmetry) signify the onset of abnormalities. Therefore, the ecological interface transforms the detection of abnormalities from a cognitive act into a perceptual-motor act; we know that workers are far more proficient at the latter. This allows abnormalities to be detected earlier, relative to traditional displays. Early detection is critical; minor incidents are much less likely to escalate into catastrophic accidents when they are detected early. Also, note that the diagnosis of abnormalities will often be facilitated by an ecological interface. Based on experience, particular patterns of geometrical distortions will eventually become associated with particular abnormalities; thus, with increased experience diagnosis will become increasingly recognition-primed.At another level, the contents of an ecological interface will serve as symbols that support effective knowledge-based behavior (i.e., problem solving). As Vicente (1999) has pointed out, it is impossible to anticipate the infinite number of ways in which things might go wrong in complex systems. On the other hand, the system resources that are available to deal with all of these abnormalities will remain constant. Cognitive work analyses conducted with the abstraction and aggregation hierarchies provide the “structural evidence” that has been demonstrated to be so critical in problem solving by the Gestalt psychologists. Ecological interface design makes this structure directly available to the worker: the possibilities for action are available to be perceived directly in the externalized models of the work domain provided by ecological displays. The empirical evidence suggests that ecological interfaces provide particularly effective support for workers who are attempting to devise novel, creative solutions to the problems presented by abnormalities.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
