@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Taking ergonomics to the bedside – A multi-disciplinary approach to designing safer healthcare

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Work analysis of bedside healthcare processes carried out based on over 70h of observation and shadowing on 3 surgical wards.Over 14 processes were identified and an HFMEA identified nearly 200 potential failure modes in the 5 highest risk processes.A causal analysis identified number of common systems influences on safety – education, lack of reminders, feedback & design.Designers and clinicians worked together to develop a suite of solutions, tackling failures across the range of processes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Medical devices,Patient safety,FMEA,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A multi-disciplinary approach to designing safer healthcare was utilised to investigate risks in the bed-space in elective surgical wards. The Designing Out Medical Error (DOME) project brought together clinicians, designers, psychologists, human factors and business expertise to develop solutions for the highest risk healthcare processes. System mapping and risk assessment techniques identified nearly 200 potential failure modes in hand hygiene, isolation of infection, vital signs monitoring, medication delivery and handover of information. Solutions addressed issues such as the design of equipment, reminders, monitoring, feedback and standardisation. Some of the solutions, such as the CareCentre™, which brings many of the processes and equipment together into one easy to access workstation at the foot of the bed, have been taken forward to clinical trials and manufacture. The project showed the value of the multi-disciplinary and formal human factors approaches to healthcare design for patient safety. In particular, it demonstrates the application of human factors to a complete design cycle and provides a case study for the activities required to reach a safe, marketable product.Human factors/ergonomics is now a constituent part of safety management and systems design in many industries (HSE, 2005; ISO 6385:2004). This is less so in healthcare, where there are still only a few exemplar projects demonstrating either the benefit, or the methods, of a Human Factors (HF) approach. The complexity of healthcare delivery means that there are extensive opportunities for human factors to contribute to improvements. A single patient journey can cross the primary, secondary and tertiary healthcare sectors. Care might be delivered by multi-disciplinary, distributed and virtual teams, often with poor communication between healthcare workers and organisations, entrenched hierarchies and little overview of the overall patient journey. Healthcare staff work in shared work-spaces with complex patients, tasks and equipment, all of which make a formal consideration of human factors necessary. Within this complexity there are clear opportunities to apply HF to common, identifiable components of the system. This paper describes a project that takes a systems approach to a particularly ubiquitous setting, the design of the bed-space and demonstrates the application of human factors to a complete design cycle; from context exploration through to manufactured product. The project used human factors principles and methodology to identify risks, engage healthcare staff and patients, facilitate ideas and develop new designs for the environment, right through to manufacture. Applying HF to a common workspace – the bedside – means that the methods and solutions should be transferable to many other clinical specialties. In particular, it provides an important demonstration of the process of applying human factors using a multi-disciplinary team that engages clinicians, designers and human factors professionals. This provides a model that can be applied in other healthcare contexts in the future.There are around 100,000 reports of patient safety incidents (PSIs) per month to the UK National Patient Safety Agency's (NPSA) Reporting and Learning Service (RLS) from NHS Trusts in England and Wales (NPSA, 2012). Other sources of estimated harm, predominantly using reviews of patient records, place the rate of in-hospital adverse events (unintended injury or complication) at almost 1 in 10 admissions (de Vries et al., 2008).While these figures are high, they must be considered in perspective of the scale of the NHS (there were 15 million A&E attendances and 85 million outpatient appointments in England during 2010 (NHS IC, 2010)) and that many PSIs are reported as causing no harm (69% in 2010/1 – NPSA, 2012). Yet there is also a recognised under-reporting of patient safety incidents; there are around 300 million GP consultations in England each year but GP reported incidents account for less than 1% of the total reported to the NPSA. Paradoxically, voluntary reporting of incidents is likely to increase as a positive safety culture develops within an organisation (Hutchinson et al., 2009). Each of these conspires to make it difficult to know the extent of unintentional harm in healthcare, and in particular the detail of what goes wrong. Together with the already risky nature of treating seriously ill patients, this has meant there has been a slow acceptance of the high risk nature of healthcare. This is now changing. Landmark reports such as the USA Institute of Medicine's ‘To Err is Human’ (Kohn et al., 2000) and better incident reporting are helping to establish – as deVries puts it – that ‘adverse events [in healthcare] are a serious problem’.Along with the relatively recent recognition of the safety issues in healthcare, human factors is also beginning to gain interest (NPSA, 2010). There are some notable examples of human factors improvements, particularly the standards for medical device design (e.g. AAMI, 2009), the recognition of human factors by groups such as the World Health Organisation (WHO, 2009) and a general promotion of human factors thinking (Reason, 1995; Vincent et al., 2004; Carayon et al., 2006; Norris, 2011; Hollnagel, 2012). The previous understanding of human factors as primarily ‘person level’ issues (such as teamwork and communication) (NHS III, 2010) is still common, but human factors principles (such as reducing complexity and variability, design for standardisation and standard procedures) and methods (such as co-design, Prospective Hazard Analysis (PHA) techniques or Human Factors Integration) are now developing.As a result, there are many examples where an absence of human factors or user-centred design is evident. Research on infusion pumps (programmable devices which control the rate of flow of medication through intravenous infusions) found there could be up to thirty different models in use within one organisation, many with differing and/or conflicting interface design (NPSA, 2004a). Colour-coded wristbands have been used to alert staff to a patient's special status (e.g. allergies or risk of falls), yet different colour coding conventions have existed within the same organisation (Sevdalis et al., 2009). Local variation and bespoke procedures are common and even considered necessary, as local circumstances are often considered unique.However, rather than focussing the human factors argument on examples of poor design, if we are to help establish human factors in healthcare it is more helpful to find positive examples of change and demonstrations of methodology. Reiling (2006) and Ulrich et al. (2008) both give good examples of user-centred approaches to healthcare design. This paper aims to help demonstrate the value of human factors by providing examples of design solutions and demonstrating a methodology to achieve this.Physical products are a component of virtually all healthcare processes, from seemingly innocuous equipment such as patient identity wristbands and bedside lockers through to cutting edge medical devices that keeps patients alive. The design of devices, equipment, workspaces, medication (pills, packaging and prescribing systems) and information systems is therefore vital to the safe delivery of care. According to the NPSA's RLS, around 35,000 patient safety incidents are reported each year in England and Wales associated with medical devices and equipment and around 100 of those resulted in death or severe harm (NPSA, 2012). An analysis of these incidents from 2006 to 2007 found the most frequently cited equipment were pumps, catheters/cannula, beds and hoists and resuscitation and surgical equipment. Contributory factors included the design of the equipment (‘equipment not operating as intended’) or the systems within which they are used (‘equipment unavailable’) (NPSA, 2008). Designing for safety is a becoming a recognised concept in healthcare (Karsh and Scanlon, 2007) but usability issues are unlikely to be recognised or reported. For instance, research into infusion pumps incidents found that of 25% of devices reported as faulty had no fault (NPSA, 2004b). International standards and regulations do require manufacturers to carry out usability testing (e.g. ISO/IEC 62366:2008; FDA, 2011) but as an ‘end user’, healthcare appears to be less demanding of good usability than perhaps other industries. This provides little incentive for improvements beyond the minimum required. Other barriers to usability improvements in medical devices (and thereby a reduction in user error) include:•Financial constraints on healthcare organisationsLegacy/existing equipment with recognised usability issues that have to remain in service such as pumps or monitorsLimited usability or human factors support during procurementDonated equipmentA focus on competency and training as a route to safety in healthcare, and a subsequent reticence to blame design (‘it's a poor doctor that blames their tools’)Impetus to fast-track new developments in diagnosis/treatment without consideration of usabilityA poor contextual match between existing work systems and new technology being introducedThe difficulty in accessing healthcare settings for equipment design research or evaluation.The DOME project therefore focused on medical devices and equipment with the aim of encouraging the use of a HF in equipment design (as opposed to the design of procedures and processes, although a systems approach would of course consider those working practices and their effect on safety).Human factors would endorse a systems approach to ensure the usability and safety of healthcare systems, and the medical equipment and devices that are part of those systems. Designing Out Medical Error (DOME) was a three year project that applied the systems approach to the design of medical devices and equipment. It was a multi-disciplinary project involving designers, clinicians, psychologists, human factors professionals and business experts. The overall aim of the study as described here was to develop a process to design safer medical devices and equipment. The objectives were:•To develop a multi-disciplinary approach to designing for safety that would provide long term engagement and potential for future design collaborationsTo develop a map, analyse and prioritise the hazards in the surgical wardsTo develop design solutions using a systems approach and co-design methods.This paper describes the key aspects of the project, such as: disciplines working together to understand risk and co-develop solutions; the large number of processes – and potential failures in those processes – that take place around the bed-side, just one part of the patient journey; the commonality of causes across multiple failures; and in particular how tackling those causes across a range of processes simultaneously can help to develop effective solutions.This study took a systems approach that meant all of the processes within surgical wards were to be considered, similar to the approach developed by Carayon et al. (2006). The study aimed to produce design solutions that could be taken forward for manufacture and widespread implementation. Within the surgical ward setting, a further focus was the hospital bed/treatment space or the bed-side. The investigation focused on patient admission through to discharge in the surgical ward, taking into account but not focussing on, surgery in the operating theatre and any related activities in primary care outside the hospital. This allowed the influence of the entire system of healthcare to be considered whilst providing a manageable and defined area to target.One of the key objectives of the project was to develop a multi-disciplinary process for developing healthcare solutions. Embedding a human factors approach in healthcare requires clinical staff to be pivotal in the analysis of systems and development of solutions, and for designers to have access to clinical staff and workplaces. Making HFE and design methods accessible and palatable for all users was part of this engagement process. A collaborative approach was adopted that aimed for knowledge and skill transfer between clinicians, designers, psychologists and business experts as well as human factors expertise. Each discipline was vital to the success of the project:•Clinical and subject matter expertise was required to understand clinical processes, healthcare environments and systemsDesign knowledge and skills were needed to develop creative solutionsPsychologists and human factors expertise was needed to understand the genesis of human error and the systems approach to safety and design, and to initiate valid methodology approachesBusiness experts enabled the application of risk management approaches and solutions from other industries.Multi-disciplinary design is difficult to achieve in healthcare as there are very real limits to clinicians' time and to the access to clinical environments. It can be difficult for designers to access clinical areas without the help of a clinician, and clinicians seeking to develop innovations often do not have access to the design and business knowledge needed to see their ideas through to realisation. To ensure true multi-disciplinarity, the research team worked side-by-side on all phases of the project, sharing all research methods. Shared-site working was adopted so that the design staff had regular access to the hospital environment and clinical staff were able to access resources within the design centre.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A number of safety interventions for the surgical ward bedside have been developed through to manufacture (and which are now subject to clinical trials; see Anderson et al., 2012b,c for details of the designs and the testing). Evidence of this sort is vital if the approach promoted in this project is to be adopted more widely in healthcare. The success of the approach can also be indicated by the level of engagement that was achieved with staff on the wards, and the contribution that they made to the co-creation process. Wide and sustained user engagement in safety analysis and design is vital to understand risks, to represent user perspectives and to help implementation. Engagement of this sort also might help to engender a better understanding of system safety amongst users, which might ultimately contribute to a better safety culture. However, finding ways to further promote and implement the collaborative analysis between designers, clinicians and manufacturers that was developed in this project is a future challenge. Encouraging cross-fertilisation and sharing of perspectives during clinician and designer education could help. Financial restrictions in the healthcare sector mean that large scale collaborative design projects such as DOME – involving a large amount of time and resources – are unlikely to become main-stream. Risk assessment methods such as FMEA and causal analysis require training and time, but are vital to understand systems contributions to risk, to avoid a superficial quick-fix and to target efforts where they are most needed. It may be that realistically, shortened or ‘light’ versions of these methods need to be developed, or resources allocated to specialist help to administer them. Some of the techniques and approaches used in this project are already familiar in healthcare; as stated earlier, the literature contains many healthcare applications of FMEA for instance. ‘Systems thinking’ has also been widely promoted in the UK through the principles of Lean and the NHS Institute's ‘Productive’ Series. However, badging these techniques together as a Human Factors approach hopefully will engender a holistic, human-centred view of safety. This project has demonstrated that investing in this approach can yield evidence-based improvements in safety for patients, however the true value will be in transferring this learning into an operational and feasible approach for resource-limited healthcare organisations.