@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
System reliability, performance and trust in adaptable automation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We examined the effects of reduced reliability levels in an adaptable automatic system.We took measures of trust, automation reliance, performance, and workload.Operator trust was affected by reduced automation reliability.Operator reliance on automation was however unaffected by reliability.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Reliability,Adaptable automation,Performance,Trust,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The present study examined the effects of reduced system reliability on operator performance and automation management in an adaptable automation environment. 39 operators were randomly assigned to one of three experimental groups: low (60%), medium (80%), and high (100%) reliability of automation support. The support system provided five incremental levels of automation which operators could freely select according to their needs. After 3 h of training on a simulated process control task (AutoCAMS) in which the automation worked infallibly, operator performance and automation management were measured during a 2.5-h testing session. Trust and workload were also assessed through questionnaires. Results showed that although reduced system reliability resulted in lower levels of trust towards automation, there were no corresponding differences in the operators' reliance on automation. While operators showed overall a noteworthy ability to cope with automation failure, there were, however, decrements in diagnostic speed and prospective memory with lower reliability.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
While automated support systems (e.g. autopilots in aircraft, car navigation systems) provide great benefits to human operators, they sometimes give inappropriate advice or make incorrect decisions that may result in serious performance problems, even leading to fatalities (see Parasuraman and Riley, 1997). Since such support systems have become very common at work, an increasingly important part of the operators' job concerns monitoring these systems and reacting adequately to such potential failures. A key factor is therefore the reliability of such systems and the effects it may have on important variables, such as trust and performance (Parasuraman et al., 1993a; Sheridan, 2002). The issue of reliability is of particular interest in the context of advanced support systems that allow for non-static allocation of tasks between the human and the machine, as encapsulated in the concepts of adaptable and adaptive automation.Automation refers to a partial or complete transfer of operator tasks to a machine, shifting operator status from active to passive agency (e.g. Wickens et al., 2004). Task allocation can either be static (i.e. a fixed task allocation between the operator and the machine, e.g. Sheridan, 2002), or be adjusted over time and tailored to operators' competences and current workload (e.g. Sauer et al., 2012). In adaptable automation, task allocation is decided by the operator, whereas in adaptive automation this decision is taken by the technical system (e.g. Parasuraman and Wickens, 2008). Overall, when compared to static automation, there seem to be benefits of both adaptable and adaptive automation with regard to operator performance (e.g. Parasuraman et al., 1993b; Kaber and Riley, 1999; Inagaki, 2003; Sauer et al., 2012).The question of task allocation is not simply one of choice between the extreme poles of ‘no automation’ and ‘full automation’, but may also entail more fine-grained decisions regarding the optimal level of automation (LOA). Various models have been proposed to distinguish between different LOA (e.g. Sheridan and Verplank, 1978; Endsley, 1999; Parasuraman et al., 2000). Each LOA denotes the degree to which the operator is involved in information acquisition, information analysis, decision-making and decision execution (Parasuraman et al., 2000). For example, 10 LOAs were proposed in the seminal model of Sheridan and Verplank (1978), ranging from full manual to fully automated control, with intermediate levels in which operators can veto decisions taken by the system. While LOA switches are decided by operators in adaptable automation, in adaptive automation measurable criteria are used automatically as switch points; these include the operators' psychophysiological state, performance, or critical events (Kaber and Endsley, 2004).The high flexibility associated with adaptable automation may be considered an advantage since it allows balancing out varying levels of workload (e.g. extreme over- or underload) by switching LOA to increase or reduce support provided by the automatic system (Wickens et al., 2004). Furthermore, the principles of adaptable automation map well onto psychological stress models advocating the importance of increasing operator control to reduce the negative effects of strain (e.g. Karasek and Theorell, 1990). For example, Karasek and Theorell's demand-control model proposes that higher levels of operator control allows a better management of high demands. Against the background of such models, offering operators free choice in adapting LOA to their needs appears to be a sensible approach.An important issue in the design of automation is the question of how system reliability affects important outcome variables. In the field of static automation, there is a considerable number of studies on the impact of variations in system reliability. Most work has shown that under decreasing system reliability, operator performance deteriorates across a range of work environments, including flight simulation (e.g. Bailey and Scerbo, 2007), in-vehicle navigation (Ma and Kaber, 2007), waste processing facility (Wiegmann et al., 2001), and military applications (Rovira et al., 2007). Although some studies have not shown such negative effects (e.g. Parasuraman et al., 1993a), they are outnumbered by studies which do (for an overview, see Wickens and Dixon, 2007).In the context of adaptable and adaptive automation, there are few studies examining system reliability. Moray et al. (2000) investigated the direct impact of reliability with an adaptive system. The task in this study involved the management of a central heating simulation, aided by a support system which helped in the diagnosis of faults and the choice of repair action. The reliability of this support system varied from 70% to 100%. Operators showed better performance under automated compared to manual control mode when the system was totally reliable, and vice versa when system reliability was low. Although the study demonstrated that operators were able to evaluate automation usefulness according to its reliability, the event-driven adaptive automation mode did not allow operators to adapt the automation level to their current need, since the LOA was predefined for each type of fault. In contrast, adaptable automation would provide such opportunities freely to the operator, allowing their actual preferences to be determined, according to such factors as their level of trust towards the automation.Originally developed as a concept in social psychology, trust has also been successfully applied to the context of human–machine interaction (e.g. Lee and Moray, 1994). It may be defined as “the attitude that an agent will help achieve an individual's goals in a situation characterised by uncertainty and vulnerability” (Lee and See, 2004, p. 54). In a meta-analysis, Hancock et al. (2011) were able to identify three factors that influence trust towards automation, namely the environment (e.g. team collaboration and tasking), the operator (abilities and personality), and the machine (attributes and performance). They showed that environmental and operator characteristics had a smaller influence than the machine-related characteristics (such as automation performance). Lee and Moray (1992) also pointed out that performance of the automated system reflects its reliability, predictability, and ability in helping operators achieve task goals. The level of trust (as an attitude) may be assumed to influence the reliance of operators (i.e. their actual behaviour) on automation, and a number of studies have shown that both trust and reliance are influenced by system reliability (e.g. Wiegmann et al., 2001; Bailey and Scerbo, 2007; Ma and Kaber, 2007). However, system reliability does not always affect attitude and behaviour in such a congruent manner. For example, Rovira et al. (2007) showed an effect only on objective measures such as performance and use of automation, whereas other studies have shown the opposite impact, affecting subjective measures such as trust exclusively (Dzindolet et al., 2003). A similar dissociation of subjective trust and objective trust-related behaviour was also observed in a study by Manzey et al. (2012), which suggested that subjective trust ratings responded to variations in automation reliability more closely than automation management behaviour (e.g. information sampling of critical system parameters). The findings of these previous studies suggest that operators are sensitive to automation reliability but its concrete effects may manifest themselves in different ways, dependent on the work environment and other factors (e.g. the simulation being employed).Although operators seem to be sensitive to automation reliability, this does not necessarily imply that they accurately match their trust to the actual level of reliability (i.e. trust calibration). Indeed, a highly accurate calibration of trust is rarely observed (e.g. Wiegmann, 2002; Wiegmann et al., 2001), not even after prolonged use of the system (Muir and Moray, 1996). The limited ability of operators to calibrate their trust may lead to non-optimal use of automation, including both under and over-reliance (e.g. Lee and See, 2004; Wiegmann et al., 2001). For instance, Bahner et al. (2008) observed that operators who relied on the support system sampled less information than needed. It is notable that all these previous studies on reliability and trust compared a manual mode with static automation. One possibility to improve trust calibration might be the implementation of a more flexible form of automation, such as adaptable or adaptive automation (Bailey and Scerbo, 2007).Automation reliability and its impact on the operator (cf. Moray et al., 2000) may also be moderated by the operators' self-confidence in their own capabilities of managing the system. Lee and Moray (1994) showed that when self-confidence was high, operators preferred to use the manual control mode, whereas there was a strong preference for even unreliable automation when self-confidence was low. These results show the importance of taking self-confidence into account as a moderating variable (Moray et al., 2000). While self-confidence enjoys some stable qualities like a personality trait, it also has state qualities and may be influenced by automation design (Sauer et al., 2012). For example, adaptable automation may provide more opportunities for operators to practise their technical skills than adaptive automation, which could enhance their self-confidence.The aim of the present study was to investigate the effects of automation reliability on a range of outcome measures, notably operator performance, automation management, and trust. These effects were examined using a complex process control simulation. An extended testing session was used to observe possible changes over time. The range of LOA offered here (LOA 1–5) was also larger than in much previous work, which has typically offered only simple binary choices (i.e. manual control vs. automation). The influence of expertise on support system reliability was also addressed by using familiar and novel fault scenarios. Finally, because the effects of automation failure are not immediate (Lee and Moray, 1992), after-effects of support system failures were assessed in the form of trust but also objective measures such as reliance and performance. According to the research literature (Lee and Moray, 1992; Itoh et al., 1999), operator trust recovers more quickly from a single acute failure than from chronic failures.The process control simulation (AutoCAMS) serves as a model for a complex work environment. Since it encompasses multiple tasks of two different priority levels, it permits assessment not only of operator performance but also of workload in the form of secondary task performance; it has been shown (Hockey, 1997) that under high workload, secondary tasks suffered more from performance impairment than primary tasks. In addition to objective measures, subjective ratings on trust, self-confidence and workload were also taken. To investigate the impact of automation reliability on trust, three reliability levels (60, 80, and 100% reliable) were selected (cf. Ma and Kaber, 2007; Wiegmann et al., 2001). Reliability levels corresponded to the proportion of misdiagnoses proposed by the support system for the fault scenarios encountered during the experimental session.The following predictions were made: (a) Under low automation reliability, operators would generally select lower LOAs, show degraded performance (especially for the secondary tasks, Hockey, 1997) and a lower trust level; their performance would also decrease more strongly over time; (b) Operators would select higher LOAs when faced by a novel than a practised fault; (c) The impact of a support system failure would persist longer for low automation reliability, that is, performance and trust would be more degraded toward the end of the experimental session for more unreliable automation.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
