@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An investigation of thermal comfort inside a bus during heating period within a climatic chamber

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A general and combined testing and calculation model for thermal comfort assessment of a bus HVAC design was described.Thermal comfort investigation inside a coach during heating period within a climatic chamber was carried out.Transient Energy Balance Model by Gagge et al. was used to calculate changes in thermal parameters.The model developed for use of HVAC engineers and scientists is valid for all vehicle types.Iterations to reach to the desired thermal comfort condition are possible with the given model.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Thermal comfort,Bus,Heating period,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
By this study, it was aimed to define a testing and calculation model for thermal comfort assessment of a bus HVAC design and to compare effects of changing parameters on passenger's thermal comfort. For this purpose, a combined theoretical and experimental work during heating period inside a coach was carried out. The bus was left under 20 °C for more than 7 h within a climatic chamber and all heat sources were started at the beginning of a standard test. To investigate effects of fast transient conditions on passengers' physiology and thermal comfort, temperatures, air humidity and air velocities were measured. Human body was considered as one complete piece composed of core and skin compartments and the Transient Energy Balance Model developed by Gagge et al. in 1971 was used to calculate changes in thermal parameters between passenger bodies and bus interior environment. Depending on the given initial and environmental conditions, the graphs of passengers Thermal Sensation and Thermal Discomfort Level were found. At the end, a general mathematical model supported with a related experimental procedure was developed for the use of automotive HVAC engineers and scientists working on thermal comfort as a human dimension.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Thermal sensation and comfort models dealing with thermal interactions between human body and environment is an important topic to assure comfort state of both passengers and drivers inside vehicles. Thermal comfort studies started first for buildings and then afterwards continued also for vehicles. Human thermal comfort has been a subject in many previous studies and considerable amount of available information was documented and codified in the literature (ASHRAE, 1989; Parsons, 1993). Most of the studies have considered that the thermal conditions are nearly uniform and steady over entire body of occupant. However, less attention appears to be directed to comfort in vehicles, where thermal conditions are highly non-uniform and transient over body of occupant.Gagge et al. (1971) investigated first physiological control mechanisms and thermal comfort (ASHRAE, 1997). Doherty and Arens (1988) worked on evaluation of physiological bases of thermal comfort models (ASHRAE, 1997). Parsons (1993) on the other hand worked on Human Thermal Environments (ASHRAE, 1989). He documented and codified information on Human Thermal Comfort. ASHRAE.TC 2.1 (1997) described all governing equations for thermal comfort and human physiology in the publishing of Physiology and Human Environment. The effects of thermal environment on health, comfort and working efficiency of occupants were separately discussed by Parsons (2000). The discussion was confined to the factors of heat and cold, vibration, noise, and light. Other environmental factors and combined effects were also briefly considered. Jones (2002) investigated further the capabilities and limitations of thermal models for use in thermal comfort models. In his study he compared several thermal sensation model outputs with measured data for a typical winter automobile warm-up condition and showed that the models differ widely in their predictions. Guan et al. (2003c) presented a literature review on current advances in thermal comfort modeling for both building and vehicle HVAC applications. Alahmer et al. (2012) reviewed Vehicular thermal comfort models comprehensively in their study. In addition to different experimental techniques used, a comprehensive review of different models developed to predict vehicular cabin's thermal comfort was provided. The manuscript discussed and analyzed each of the thermal indices that were typically used in assessing in-cabin conditions such as the Predicted Mean Value PMV index and the Predicted Percentage Dissatisfied PPD.Clothing insulation asymmetry and thermal comfort was studied by Olesen et al. (1988). McCullough et al. (1989) worked for preparation of a data base for determining evaporative resistance of clothing ASHRAE (1989). Insulation value, evaporative resistance and permeability index of 22 representative clothing ensembles with or without contribution of the air layer around clothed body were measured with a thermal manikin. These parameters were also measured for 39 component fabrics using a sweating hot plate apparatus. The predictions generated by the model were compared to values measured with a manikin. Tanabe et al. (1994) evaluated thermal environments by using a thermal manikin with controlled skin surface temperature. They investigated sensible heat loss from several parts of human body by use of a manikin. For each considered piece of the body, total heat transfer coefficient and thermal resistance were found. Since however their study was performed in a constant temperature environment, it did not give any result about thermal comfort conditions. Ogulata (2007) discussed theoretically basic physical principals of body's mechanism for heat transfer with environment and examined body's heat balance. Effects of clothes and various climatic conditions on thermal comfort were also investigated for different activities in this study.Burch et al. (1991a,b) worked on an experimental study of passenger thermal comfort in an automobile under severe winter conditioning. Two different options for supplementary electrical heating such as low-power electric heating pads installed on seat and back support were studied experimentally and the results were reported. Changes of temperatures of interior and body parts contacted with solid surfaces were investigated during standard heating process in a very cold day (∼−20 °C). During this period, effects of heat losses from the body by conduction, convection and radiation on thermal sensation (TS) were investigated. On the other hand, the heat losses from body segments and their skin temperatures were not considered during this study. The authors analyzed also passenger's thermal comfort in an automobile under severe winter conditioning in the same study.Chakroun and Al-Fahed (1997) worked on Thermal comfort analysis inside a car. Their study of interest was temperature variation and thermal comfort inside a car parked under the sun during summer months in Kuwait. They considered effect of using different combinations of internal covering on PMV value inside the car. Lee and Yoon (1998) investigated effects of ventilation mode on the distribution of air temperature and velocity in a 1/10 scale vehicle interior model during heating period experimentally. In their experiments, three different ventilation modes (panel-vent, foot-vent and hybrid-vent) were tested at the same flow rate. Aroussi and Aghil (2000) studied characterization of flow field in a passenger car model. In their study, they tried to understand air flow behavior to improve climatic comfort within passenger vehicles. But, in the study, effects of air flow on human body were not mentioned and any result related to thermal comfort was not reached. Daanen et al. (2003) investigated driving performance in cold, warm, and thermo-neutral environments. They experimentally investigated effects of warm, cold and thermo-neutral environments on driving performance and concluded that driving performance was affected from cold and hot ambient conditions. Guan et al. (2003a) presented an experimental study to examine human thermal comfort under highly transient conditions in an automobile. They used an environmental chamber to simulate 16 typical winter and summer conditions. Thermal sensation modeling was discussed in their companion paper (Guan et al., 2003b). In their mathematical model, physiological and psychological factors were combined and environmental and personal parameters were used as inputs to determine the physiological responses. Alahmer et al. (2011) worked on analysis of vehicular cabins' thermal sensation and comfort state, under relative humidity and temperature control, using Berkeley and Fanger models. At the end, it was shown that controlling the relative humidity along with the dry bulb temperature (DBT) enables the cabin to reach comfort zone faster than sole control of the cabin (DBT), in both cooling and heating processes, i.e. summer and winter conditions, respectively.Kaynakli et al. (2002) presented a computational model of heat and mass transfer between human and vehicle interior environment during heating and cooling periods. The model was based on the heat balance equation for human body combined with empirical equations defining sweat rate and mean skin temperature. Kaynakli et al. (2003a) again presented a numerical model of heat and mass transfer between human body and its environment. There, the required environmental and personal conditions for satisfaction of people obtained under steady-state conditions and total sensible and latent heat losses, skin temperature, skin wettedness, predicted mean vote (PMV) and predicted percentage of dissatisfied (PPD) values were calculated by simulation. Kaynakli et al. (2003b) reported also a study in which human body is divided into 16 sedentary segments, a computational model of thermal interactions between each of 16 body segments and the environment was developed. By the use of the model, skin wettedness and latent (sweating, diffusion) and sensible (conduction, convection, radiation) heat losses from each body segment and whole body are calculated for both sitting and standing postures. Kaynakli et al. (2004) studied additionally thermal comfort during heating and cooling periods in an automobile. They presented a model of thermal interactions between a human body and interior environment of an automobile. The model was based on the heat balance equation for human body, combined with empirical equations defining sweat rate and mean skin temperature. Effects of both heating and cooling processes on thermal comfort inside the automobile were investigated. Kaynakli and Kilic (2005) investigated thermal comfort inside an automobile during heating period. The study presented an experimental work and a mathematical model of thermal interactions between a human and the interior environment of an automobile. Human body was divided into 16 sedentary segments, change of temperature was observed both theoretically and experimentally. The model was based on the heat balance equation for human body, combined with empirical equations defining sweat rate and mean skin temperature. Simulation was performed by use of transient conditions. Effects of heating process on thermal comfort, with respect to temperature, relative humidity and air velocity inside an automobile were investigated in this study. Test duration was 60 min in their study and initial temperature at the start of the test was 0 °C.Kilic et al. (2006) studied determination of required body core temperature for thermal comfort with steady-state energy balance method. In this study, the fundamental equations given in the steady-state energy balance and the empirical relations expressing effects of the thermoregulatory control mechanisms of body were combined. Kilic and Akyol (2009) separately investigated environmental parameters affecting thermal comfort as air temperature, relative humidity, mean radiant temperature and air velocities on human body segments. In the study, effects of non-uniform and highly transient thermal comfort parameters were tested for two ventilation modes (panel vents, windshield and foot vents). With the prepared simulation model, thermal behavior, physiological reactions (skin temperatures) and thermal sensations of the driver were predicted. The model was justified with experimental data obtained from the literature. Gagge model was used for the analysis.A direct thermal comfort investigation for a bus in general and for a coach in particular, as in the current study was not met in the literature. This study presents both an experimental work and a mathematical model of thermal interactions between passengers and interior environment of a coach. Human body was considered as one complete piece, change of temperatures was observed both theoretically and experimentally. The model is based on the heat balance equation according to Gagge Model for human body, combined with empirical equations defining sweat rate and mean skin temperature. Effects of a heating process within a climatic chamber on thermal comfort of passengers under transient conditions with respect to temperature, relative humidity, air velocity and clothing of passengers inside a bus were investigated in detail. Experimental data was collected by means of data acquisition system and related sensors connected to it in a climatic chamber. Details of the mathematical model were also presented step by step for further applications in automotive HVAC R&D area. Similar procedure can be applied for automobiles as well by considering also their special working environments and acquired raw test data.The performance of a Heating Ventilating and Air Conditioning System (HVAC) is measured mainly by reaching to an adjusted temperature level at selected locations inside vehicle compartment during warm-up and cool-down periods.Environmental factors affecting thermal comfort are air temperature, relative humidity, air velocity over passenger bodies and mean radiant temperature. Subjective personal factors on the other hand are body weight, human metabolism and clothing. Depending on the above mentioned parameters, complex thermoregulatory reactions of a human body include sweating, shivering and blood flow control through vascular constriction and dilation. In response to changing rates of heat loss due to thermal transients and non-uniformities in clothing, temperature, relative humidity and air velocities vary these thermoregulatory functions in body during ride period. These are simply the physiological control mechanisms of human body under transient thermal conditions.The heat-up period from −20 °C to +20 °C in 90 min within a climatic chamber is a quite extreme, non-uniform and transient stage until reaching nearly steady-state conditions and an occupant inside would normally experience localized chilling due to contact with an initially cold seat and back support and non-uniform air velocities depending on the locations of air exit nozzles and their adjustments. Passengers are directly affected due to dramatic temperature, humidity and air velocity changes and consequently thermal comfort of passengers change also depending on these parameters. Bus HVAC designers must consider and take all parameters into consideration to assure passenger's thermal comfort, health and driving safety.There are two major stages in thermal comfort modeling:1.Heat exchange process between body and its environment to be able to estimate rate of heat transfer by conduction, convection, radiation and evaporation through respiration and sweating, rate of heat storage, core and skin temperatures and skin wettedness.Use of physiological parameters to predict thermal sensation or thermal comfort that individuals would experience. This stage is based on jury evaluations and is usually purely empirical. There are already available jury evaluations and related thermal comfort equations derived from these jury evaluations by the previous studies and it is convenient to use them directly.Thermal sensation and comfort models should normally attract more attention especially in public transport vehicles like coaches serving for long distance travelers. Thermal comfort studies in the literature are mostly on buildings. There are some papers in automotive area directly related with these topics but mostly conducted on cars. A study in which, a direct thermal comfort investigation during a standard heating or cooling period for a bus was not met in the literature.In automotive business all prototyping and testing activities must be finished normally until the so-called pre-serial production deadline. This means that it is possible to conduct all HVAC prototyping and testing activities until this date, to compare the results of different alternatives or with competitors and get an idea about the thermal comfort state of passengers inside the bus with such a modeling.The purpose of this study is to investigate Thermal Comfort Parameters and required testing and calculation methodology to be considered during bus HVAC design, prototyping and testing process. It will be tried to put an analytical model in determining thermal comfort state of passengers inside bus compartment by considering also the technical features of a coach at the same time. Since thermal comfort is one of the most important parameters in passenger's consideration in choosing the right bus to travel, it is very important to validate the HVAC system of the vehicle through testing within a climatic chamber and then, according to the data acquired, to apply required analytical modeling to see how thermal comfort curve vary during testing period under the given conditions. According to the test and analysis results, it will be clearly possible to decide on modifications of the predefined design parameters such as capacity of heating or cooling elements and their locations inside, air distribution concept of the bus, average air velocity over passenger bodies, clothing ensemble, etc. to guarantee thermal comfort state of bus passengers. Such a thermal comfort modeling can also provide a very useful tool to iterate in order to find the optimum thermal comfort design parameters for a vehicle.It was aimed to use an already available standard raw test data acquired within a climatic chamber with a coach from −20 °C to +20 °C within 150 min. Raw data includes the following parameters inside the bus:-air temperatures at certain feet and head points, which were then averaged to find bus cabin temperaturerelative humidity measurement at one pointAir velocities were also measured separately and they were used for model calculations as mean air speed value as one of the main inputs.In case of aiming to compare mathematical model and test results for comfort investigation directly, skin temperature measurements are also normally needed. However, good agreements between the models and the test results were already proven by some previous studies. Therefore it is not a must anymore for the rest of calculations here and the available raw data does not simply include skin temperature measurements, because it was a standard test conducted during project development and evaluation phase of a bus HVAC system without passengers inside the bus. Skin and core temperatures were calculated at every data measurement step starting from their neutral levels of 33.7 °C for the skin and 36.8 °C for the core.During conduction heat transfer calculations, for interface temperatures between passenger–seat and passenger–back support, the equations given by Burch et al. for the same −20 °C test temperature were used during current analysis. Since the main target of this study is to put an applicable thermal comfort model for busses, this approach fits for this purpose. Main focus here is the approach and the methodology and use of an available real test data for a complete coach within a climatic chamber helps to enrich this study considerably.Although there are some different models in the literature to investigate thermal interactions between human body and its environment, two of them are widely used:1.Fanger Model (1970): “Steady-State Energy Balance Model” in which no heat storage within body is considered.Gagge Model (1971): “Transient Energy Balance Model” in which heat storages either in the body core or in the skin compartment is taken into account.Gagge Model was preferred to use in this study since it is more realistic. The model shown in Fig. 1:-assumes human body as two concentric cylindersconsiders energy storages both in the core and in the skin separatelyassumes that body and skin temperatures change over time and are uniformconsiders permeability of clothing ensemblesassumes evaporation of sweating partiallyenergy flow between core and skin compartments is provided by both heat transfer and blood flow in betweenIn each model human body can be considered either as a whole piece or as composed of 16 pieces as given in the literature. In this study, human body was taken as one complete piece into consideration during calculations for the sake of simplicity. Matlab codes were written to make all related calculations and drawings. During analysis, clothing ensemble for passengers was assumed as winter clothing and its value of 1.5clo was used for calculations.The related testing and analysis procedure of this study is shown in Fig. 2.Depending on the activity level, human body generates heat. Heat generated in the body for heavy work is approximately 10 times higher than resting situation (ASHRAE, 1989; Butera, 1998). To continue normal functions of the body and to ensure the comfort conditions, the heat generated inside the human body must be transmitted to the environment by some ways. According to the Gagge Model, thermal interaction of human body with its environment for the core and skin compartments can be written separately as follows:(1)Scr=M−Wˆ−Qres−Qcr,sk(2)Ssk=Qcr,sk−(Qcd+C+R+Esk)where energy storage (S) is in W/m2. M is the total rate of human body heat production which is composed of both metabolic heat production and the heat produced by the body by shivering.Wˆis the rate of external work done by the muscles which was taken as zero for sitting passengers. Qres is the total rate of heat loss through respiration. Qcr,sk is the rate of heat exchange between core and skin. Esk is the total rate of evaporative heat loss from skin. The total rate of sensible heat loss from skin can be divided into three parts as conduction (Qcd), convection (C) and radiation (R) heat loss rates.Heat storage rate of core and skin causes instantaneous temperature changes both in core and skin compartments of body. This effect can be expressed as follows:(3)ⅆTcrⅆt=ScrAb(1−α)mcp,b(4)ⅆTskⅆt=SskAbαmcp,bwhere total body area Ab = 1.751 m2; total body weight m = 70 kg; specific heat of body cp,b = 3470 J/kg °C; and α is the ratio of skin weight to total body weight and it is given by the following formula:(5)α=0.0418+0.7453600m˙bl+0.585where (·) denotes time derivative. The core and skin temperatures change by time. In this analysis, they are calculated starting from their initial conditions of Tcr = 36.8 °C and Tsk = 33.7 °C by the following formulas. Note that measurement intervals were 5 s during the test.(6)Tcr=Tcr+5(ⅆTcrⅆt)and(7)Tsk=Tsk+5(ⅆTskⅆt)Convective and irradiative heat loss from clothed body to environment is calculated as:(8)C+R=Tsk−ToRcl+1/[(hc+hr)fcl]where Rcl = 0.155 m2 K/W nclo is thermal resistance of clothing. During this analysis nclo = 1.5clo was taken to represent winter clothing. In this case Rcl = 0.2325 m2 K/W. fcl is the ratio of clothed to nude body area and was taken as fcl = 1.15 as in the literature. It indicates the amount of increment in body surface area due to clothing. hc and hr are convective and irradiative heat transfer coefficients, respectively. Operative temperature (T0) can be defined as:(9)T0=hrTr¯−hcTahr+hcwhere Ta is the measured bus compartment temperature andTr¯is the mean radiant temperature of body and is given in a simple form by Burch et al. (1991a,b) as:(10)Tr¯=0.94Ta−1.38The irradiative heat transfer coefficient hr = 4.7 W/m2 °C for typical clothing systems and convective heat transfer coefficient (hc) was determined as defined by ASHRAE (1989).(11)hc=8.3V0.6where V is the air velocity and in this investigation it was taken as the average air velocity from different measurement locations and points inside the bus. It was measured and then its average value was calculated as 0.35 m/s.A significant portion of body surface is in contact with an initially cold seat and back support in vehicle. These portions do not lose heat by convection and radiation naturally. Whereas the conductive heat loss is calculated as:(12)Qcd=Tsk−Tintxcl/kcl=Tsk−Tint,seatRcl,seat+Tsk−Tint,bsRcl,bswhere xcl and kcl are the thickness and thermal conductivity of clothing, respectively. Rcl,seat = 0.1131 ∗ nclo and Rcl,bs = 0.3302 ∗ nclo values were directly taken from previous study (Kaynakli and Kilic., 2005). Tint is the surface temperature of solids in contact with the body. Since interface temperatures were not measured in this standard test, these relations were imported from Burch et al. (1991a,b) study for an unheated seat option as follows:(13)Tint,seat={41(1−ⅇ(−t240))−20fort≤900s20+0.17(t60−15)for900<t≤1800s22.5fort>1800sDuration of the standard warm-up test by Burch et al. was only 30 min, but in this test it is 150 min. Therefore, the curve equation given there was taken as the same for the first part, but the second and the third parts of it were revised and extrapolated so that final temperature inside the bus becomes 22.5 °C as in our real test results. So the behavior of the interface temperature increase is very similar and acceptable at the end.Similarly graph for back support was given as follows by Burch et al. (1991a,b), which can also be used as a reference here.(14)Tint,bs={−20+30t60fort≤60s11(1−ⅇ(−t60)+15)+10fort≤600s19.4+0.16(t60−10)fort≤1800s22.5fort>1800sAs in the case of seat interface temperature curve, the first part of the expression was taken as the same, but the second, third and fourth parts of it were revised and extrapolated so that the final temperature inside the bus becomes 22.5 °C as in our real test results. Again a similar behavior is observed here.Total latent heat loss from skin (Esk) by both sweating and natural diffusion of water through skin is given by the following expression:(15)Esk=Ersw+Edif=w(Psk,s−Pa)(Rcl/ηclLR)+(1/hcfclLR)where w is the skin wettedness, Psk,s is the saturated water vapor partial pressure at the skin temperature and Pa is the water vapor partial pressure in the ambient air, ηcl = 0.40 is the permeation efficiency of the clothing and LR is the Lewis ratio which is the ratio of evaporative heat transfer coefficient to convective heat transfer coefficient.It should be noted that evaporation of sweat secreted due to thermoregulatory control mechanisms (Ersw) is equal to zero, because, since WSIGsk (Eq. (29)) is always zero throughout the test, sweat generation does not occur under these test conditions, as expected.(16)LR=15.15(Tsk+273.2)273.2Saturated water vapor partial pressure at the skin temperature is given by:(17)Psk,s=610.78ⅇ(17.2694TskTsk+238.3)and water vapor partial pressure in ambient air is given by:(18)Pa=RH100Psk,sDuring respiration, body loses both sensible and latent heat by convection and evaporation of water vapor inside the inhaled air through respiratory tract.Convective (Cres) and evaporative (Eres) heat losses due to respiration are:(19)Qres=Cres+Eres=m˙res[cp,a(Tex−Ta)+hfg(Wex−Wa)]Abwherem˙res=0.0001296kg/sis the mass flow rate of air inhaled which corresponds 6 L/min, cp,a = 1005 J/kg K is the specific heat of air, Tex = 35 °C is the exhaled air and Ta is the measured ambient air temperatures, respectively. Wex = 0.95 is the exhaled air and Wa is the measured ambient air humidity ratios in kg H2O/kg dry air. The heat of vaporization is hfg = 2.43 × 106 J/kg.Heat transfer between core and skin is given by the following expression:(20)Qcr,sk=(K+cp,blm˙bl)(Tcr−Tsk)where K = 5.28 W/m2 K is the effective heat transfer coefficient between core and skin; cp,bl = 4145 J/kg K is the specific heat of blood. Temperature control signal equations used in this model were taken from Doherty and Arens (1988).(21)m˙bl=13600(6.3+200WSIGcr1+0.5CSIGsk)where WSIGcr is the warm signal from the core and CSIGsk is the cold signal from skin and are given as:(22)WSIGcr=Tcr−36.8(23)CSIGsk=33.7−TskAdditionally, metabolic energy production due to shivering is related with two signals by the expression:(24)Mshiv=19.4CSIGskCSIGcrwhere CSIGcr is the cold signal from core and is given as(25)CSIGcr=36.8−TcrThis means that in case where one of CSIGsk or CSIGcr is zero then there will be no heat production by shivering.Total rate of body heat production is then summation of both metabolic and shivering heat productions in W/m2:(26)M=Mmet+Mshivwhere Mmet = 131 W or 75 W/m2 according to Olesen et.al. (1988) is taken as standard metabolic heat production rate for a human body.On the other hand, rate of sweat production per unit skin area is estimated as follows:(27)m˙rsw=4.7×10−5WSIGbⅇ(WSIGsk10.7)where WSIGb is the warm signal of body and WSIGsk is the warm signal of skin and are expressed as:(28)WSIGb=Tb−36.49(29)WSIGsk=Tsk−33.7Mean body temperature Tb is defined as:(30)Tb=αTsk+(1−α)TcrIt is suitable at this stage to give also the polynomial expressions of measured bus interior temperature Ta and bus interior relative humidity RH parameters. These are the curve polynomials fitted to the measured data by the written Matlab Code.(31)Ta=−2.91×10−28t8+8.46×10−24t7−8.78×10−20t6+3.17×10−16t5+7.36×10−13t4−9.13×10−9t3+2.43×10−5t2−0.01t−18.64(32)RH=−1.25×10−20t6+3.69×10−16t5−4.20×10−12t4+2.26×10−8t3−5.34×10−5t2+0.02t+96.03Thermal comfort is related to the physiological responses of people. For this purpose, comfort indices were developed in the course of time to quantify degree of thermal sensation and degree of thermal discomfort. To predict it, TSENS and DISC indices were defined by Gagge et al. (1971). During analysis, it is normally aimed to observe the differences between these two different TSENS and DISC indices depending on the boundary and ambient conditions, whenever available. These indices are shown as in the following expressions:(33)TSENS={0.4685(Tb−Tb,c)ifTb<Tb,c4.7ηe(Tb−Tb,c)Tb,h−Tb,cifTb,c≤Tb≤Tb,h4.7ηe+0.685(Tb−Tb,h)ifTb,h<Tb(34)DISC={0.4685(Tb−Tb,c)ifTb<Tb,c4.7(Ersw−Ersw,req)(Emax−Ersw,req−Edif)ifTb,c≤Tbwhere ηe is the evaporation efficiency which is taken as ηe = 0.85 and Tb is the mean body temperature. Mean body temperature Tb is compared with upper and lower levels of evaporation control temperatures. These are actually evaporation control region low border and high border temperatures. Namely;Tb,c is the evaporation control region low border temperature and is defined as:(35)Tb,c=(0.194/58.15)(M−Wˆ)+36.301Tb,h is the evaporation control region high border temperature and is defined as:(36)Tb,h=(0.347/58.15)(M−Wˆ)+36.669Ersw is the heat loss due to evaporation of sweat and is defined as:(37)Ersw=m˙rswhfgwhere hfg = 2.43 × 106 J/kg is the heat of vaporization of water.Ersw,req is the required Ersw value which provides thermal comfort and according to the data given by Rohles and Nevins (1974) the Ersw value in W/m2 providing thermal comfort is defined as:(38)Ersw,req=0.42(M−Wˆ−58.15)Emax is the max total latent heat loss from skin by both sweating and diffusion and is given by the following expression:(39)Emax=Psk,s−Pa(Rcl/ηclLR)+(1/hcfclLR)This is exactly the case, where skin wettedness w = 1 in Eq. (15).The wet portion of the body necessary for sweat evaporation is calculated as:(40)wrsw=Ersw/EmaxSkin wettedness (w) on the other hand is given by:(41)w=0.06+(0.94Ersw/Emax)Edif is the evaporation by diffusion and is defined as:(42)Edif=0.06(1−wrsw)EmaxNote that (1 − wrsw) = wdif which means, diffusion takes place through dry portion of the body. Both thermal sensation and thermal discomfort indices are scaled as shown in Table 1.The equations given above will be used in calculating all parameters and properties and be plotted in Section 5.Bus passenger compartment volumes are relatively much bigger compared to cabin volumes of cars. Nevertheless a bus passenger compartment is still a volume that there are non-uniform, three-dimensional unsteady turbulent flows and temperature variations inside during heating and cooling periods. On the other hand, since a coach in particular serves for long distances, HVAC performance of a coach is of prime importance.There are different heating elements inside a coach in general. These are namely, roof AC unit (Fig. 3a) with also a heating capability, convectors (Fig. 3b) and defrosting unit (Fig. 3c). Internal air of the bus is sucked from inside and by means of a heat-exchanger inside the roof AC unit, internal air is heated-up and sent again inside the bus through air channels located on top of passengers on both sides of the vehicle (Fig. 5). Main heat source is the engine coolant, but usually, except tropical countries, an auxiliary heater of typically 30 kW heating capacity is also installed on coaches (Fig. 3d). This means that the engine coolant is heated up by means of both vehicle diesel engine of 350 kW power running at 1500 rpm and also an auxiliary heater of 30 kW power running again with diesel during heating test.Heating elements capacities of the tested coach are:1.Roof AC unit heater = 38 kWConvectors = 11 kWDefrosting unit = 20 kWTotal vehicle heating capacity = 69 kWCoaches are also good examples of personalized ventilation systems. This is achieved through separate and adjustable air nozzles special for each passenger inside (Fig. 4a). Indeed window and aisle air exits have constant opening cross sections and cannot be adjusted, but the nozzles on service sets over passenger heads can be adjusted according to passenger needs to make it personalized (Fig. 4b).Convectors lie at the bottom level of passenger compartment on both sides. Defrosting unit is located just behind the front window and under the cockpit.The experimental study here was performed on a 2006 model 3-axle Travego 17 SHD coach equipped with an OM 502 LA, Euro 3 engine with 350 kW power diesel engine within a climatic chamber.The bus was instrumented with sensors in the passenger compartment to measure air temperature, air velocity and relative humidity inside and outside the vehicle. Air temperature measurements were conducted for heads and feet levels as standard and then averaged to use for the rest of the analysis. Air velocity measurements were conducted separately and then combined and an averaged single air velocity value was used during analysis for complete bus. The measurement types and points are clearly shown in Fig. 6.An existing data set collected at every 5 s at above given points for all temperature and relative humidity measurements were used for this analysis. These measurements were conducted in 2006 for HVAC development purposes in a bus project. All data were collected by the original data acquisition system of the owner of climatic chamber. This data set was used for the first time for such a thermal comfort analysis for a coach. Totally 38 data channels have been utilized for this investigation. They were mainly temperature measuring points measured with K-type thermocouples and additionally inside and outside relative humidity (RH) measurements were also conducted. Measurement data points were stored at every 5 s for minimum 90 min of official test duration according to GBK Standards (Gütegemeinschaft BusKomfort E.V.). During heating measurements the standard conditions described by GBK and bus manufacturer standards were applied.Since the test was a standard test within a climatic chamber, skin temperatures were not measured but calculated starting from its neutral value of 33.7 °C at the beginning of the test by means of described mathematical model above. In a similar way, core temperatures were also calculated through the mathematical model starting from its neutral value of 36.8 °C at the beginning of the test.To be able to calculate conductive heat loss from the body, interface temperatures of the body in contact with solid surfaces such as seat and back support should also be normally measured. But again due to having a standard test data in hand, interface temperature between passenger–seat and passenger–back support was not available. Thanks to the test conducted by Burch et al. with the same ambient temperature of −20 °C, these mathematical relations for interface temperature variations were taken mostly from their study. For a new analysis in the future with a different ambient temperature, interface temperatures must also be measured for at least one passenger to have more accurate results. An existing temperature variation curve can also be used, if available. Air velocities were measured separately and manually by Testo 435 Anemometer. According to the averaged results an average air velocity of 0.35 m/s was taken as calculation parameter during the analysis.The test was carried out according to the generally accepted GBK Standard for busses as given in details below:•Ambient temperature is −20 °C (diesel with additives or arctic diesel is to be used)Vehicle waits at least 7 h under −20 °C for a homogeneous temperature distribution without engine runningAll doors and flaps are to be closed before the test startsVehicle should not move during the testMeasurements are done within a climatic chamber equipped accordinglyTemperature deviations between measured and set values cannot exceed +/−3 KDuring the test, there is intentionally a wind speed of 20–30 km/h within the climatic chamberDefrosting unit of the vehicle runs with 100% fan speed and set at max. temperature valueDefrost flaps are in circulation position (no fresh i.e. cold air taken from outside) and its air flaps are adjusted to foot/head positionHeating system is adjusted to Regulation Mode with max. Tset value of 26 °CAll nozzles and service sets are to be fully opened before the testEngine revolution is fixed to 1500 rpm throughout the test by the use of a fixing toolAuxiliary heater is also started from the beginning of the testThere can be max. 2 persons inside the vehicle during heating testTesting time begins just after engine startTemperature measurements are taken at 150 cm height for head and at 10–20 cm height for foot from the vehicle groundTest continues until the adjusted regulation condition is reachedMain evaluation criterion is the average of vehicle head and feet level average temperatures for the vehicleThe release condition stated by GBK for coaches is that the vehicle must reach to +20 °C from −20 °C within 90 min. Related Standards are: DIN 1946-3, GBK, VDV 230, 231, 233, 234, 236, 237.At the beginning of the test, the inside and outside temperatures were both −20 °C and relative humidity value was almost 100%. All measurements were done while the bus was stationary. In case, the bus is in motion, this may naturally affect the results. However the model given here can be applied for different test conditions as well.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A combined theoretical and experimental study of thermal comfort during heating period inside a coach within a climatic chamber was described in this study. The methodology described here is valid for all cases including also a normal drive of a coach between distant cities in winter and summer seasons.The main aim with the current study is to provide a standard testing and computational model for bus HVAC design and testing engineers and assessment of a bus HVAC system either for heating or cooling. The important point there is to measure also the interface temperatures for seat and back support at least for one passenger. This can be accomplished either directly with a human or with a thermal manikin. Transient Energy Balance Model provides on the other hand a very practical tool for such type of measurements, since there is no need to measure also skin and core temperatures directly and it is possible to start with neutral core and skin temperatures for the calculations.Gagge Model with human body as one complete piece was chosen to apply for the analysis for simplicity.Effects of changing clothing ensemble, heating capacity, average air velocity, relative humidity, internal temperature etc. can easily be observed through different iterations in the Matlab algorithm. This approach can help in many cases to minimize the need for expensive and time consuming experiments.For a test starting from −20 °C it is normally expected to observe relatively lower TSENS and DISC values as in other studies. However when it is carefully examined, since Tb < Tbc condition is always satisfied according to the general conditions of the test, only the first term of these indices could be used. In case when the second and the third terms were also in use, a dramatic decrease in thermal comfort level would be observed. However this did not occur with this data set.Asurface area, m2specific heat, J/(kg K)convective heat loss rate, W/m2cold signal(thermal) discomfortevaporative heat loss rate, W/m2correction factorheat transfer coefficient, W/(m2 K)conductive heat transfer coefficient, W/(m K)effective heat transfer coefficient between core and skin, W/m2 KLewis ratio, °C/kPabody mass, kgmass flow, kg/(s m2)rate of metabolic heat production, W/m2water vapor pressure, kPaheat transfer rate, W/m2thermal or evaporative resistance, (m2 K)/Wrelative humidity (%)heat storage, W/m2time, in s or mintemperature, °Cthermal sensationair velocity, m/sskin wettedness, %humidity ratio, kg H2O/kg dry airwarm signalexternal work accomplished, W/m2thickness, mratio of skin layer mass to total body masspermeation efficiencyair, ambientactivitybodyevaporation control region low borderevaporation control region high borderbloodback supportconductionclothingcoreconvectiondiffusionevaporationexhaledinterface between outer clothing surface and a sol id (such as the seat and the back support)metabolicoperativeradiationrequiredrespirationdue to regulatory sweatingsensible or saturatedsignalshiverskintotal