@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A coupling system to predict the core and skin temperatures of human wearing protective clothing in hot environments

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A coupling system to predict the human core and skin temperatures was developed.Experiments were conducted in hot environment to get human temperatures.Comparison between the predicted results and experimental data was conducted.The coupling system has shown accurate compared with the experimental results.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Core temperature,Skin temperature,Subject tests,Coupling system,Hot environment,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The aim of this study is to predict the core and skin temperatures of human wearing protective clothing in hot environments using the coupling system. The coupling system consisted of a sweating manikin Newton controlled by a multi-node human thermal model, and responded dynamically to the thermal environment as human body. Validation of the coupling system results was conducted by comparison with the subject tests. Five healthy men wearing protective clothing were exposed to the thermal neutral and high temperature environments. The skin temperatures of seven body segments and the rectal temperatures were recorded continuously. The predictions of core temperatures made by the coupling system showed good agreement with the experimental data, with maximum difference of 0.19 °C and RMSD of 0.12 °C. The predicted mean skin temperatures fell outside of the 95% CI for most points, whereas the difference between the simulated results and measured data was no more than 1 °C which is acceptable. The coupling system predicted the local skin temperatures reasonably with the maximum local skin temperature of 1.30 °C. The coupling system has been validated and exhibited reasonable accuracy compared with the experimental results.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In recent years, researches about the physiological responses of firefighters in hot environments have aroused extensive concern, which are important for the heat stress assessment and the design of the personal protective clothing (PC). The personal protective clothing, the only and irreplaceable protection for firefighters, includes a thermal layer and a moisture barrier layer to prevent heat and hot water passing through the material to the human body (Barr et al., 2010; Holmer, 2006; Park et al., 2015). However, personal protective clothing may cause discomfort and even lead to intolerable heat strain in hot environments, as the multi layers limit the heat exchange with the environmental conditions (Havenith, 1999; Perroni et al., 2014; Song et al., 2011).In the past decades, methods including the subject test, manikin experiment, and thermal model simulation have been used to study the human physiological responses, such as the skin temperature, core temperature, heart rate, and heat exchange between human body and environment. The manikins have been widely applied in the measurement of clothing thermal properties and the evaluation of the local heat exchange. However, the manikin cannot simulate human physiological responses and perceptions (Psikuta et al., 2013). Several human thermal models have been developed to simulate human physiological responses (Fiala et al., 2001; Stolwijk et al., 1973; Tanabe et al., 2002; Zolfaghari and Maerefat, 2010). Most of those thermal models focused on the heat transfer process in normal temperatures, in which, the upper limit of ambient temperature usually does not exceed 40 °C (Weng et al., 2014). Nelson et al. (2009), Weng et al. (2014), and Yang et al. (2014) presented thermal models to simulate the human physiological responses in hot environments. Kim et al. (2013), Raimundo and Figueiredo (2009), Richards and Fiala (2004), and Yokota et al. (2014) predicted the human physiological responses for the human wearing protective clothing. Those models only used the thermal insulation and evaporation resistance to simulate the heat and moisture transfer in the protective clothing. However, the heat and mass transfer in the multi-layer protective clothing was quite complex. It is likely to be inaccurate for the thermal models to predict the physiological responses of firefighters in hot environments (Havenith, 2001; Wang et al., 2011).Based on the limits of the two methods, several studies (Burke et al., 2009, 2010; Redortier and Voelcker, 2010) have coupled the manikin with thermal model to predict human physiological responses in the environment temperatures from 30 °C to 47.5 °C. Psikuta et al. (2008a) developed the single-sector and multi-sector physiological coupling systems. Compared to the multi-sector coupling system, the single-sector one can simulate the mean skin and core temperatures more accurately. However, in this single-sector coupling system,the local skin temperatures cannot be obtained. Blood and Burke (2010) developed a coupling system to simulate the core and mean skin temperatures in the environments range from 5 °C to 47.5 °C, but the maximum difference between the simulated results and the experimental data was close 1.5 °C for the mean skin temperatures. Rugh and Lustbader (2006) developed a coupling system to simulate skin temperatures, but the predicted deviation of the local skin temperature was up to 4.2 °C. Those coupling systems demonstrated better performance in conditions close to thermo-neutral, but none of them exhibited high accuracy in a wide range of environmental conditions (Psikuta et al., 2013). In fact, firefighters often work in hot environments. Therefore, it is necessary to develop a coupling system to accurately predict physiological responses of the whole body and local segments in hot environments for practical use.The core temperature is one of the most important physiological variables and skin temperature is a useful indicator for the body (Psikuta et al., 2012). The core and skin temperatures were simulated by the coupling system in hot environments with two types of protective clothing. Human subjects tests were conducted in climate chamber, and local skin temperatures and rectal temperatures were recorded continuously. The simulated results of the coupling system were then validated against the experimental data.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, a multi-node human thermal model was coupled with the sweating manikin Newton. The coupling system was validated against the subject tests with two types of protective clothing both in the neutral and hot environments. Comparisons between the predicted results and the experimental ones indicated that the coupling system predicted the core temperatures, mean skin temperatures, and local skin temperatures reasonably. Therefore, it can be a useful tool to predict the core and skin temperatures in the hot environment, and can be applied in the assessment of the heat stress. However, the coupling system used in hot environment is still a challenge because of the technology limitations. In this work, the manikin was used in climate chamber and seated in a wheelchair. Future studies will focus on more practical conditions in which the manikin can simulate walk and breathe under transient conditions.