@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An experiment with content distribution methods in touchscreen mobile devices

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An experiment about usability for reading in mobile web pages has been carried out.Vertical scrolling is the most efficient for reading in webpages for mobile devices.Mobile users prefer vertical scrolling instead of paging or internal links.If the content to be showed is very large then paging is preferred by users.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Mobile usability,Empirical study,Scrolling,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper compares the usability of three different content distribution methods (scrolling, paging and internal links) in touchscreen mobile devices as means to display web documents. Usability is operationalized in terms of effectiveness, efficiency and user satisfaction. These dimensions are then measured in an experiment (N = 23) in which users are required to find words in regular-length web documents. Results suggest that scrolling is statistically better in terms of efficiency and user satisfaction. It is also found to be more effective but results were not significant. Our findings are also compared with existing literature to propose the following guideline: “try to use vertical scrolling in web pages for mobile devices instead of paging or internal links, except when the content is too large, then paging is recommended”. With an ever increasing number of touchscreen web-enabled mobile devices, this new guideline can be relevant for content developers targeting the mobile web as well as institutions trying to improve the usability of their content for mobile platforms.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Several aspects of the usability of interfaces have already been addressed in Personal Computers (PC) including characters, formatting, contrast and color, and dynamic text (Mills and Weldon, 1987) or line length (Dyson and Kipping, 1998). However, it is also necessary to study similar and other usability aspects in mobile devices because of the substantial differences that exist between them and PCs, especially concerning the size of the screen. Such differences may have a negative influence in the efficiency of users (Jones et al., 1999; Parush and Yuviler-Gavish, 2004). The degree of interaction is usually higher when using a small screen (Dillon et al., 1990) because of the limited amount of information that can be displayed. Therefore smaller screens require that the user scrolls more times and more often to go through all the content.Several studies have compared different aspects of usability when performing tasks with screens of different sizes, where more or less information can be showed at a glance. Although Kim and Albers (2001) found that there was no difference between a small screen (a PDA in their study) and a larger one (PC) in terms of the number of errors made to complete a task and time taken; most studies found differences in effectiveness (Jones et al., 1999), efficiency (Lai and Wu, 2014; Parush and Yuviler-Gavish, 2004) and satisfaction (Dillon et al., 1990). Such differences evidence the necessity to study independently the interfaces of mobile devices. For instance, adaptive systems that accommodate web pages to mobile interfaces have been developed to try to improve the usability of mobile navigation (Ahmadi and Kong, 2012; Lee and Bahn, 2005).One of the major issues concerning usability for mobile devices is the scroll. Scrolling happens when the information that has to be displayed does not fit in a single screen, “overflowing” off the screen out of immediate view (Sanchez and Wiley, 2009). This results in a serious usability problem (Nielsen, 1997) when the user is reading since it is necessary to handle the device and the information being displayed simultaneously, and this can interfere reading (Wästlund et al., 2008). The problem is aggravated when the user is in front of a small screen as she will have to go through more pages to read the same amount of text (Dillon et al., 1990).Nowadays, with an ever increasing number of accesses to the mobile web, it is also becoming increasingly important to study the usability of web interfaces in mobile devices. Research to date has studied mobile devices with stylus, keyboards or even with simulated devices in computers, but today the most common mobile device is a touchscreen smartphone. The objective of this paper is to analyze the usability of methods to present information for users of web content in mobile devices with touchscreen.The most common content distribution method is vertical scrolling. It is used for texts (Andersen, 2005), documents and web pages (Yin and Liu, 2010). This paper sets out to test whether vertical scrolling in mobile devices is more usable in webpages than other methods like paging or internal links in terms of effectiveness, efficiency and user satisfaction. Results of our study can be relevant for mobile web developers who are involved in designing interfaces, and also for companies and organizations interested in increasing the readability of their web sites and applications. We provide a new usability guideline to improve the usability of regular-length web documents displayed in touchscreen mobile devices.The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents related work pointing the necessity of studying scrolling in web interfaces for touchscreen mobile devices. Section 3 presents the method and experimental design. Section 4 presents the results of experimentation. Section 5 presents discussion comparing our findings with previous studies. Finally, Section 6 outlines conclusions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
