@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Sex-based differences in lifting technique under increasing load conditions: A principal component analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Differences in lifting conditions between sexes were analyzed under increasing load conditions.Principal component analysis was used to analyze lifting waveforms.Single component reconstruction was used to interpret principal components.Lifting style was similar between sexes when load standardized to the individual.Lifting technique changed with increasing load.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Lifting kinematics,Sex differences,Principal component analysis,Single component reconstruction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The objective of the present study was to determine if there is a sex-based difference in lifting technique across increasing-load conditions. Eleven male and 14 female participants (n = 25) with no previous history of low back disorder participated in the study. Participants completed freestyle, symmetric lifts of a box with handles from the floor to a table positioned at 50% of their height for five trials under three load conditions (10%, 20%, and 30% of their individual maximum isometric back strength). Joint kinematic data for the ankle, knee, hip, and lumbar and thoracic spine were collected using a two-camera Optotrak motion capture system. Joint angles were calculated using a three-dimensional Euler rotation sequence. Principal component analysis (PCA) and single component reconstruction were applied to assess differences in lifting technique across the entire waveforms. Thirty-two PCs were retained from the five joints and three axes in accordance with the 90% trace criterion. Repeated-measures ANOVA with a mixed design revealed no significant effect of sex for any of the PCs. This is contrary to previous research that used discrete points on the lifting curve to analyze sex-based differences, but agrees with more recent research using more complex analysis techniques. There was a significant effect of load on lifting technique for five PCs of the lower limb (PC1 of ankle flexion, knee flexion, and knee adduction, as well as PC2 and PC3 of hip flexion) (p < 0.005). However, there was no significant effect of load on the thoracic and lumbar spine. It was concluded that when load is standardized to individual back strength characteristics, males and females adopted a similar lifting technique. In addition, as load increased male and female participants changed their lifting technique in a similar manner.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Low back disorder (LBD) is the most prevalent and costly musculoskeletal disorder in the world (Brooks, 2006; Kumar, 2001, LeBlanc and LeBlanc, 2010; Punnett and Wegman, 2004). It is such a widespread problem that it has been identified by the Pan American Health Organization as one of the top three occupational health problems to be targeted for surveillance by the World Health Organization (WHO) (Choi et al., 2001). LBD is estimated to affect 4–33% of the population at any given time (Papageorgiou et al., 1996; van Tulder et al., 2002; Woolf and Pfleger, 2003), and up to 85% of individuals over their lifetime (Freburger et al., 2009; Papageorgiou et al., 1996; van Tulder et al., 2002; Walker, 2000; Woolf and Pfleger, 2003) with the majority of people being affected between the ages of 25 and 64 years (Nelson et al., 2005). The specific age group affected can be explained by the fact that 37% of LBD has been attributed to occupational factors such as lifting (Nelson et al., 2005; Punnett et al., 2005). The cost of medical care contributes to the large financial burden of LBD. However, indirect costs, such as: days off work, decreased productivity, and insurance claims are also major contributors. The annual cost of LBD in Canada is estimated to be $16.4 billion (Badley et al., 1994; Coyte et al., 1998). In the United States, the estimated annual cost of LBD is between $100 and $200 billion (Katz, 2006).In terms of sex, earlier studies found that males have higher prevalence of LBD than females (Punnett et al., 2005). Recently; however, studies are reporting that females have a higher prevalence of LBD than males (Freburger et al., 2009). The rising prevalence of LBD in females may be partially attributed to the fact that more females are obtaining employment in physically demanding occupations than in the past. However, there remains to be more males than females in jobs that are physically demanding (Statistics Canada, 2011). Therefore, other factors likely contribute to the rising prevalence of LBD in females. Few studies have investigated the sex-based differences in lifting technique. Lifting technique is important to consider because it gives valuable insight into typical movement patterns. However, previous research has shown that training lifting technique (i.e. squat vs. stoop) is not effective in reducing spinal load (van Dieen et al., 1999), and that training lifting technique is not effective in preventing LBD (Martimo et al., 2008). Thus, new research assessing lifting technique and technique differences between sexes should be innovative, in order to ensure that any workplace strategies for decreasing LBD are effective and transferrable between males and females.Sex differences in lifting technique were examined directly by Lindbeck and Kjellberg (2001). In their study, participants were required to lift a handled box from the floor to a table located at the level of the umbilicus. Each participant performed two constrained lifting methods at two speeds. The load in the box was 12.8 kg for males, and 8.7 kg for females. The difference in load was assumed to correspond approximately to differences in physical capacity between males and females. Kinematic differences in lifting technique were found between sexes. More specifically, trunk angles were significantly greater for males for all lift conditions. However, a number of limitations were discussed by Lindbeck and Kjellberg (2001). Primarily, the biomechanical model that was used represented the trunk with one segment and, as a result, it may not have accurately represented the spinal curvature of the participants. A second limitation they outlined was that, although the load was different for males and females, it did not account for individual capabilities.In 2013, Sadler, Graham, and Stevenson completed a study that addressed the limitations outlined by Lindbeck and Kjellberg (2001). Participants were instructed to continuously lift a handled box from the floor to a table positioned at 50% of their height at a lifting rate of ten times a minute for 3 minutes using a freestyle (self-selected) lifting technique. They completed this twice; with a load of ∼0% and 10% of each individual's maximum isometric back strength. Using principal component analysis (PCA), no significant differences were found between males and females. The main limitation in the study was that participants were required to lift light loads, which may be why no differences in lifting technique were found. A second limitation is that participants were required to perform 30 continuous lifts, which may have led to a change in technique or fatigue.The objective of the present study was to determine if there is a sex-based difference in lifting technique across increasing load conditions using PCA. Based on the study by Sadler et al. (2013) it was hypothesized that: 1) there would be no effect of sex on lifting technique, 2) there would be an effect of load on both sexes, and 3) both sexes would respond the same to the increase in load (i.e. there would be no significant interaction between sex and load). The findings of this research will help determine preferred self-selected lifting technique for males and females. This will help ergonomists and rehabilitation professionals understand whether the same strategies to help decrease LBD in males can also apply to females.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
