@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Overload depending on driving experience and situation complexity: Which strategies faced with a pedestrian crossing?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We examine the influence of situation complexity and driving experience on subjective workload and driving performance.We identify effective avoidance maneuvers faced with a hazard pedestrian appearance.A driving simulation study is carried out.The situation complexity and the lack of experience increase the subjective workload.The swerving maneuver is the most effective strategy to avoid a pedestrian.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Subjective workload,Driving experience,Situation complexity,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The purpose of this study was to identify the influence of situation complexity and driving experience on subjective workload and driving performance, and the less costly and the most effective strategies faced with a hazard pedestrian crossing. Four groups of young drivers (15 traditionally trained novices, 12 early-trained novices, 15 with three years of experience and 15 with a minimum of five years of experience) were randomly assigned to three situations (simple, moderately complex and very complex) including unexpected pedestrian crossings, in a driving simulator. The subjective workload was collected by the NASA-TLX questionnaire after each situation. The main results confirmed that the situation complexity and the lack of experience increased the subjective workload. Moreover, the subjective workload, the avoidance strategies and the reaction times influenced the number of collisions depending on situation complexity and driving experience. These results must be taken into account to target the prevention actions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Epidemiological studies covering 37 countries show that young drivers are the most involved in road accidents (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)/International Transport Forum (ITF), 2014). The age is thus an important factor and more precisely the experience inherent in the age, as the accident rate decreases with experience (Mayhew et al., 2003) with a high risk the first months and the first kilometres after getting the driving license (McKnight, 2006; Preusser, 2006). During the first eight months, the number of accidents involving novice drivers decreases by approximately 50% (Sagberg, 2000, cited by OECD, 2006), confirming that these road accidents are more linked to their driving experience than to their age.Situation complexity and hazard events also constitute a major determinant of driving performance. Generally, most fatalities occur on rural roads compared to urban roads and motorways, with 65% of the fatalities in France, 62% in Austria, almost 60% in the United Kingdom, 49% in United States and 48% in Belgium in 2012 (OECD/ITF, 2014). These types of roads define the situation complexity, according to a taxonomy that classifies the elements of a situation as more or less complex (Fastenmeier, 1995). The complexity can thus vary with road geometry (rectilinear vs. curvilinear, flat vs. hilly), roadside environment (quantity and variability of traffic signs, variability of the scenery) and traffic density (low vs. high). Finally, hazard events are broadly observed with pedestrians crossing the road, making them the largest group of vulnerable road users in most countries. The number of fatalities amongst pedestrians slightly increases since 2009 and represents 19% of all fatalities in the 37 countries recorded by the International Traffic Safety Data and Analysis Group (IRTAD) in 2014 (OECDE/ITF, 2014). Data from the Detailed Accident Study collected by the Mechanisms of Accidents Laboratory at IFSTTAR (French Institute of Science and Technology for Transport, Development, and Networks) also precise that unexpected events, such as a pedestrian crossing in front of a driver, correspond to prototypical accident scenarios (Damm et al., 2011). Among several configurations of accidents between a vehicle and a pedestrian, many occur when a pedestrian moves more or less perpendicular to the vehicle path covers (Wisch et al., 2013).Considering that 90% of road accidents are due to human errors (Amditis et al., 2010), the research question concerns the processes involved and particularly the subjective workload, i.e. cost perceived depending on the interaction between required tasks and drivers' internal state (Hockey, 2003). Situation complexity and low driving skills can particularly enhance the drivers' level of subjective workload, leading to performance impairments. Based on the taxonomy of situation complexity (Fastenmeier, 1995), a recent study revealed performance degradations in “urban” sections and “oncoming traffic” sections (complex situations) compared to “rectilinear roads” sections (simple situation), characterized by higher Standard Deviations of the Lateral Position (SDLP) and higher Standard Deviations (SD) of speed (Baldauf et al., 2009). Meister's model (1976) explains these results by a link between the situation complexity, the level of subjective workload and the performance. When the situation is low demanding (e.g., in long and monotonous roads with a low traffic density), or conversely high demanding (e.g., in rural roads with a high traffic density), the level of subjective workload is high and the performance is impaired, revealing an overload. Indeed, when the level of demand is low, the driver has to provide a high effort to overcome the vigilance decrement and when the level of demand is high, the driver needs to provide a high effort to process the vast amount of information. In these types of situations, the level of workload thus increases with the provided effort, until the driver doesn't have sufficiently available resources to maintain a good performance. However, when the situation is moderately complex (e.g., in rural roads with a moderate traffic density), the level of subjective workload is relatively low. Even if it slightly increases, drivers can adopt the compensatory strategy of reducing their speed in order to correctly perform the task. Accident reports on rural roads provide few details about road characteristics at the time of the accidents. However, it is necessary to identify the potential complex elements of the situation in the aim of better discern the origin of rural roads' accidents.Workload varies differently depending on driving experience. The Skill, Rule, Knowledge (SRK) model of Rasmussen (1984) shows that driving skills are acquired in three steps with experience. The Knowledge-based behavior, mainly adopted by novice drivers, is a controlled action (slow and effortful) referring to the knowledge about the Highway Code and previous experiences. The Ruled-based behavior is an intermediate step which can be adopted either by novice or experienced drivers. It is a controlled action which follows prescribed rules (e.g., stopping at a red traffic light). The Skill-based behavior is an automatic action (fast and effortless) rather adopted by experienced drivers (e.g., changing gear without attention). This model confirms that novice drivers predominantly have a lack of routine automation (De Craen et al., 2008). Performing the task thus implies producing a higher effort for novices than for experienced drivers (Patten et al., 2006), this effort reflecting a high level of subjective workload. Consequently, novice drivers are more likely to have accidents when they are overloaded, with a level of workload too high to maintain a good performance.Three profiles of young French drivers can especially qualify the different levels of experience. Traditional trained drivers have 20 h of driving lessons with an instructor. Early-trained drivers have an additional driving practice with an adult during 3000 km and can start the learning at the age of 16. These two profiles of novice drivers can both get their driving license from the age of 18. They subsequently have a restricted license including a speed limitation and a restriction to 6 points instead of 12 points on their license. This probationary period, preceding the obtaining of a full license, lasts three years for traditionally trained drivers and two years for early trained drivers. It also appears that drivers with more than five years of experience are three times less likely to have an accident compared to drivers who have just had their driving license (Maycock et al., 1991). Therefore, the overload probably appears earlier with the lack of experience, in the following order for: novice drivers who are traditionally trained, novice drivers who are early-trained, drivers arriving at the end of the three year probationary period, and drivers having more than five years of experience.Faced with a hazard event with a high temporal pressure as a pedestrian crossing, reacting in time to avoid the vulnerable user becomes difficult. Several strategies can be adopted to avoid the accident, i.e. braking, swerving, making a combination of both of them, or anticipating the hazard appearance by braking, swerving or releasing the accelerator pedal in advance. According to a literature review about possible avoidance maneuvers in emergency situations (Adams, 1994), drivers brake more than they swerve, although braking alone is less effective to avoid any collision than swerving or both braking and swerving.Age and experience are often combined in driving studies. The present objective is to particularly focus on driving experience by comparing, among young drivers, groups having different levels of experience. The main hypothesis is that combined effects of high temporal pressure inducted by pedestrian apparition, situation complexity (simple or very complex situations) and lack of experience should enhance the level of subjective workload and impair driving performance when drivers are faced with an unexpected pedestrian crossing the road. Performance decrement could be longer reaction times and a higher number of collisions with the pedestrians due to costly and inappropriate avoidance maneuvers as braking alone (Adams, 1994).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
