@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Impact of online training on delivering a difficult medical diagnosis: Acquiring communication skills

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Design and evaluation of a web-based self-training package.Web-based training for the acquisition of communication skills.Web-based training that enriches how physicians view diagnosis delivery.Interviews showed how physicians' mental picture of diagnosis delivery evolved.The exercises identify changes in practice and acquisition of new skills.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Training,Assessment,Skill,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper deals with developing and assessing the training of physicians to deliver a difficult diagnosis to patients. The training is provided by a web-based self-training package. This online training emphasizes the structural, functional and relational dimensions of interviews delivering a serious diagnosis, and a logical set of recommendations for behavior towards the patient. The content is illustrated by numerous delivery interview sequences that are described and for which commentary is provided. This online package was expected to enable physicians to acquire new skills and change their mental picture of diagnosis delivery. Here we discuss the assessment of training in managing the delivery of a serious diagnosis. The approach taken and the methods used to measure knowledge and skills are presented.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
This paper deals with training to deliver a difficult medical diagnosis. The training is given through an online package designed to develop communication skills.Having to deliver a difficult medical diagnosis to a patient is a situation that every physician will have to face sooner or later. Preparing and training to manage this type of interview is thus essential for both patients and physicians. For patients, it has been shown that a delivery correctly made has a positive effect on their commitment to the therapeutic process (Libert and Reynaert, 2009) and on their propensity to adopt an active forward-looking attitude (Baile and Aaron, 2005; Butow, 2005; Fallowfield, 2008). For physicians, being trained in managing the delivery interview helps them approach these grueling and dispiriting situations with greater equanimity (Bettery et al., 2006).We can distinguish two forms of difficult diagnosis delivery training: classical and interactive. The first form imparts information on legislation, defense mechanisms, what should be done during the interview (managing emotion, answering questions, etc.) or should not be done (interrupting or making a judgment on the patient, etc.). The second form focuses on acquiring the communication skills needed to smoothly conduct a delivery interview. The first form has a low implementation cost (one-way communication), unlike the second form, which generally involves courses lasting several days, and requires trainers versed in role-play management and collective discussion.Countries such as Canada have integrated such training into their academic programs. In France, though not yet compulsory, this training is offered in more and more French universities. Even so, the training proposed remains classical; cost still makes interactive training less preferred. It is obviously important to be well-informed about the determinants of the diagnosis delivery, legislation, patient reaction, and what should and should not be done, but the acquisition of communication skills is also essential. Hence there is still an unmet need to devise and develop accessible, effective training provision for conducting diagnosis delivery interviews (Ferraton-Rollin et al., 2013).Accordingly, with the support of the French Ligue Contre le Cancer, we developed a training website devoted to delivering a difficult diagnosis. It has the following features: (i) it is freely accessible, being web-based, (ii) it is a self-training package and so it needs no trainers, (iii) an online training session takes at most half an hour, and so it is not costly or time consuming for the trainees, and (iv) its content is based essentially on the results of analyzing physician–patient interviews obtained by role-play. This design aims to offer training that, though non-interactive, still enables the acquisition of communication skills. Our project was prompted by the work of Cuenot et al. (2005), who show that simply observing role play situations where a difficult diagnosis is delivered gives the observers the feeling they have acquired communication skills. Although the authors did not verify whether skills were effectively acquired, we take the view, classical in interactive training, that to acquire these skills, trainees do not have to be actually involved in the situations in which they have to act. It is sufficient to induce them to take a reflective stance on the practice to be acquired, and give them the resources to do so. Hence presenting interaction sequences extracted from interviews where a difficult diagnosis is delivered, commenting on them and explaining them, should favor the acquisition of skills. Our website was designed on this basis.To test our hypothesis, we recruited participants representative of the targeted audience, i.e. young physicians and medical interns. Before and after use of the site, the participants were interviewed and were given two exercises to do. The interviews were carried out to identify their mental picture of the difficult diagnosis delivery consultation. The exercises were designed to appraise the acquisition of a communication skill involved in the recommendation “avoid an emotional shock”. The results obtained showed that our web-based package enabled trainees to acquire communication skills and to form a mental picture of the delivery interview compatible with those skills.The first part of this paper sets out the existing provision of training for diagnosis delivery with the corresponding evaluation processes. The second part describes the design of the web-based package and its evaluation.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
