@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The effects of a convex rear-view mirror on ocular accommodative responses

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We examined the ocular accommodative responses while viewing an object in a convex rear-view mirror.Viewing an object in a convex mirror caused a false recognition of its position.It would cause large accommodative fluctuations and blurred vision for the user.The ocular accommodative responses should be considered as a new indicator of automotive safety.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Convex rear-view mirror,Ocular accommodative response,Infrared optometer,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Convex mirrors are universally used as rear-view mirrors in automobiles. However, the ocular accommodative responses during the use of these mirrors have not yet been examined. This study investigated the effects of a convex mirror on the ocular accommodative systems. Seven young adults with normal visual functions were ordered to binocularly watch an object in a convex or plane mirror. The accommodative responses were measured with an infrared optometer. The average of the accommodation of all subjects while viewing the object in the convex mirror were significantly nearer than in the plane mirror, although all subjects perceived the position of the object in the convex mirror as being farther away. Moreover, the fluctuations of accommodation were significantly larger for the convex mirror. The convex mirror caused the 'false recognition of distance', which induced the large accommodative fluctuations and blurred vision. Manufactures should consider the ocular accommodative responses as a new indicator for increasing automotive safety.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Convex mirrors are used to reduce blind spots and to increase the field of view in many situations. Some of them are used for crime prevention in automated teller machines or stores, allowing the users to see what is happening behind them or in their blind spots. Others are used to confirm safe traffic conditions at intersections or on the vehicles (Moukhwas, 1987). In automobiles, convex type mirrors are often use and designed as rear-view mirrors to confirm the safety of rear or side blind areas without requiring the occupant to change his/her head position (Case et al., 1980). Rear-view mirrors can be grouped into outer rear-view mirrors and inner rear-view mirrors. Outer rear-view mirrors, which are also called wing mirrors or side-view mirrors, include fender mirrors and door mirrors. The UNECE (United Nations Economic Commission for Europe) Transport Division has been providing secretariat services to the World Forum for Harmonization of Vehicle Regulations (WP 29) for more than 50 years. In this forum, the global uniformity of wheeled vehicle equipment or parts has also been discussed. However, the rear-view mirrors are currently different in each country and for each manufacturer, because they are not fully standardized. The advantages of using convex mirrors in driving are an increased field of view and the reduction of blind spots. However, the image size is smaller than that seen in a plane mirror in the same location. Then, when overtaking other automobiles, drivers may overestimate their distance from a following car and make dangerous decisions. Therefore, in some countries (United States, Canada, India, Korea and so on), these mirrors need to be labeled with the safety warning “Objects in mirror are closer than they appear”, to warn the driver of the convex mirror's distorting effects on distance perception.In addition to above features of convex mirrors, we cannot see objects clearly, and perceive blurred vision when we observe them carefully through a convex mirror. We supposed that this blurred vision derives from the temporary disorder of ocular accommodation that occurs when looking in a convex mirror. There have so far been a few reports written about the optical specificity of the convex mirror (e.g., Hahnel and Hecht, 2012; Higashiyama et al., 2001; Higashiyama and Shimono, 2004; Smith and Atchinson, 1997; van der Horst, 2004). All of these reports were written about the relation between human perceptions of the distance from the mirror to the object and the parameters such as mirror curvature. However, no study has yet reported objective evaluations of viewing through convex mirrors.The present study investigated the effects of a convex mirror on human ocular accommodative systems using an infrared optometer.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study, we examined, for the first time, the human ocular accommodative responses while viewing an object in a convex mirror. The results indicated that viewing an object in a convex mirror causes a false recognition of its position, which would induce large accommodative fluctuations and blurred vision for the user with normal visual function. These results show that drivers who use convex mirrors to confirm the safety of rear or side blind areas should therefore familiarize themselves with the shortcomings of such mirrors in order to avoid traffic accidents. In addition, automobile manufacturers and the transport ministry should consider the human ocular accommodative responses as a new indicator of automotive safety when they either design or set up the tools for confirming safe driving; not only rear-view or side mirrors, but also speed meters and a display of car navigation, would be helpful for increasing safe driving.