@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Evaluation of thermal formation and air ventilation inside footwear during gait: The role of gait and fitting

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The effect of air behavior inside footwear on foot temperature formation was studied.The effect of the energy balance of the foot on skin temperature was examined.The cooling effect of ventilation on the arch temperature was observed.The ventilation rate was determined based on the footwear air space and gait.Ventilation was found to be a key to the design of thermally comfortable footwear.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Foot temperature,Air behavior,Energy balance,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Comfort is an important concept in footwear design. The microclimate inside footwear contributes to the perception of thermal comfort. To investigate the effect of ventilation on microclimate formation inside footwear, experiments with subjects were conducted at four gait speeds with three different footwear sizes. Skin temperature, metabolism, and body mass were measured at approximately 25 °C and 50% relative humidity, with no solar radiation and a calm wind. The footwear occupancy and ventilation rate were also estimated, with the latter determined using the tracer gas method. The experimental results revealed that foot movement, metabolism, evaporation, radiation, convection, and ventilation were the main factors influencing the energy balance for temperature formation on the surface of the foot. The cooling effect of ventilation on the arch temperature was observed during gait. The significance of the amount of air space and ventilation on the improvement in the thermal comfort of footwear was clarified.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Covering the body is a major contributor to the microclimate around the human body, which is the state of temperature formed by the combination of the environment, the human body, and materials. The outer materials influence the heat transfer between humans and their surroundings and the thermoregulation of the human body, thus affecting thermal comfort. Therefore, assessment of coverage thermal insulation has been carried out by several researchers, and a guideline has been provided in ISO9920 (2007), particularly for clothing. Like clothing, footwear serves a physiological function. Although the feet account for only 7% of the body surface area (Hardy and Dubois, 1938), they significantly influence physiological heat exchange. The thermal protection characteristics of footwear play an important role in confining heat inside footwear, particularly in hot environments. Because the feet are dense in sweat glands (Kuno, 1956), high temperatures induce sweating. During exercise, particularly in the heat, which is assumed to be the normal use condition of footwear, there is a larger sweat secretion rate from the dorsal surface than from the sole and plantar side of the toes (Smith et al., 2013). Because sweat production is one of the influential factors in footwear design, evaluation of footwear for moisture disposal has been conducted (Schols et al., 2004; Heus et al., 2005). The subjective perception of the thermal comfort of footwear has been found to be related much more to increased foot temperature than to moisture retention (Arezes et al., 2013). This finding seems to be related to the basic idea that the thermal comfort is related to skin temperature (Bulcao et al., 2000).In order to provide thermal comfort inside footwear, the temperature and humidity need to be maintained within normal limits. One study reported that the footwear temperature should be kept in the range of 27–33 °C for foot comfort (Kuklane, 2009). Footwear temperatures up to 50 °C have been measured in summer during exercise (Kinoshita and Bates, 1996), and foot temperatures beyond the comfortable range have been measured even for indoor gaits (Shimazaki and Murata, 2015). Cooling the foot may therefore affect the comfort of footwear.Footwear has multiple functions, including reducing injuries and maintaining hygiene by protecting the foot. One possible solution to cooling feet enclosed in footwear is prompt ventilation. The removal of heat and moisture from inside footwear is achieved mainly by the piston-like action, called bellows action, that occurs during gait (Vokac et al., 1973). Several methods for measuring microclimate ventilation for enclosed spaces have been developed (Crockford et al., 1972; Lotens and Havenith, 1988). Havenith et al. (2010) confirmed the validity of a method intended for clothing ventilation after comparing several ventilation methods. Subsequently, Satsumoto et al. (2011) proposed a method that was applicable to footwear. Because the gait motions change depending on the gait speed, the ventilation conditions vary. However, the effects of ventilation on thermal formation inside footwear under various gait conditions are still unclear, and there is no organized data available for use in footwear design.The thermal aspect of comfort is one of the most important concepts in footwear design. The temperature and air behavior inside footwear contribute to the perception of thermal comfort, and many commercial products have been developed based on the optimization of these parameters. However, there have been no studies on the heat exchanges in footwear that are associated with ventilation of air and thermal comfort. Therefore, this study was conducted to analyze the heat exchanges associated with ventilation and assess their influence on the formation of the thermal environment inside specific footwear. The results of the study also provide a database for designing comfortable footwear with adequate ventilation.Experimental measurements were performed in this study to examine the relationships between the characteristics of footwear, the microclimate inside footwear, ventilation, and gait. First, the characteristics of the footwear were determined, namely, their fitting and air ventilation rate. Then, to analyze the microclimate conditions inside the footwear, the inside temperatures were measured during gait. The ambient weather conditions were also measured, including the global solar radiation (with an EKO MR-60), the solar radiation reflected from the ground (with an EKO MR-60), the infrared radiation from the atmosphere and ground (with an EKO MR-60), the air temperature (with a thermistor), the wind speed (with a Kanomax model 6531), and the humidity (with a polymer resistance hygrometer).Most studies of the thermal comfort of footwear have been conducted using foot manikins. However, the characterization of footwear under real gait is essential and requires human participants. All of the measurements used in this study were obtained during a single session. The participants were seven healthy adult males (1.72 ± 0.07 m height, 61.8 ± 4.7 kg weight, and 23.8 ± 4.3 years old). After informed consent was obtained from all the participants, the subject experiments were conducted with the approval of the Research Ethics Committee of Okayama Prefectural University.Four gait speeds, transitioning from walking to running, were selected for the experiments: 0.0, 3.0, 6.0, and 9.0 km/h.The participants changed into specified clothing and were acclimated to the initial environmental state in a chamber before the experiment. They wore shoes on their bare feet to eliminate any effect from socks.For the purpose of eliminating the influence of different types of footwear on the microclimate inside the footwear, we studied different sizes (26.0, 27.0, and 28.0 cm) of specific footwear designed for running to analyze their fitting (Fig. 1). The footwear had a slightly raised heel with rubber cushioning and a maximum height of 2.0 cm, and the outsides of the shoes were made of porous material. When considering the airflow inside footwear, the gap space between the foot and the footwear is important. There are several techniques for modeling the foot and footwear shapes (e.g., Kouchi, 1995; Mauch et al., 2009), but a simple method was used in this study. In order to assess the overall fitting between the foot and the footwear, occupancy was used as an indicator of the gap space volume. The occupancy R [no units] is the ratio of the volume of the foot to the volume of the interior of the footwear and is expressed as follows:(1)R=VfootVfootwearwhere V denotes volume [m3]. The volume of the foot Vfootwas measured by the water displacement method using Archimedes' principle (Manna et al., 2001). After marking the upper limit of the footwear on the foot with the footwear on, the participant's foot was positioned in a water bath filled with water to ensure that the mark met the water surface, and the volume of spilled water was taken as the volume of the foot. The volume of the footwear Vfootwearwas measured using a fine powder. The footwear was filled with the powder, and then the mass of the powder was measured. The volume of the footwear was obtained by dividing the mass of the powder by its density (1.09 kg/m3). The powder was put inside a plastic bag so that it could deform smoothly and freely. The volumes were determined from the masses of the spilled water and powder, using an electrical balance with a 0.1-g resolution (Shimadzu ELB3000).The tracer gas method was used for ventilation rate measurements (Havenith et al., 2010; Ke et al., 2014), as shown in the schematic diagram in Fig. 2. The tracer gas, CO2, was mixed with air and injected at four locations inside the footwear (upper, bottom, inner, and outer sides) using a perforated tubing system. After the inlet flow into the footwear was enriched with CO2, the flow circulated through the system via the connected pump. The flow rate was measured at 1-s intervals (Azbil MQV), and the tracer gas concentrations were measured at the inlet and outlet, and in the ambient environment (Vaisala GMP343). The ventilation rate Vent [L/min] was calculated using the following expression:(2)Vent=QCin−CoutCout−Cambwhere Q is the flow rate of the circulating flow [L/min], Cinis the CO2 concentration of the inlet flow into the footwear [ppm], Coutis the CO2 concentration of the outlet flow from the footwear [ppm], and Cambis the CO2 concentration in the ambient environment [ppm].The experiment was performed in a climate chamber at Yokohama National University. The chamber provided a constant air temperature of 25 °C, a relative humidity of 50%, no solar radiation, and a calm wind. Before the experiment, the ventilation measurement system was turned on to ensure a steady state. The sensors were installed 15 min before the measurements began, and the measurements were carried out for 17 min in the indoor chamber. After performing 12 min of gait, the participants recovered for 5 min.Foot skin temperatures were measured at seven points during gait at 1-min intervals using thermocouples. Understanding the regional distribution of skin temperature contributes to advancing footwear design; thus, measurement points at the ball of the foot, the neck of the big toe, the arch, the heel, the instep, the medial malleolus, and the lateral malleolus were selected to represent the entire foot (Fig. 3). The ball is the point between the big toe and arch and contacts the ground, whereas the point on the neck of big toe does not.The experiment was performed in an indoor chamber at Okayama Prefectural University. The sensors were installed 15 min before the measurements began for acclimatization to the environment, and the measurements were carried out for 50 min. After 10 min of rest, a subject performed a gait exercise for 30 min and then recovered for another 10 min.The average air temperature, humidity, solar radiation, and wind speed were approximately 26.6 ± 2.0 °C, 58.5 ± 10.7% RH, no solar radiation (0 W/m2), and calm wind, respectively.In general, the temperature values depend on the energy balance: when the received heat is greater than the released heat, the temperature increases, and vice versa. Thus, the measurements were planned to determine the energy flows to and from the skin regions and particularly on the enclosed foot, so that the knowledge gained from the analysis can be utilized in practical design applications. The energy balance for humans consists of heat generated by metabolism, physical work output, net radiation, convective heat, and evaporative latent heat (Fanger, 1972). However, there is currently no established method for directly calculating the energy balance of an individual body part, such as the feet. Therefore, the components contributing to energy balance were evaluated based on whole-body calculations using the “human thermal load” model (Shimazaki et al., 2011). Footwear was considered to act as a thermal insulator in the same manner as clothing.The inhaled oxygen and exhaled carbon dioxide were measured at 20-s intervals during the experiments to determine the heat generated by the metabolism of the subject. The heat generated by metabolism was estimated by Weir's method (Weir, 1949). Evaporative heat and convective heat were estimated based on ASHRAE's method (ASHRAE, 2013). Net radiation, which is the difference between the incoming and outgoing radiation, is the summation of the solar radiation and infrared radiation. The skin temperature used in the heat transfer and energy balance calculations was the mean value for the bottom of the foot.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In order to identify the mechanism of formation of the microclimate inside footwear for the purpose of assessing thermal comfort, experiments with subjects were conducted at four different gait speeds and three different sizes of specific footwear to evaluate skin temperature changes.Considering the energy balance of the skin region is useful for understanding the temperature formation trends inside the footwear. In fact, during the resting period, when the energy balance was confirmed to be stable, the foot temperature was also found to be stable. During gait, heat generation associated with gait exercise and foot contact is the dominant factor influencing the foot temperature elevation. Radiative and evaporative heat loss cools the foot, but heat generation has a stronger impact than heat losses at higher gait speeds. Other cooling factors are the overall heat dissipation associated with convective heat loss and the air ventilation inside the footwear. The skin temperature at the arch, below which an air space exists, was found to be lowered by ventilation, and thus the ventilation rate could be used as an indicator of cooling.A beneficial way to improve the design of footwear for coolness and comfort would be to enhance the ventilation. As the degree of ventilation is determined by gait conditions and air behavior inside the footwear, clarification of the airflow formation mechanism and effective space arrangement inside the footwear need to be pursued in future research.