@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Whole-body vibration exposure of haul truck drivers at a surface coal mine

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Haul truck drivers are exposed to WBV amplitudes within the HGCZ defined by ISO2631-1.Maintained roadways were associated with substantially lower WBV amplitudes.Larger trucks were associated with lower vibration levels than small trucks.A WBV management plan should be in place at surface mine sites.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Whole-body vibration,Mining,Haul truck,ISO2631-1,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Haul truck drivers at surface mines are exposed to whole-body vibration for extended periods. Thirty-two whole-body vibration measurements were gathered from haul trucks under a range of normal operating conditions. Measurements taken from 30 of the 32 trucks fell within the health guidance caution zone defined by ISO2631-1 for an 8 h daily exposure suggesting, according to ISO2631-1, that “caution with respect to potential health risks is indicated”. Maintained roadways were associated with substantially lower vibration amplitudes. Larger trucks were associated with lower vibration levels than small trucks. The descriptive nature of the research, and small sample size, prevents any strong conclusion regarding causal links. Further investigation of the variables associated with elevated vibration levels is justified.Relevance to industryThe operators of mining equipment such as haul trucks are exposed to whole-body vibration amplitudes which have potential to lead to long term health effects. Systematic whole-body vibration measurements taken at frequent intervals are required to provide an understanding of the causes of elevated vibration levels and hence determine appropriate control measures.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Long term exposure to high amplitude whole-body vibration (WBV) is strongly associated with the subsequent development of back pain (Bernard, 1997; Bovenzi and Hulshof, 1998; Sandover, 1983; Wilder and Pope, 1996). Other health effects associated with WBV include adverse consequences for cardiovascular, respiratory, digestive, reproductive, endocrine and metabolic systems (Griffin, 1990). Many operators of mobile equipment used in mines and other industries are exposed to significant WBV for relatively long periods (Burgess-Limerick, 2012; Eger et al., 2006; Eger et al., 2011).ISO2631-1 (ISO, 1997, 2010) describes procedures for the evaluation of WBV. Two principle methods of describing frequency-weighted acceleration amplitude are defined: (i) the root mean square (r.m.s.); and (ii) a fourth root measure termed the Vibration Dose Value (VDV) which is more sensitive to high amplitude jolts and jars. ISO2631-1 also provides guidance regarding the evaluation of health effects, defining a “health guidance caution zone” (HGCZ). For exposures below the HGCZ it is suggested that no health effects have been clearly documented. For exposures within the HGCZ “caution with respect to potential health risks is indicated” and for acceleration exposures greater than the HGCZ it is suggested that “health risks are likely”. For an eight hour daily exposure, the upper and lower bounds of the HGCZ are 0.47 m/s2 and 0.93 m/s2 r.m.s. respectively (McPhee et al., 2009). The corresponding values for the VDV measure are 8.5 m/s1.75 and 17 m/s1.75.Haul trucks are used extensively in the surface mining industry. It has been suggested that haul truck drivers may be exposed to WBV amplitudes which have adverse health effects. Kumar (2004) recorded accelerometer data during nine 15 s intervals while each of 4 haul trucks (240 ton and 320 ton) completed a hauling cycle over smooth frozen roads. It was concluded that vibration amplitudes were greatest in the vertical direction, and particular while the trucks were driven unloaded. Vertical accelerations measured at the seat pan while driving unloaded ranged from 0.45 m/s2 to 1.75 m/s2 r.m.s. Although the author concluded that haul trucks “frequently generated vibrations in excess of ISO standards” (p. 509), the extremely short duration measurements make interpretation of these data difficult.In contrast, however, Eger et al. (2006) measured the WBV amplitudes associated with a range of mining equipment including two 150 ton surface haul trucks during several 5 min trials. Vibration amplitudes were found to be highest in the vertical directions, and the average was found to be 0.28 and 0.37 m/s2 r.m.s. for the two trucks respectively, well below the HGCZ defined by ISO2631-1.More recently, Smets et al. (2010) collected one hour duration WBV measurements from eight haul trucks of varying capacities (30 ton to 150 ton) during normal operation at surface mines in Northern Ontario. The vertical accelerations measured ranged from 0.44 m/s2 to 0.82 m/s2 r.m.s., and the VDV(8) from 8.8 m/s1.75 to 16.4 m/s1.75. Seven of the eight measurements were found to lie within the HGCZ defined by ISO2631.1 for r.m.s. and all eight VDV(8) measurements lay within the HGCZ.There is limited evidence to suggest that haul trucks used in surface mining may expose operators to levels of WBV which are associated with risks to the operators’ health, however there is some inconsistency in previous reports. These differences are likely to arise from the short measurement durations associated with some of the previous investigations, as well as variability in equipment and sites. Further investigation of WBV exposures associated with a larger sample of trucks is justified. The aim of the current investigation is to examine the WBV exposures of operators of haul trucks during a range of normal operating conditions at an Australian surface coal mine to assess the potential health risks to drivers.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
