@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Effect of firefighters' personal protective equipment on gait

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Wearing firefighting boots is a major contributor to firefighters' gait change.An increase in flexing resistance of the boots restricts normal foot motions.Increased flexing resistance of the boots elevates gait instability.Increased gait instability in stiff boots can increase traumatic injury risk.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Firefighters,Foot,Gait,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The biomechanical experiment with eight male and four female firefighters demonstrates that the effect of adding essential equipment: turnout ensemble, self-contained breathing apparatus, and boots (leather and rubber boots), significantly restricts foot pronation. This finding is supported by a decrease in anterior-posterior and medial-lateral excursion of center of plantar pressure (COP) trajectory during walking. The accumulation of this equipment decreases COP velocity and increases foot-ground contact time and stride time, indicating increased gait instability. An increase in the flexing resistance of the boots is the major contributor to restricted foot pronation and gait instability as evidenced by the greater decrease in excursion of COP in leather boots (greater flexing resistance) than in rubber boots (lower resistance). The leather boots also shows the greatest increase in foot contact time and stride time. These negative impacts can increase musculoskeletal injuries in unfavorable fire ground environments.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Firefighting is one of many physically demanding occupations, where daily tasks often occur in dangerous environments (Coca et al., 2010). Wearing personal protective equipment (PPE) is the only, irreplaceable protection for firefighters who are exposed to multiple hazards. Firefighters' PPE includes turnout coat, pants, boots, hood, gloves, self-contained breathing apparatus and helmet, which are governed by NFPA (National Fire Protection Association) 1971 and 1981 standards. These items of PPE are designed and certified by following NFPA's rigorous requirements and testing methods to protect firefighters from not only flame and high heat, but also from exposure to hazardous liquid, physical, and electrical hazards. Boorady et al. (2013) reported that the enhanced protection of PPE has greatly reduced burn injuries.However, recent literature (Chiou et al., 2012; Punakallio, 2005; Sobeih et al., 2006) reported that wearing PPE poses additional adverse effects, such as restricting movement and impeding firefighter job performance. Smith (2008) found that added weight and bulkiness of PPE for enhanced protection led to increased mobility restriction and physical strains. Park et al. (2010) reported that impaired body balance and mobility restriction are the most significant contributors to musculoskeletal injuries such as slips, trips and falls. These injuries accounted for 27.6 percent of firefighters' on-duty injuries in 2003 (Sobeih et al., 2006). NFPA (2014) also reported that the number of US firefighters' fireground injuries in 2012 from sprain and strain (55%) is greater than burn injuries (7%), thermal stress (6%), and toxic gas inhalation (4%). Such fireground injuries account for 25% of the total injury-related time lost for firefighters (Cloutier and Champoux, 2000). Physically demanding environments in conjunction with cumbersome PPE further increase challenges placed on personal balance control systems while working on unfavorable fireground with typically low visibility in damaged building structure (Punakallio, 2005; Sobeih et al., 2006). Hence, firefighters' locomotion and body balance are critical to safety and job performance.A review of the literature identified the negative effect of PPE on firefighters' locomotion and work efficiency. Physiological studies show that heavy and bulky PPE is a dominant factor contributing to fatigue with increased energy expenditure, causing more injuries (Chiou et al., 2012). Punakallio (2005) and Park et al. (2010) concluded that the self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA) was the single-most influential piece of firefighting gear effecting balance. Park et al. (2010) further demonstrated that the weight of SCBA is closely related to the risk of slipping trauma. Taylor et al. (2011) found that footwear had a greater impact on firefighter exertion than other equipment, such as SCBA and turnout ensembles.Studies that specifically investigated the impact of firefighters' boots on physiological stress and job performance found the weight of firefighter boots to significantly increase physiological stress. Neeves et al. (1989) reported that wearing heavier rubber boots resulted in greater negative impact on firefighters' performance as compared to lighter weight leather boots, because of the greater fatigue associated with energy expenditure while wearing rubber boots. However, the recent study by Huang et al. (2009) found conflicting results. Their study showed that, when wearing rubber boots, firefighters were more effective in resisting fatigue and had increased force production than when wearing leather boots. The study did not find evidence of greater fatigue in rubber boots than in leather boots, although the rubber boots (2.93 ± 0.24 kg) weighed more than leather boots (2.44 ± 0.21 kg). Although the impact of the turnout ensemble, SCBA, and boots on firefighters' performance has been studied, the available data is insufficient to draw a consensus on the level of negative impact of those factors. The current body of literature has not investigated the incremental impact of wearing each item (turnout ensemble, SCBA, and boots) on body balance and gait pattern.Considering the importance of firefighters' locomotion and dynamic body balance on unfavorable fireground, this study aimed to 1) investigate impacts of wearing each item (turnout ensemble, SCBA, and boots) on gait by using plantar pressure sensor technology, and 2) identify contributing factors that affect gait, which may serve as practical implications to improving design of PPE for enhanced gait performance and improved body balance.Human gait is achieved through a biphasic forward movement of the center of gravity of the human body, in which stance phase and swing phase movements alternate. Stance phase refers to the time period when the foot is in contact with the ground for foot pronation (heel strike–mid stance–toe off), bearing the body weight and maintaining body balance. Swing phase indicates the time period when the foot is not in contact with the ground (Gage, 2004). Normal gait consists of approximately 60% stance phase and 40% swing phase with about 20% of the time spent in the double support phase, where the two feet are in contact with the ground at the same time (Perry, 1992).Literature indicates additional weight and footwear characteristics as external factors affecting body balance and gait pattern. Additional weight on the body amplifies dynamic instability, pulling the new center of mass (body mass + added weight) away from the original point, located inside the pelvis, without load carriage (Gronqvist et al., 1989; You et al., 2001; Regia-Corte and Wagman, 2008; Park et al., 2013). Therefore, the center of gravity of the total system, which is a vertical projection of the center of mass of the system on the ground, moves away from the base of support (Gronqvist et al., 1989; You et al., 2001). This has been found to increase dynamic instability, causing greater risk of traumatic injuries such as falling and slipping (You et al., 2001). Therefore, the human body automatically alters the gait pattern in order to maintain balance by increasing the stance phase and double support time (Birrell and Haslam, 2010; Kinoshita, 1985; Park et al., 2013).The characteristics of footwear such as fit, footwear morphology, and flexing resistance constitute another external factor. For example, looseness of the footwear makes the foot slide forward and causes the foot to be squeezed in the toe area, which lead to joint and tissue deformation. This results in impaired foot function and altered gait (Goonetilleke, 2012). In addition, wearing footwear with a high outsole (e.g. high-heeled shoes) changes range of motion of the foot by limiting foot abduction, eversion and medial rotation (Goonetilleke, 2012). An increase in heel height also induces excessive weight bearing on the forefoot. These two factors resulting from the height of the outsole leads to a significant change in gait pattern and also leads to disturbed body balance, and increased risk of ankle sprain and rapid fatigue (Goonetilleke, 2012). Similarly, wearing footwear with high flex resistance due to stiff materials or poor construction can cause mechanical binding and poor interaction between foot, footwear, and the ground that can impair foot function and alter gait (Cikajlo and Matjačić, 2007).Gait analysis has been done in several ways using biomechanical measurement technologies such as three-dimensional motion analysis systems and force plates. In addition, analysis of the dynamic change in plantar pressure distribution is widely used to diagnose gait changes and balance control problems (Abdul Razak et al., 2012). By calculating the timing and duration of the plantar pressure detected on a specific part of the foot, current technology is capable of assessing changes in stance phase, swing phase, double support, stride time, walking velocity and other spatiotemporal parameters of gait. Specifically, the center of plantar pressure (COP) has been used as an indicator of changes in gait and body balance related to fall injury risks in biomechanics (Maki et al., 1994; Stel et al., 2003).COP is the point where all ground reaction forces, acting on the foot when it is in contact with the ground, are balanced (Harris and Smith, 2007). COP is considered to be concentrated and representative of the total force by the foot required to move the body forward while maintaining balance during walking. It is a calculated value based on the amplitude of plantar pressure and the location of the individual pressures under the plantar foot (Harris and Smith, 2007). In normal walking, COP travels from the middle of the heel, passing through the midpoint towards the big toe, creating a bow shaped trajectory as shown in Fig. 1(Harris and Smith, 2007). Restricted foot movement resulting from external stimuli such as poorly designed footwear, decreases the anterior-posterior (AP) and the medial-lateral (ML) excursion of COP trajectory (Fig. 1).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This study identified design features impeding firefighters' locomotion and explored a biomechanical method to evaluate the impact of PPE. As compared to the turnout gear and SCBA, the findings demonstrated that wearing boots with high flex resistance (the selected leather boots in this study) lead to greater negative impacts on gait. Boots with high flex resistance increase walking instability. Improving boot design for less restrictive foot movement and gait, while maintaining the same level of protection, should be emphasized as a top priority of PPE designs.This study has a few limitations. The small sample size (n = 12) requires caution to generalizing the findings to larger populations. Although the boots were standardized, the turnout gear was not and this may be viewed as limitation of this study. We designed the experiment so that each firefighter could wear their own turnout jacket and pants in an effort to limit a garment effect of wearing new and unbroken in gear. Visual documentation noted only minor variations of fabric type, design detailing, and construction between the firefighter's entire turnout ensembles. We also measured the weight of each firefigher's turnout ensemble to ensure differences of turnout gear were minimal. We found the weight of each turnout gear to be very similar (as shown in Table 1).We investigated changes in gait with two common boot styles available in the market, for normal walking in lab conditions. It is likely that different construction practices use by footwear manufacturers may distinguish other differences in flexing resistance between footwear material types (rubber and leather). In addition, accounting for different firefighter postures and locomotion, such as crawling, “duck walking”, or dragging a charged hose line on the fire ground could reveal additional findings related to footwear function not examined in this research. Future studies should explore additional design features affecting firefighters' performance in more active tasks and for a longer duration, which may provide more practical implications. Measurement of flex resistance was taken for boots and running shoes. In particular, each participant wore the given boots for a relatively short period of time before the experiment. Longer use of boots may lower flex resistance in rubber and leather boots, which suggests the need for investigating change in flex resistance over time and its impact on firefighters' performance for future research. Investigating the impact of boot fit on gait performance and comfort perception may also provide additional meaningful information. This study measured only a few kinetic variables of gait and foot function. Further investigation of kinematic variables will provide additional meaningful information.