@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Influence of musculoskeletal pain on workers' ergonomic risk-factor assessments

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This study compares the workstation assessments of workers with and without musculoskeletal pain.Workers reporting pain assessed their workstations more negatively with respect to certain aspects related to ergonomic risk factors.Findings indicate that from an MSD prevention point of view, an ergonomics expert assessment may be more suitable to detect at risk workstations.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Self-assessment,Musculoskeletal pain,MSD risk factors,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study compares the ergonomic risk-factor assessments of workers with and without musculoskeletal pain. A questionnaire on the musculoskeletal pain experienced in various body regions during the 12 months and seven days preceding the data collection was administered to 473 workers from three industrial sectors. The Ergonomic Workplace Analysis method, developed by the Finnish Institute of Occupational Health (FIOH), was then used by the workers and an ergonomics expert to assess the workstations. The ergonomic quality of the workstations and the need for change were also assessed by the expert and the workers at the workstation, using visual analog scales (VAS). Results show that the workers in this study were exposed to significant musculoskeletal disorder (MSD) risk factors, according to the FIOH assessment and the high percentages of reported pain. The results also show that those who reported pain in the seven days prior to the assessment evaluated their workstations more negatively than subjects who reported no pain, while the expert found no difference between the two groups' exposure to MSD risk factors.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The prevalence of musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs) in workplaces is a major problem (NRC/IM, 2001; Stock et al., 2011). Several studies have been conducted to assess exposure to ergonomic risk factors in worker populations. For extensive surveys, worker self-report questionnaires are used to estimate the worker's exposure to a variety of risk factors (Burdorf and van der Beek, 1999). Self-assessment can also be used by ergonomics practitioners when implementing an ergonomic intervention project in a company. Measuring exposure to risk factors is an important MSD prevention tool for both epidemiologists and ergonomists.Some studies have examined the factors influencing the reliability and validity of workers' self-reports and self-assessments (Burdorf, 1992; Stock et al., 2005; Winkel et al., 1991). Sources of error and bias in subjective ratings have also been studied, among others, by Poulton (1982) and Toomingas et al. (1997). Other studies have focused specifically on the effect of musculoskeletal pain on the worker's assessment of physical workload (Leijon et al., 2002; Roskes et al., 2005; Wiktorin et al., 1993; Viikari-Juntura et al., 1996). This question is becoming particularly important for epidemiological studies with large-sized samples as well as for ergonomics practitioners and merits attention when an employee's assessment is taken into account to determine the workstation risk level and establish intervention priorities.The assessment of a workstation's MSD risk factors usually relies on observational methods. Several methods from the ergonomics literature are available to researchers and practitioners (David, 2005; Li and Buckle, 1999). Many have the advantage of being fast and inexpensive to implement (Viikari-Juntura et al., 1996). Some were developed with the intention of supporting industry-led MSD-prevention efforts (Cole et al., 2003). Among other things, they can help prioritize ergonomic interventions. Some of these methods combine worker and expert assessments to determine a workstation's MSD risk level. Given the significant presence of MSDs in the population, it is only natural to assume that these methods can be used to assess workstations where workers are experiencing MSD symptoms. Therefore, it is important to know whether the workers' perception may be influenced if they are experiencing pain when these methods are being used. So far, only a few studies have focused on this subject. Some researchers have observed that workers with MSDs and those who were in pain reported greater exposure to MSD risk factors (Balogh et al., 2004; Hansson et al., 2001; Leijon et al., 2002; Viikari-Juntura et al., 1996; Wiktorin et al., 1993). These studies compare the differences between the exposure ratings of workers with pain and those with no pain in relation to exposure variables such as manual handling activity, movement repetitiveness and the posture of specific body regions. According to the findings of Donders et al. (2007), workers suffering from illness or chronic pain responded more negatively to questions characterizing their work than those not suffering from illness or chronic pain. Since all the study subjects worked for the same company and at similar workstations, this study shows that a negative perception of the job was strongly related to chronic pain rather than actual poor working conditions. The studies published to date have revealed similar levels of exposure to MSD risk factors. Furthermore, since none of these studies used an observational method developed for ergonomics practitioners, it is not clear whether such methods used in the context of an ergonomics practice would produce the same results as those developed by researchers for a specific research project.Observational methods are still those most commonly used by practitioners (Takala et al., 2010; Dempsey et al., 2005). Often developed for practitioners and adapted to requirements of SMEs in a context of health and safety management at work, they are easier to use, less costly and more flexible when it comes to collecting data in the field. Many methods have been proposed over the last 30 years for the systematic and comprehensive assessment of a workstation. The Ergonomics Workplace Analysis method developed by the Finnish Institute of Occupational Health (FIOH) (Ahonen et al., 1989) which includes both expert and worker opinions, is one of them and among the best known (Malchaire, 1997, 2002).The goal of the present study is to determine whether a worker's report of musculoskeletal pain during the prior 12 months or 7 days influences the worker's perception of his/her workstation's ergonomic risk factors, when assessed using the FIOH's Ergonomics Workplace Analysis observational method (thereafter named FIOH). This is the first study to use this type of method to examine the influence of reported pain on workers' perceptions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
