@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A macroergonomic perspective on fatigue and coping in the hospital nurse work system

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We explore hospital registered nurses' perceptions of fatigue and coping at work.We apply the SEIPS model to find barriers and facilitators to fatigue and coping.Factors that contribute to or prevent fatigue span work system components.Barriers and facilitators to coping also span all work system components.Fatigue risk management in hospital nursing should apply a macroergonomic approach.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#


@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Occupational fatigue in hospital nurses is associated with increased nurse turnover, and decreased nurse health and patient safety. The goal of this study was to explore the factors contributing to or preventing fatigue, and barriers and facilitators to individual nurse coping in hospital work systems. Interviews were conducted and analyzed using a directed qualitative content analysis approach guided by the Systems Engineering Initiative for Patient Safety (SEIPS) model. Themes related to sources of fatigue within each of the five primary components of the SEIPS work system were identified, along with barriers and facilitators to nurses' experiences and strategies for coping with fatigue. Findings from this study provide guidance on what nurses perceive as contributing to fatigue and factors that are helpful and harmful to coping with fatigue within their work system. Implications for fatigue risk management systems (FRMS) are also discussed, in particular the importance of maintaining nurse autonomy in decision-making when implementing fatigue interventions or countermeasures.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
It is estimated that 37.9% of the US workforce experiences occupational fatigue at work (Ricci et al., 2007). Occupational fatigue can be defined as a multidimensional state that arises in workers who are exposed to excessive demands through their work tasks, environment, and schedules, and that can interfere with workers' physical and cognitive abilities and their ability to function at their normal capacity (Barker and Nussbaum, 2011; Rogers, 2008; L. M. Steege et al., 2015). This paper will refer to occupational fatigue as fatigue unless otherwise noted. There is an increased interest in research, regulation, and management of fatigue in industries where the public could be exposed to negative consequences of workers' fatigue, such as transportation, the military, and healthcare (Gander et al., 2011). While other industries, such as transportation, have developed safeguards to address fatigue through fatigue risk management systems (FRMS) and state and federal regulation, healthcare, specifically nursing, has not wholly developed or implemented such systems (Gander et al., 2011; Lerman et al., 2012). FRMS aim to manage risks, especially risks to safety, associated with fatigue. They rely on data to understand sources of risk and develop strategies for removing, minimizing or mitigating identified risks (Lerman et al., 2012). FRMS generally span multiple levels of intervention and offer increased flexibility in addressing risks compared to interventions that solely focus on work hour restrictions. This is particularly true in industries that rely on shiftwork, such as healthcare (Lerman et al., 2012).Fatigue is prevalent in hospital registered nurses (RNs), and one survey study of hospital RNs (n = 745) found 65% experienced acute fatigue and 50% experienced chronic fatigue (Barker and Nussbaum, 2011). The identified consequences of fatigue in hospital RNs are substantial and include: increased adverse patient events, including falls, medication errors, and mortality; as well as individual nurse consequences, such as decreased quality of decision-making, increased work injuries, decreased productivity, poor health, and job dissatisfaction and turnover (Bae and Fabry, 2014; Reese, 2014; Williamson and Friswell, 2013). Addressing occupational fatigue in hospital RNs has been identified as a priority of the American Nurses Association (ANA), the Institute of Medicine, and the Joint Commission (Addressing Nurse Fatigue to Promote Patient Safety and Health: Joint Responsibilities of Registered Nurses and Employers to Reduce Risks, 2014; Health care worker fatigue and patient safety, 2011; IOM, 2006; Page, 2004; Smith-Miller et al., 2014). Prior work on fatigue in hospital nurses has focused on temporal and circadian demands, as areas of concern and intervention because of the success of addressing these areas through regulation and FRMS in other industries, and the link between fatigue and circadian and shift demands. In fact, studies on shift work, circadian rhythms and scheduling act as the basis for many of the current recommendations on fatigue management for hospital RNs (Bae and Fabry, 2014; Smith-Miller et al., 2014). The Addressing Nurse Fatigue to Promote Patient Safety and Health: Joint Responsibilities of Registered Nurses and Employers to Reduce Risks (2014) on addressing fatigue includes nurse sleep hygiene, scheduling, and shift length recommendations.However, fatigue in nursing is now understood to be a multifaceted issue due to the complex nature of overlapping constructs (e.g. stress, burnout), stigma, and blend of work environment and personal sources (Lee et al., 2014). As a result, more recent research on fatigue in hospital RNs has focused on identifying multidimensional work demands specific to nursing that need to be addressed in FRMS (Chen et al., 2014; Myny et al., 2012; L. M. Steege et al., 2015). Results of multiple survey, fatigue modeling, and data mining studies illustrate that fatigue is the result of many individual (e.g. age, circadian rhythm, prior work experience) and work system factors (e.g. repetitive tasks, shift work, and nighttime work) (Hallowell, 2010; Lee et al., 2014; Pasupathy and Barker, 2012; L. M. Steege et al., 2015). The breadth of fatigue sources identified in these studies points to the need for a macroergonomic approach to better understand and address factors contributing to and/or preventing fatigue within hospital nurse work systems.One such macroergonomic approach is the Systems Engineering Initiative for Patient Safety (SEIPS) model (Carayon et al., 2006). The SEIPS model is derived from both Donebedian's model for quality improvement, incorporating structure, process, and outcomes (Donebedian, 1988), and balance theory (Smith and Carayon, 2001; Smith and Carayon-Sainfort, 1989). The SEIPS model was developed specifically to address patient safety and other organizational, employee, and patient outcomes for healthcare work systems. The model outlines five components for the work system structure: person, organization, task, environment, and tools and technology; and in its subsequent SEIPS 2.0 version, the ability of the system to adapt and respond to external forces' effects on the work system (Carayon et al., 2006; Holden et al., 2013). Balance theory emphasizes the relationships between components of the system and the importance of considering the entire system when evaluating healthcare processes and outcomes. Some components of a system may act as barriers to a particular process or outcome, but this may be offset by focusing on or enhancing more positive components of the system. The SEIPS model has been utilized as a basis for investigating the healthcare work system to gain understanding and carry out interventions (Carayon et al., 2014).One component of the work system in the SEIPS model is the person, in this case the individual hospital RN. Models of FRMS also include personal protective approaches as hazard controls at the individual level (Williamson and Friswell, 2013). Examples of reducing fatigue through a personal protective approach include training, education, use of alertness aids, and evaluation and treatment of individual sleep. These protective approaches can also be considered as coping strategies. Coping strategies are cognitive and behavioral efforts employed by an individual to manage internal and external stressors (Chang et al., 2006; Samaha et al., 2007). Coping has been identified as a way to combat nursing workplace stressors and their consequences (e.g. burnout, and turnover), but limited research has studied the relationship between coping behaviors and their impact on nurse fatigue levels (Chang et al., 2006; Samaha et al., 2007). Samaha et al. (2007) looked at the relationship between chronic fatigue and lifestyle factors, psychological variables, and coping behaviors, and found that the relationship between fatigue and coping varied by coping type and called for further investigation. Other prior work has focused primarily on coping strategies (e.g. sleep, scheduling, and recovery) employed by hospital RNs in preparation for or at the conclusion of a shift rather than during a shift (Chen et al., 2014). To improve FRMS in the context of the work environment, it is important to understand nurses' coping strategies with fatigue as a mechanism for personal protection in the context of their work system.The overall aim of this study was therefore to explore barriers and facilitators within the hospital nurse work system to coping and fatigue. Specifically, this study addressed two primary research questions:•What do hospital RNs identify as factors in the work system contributing to or preventing the development of occupational fatigue?What do hospital RNs perceive as barriers and facilitators to coping with fatigue in their work system?

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
