@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Evaluation of jar lid design characteristics by older women with hand use limitations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We studied jar lid design characteristics to aid people with hand dysfunction.Study participants provided ratings of perceived effort and discomfort.Advantageous combinations of jar lid design characteristics include.For 42 mm dia. lids: taller height, hexagonal top shape, and convex side shape.For 28 mm dia. lids: taller height and hexagonal top shape.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Lid design,Older adult,Hand dysfunction,Hand pain,Activities of daily living,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The study evaluated several lid design characteristics (diameter, height, top shape, side shape, and surface texture) by means of controlled laboratory testing with older women with hand function limitations. A subjective evaluation process was applied to examine main effects and interactions of lid design characteristics on usability, determined by participants' perceptions of effort and discomfort. Results showed that lid height was the most important design characteristic associated with usability. For 42 mm diameter lids, designs perceived as best were ones with taller height, hexagonal top shape, and convex side shape. For 28 mm diameter lids, the best designs were ones with taller height and hexagonal top shape. Additionally, when the smaller lid's side shape was flat, a serrate surface texture provided some advantages, particularly for subjects with more severe hand dysfunction. This information could be used by package designers to improve jar lid usability for a growing sector of consumers.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Aging and chronic diseases, for example hand osteoarthritis (OA), hand rheumatoid-arthritis (RA), or Parkinson's disease, have been found to be key factors associated with significant decline in hand function, including weaker muscle strength and impaired mobility, in older populations (Hunter et al., 1998; Carmeli et al., 2003). Langley et al. (2005) proposed the term “Openability”, e.g. “how easy it is for the consumer to access a product”, when discussing human hand capabilities in packaging design research. While many older individuals with hand use limitations lack some independence in activities of daily living (ADL), opening a new jar or bottle has been determined to be one of the most difficult everyday tasks (Bellamy et al., 2002).The association between human hand performance and jar lid design characteristics, for example diameter, height, surface texture, and shape, has been studied previously. For example, Yoxall et al. (2006) examined maximum voluntary torque (MVT) for 235 people (age range 8–95 years) when turning a 75 mm diameter jar lid. They determined that the mean opening torque required for 75 mm diameter jars in the market exceeded the MVT of 75-year-old females; overall, 40% of the women in the study produced a MVT less than the mean jar opening torque. Crawford et al. (2002) examined associations between lid size, height, and shape with MVT in healthy people (20 in the age range of 20–40 yrs and 20 in the age range of 60–81 years). They found that torque increased with lid height and diameter, for 20 and 50 mm diameter circular lids. Height was not a factor for the largest circular lid (80 mm). Subjects produced higher torque with a square 50 mm lid than with the circular 50 mm lid; torque produced with the square lid was also not affected by lid height. Imrhan and Loo (1988) investigated the MVT of older people when opening circular jar lids with different diameters (31, 55, 74, and 113 mm) and surface textures. They found that for lids with a smooth surface, the 74 mm diameter lid was the best for generating torque. However, when turning rough texture lids, participants' MVTs monotonically increased as lid diameter increased.Given that jars and bottles come in different diameters, lids will continue to also come in different diameters. As such, it is useful to explore which lid design characteristics are important to improve usability for different lid diameters. In prior work a wide range of novel lids was assessed, based on subjective preference ratings (Flinn et al., 2013; Yen et al., 2013). The primary goal of the current study was to examine specific design characteristics based on the more favorably rated lids from that prior study. Lid design characteristics evaluated explicitly in the current study were top and side shapes, height, and texture for two representative lid diameters.The primary user population of interest in the current study was older women with some degree of hand impairment. Females, particularly girls and older women, are known to have problems opening jars (Yoxall et al., 2006; Chang et al., 2008; Voorbij and Steenbekkers, 2002). This is related, in part, to hand anthropometry and strength (Crawford et al., 2002), but in older women this may also be associated with discomfort or pain associated with a health condition, such as OA. Hand OA was reported by Dahaghin et al. (2005a) to affect 67% of women and 54.8% of men in the population over 55 years of age. Important for jar lid opening, symptomatic joints often include those in the thumb (Dreiser et al., 2000). Yet, hand health of participants in prior jar lid openability studies has either not been reported or people with hand symptoms have been explicitly excluded from study participation (Crawford et al., 2002). The current study, therefore, addresses an important void in the knowledge base by featuring, as study participants, older women with hand impairment.Lastly, the study evaluates lid design characteristics based on usability, rather than maximum torque exertion. As discussed by Carse et al. (2011), jar opening is a complex activity and alternatives to assessing maximum voluntary torque can provide valuable information and insight. Further, because subjects in the current study had some degree of hand impairment, repeated testing at their maximum level of exertion was deemed problematic. Repetitive testing within a short period of time would likely cause fatigue, discomfort, or even pain. As such, an alternative protocol which utilized submaximal exertions was developed for the study.Participants were recruited from retirement communities in the Central Ohio area. Similar to the participant recruitment and eligibility assessment processes used in the prior study (Yen et al., 2013), the initial eligibility criteria included being female, at least 65 years of age, and having self-reported difficulty in opening jars or bottles with twist-off lids. In addition, a hand function assessment method developed by Yen et al. (2013) was applied to determine each participant's hand dysfunction level. The assessment included two short surveys and six short performance tests to measure difficulty in performing ADL, chronic pain, sensibility, dexterity, pinch strength, anatomical integrity, and mobility of the thumb (Table 1). Participants received a total weighted score from 0 to 10, where 10 was defined as the worst hand function level and 0 was defined as no hand problems. The hand assessment was performed at the time that informed consent was obtained from the participant, and in advance of the lid testing sessions. The hand assessment was not conducted on the day of the test session because of concern for tiring the participants, physically and/or mentally, given their age and hand condition. The hand assessment served to verify that all participants had some hand dysfunction.Eighteen older women (mean age: 85.4 years; s.d.: 5.4 years) participated in the study. According to the self-report survey, all the participants used their right hand to turn lids when performing jar opening tasks, and 89% experienced hand discomfort or pain in the month prior to the study. Overall, the mean hand dysfunction score of the participants was 5.8 out of 10 (s d.: 1.8) (distribution is presented in Fig. 1.). Participants whose scores exceeded 5.5 were categorized into the more severe hand-dysfunction group (n = 11), and participants with lower scores were categorized as the hand-healthier group (n = 7).There were thirty-two lid designs tested in the study, including two diameters (28 mm and 42 mm), two heights (9 mm and 17 mm), two top shapes (circular and hexagonal), two side shapes (flat and convex), and two surface texture of sides (smooth and serrate). The selections of lid shapes and surface texture tested in the study were based on results from Yen et al. (2013). Heights and diameters represented smaller and medium sizes of common beverage bottles, water bottles, and sauce/dressing containers currently in the market. Images and dimensional information are provided in Table 2. The lids were made using a 3D CAD/rapid prototyping system; they were all white plastic and were attached to identical bottles in order to minimize any subjective preference based on appearance.Usability of the lid design features was based on the participants' subjective ratings of perceived effort and discomfort when trying to open the lids (which were glued in place). The process required participants to perform only two or three repetitions of their MVT at the beginning of the experimental session, using the taller, circular lid with flat sides. The remaining exertions in the session were all performed at 70 percent of that reference maximum voluntary torque (Fig. 2). The perceived effort levels were verbally reported by participants using the Borg CR10 Scale (Borg, 1998). The discomfort ratings were on a five-level scale: “Not uncomfortable”, “Somewhat uncomfortable”, “Pretty uncomfortable”, “Very uncomfortable”, and “Painful”.The activities of evaluating each lid design were performed with the subject seated facing an oscilloscope and two response scales; the jars were positioned on a table to the right of the subject (see Fig. 3). A testing lid was mounted on a bottle held in a closure torque sensor (STBA50, MARK-10, Copiague, NY; Capacity: 570 Ncm; Resolution: 0.5 Ncm) prior to the evaluation process. The participants were encouraged to position each lid (along with the bottle) onto the torque sensor by themselves, especially for the non-circular shaped lids, so that it felt most comfortable for their hands as they applied a twisting force.Participants were given instruction to “Lift the flashing line to the red line by twisting the lid”. They were instructed to apply a twisting force to turn the lid so that their applied torque (i.e. flashing line or analog signal line) matched the target torque (i.e. 70% of RMVT, which was marked with thin red tape) on the display of the oscilloscope (2245A, Tektronix, Beaverton, OR) positioned in front of them. The exertion was isometric, because lids were glued to bottles. The more torque the participants applied to the lid, the farther the flashing line moved upward. The participants were asked to match the flashing line with the red line and then hold the applied torque for four seconds.After the four-second exertion participants were asked to evaluate the lid they just experienced. They were asked (1) “According to the scale, how difficult was it for you when turning the lid?”, and (2) “How uncomfortable did your hand feel?” A replica of each scale was presented on a board in front of the subject, as a visual prompt to aid subjects in rating their effort and discomfort. A researcher pointed to the corresponding display board when asking each question.Participants were tested one at a time. Lid-twisting exertions were performed while seated, using the dominant hand, which was the right hand for each subject. The relative height of the testing lids was adjusted according to the participant's elbow height. The participants were required to sit comfortably upright with their feet on the floor, shoulder adducted, elbow flexed about 90°, forearm pronated, and wrist in a neutral position. No specific lid grasp type was suggested during the experiments. Participants were instructed to adopt any grasp type they used normally for opening jars or bottles.Each participant's diameter-specific MVT was tested at the beginning of the test session by turning a prototype model that reflected common, current jar lid design (17 mm ht, circular top shape, flat side shape, smooth surface texture), matched in diameter to the lids that would be tested in that session; all the lids of one diameter (medium or small) were tested in a single session. During the MVT measurements, participants were specifically instructed to ramp up to their peak capacity, sustain the effort for a brief time, and then gradually ramp down. No verbal encouragement was given during the tests. In addition, 2 min breaks were allowed between at most three trials – if the first two trials were within 10% of each, the third one was not collected. Out of the two or three consecutive measurements, the maximum reading was defined as the participant's reference MVT for lids of that diameter. Accordingly, 70% of the participant's reference MVT was calculated for use as the target torque for testing all the lids of that diameter.Next, a customized transparency card that fit the oscilloscope's screen was made and marked with two horizontal lines for the specific participant: (1) baseline, which represented the location of the analog signal line when zero N-cm was applied, and (2) target line (with thin red tape), which represented the location of the analog signal line when the target torque was applied.The participants practiced the evaluation process before testing began. During the evaluations, a minimum 30 s break was given between torque exertions. The participants were encouraged to request more rest if any symptoms of fatigue were felt at any point during the experiment.In order to minimize any possible fatigue and discomfort associated with hand conditions of the participants, a complete block design was adopted which allowed for testing the blocks on two different days with at least three days between test sessions. Lid diameter was the block factor. In each block, sixteen lid designs, composed of two top shapes, two side shapes, two heights, and two surface textures, were tested. Testing order was randomized within each block. The testing order of the two testing blocks was randomized between subjects.Statistical analyses were performed with SPSS for Windows (version 19, IBM, Armonk, New York). Kolmogorov–Smirnov Test was applied first to test the normal distribution hypothesis for the data sets. Linear Mixed Model Analysis (Dependent variable: perceived effort ratings based on Borg CR10 Scale; Fixed factors: all other factors; Random factor: subject; Repeated covariance type: compound symmetry) was applied after that to test the fixed effects of the jar lid design characteristics (main effects and interactions). Associated pairwise comparisons (e.g. comparing estimated marginal means) were made if any significant effects were found; Tukey's test was used. The relationship between perceived effort and discomfort ratings was examined by Spearman Correlation Coefficient.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
