@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Musculoskeletal disorders in construction: A review and a novel system for activity tracking with body area network

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present a review of assessment frameworks used for the evaluation of body motion.Different methods for measuring working postures and motions are compared.We introduce a new system to characterise unsafe postures of construction workers.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
WMSDs,Construction,Health,Well-being,Biomechanics,Inertial measurement unit,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Human body motions have been analysed for decades with a view on enhancing occupational well-being and performance of workers. On-going progresses in miniaturised wearable sensors are set to revolutionise biomechanical analysis by providing accurate and real-time quantitative motion data. The construction industry has a poor record of occupational health, in particular with regard to work-related musculoskeletal disorders (WMSDs). In this article, we therefore focus on the study of human body motions that could cause WMSDs in construction-related activities. We first present an in-depth review of existing assessment frameworks used in practice for the evaluation of human body motion. Subsequently different methods for measuring working postures and motions are reviewed and compared, pointing out the technological developments, limitations and gaps; Inertial Measurement Units (IMUs) are particularly investigated. Finally, we introduce a new system to detect and characterise unsafe postures of construction workers based on the measurement of motion data from wearable wireless IMUs integrated in a body area network. The potential of this system is demonstrated through experiments conducts in a laboratory as well as in a college with actual construction trade trainees.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Deterioration of workers' physical health and loss of workdays not only impact their well-being and quality of life, but also the country's economy. For example, in 2011 more than 400,000 people in the United Kingdom suffered from illness caused by their work, resulting in 7.5 million lost days (The Health and Safety Executive, 2014).Musculoskeletal Disorders (MSDs) are injuries or pain affecting muscles, joints and tendons. MSDs result from daily awkward postures and handling tasks, such as: forceful exertions in lifting or carrying loads, bending and twisting the back or limbs, exposure to vibration or repetitive movements (including keyboard typing). If these activities are work-related, then the resulting injuries and disorders are referred to as Work-related Musculoskeletal Disorders (WMSDs).Construction workers are particularly at risk of WMSDs because they are frequently exposed to awkward postures and motions, such as lifting, bending or twisting, sometimes for long periods of time. Comparing the different industries in the UK, the Health and Safety Executive (HSE) shows that, despite some improvement over the last 10 years, the rate of self-reported work-related illness in the construction sector remains the second highest behind transport and storage (The Health and Safety Executive, 2014).With the construction sector employing almost twice more people than the transport sector (2.3 million and 1.47 million respectively, according to the British Office for National Statistics), the number of self-reported work-related illness in the construction sector is likely the highest among all sectors. Note that these figures do not take account of the additional large number of unreported injuries.The extent to which certain construction occupations are exposed to awkward positions is well summarized by the Center for Construction Research and Training (CPWR) in the United States which reported that carpet and tile installers are on their knees, crouching or stooping more than the 80% of the time, and bricklayers spend 93% of their time bending and twisting the body or doing repetitive motions (The Center for Construction Research and Training, 2013). Memarian and Mitropoulos (2012) conducted a detailed study of incidents and risk activities in a large masonry company and concluded that the tasks resulting in most incidents (and consequently an important number of days away from work and days with modified tasks) were: laying bricks (19%), scaffold erection (18%) and material handling (14%).Focusing on the postures resulting in WMSDs, Zimmerman et al. (1997) identify the top five ergonomic problems in construction as: working in the same position for long periods, bending or twisting the back in an awkward way, working in awkward or cramped positions, working when injured or hurt, and handling heavy materials or equipment.Occupational health has been recognized as an important problem since Gilbreth started his motion studies in the early 20th century (Gilbreth and Gilbreth, 1917). Yet, despite advancements in technology and the development of many tools and initiatives, WMSDs persist as statistics reflect. Better monitoring the body movements of workers, including during their training period, could help correct bad postures and raise awareness about good practice, and consequently improve their quality of life and save working days and money.Focusing on the construction sector, this article first reviews tools currently employed by government and companies to assess the postures and motions of workers with regard to their long-term health, including the risk for WMSDs (Section 2). Next, Section 3 provides an in-depth review of measurement tools that have been proposed and used for human biomechanical analysis. The use of Inertial Measurement Units (IMUs) is particularly studied as this relates to the system proposed here. Section 3 concludes with the identification of the need for developing and assessing non-invasive wearable systems for continuous body motion monitoring to support assessors and workers in improving construction tasks and preventing WMSDs. Section 4 then presents our proposed Activity Tracking system based on IMUs integrated in a novel wireless Body Area Network (called AT-BAN) and reports experimental results on the recognition of body postures related to lifting, an activity well-known to be problematic. The experiments are conducted both in a laboratory and in a college with actual construction trade trainees. Section 5 concludes this article with an analysis of the contributions made and suggestions for further development and assessment of the proposed system.The postures and body movements of workers can impact their health and well-being and also affect productivity. F. B. Gilbreth was a pioneer of motion study in the field of industrial management (Gilbreth and Gilbreth, 1917, 1924), focusing mainly on better coordinating the body motion of workers to improve productivity. Ever since, practitioners, physiotherapists and ergonomists, from both public and private organisations, have taken a keen interest in the study and evaluation of tasks and workers, developing various assessment methods with focus on productivity and/or health. These methods consider different parameters to be measured, from motion amplitude and frequency to muscle activity.Section 2.1 reviews the main risk assessment methods that have been developed and applied in various sectors. Section 2.2 then reviews how most of these methods have particularly been applied within the construction sector. Section 2.3 summarizes the strengths and limitations of these methods, with particular focus on the posture and motion measurement techniques they employ.Government agencies dedicated to health and safety issues across industries (such as the Health and Safety Executive (HSE) in the UK or the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) in the United States), universities as well as some companies have been developing techniques and proposing guidelines to assess the daily tasks of workers and alter them to reduce the number of work-related injuries and illnesses. Some of these techniques focus on assessing the task, in order to infer its impact on posture and body motions and as a result the level of risk of WMSDs. These methods include the Work Practices Guide for Manual Lifting developed by NIOSH (NIOSH, 1981; Waters et al., 1994) to help practitioners assess and minimize the risks associated to lifting jobs, as well as the method of Snook and Ciriello (1991) to assess the risk of lower back disorder (LBD) in lifting, lowering, carrying, pushing and pulling tasks. While practical, these methods however infer postures and body motions as opposed to directly measuring them, which adds a layer of potential error in the overall risk assessment.Other methods have been developed that are instead based on the direct measurement of actual postures and body movements. Since direct measurement is preferable to identify the source of WMSDs and this is the approach considered in the system presented later in this manuscript, these methods are reviewed in more detail below.One of the methods developed by the HSE in the UK, the Assessment of Repetitive Task (ART) tool (The Health and Safety Executive, 2009), assesses repetitive tasks typically carried out by factory workers (e.g. packaging). A scoring method is established that takes into account the posture of the upper limbs, neck and trunk, evaluated by a risk assessment expert who is observing the worker. The final score rates the level of exposure of the worker, helping to identify the risk factors that contribute to the development of WMSDs. A traffic light coding system is also introduced to report performance in a way easily understood by users.The HSE also proposes the Manual Handling Assessment (MAC) tool (The Health and Safety Executive, 2002) to evaluate other tasks involving risks to the lower back. Motion parameters related to lifting and carrying movements are considered, such as back bending, torso twisting, and the distance between the hands and the lower back. These movements are assessed by an expert watching the workers in the jobsite.Note that ART and MAC evaluation tools are based on the subjective (qualitative) judgement of the assessors, as opposed to the quantitative direct measurement of body motions.The (OWAS) was developed by the steel-manufacturing company Ovako with the goal to redesign their production line. It identifies and evaluates bad working postures based on the visual observation of the daily routine of workers (Karhu et al., 1977). Postures are classified in more than 250 different poses by assessing the position of trunk, arms and legs, as well as the weight of the load. Every posture is coded to enable the evaluation of the overall risk of WMSDs.The (PATH) assessment method, proposed by Buchholz et al. (1996), codes the postures as originally suggested by Karhu et al. (1977) in the OWAS method, adding new codes for different activities, loads and equipment. By evaluating images recorded during work activities, assessors identify the proportion of time workers spend in the coded postures that are classified as ‘neutral’ or ‘non-neutral’.McAtamney and Nigel Corlett (1993) present the Rapid Upper Limb Assessment (RULA) survey to evaluate certain postures of the neck, trunk and upper limbs. Ergonomists code each posture by visually evaluating the angles between the studied body parts, and obtain a grand score that is used to decide whether a movement is considered acceptable (based on the criteria derived from the relevant literature) or some changes have to be made.The Rapid Entire Body Assessment (REBA) method (McAtamney and Hignett, 1995; Hignett and McAtamney, 2000) was developed to improve and extend RULA. Like RULA it evaluates and scores the postures of workers, but extends it by visually evaluating the positions of the legs, considering postural loading factors and evaluating awkward positions in upper limbs (e.g. if arms are abducted or rotated or if shoulders are raised).The QEC tool, proposed in (Li and Buckle, 1999), consists of a questionnaire and a scoring sheet. The scoring sheet is used by experts to assess the movements of the trunk and upper limb joints to identify those postures leading to WMSDs. To create this tool, Li and Buckle registered the movements of workers by means of a vision-based platform for motion capture, and, with the opinions of experts assessors, they defined the different postures to be considered and the range of movements leading to WMSDs.In contrast to the previous tools, not only practitioners are involved in the evaluation but workers also play their role by filling out in a questionnaire related to the studied movements.Most of the above-mentioned works have actually been applied and validated in the construction sector. McGorry and Lin (2007) study grip strength in the handling of tools used in construction trades using the RULA method as a basis to evaluate the posture of the arms obtained from different tools configuration. Kim et al. (2011) apply the REBA method to study the movements of workers during the installation of prefabricated walls in order to improve panel design and construction processes. Wall panel installation is also evaluated by means of the QEC method in (Rwamamara, 2007). Kivi and Mattila (1991) were pioneers in the application of the OWAS method to the field of construction, developing a basic portable computer system to manually score the observed tasks; the computer then calculates an overall score. The same group later used that same system to evaluate the use of tools, such as hammers (Mattila et al., 1993). More recently, the OWAS method has also been used in (Saurin and de Macedo Guimaraes, 2008) as a tool to assess the body position of operators working on scaffolds and painting or coating building façades. Finally, Forde and Buchholz (2004) have evaluated the movements of ironworkers by means of the PATH method in order to develop improved tools and work techniques, reducing non-neutral postures.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Proper postures and body motions on the jobsite help workers maintain a good health and improve their well-being. They prevent the appearance of WMSDs and other work-related illnesses, avoiding days away from work or days with modified task, which consequently enhances performance and saves money.Currently employed methods are often based on visual observations (in-situ or post-evaluated using videos) which is not very accurate and precise. Research has been conducted to replace or supplement visual observations with more accurate body posture measurement devices but many of the reviewed works used systems that are either not wearable, invasive and/or infrastructure-intensive, possibly requiring usage in controlled environments. More recently, the development of small IMUs has open the possibility of developing wearable systems that are not invasive and so could be employed for reliable assessments over long periods of times and in diverse working environments. However, no work seems to have yet focused on developing and using such systems for WMSD risk assessment among construction workers.In this article, we present a novel wearable wireless system based on IMUs which provides non-invasive, long-term and ubiquitous tracking of body postures and motions. The data captured is processed in real time to recognize certain postures and evaluate them.Experiments have been reported that have focused on the study of low back and legs for tracking the lifting-related motions of squatting and stooping. This preliminary validation of our system was conducted in our laboratory as well as with actual trainees in their college over periods of 15 min and more. The results are very encouraging, so future work will aim at assessing the system in real work environments (i.e. on actual jobsites) and over entire working days. Furthermore, future work will attempt to calibrate the system with the help of experts to characterise various motions of interest (e.g. lifting), and take into account not only posture characteristics (i.e. angles, distances) but also motion characteristics such as speed and acceleration (which is readily available from the sensors).