@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Improving meat cutters' work: Changes and effects following an intervention

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We describe ergonomic changes implemented within meat cutting.Main changes were reducing knife work and job rotation.Results showed a significant reduction in perceived physical work load.In general, the participative changes were perceived positively.The company did not report important setbacks due to the changes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Comparison,Change programme,Consequence,MSD,Work environment,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Meat cutters face higher risks of injury and musculoskeletal problems than most other occupational groups. The aims of this paper were to describe ergonomics changes implemented in three meat cutting plants and to evaluate effects related to ergonomics on the individual meat cutters and their work. Data was collected by interviews, observations, document studies and a questionnaire (n = 247), as a post intervention study. The changes implemented consisted of reducing knife work to a maximum of 6 h per day and introducing a job rotation scheme with work periods of equal length. Tasks other than traditional meat cutting were added. A competence development plan for each meat cutter and easy adjustment of workplace height were introduced. The questionnaire showed a reduction in perceived physical work load. In general, the changes were perceived positively. Figures from the company showed a positive trend for injuries and sick leave.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Meat cutting work imposes increased risks for accidents and occupational diseases, e.g. due to musculoskeletal disorders (MSD) and cutting injuries (Lindbeck and Engkvist, 2008; Vogel et al., 2010). Several studies have confirmed that work related MSDs are multifaceted and have many contributing causes, also among meat cutters (Johansson et al., 2010; Karsh et al., 2001; National Research Council and The Institute of Medicine, 2001; NIOSH, 1997; Tappin et al., 2008). A combination of technical and other measures are considered more effective than one measure in controlling risk (Karsh et al., 2001). Intervention studies have confirmed that improvement effects can be seen, not only on MSD symptoms and absence, but also on profitability (Moore and Garg, 1998; Yeow and Nath Sen, 2006). When involving staff in participative improvement work, results were better, although every workplace must consider their context and their needs, tasks and employees (Caroly et al., 2007; Norman and Wells, 1998; van Eerd et al., 2010).Hansson et al. (2009, 2010) have shown high wrist velocity and force demands, established risk factors for MSD, be present in meat cutting, both in line work and at individual tables. The knife, being the meat cutters' main and often only tool, is a source of both accidents and disorders (Blom, 2008; Fogleman et al., 1993; Szabo et al., 2001).In 2007, 7411 individuals were employed in the Swedish Cattle Slaughter and Meat Cutting industry. The meat industry in Sweden has however, low profitability. Moreover, many companies have difficulties in recruiting meat cutters, although skilled meat cutters in Sweden have relatively high status and salaries in the companies. The meat industry thus increasingly chose to rely on meat cutters coming from employment agencies. In several personal communications with the CEO, Swedish Meat Industry Association (2009–2011) he expressed concern about the competitiveness of the Swedish meat industry. This is also verified by several industry stakeholders (Jordbruksverket, 2011; Wikström, 2011).Between the years 2005–2007 the industry reported 940 injuries (666 occupational accidents with absence and 274 occupational diseases). Meat cutters account for 29% of the 1409 reported injuries. Most of the accidents were related to knife handling, mainly amongst meat cutters and slaughterers. When comparing work-related accidents and diseases per 1000 employees and self-employed in this industry to the average of all employees/self-employed in Sweden in 2007, the figures are 39 to 12 for occupational accidents and 6 to 2 for diseases (Blom, 2008).To improve health and safety among meat cutters, in 2007 the Swedish Work Environment Authority (AV) made demands on the largest meat cutting companies, which had more than 3/4 of the Swedish meat cutting market, to reduce the risk of occupational accidents and work related diseases for meat cutters. The companies were to meet the requirements by December 31, 2008. The requirements were as follows (directly translated):1.A work period shall be a maximum of 1.5 h between breaks and work using knives should be limited to 6 h per day. Break length should be adapted to the shift length (short work periods – short breaks, longer work periods – longer breaks). Production flow rate should be capped and an even work load must be ensured for the whole day.Technical improvements that eliminate heavy lifting shall be implemented.The temperature in the workplace must not fall below +12 °C.There must be routines to deal with the problem of “hard pigs” (crystallized fat).All meat cutters must be offered annual medical examinations for work-related symptoms.Independent expertise must be employed to ensure that the requirements are met (The Swedish Work Environment Authority, 2007).The Swedish meat cutting industry and union jointly contacted the authors of this paper for collaboration. This resulted in a four year interactive research and development programme with the dual purpose of reducing MSDs and accidents among Swedish meat cutters and also to improve company performance. The researchers had a pre-understanding of the industry and its culture and risks, based on in-depth interviews of staff on different levels as well as literature studies (Karltun, 2008, 2010; Karltun et al., 2011, 2008; Lindbeck and Engkvist, 2008; Vogel et al., 2010). Beyond this, Vogel had eight years of experience as a meat cutter, is a trained ergonomist and had fourteen years as an ergonomics consultant within the meat cutting business and experience from a previous research project (Hägg et al., 2007).The present study was part of this programme. To meet the demands from the authorities, the case-company undertook a company-wide programme to develop and implement changes. The changes were intended as a radical improvement in the organization of meat cutting, both in the content of meat cutters' daily work and in their physical work load. The researchers were then offered the opportunity to evaluate the results of the programme. The other companies were not evaluated due to time and resource constraints. The case-company was considered to offer the best opportunities for evaluation.The aim of this paper was threefold:1.To describe the changes implemented in the case company.To assess the effects on the individual meat cutter and his/her work from an ergonomics perspective. These effects included changes in perceptions of physical and mental demands, safety issues, workplace design and qualification demands.To assess effects for the organization.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The intervention (introducing a rotation scheme and reducing knife work to maximum 6 h per day) was regarded highly positive by a majority of the meat cutters. This work organization solution can thus be considered to be much better than the previous ones in this case.The interventions included non knife related work, work and rest pattern, job rotation and competence development, in addition to administrative, more long term improvements. The results further indicate that it was possible to reduce the time working with a knife to 6 h per day out of an 8 h working day without significant financial losses. The rotation and knife free work however made certain complementary measures necessary:•In order to make the rotation scheme work, the introduction of an individual competence and skill development programme for all meat cutters had to be introduced.There was a need for easily adjustable workplaces since each worker changed workplace during each break. The time needed for adjusting the workplace to a worker therefore had to be minimized since this procedure could be required five times a day. The technical system thus support the organizational changes wanted.Time should be allowed for finding appropriate rotation schemes and ramp up procedures.The feeling of lost flow in work should be dealt within some way and might need some further examination.The changes meant an actual reduction in perceived physical tiredness of the meat cutters, but less change of the perception of mental tiredness.Perceived accident risks were not particularly affected. Other major changes in work were not perceived by the meat cutters.The process in itself was conducted in a participatory way. Many issues were addressed in the company's SCs ensuring the trade unions to be involved.•A change in work content as described in this article is considered mainly positive by the workers affected.It is possible to reduce the time working with a knife for meat cutters, thus changing their work content, without radical setback for the company.Reducing the time working with a knife in most cases means reducing repetitive work load and hence decreasing risk of MSD.A participative change process including management and union representatives created joint support for the changes introduced.