@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An investigation of the performance of novel chorded keyboards in combination with pointing input devices

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We compared combinations of two novel chorded keyboards with various pointing devices.Usage performance was determined by input rate, accuracy, and user assessments.Input rates of both keyboards with stylus and mouse devices improved with training.The best combination observed was a novel cross-shaped key keyboard and a stylus.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Chorded keyboard,Pointing input,Operating efficiency,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Rapid advances in computing power have driven the development of smaller and lighter technology products, with novel input devices constantly being produced in response to new user behaviors and usage contexts. The aim of this research was to investigate the feasibility of operating chorded keyboard control modules in concert with pointing devices such as styluses and mice. We compared combinations of two novel chorded keyboards with different pointing devices in hopes of finding a better combination for future electronic products. Twelve participants were recruited for simulation testing, and paired sample t testing was conducted to determine whether input and error rates for the novel keyboards were improved significantly over those of traditional input methods. The most efficient input device combination tested was the combination of a novel cross-shaped key keyboard and a stylus, suggesting the high potential for use of this combination with future mobile IT products.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
As the mobile era has progressed, communication between people and information technology (IT) products has increasingly relied on various types of input devices. The most common tasks carried out using computer input devices include positioning, selecting, and the input of graphics and data. In general, the operation of input devices is divided into two categories according to the situations in which they are used.First, when a computer device is attached to a secured point on a fixed workstation, the usual means of operation is the combination of a pointing device (such as a mouse) and a text input device (such as a keyboard). The pointing device performs the functions of positioning, selecting, and graphics input, while the text input device is responsible for data input functions.Second, when traveling or in unstable operating environments, computer devices often must accommodate user movements. In such scenarios, most input operations are dependent on a pointing device (such as a stylus) to complete all the input functions. However, a single pointing device has often proven unsatisfactory to those who frequently perform text input operations. This dissatisfaction is obvious enough from the continuous new introduction of plug-in type input devices. Simply put, in many increasingly common computer operating environments, a single input device is not ideally suited to many user operations.Many portable computer devices currently on the market contain disjointed interfaces along with incompatible input devices. It might thus be necessary for future users to learn multiple input methods, and the importance of input method integration has thus been raised previously (Isokoski and Kaki, 2000). The present research accounted for the suitability of different devices for portable computer use and previous user experiences to exclude inappropriate input devices that are currently available on the market and to devise an initial concept for combining a chorded keyboard with stylus or mouse. The design of appropriate control motions for devices and technologies must consider multiple user characteristics such as sensations, cognitions, physiological performance, and anthropometry, among others. The input requirements for mobile IT products warrant specific attention from researchers in the modern mobile era, as the extrinsic limitations of input devices often force users to learn and adapt all over again. As it is, those input devices that are not significantly improved by the incorporation of new IT product concepts will hinder users with considerable challenge in terms of input efficiency.Accordingly, the present research consisted of a comparison of the operating conditions for different combinations of two novel chorded keyboards with two different pointing devices in hopes of finding a better combination for future electronic products.There have been few studies focusing on chorded keyboards in the past. Initially intended for special input purposes, the chorded keyboard has received renewed interest since the introduction of wearable computers. Studies by Bowen and Guinness (1965) and Conrad and Longman (1965) showed that the chorded keyboards held two distinct operational advantages over conventional keyboards: smaller space requirements and higher input efficiencies. The performance of chorded keyboards is also equal to or better than that of general sequential keyboards.The present research developed a novel chorded keyboard as primary textual and numeric input device that meets the input efficiency and size reduction requirements of modern mobile IT products.The aim of this research was to investigate the feasibility of operating chorded keyboard control modules in concert with pointing devices such as styluses and mice. A study conducted by Buxton and Myers (1986) indicated that during certain operations, higher efficiency is achieved with the simultaneous use of both hands than is achieved with one hand alone. Hence, we proposed an operating condition where the left hand operates the dependent modules through a chorded keyboard, while the right hand operates the control modules and pointing functions through a stylus or mouse. We also investigated whether the proposed combinations of different keyboards with a stylus or mouse were more efficient and ergonomic than the current form of encoded design.The burden on the left hand is expected to be reduced with an improved work balance between the two hands in terms of movement and time demands. Revealing the optimal combination form would serve as a reference for the design of future mobile IT products. Experimental comparisons between two novel chorded keyboards combined with either a stylus or mouse were conducted to determine the optimal device combination in terms of high operational performance, low error rate, and high subjective satisfaction. The four main goals of this study were: (1) to determine the operational performance and error rate of the different novel keyboard with pointing device combinations; (2) to investigate how comprehensible such combinations are by determining whether practice results in significant performance improvement; (3) to observe the operating posture of users in order to reduce possible physical injuries; and (4) to survey user satisfaction to determine advantages and disadvantages for reference in future improvements.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The rapid development of technology has led people living in the information era to embrace new technologies and enjoy the resulting convenience. Previous studies have found that approximately 80% of people are exposed to IT products in their daily lives. Mobile IT products have now become a part of daily life for many people, and it is necessary to develop novel input methods specifically for IT products.It was suggested by previous research that working with both hands brought a higher operating efficiency than working with just one hand (Damper, 1986). Novel combinations of stylus with chord entry were proposed by this research and compared to the entry methods of current products, and the best combination was determined. The results could serve as a reference to the design of future input devices for table computers.The conclusion and recommendations of this study are as follows:1.Input efficiency of chorded keyboard in combination with stylus and mouse pointing devices gradually improved with training – this study conducted device set building with two novel chorded keyboards with stylus and mouse pointing devices. The user input efficiency with all devices sets improved with the increase in usage days. The input rate of chorded keyboard significantly improved after short period of training, and a decent input rate was achieved.We compared the character string sets input rate of device set combinations of cross-shaped directional and square cornered chorded keyboards with pointing devices of stylus and mouse. Encoding method that focused on character string input allowed users to quickly achieve particular input rate. However, a shortcoming of earlier arrival of input rate at the convergence value than other methods was also observed. After short periods of training the test subjects effectively recalled the chord arrangements from memory, and continuous improvement was possible.New combinations of chords created from the current chord arrangements were helpful to chord arrangements familiarization and effective learning by the test subjects. Therefore, variations of the current chords could be included in the development of chords for touch-controlled tablet computer keyboards to encourage users to embrace the chords within a short period of time.The utilization of a stylus as pointing device for mobile communication products effectively reduces injuries associated with certain operating posture, while maintaining an input rate similar to that of a mouse. The best input device combination observed in this study is the combination of a novel cross-shaped key keyboard and a stylus, which fulfilled the input rate requirement of mobile IT products.