@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Active workstation allows office workers to work efficiently while sitting and exercising moderately

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Pedalling workstation enables moderate exercise without seriously affecting work.Half an hour daily usage achieves minimum physical activity recommendations.Most participants would rather use this workstation than exercise outside work.Can also be used during free time (sport events, TV, Cinema, PC, commuting, etc.).

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Active sitting,Active workstation,Physical activity,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectiveTo determine the effects of a moderate-intensity active workstation on time and error during simulated office work.MethodsThe aim of the study was to analyse simultaneous work and exercise for non-sedentary office workers. We monitored oxygen uptake, heart rate, sweating stains area, self-perceived effort, typing test time with typing error count and cognitive performance during 30 min of exercise with no cycling or cycling at 40 and 80 W.ResultsCompared baseline, we found increased physiological responses at 40 and 80 W, which corresponds to moderate physical activity (PA). Typing time significantly increased by 7.3% (p = 0.002) in C40W and also by 8.9% (p = 0.011) in C80W. Typing error count and cognitive performance were unchanged.ConclusionsAlthough moderate intensity exercise performed on cycling workstation during simulated office tasks increases working task execution time with, it has moderate effect size; however, it does not increase the error rate. Participants confirmed that such a working design is suitable for achieving the minimum standards for daily PA during work hours.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Regular and above moderate physical activity (PA) has many beneficial effects on the human organism, for instance prevention of heart disease (Ivey et al., 2003; Lee and Blair, 2002), obesity (Saris et al., 2003) and diabetes (Hu et al., 2001; Katzmarzyk et al., 2003), improvement in mental health (Dunn et al., 2002; Lawlor and Hopker, 2001), prevention of cancer (Thune and Furberg, 2001; Wannamethee et al., 2001) and premature death (Crespo et al., 2002; Lee and Paffenbarger, 2000). Therefore, based on epidemiological research on PA the minimum standard for adults is set at an accumulation of 150 min weekly moderate to high intensity PA (WHO, 2010).Today all evidence points (Alderman et al., 2014; Carr et al., 2012, 2014; Hamilton et al., 2008; Healy et al., 2008; John et al., 2011; Levine and Miller, 2007; McAlpine et al., 2007; McCrady and Levine, 2009; Straker et al., 2009; van der Ploeg et al., 2012) to the dominance of a passive lifestyle (obesity, obesity-related diseases, lower physical and work efficiency and injuries). Sitting, an independent factor of our health, is associated with increased body mass, hyperlipidaemia, hypertension, hyperglycaemia, increased risk of developing metabolic and chronic cardiovascular diseases such as diabetes, atherosclerosis, heart attack and increased mortality in adults (Hamilton et al., 2007, 2008; Healy et al., 2008; Hu et al., 2001; McCrady and Levine, 2009; van der Ploeg et al., 2012; Warren et al., 2010). The global trend of prolonged sitting in occupational and domestic settings is likely to continue due to the growing availability and popularity of computers, televisions, automation of tasks, trends in transport, etc. (Tornqvist et al., 2009).In occupational health research it is important to highlight prolonged sitting. People with sedentary jobs are engaged in sitting 10.0 ± 2.0 h/day and 8.1 ± 1.4 h/day during the work day and days off (McCrady and Levine, 2009). In comparison to the general population who sit 4.5 ± 2.9 h/day, people with sedentary jobs have 80%–122% longer sitting time (Salmon et al., 2003). The daily sitting time of office workers is positively related to their body mass (McCrady and Levine, 2009).Furthermore, office workers who use computers can be chronically physically and emotionally exhausted (burnout syndrome) (Kowalska et al., 2010). Moreover, excessive workload, the inappropriate use of computers and an inappropriate work environment can cause pain in the upper body – arms, shoulders, neck (Blangsted et al., 2008; Thorn et al., 2007).The introduction of periods of PA during work hours can lead to health and organisational benefits (Carr et al., 2014; Lara et al., 2008; Levine and Miller, 2007; McAlpine et al., 2007). Physically active office workers are less vulnerable to stress and have more energy (McCrady and Levine, 2009). Repeated breaks between work and implementation of general exercise decreased acute and chronic muscular disorders (Søgaard et al., 2012). Exercise during work hour breaks is an important recommendation (Carr et al., 2014; Straker et al., 2009), but it leads to a reduction in work time. However, von Thiele Schwarz and Hasson (2011) showed that even though a health intervention takes place during work hours, thereby decreasing work-hour input, such an intervention might not be associated with a corresponding decrease in output or production. On the contrary, productivity was improved as the production levels and self-rated productivity were increased despite fewer work hours. We were further interested to see if including exercise during work hours without reducing work hours will have an even greater positive effect.Research about the positive effect of using a workstation is heterogeneous; there are many knowledge gaps and opportunities for research, which are primarily aimed to improve employer and worker uptake (Tudor-Locke et al., 2013). Several studies investigated the feasibility of simultaneous work and exercise solutions for office workers (Alderman et al., 2014; Carr et al., 2012, 2014; John et al., 2009; John et al., 2011; Levine and Miller, 2007; McAlpine et al., 2007; Ohlinger et al., 2011; Straker et al., 2009). However, to our knowledge, only four studies (Carr et al., 2014; Levine and Miller, 2007; Ohlinger et al., 2011; Straker et al., 2009) reported the actual exercise intensity. The participants walked at an average self-selected speed of 1.6 km/h (Levine and Miller, 2007; Straker et al., 2009) and 2.6 km/h (Straker et al., 2009), in the most recent study (Carr et al., 2014) the participants made a work effort of 9W while pedalling, which is considered low intensity exercise. Most studies reported increased physiological responses during exercise, but failed to provide enough evidence on the effect of PA on work performance. One study (Carr et al., 2014) did manage to measure work performance and physiological responses during low intensity exercise and work, but the total exercise time was probably not long enough (only eight minutes) to provide enough data for accurate and comparable results. Others (Alderman et al., 2014; Ohlinger et al., 2011) measured selected parameters of work performance, but without measuring physiological responses. These findings warrant further investigation on the effect of simultaneous moderate to vigorous exercise during work on work performance.Only two studies (Carr et al., 2014; Straker et al., 2009) report the use of a cycling workstation: Straker et al. (2009) by cycling for just five minutes at low intensity (5 and 30W) and Carr et al. (2014) by cycling for just eight minutes at low intensity (40 rpm, 9W). Participants agreed that a sitting workstation might be more beneficial than a walking workstation; positive user perceptions for the cycling workstation included that balance was improved with less upper body movement than occurs during walking (Straker et al., 2009). Carr et al. (2014) also reported that a pedalling workstation allows for steady hand-eye coordination necessary during computer work; allows for light intensity activity necessary to short circuit the physiological mechanisms by which sedentary behaviour exerts its negative impact; and reduces the chance of falls that can occur while walking on treadmills. As in developed/high-income countries, the predominant mode of working has become computer-based (Levine and Miller, 2007; Smith et al., 1999), the cycling workstation could be a more appropriate solution in comparison to a walking workstation (Carr et al., 2014). Furthermore, a limited amount of research is available on the physiological responses, changes in work effectiveness, and the readiness of the participants to use cycling workstations to achieve the minimum daily PA recommendations.The purpose of this study was to evaluate the impact of moderate-intensity cycling on work performance. We hypothesised that office workers can exercise at a moderate intensity for 30 min at a sitting workstation (without interrupting their work), without exercise having a significant effect on their work performance.We advertised and presented the study at different university facilities. Fifteen of the university office workers signed up to participate in the study, of which 13 (with no history of neuromuscular and cardiovascular disorders) successfully completed all measurements. Table 1presents their background and demographic data. For inclusion criteria, we selected female participants who spent at least four hours per day performing typing tasks and who used a bicycle on a weekly basis. We excluded those with vision impairments. All procedures of the study were fully explained to the participants at the beginning of the study. They gave their written consent to participate in the study. All procedures conformed to the 1964 Helsinki Declaration and were approved by the Institutional Review Board.We selected a crossover design with the same 13 participants who were tested three times. First, we measured fat and muscle mass with single frequency (50 Hz) Bio Impedance Analysis (BIA) machine (BioScan 916s, Maltron UK), a valid (classified as good agreement) and accurate (1.6%) measurement in comparison to dual-energy X-ray (Hasnan et al., 2014). During the course of one day, each participant performed three tasks at three different exercise intensities: no exercise: 0W and moderate exercise intensities at 40W and 80W. At the beginning, each participant randomly selected the order of their tests and exercise intensity (each subject was asked to draw the sequence of exercise intensity and battery of cognitive tests). Later on, participants performed three 30-min tests with exercise in a random order with at least a 30-min break in between to recover. We continuously measured physiological responses in resting and exercising states before and during each exercise. Five minutes after beginning the exercise, participants started to perform a typing test, followed by a cognitive test for assessing working performance. Both tests were timed to finish after approximately 30 min. If they finished the test before, participants continued exercising until 30 min had passed to achieve minimum standards for daily physical activity.Exercise was achieved by cycling under a modified desk and chair (Fig. 1). Under the table we integrated a modified cycle ergometer (SCHILLER CARDIOVIT CS/200) and adjusted table/chair height and spacing for the comfort of each participant. The table and chair settings were not changed during any of the trials. However, we did change the workload of the cycle ergometer from 40 W (C40W) to 80 W (C80W) to simulate two moderate exercise intensities. In C40W and C80W the cadence was set in the range of 20–40 revolutions per minute. Additionally, participants also performed their tests under a third condition – without cycling (C0W).We used a text re-typing test as proposed in many similar studies (Beers et al., 2008; Newsham et al., 2004; Veitch and Newsham, 1998). We selected three different parts of the chapters of one Slovenian novel, each with 2938 characters. The goal was to have the participants cross-type a selected text from one document to another as correctly and quickly as possible. Participants had both documents visually and vertically aligned on the 24 inch computer display. They used the computer keyboard and a mouse to navigate while typing. Typing time was the time needed to re-type the whole text. Then we used a software solution offered by Microsoft Word – comparing documents to compare the original with a re-typed copy to calculate the number of typing errors, which we counted. During the typing test, the intensity of the physical exercise was not changed: 20–40 revolutions per minute at each intensity (C40W, C80W) and no exercise in C0W.After analysing their regular work tasks, participants performed a general cognitive ability test in the areas of math, vocabulary, and reasoning, also known as wonderlic test (Matthews and Lassiter, 2007). The cognitive test started approximately one minute after the typing test finished. Also during the cognitive test, the intensity of the physical exercise was not changed: 20–40 revolutions per minute at each intensity (C40W, C80W) and no exercise in C0W.Apart from performance in the typing and cognitive tests, some continuous physiological data were collected as well (heart rate, oxygen consumption). We also collected data before and after the task: self-perceived effort, sweating stains and environmental condition.Typing test time and number of typing errors were measured in seconds and in number of typing errors per text (typing error count), respectively. Analogously, the cognitive test time and cognitive test score were measured in seconds and in number of overall correct answers (cognitive test score), respectively.Physiological responses were collected using a chest strap with a heart rate monitor (POLAR RS400) and a calorimeter (Schiller Cardiovit CS/200) for oxygen consumption. After recording resting values, we averaged physiological responses for further analysis from the fifth minute after the onset of exercise to the thirtieth minute of exercise.Self-perceived effort was rated from 0 (nothing at all) to 10 (very, very strong) using the Borg scale (Borg, 1982) before and after every task.Sweating stain areas were evaluated semi-quantitatively by evaluating axillar, palmar and plantar sweat stains in areas of the upper body (Wörle, Rapprich and Heckmann, 2007; Hölzle, 2002). We used a procedure proposed by the International Hyperhidrosis Society (2010) to estimate the overall area of sweat stains. For this, participants wore a black shirt and changed into a dry one after the rest break that followed every test.Environmental stress was controlled with room temperature, illumination and air freshness. The room was 100 m3 in volume. We assured the same artificial lighting for each task and participant. At each break we ventilated the room. Since we could not regulate the moisture, we selected tasting days with relatively low humidity, up to 40%.At the end of the C40W and C80W exercise tests, the participant evaluated if they would rather do a 30-min daily workout during their work hours (as in our setting) or some other way (before or after work). We evaluated their answers with a discrete Likert scale from −5 to +5; where +5 stood for rather exercise during work (as in our setting), −5 stood for rather exercise before/after work.Data are presented as means with standard deviation. There was no deviation from normal distribution. Differences in all dependent variables (heart rate (HR), oxygen consumption (VO2), typing test time, typing error count, cognitive test time, cognitive test score, self-perceived effort and sweating area) were tested with 1-way repeated measures analysis of variance with exercise (C0W, C40W and C80W) as a grouping factor. The study was designed to reach a research power of over 0.8 (expecting moderate intensity effect size <0.2 for typing test time and cognitive test time, using 1-tailed analysis with p < 0.05). If the main effect was significant, we used the Bonferroni post-hoc test.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We provided evidence that active workstations may have a future in occupational health and elsewhere. The major limiting factor of their practical use is the issue of sweating at the workplace. Sweat production brought about by 80W may negatively impact one's desire to exercise in the workplace. Exercise performed at 40W does not appear to elicit sweat production that would prevent someone from exercising in the workplace. There are, however, many ways to control and modulate sweating (using a better chair design, interval exercise, a cooler environment, lighter clothing, etc.). There also seems to be a low effect of exercise on the hand (finger) fine motor skills through body sway. Again, with further mechanical design of an active workstation, this issue could be overcome.