@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Using archetypes to create user panels for usability studies: Streamlining focus groups and user studies

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
9 Clusters and archetype persons to represent the clusters' ear characteristics are generated out of 200 participants.The cluster people are validated through a usability study.A methodological framework to develop a representative user panel is presented.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Comfort,Anthropometry,Ergonomics,Archetypes,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Designers at the conceptual phase of products such as headphones, stress the importance of comfort, e.g. executing comfort studies and the need for a reliable user panel. This paper proposes a methodology to issue a reliable user panel to represent large populations and validates the proposed framework to predict comfort factors, such as physical fit. Data of 200 heads was analyzed by forming clusters, 9 archetypal people were identified out of a 200 people's ear database. The archetypes were validated by comparing the archetypes' responses on physical fit against those of 20 participants interacting with 6 headsets. This paper suggests a new method of selecting representative user samples for prototype testing compared to costly and time consuming methods which relied on the analysis of human geometry of large populations.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Design engineers who are involved in the early conceptual phase of the development of products such as seats, headphones and domestic appliances stress the increasing importance of comfort. Comfort is taken into account in the purchasing decisions of buying a chair, a bed, and when driving a car, or flying. Industry strives to produce products that are comfortable in order to increase the appeal to consumers. The Second European Survey on Working Conditions (Merllié and Paoli, 2002) that took place in 1996, where a sample of 1000 workers from each member state were interviewed, revealed that back pain (30% of the workers) and muscular pains in arms or legs (17% of workers) were amongst the most common work-related health problems. Absenteeism due to work-related health problems affects 23% of workers each year (averaging out at 4 working days lost per worker). These health problems strongly relate to postural musculoskeletal discomfort. Hence, designers need to increase their knowledge on both comfort and discomfort in product design (and workspaces).The terms comfort and discomfort are widely used in studies where prototypes are tested for usability. Despite the frequent use of these terms there is an absence of a general notion of comfort or discomfort. There are three main issues when designing a product to achieve comfort: 1) the exact cause of comfort is unknown, 2) comfort relies to a certain extent on subjectivity and, 3) there is a lack of a methodology for considering comfort in the design process (Vink, 2005). Extensive research mainly in the form of comfort studies (Kuijt-Evers, 2004; DeLooze et al., 2003) has explored some of the influential factors of comfort such as postural stress (Kee and Lee, 2012), levels of pressure and force increase (Goossens et al., 2002) and noise (Vink et al., 2001). Most of these factors are physical, physiological or linked to external attributes of the environment in which the interaction between a human and a product takes place. For products that are in a physical contact with the human body, such as chairs and hand tools, researchers have attempted to match product dimensions with people's anthropometry (Mououdi and Choobinesh, 1997; Cho, 1994). However, there is little research for external ear products, such as headphones and headsets with respect to human ear dimensions, partially due to the limited data sets available. In terms of methods to benchmark human dimensions against product dimensions, research is scarce regarding the evaluation of the ergonomic functionality of products. This translates into two issues: primarily current comfort studies either give no justification for the selection of the number of users to include in the comfort studies, or select small samples of users for prototype benchmarking (Parcells et al., 1999; Gouvalli et al., 2006) which are not representative of the population as a whole; and secondly there is a lack of methodology to define product dimensions and predict good fit. Essentially, the research presented in this paper, responds to the call for a new approach towards comfort and draws inspiration from Vink and Hellbeek (2012) who has stressed the need for an improved comfort methodology.Given this background, the main aim of this research is to propose a methodology to develop a reliable user panel for the execution of comfort studies in the industry of external ear-worn products, by using archetypes to represent large clusters of anthropometric data. The subaims were to investigate and generate the proposed methodology through a second usability study comparing archetypes' responses to a number of participants' responses.This paper consists of four main parts: 1) The paper first reviews the existing literature on definitions of comfort and the studies attempting to link comfort to anthropometry; 2) Then it presents, in detail, the main stages of the archetype methodology, i.e. the process to select participants and the cluster analysis to generate the archetypes; 3) The framework of the ARCH method and the results of the validation of the archetypes are presented in the findings section; and 4) The paper concludes with a discussion of the theoretical and industrial implications of the archetypes and the archetypes methodology (ARCH), as well as, the limitations and the contributions of the methodology.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
