@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Reliability and validity of the Home Care STAT (Safety Task Assessment Tool)

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Home care workers are a high priority population for safety and health research.Home care workers are reliable at self-assessing task exposures.Several task exposures were related to daily pain and fatigue outcomes.Task exposures may indirectly affect worker health behaviors.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Home care workers,Hazard exposure,Self-assessment,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Home care workers are a priority population for ergonomic assessment and intervention, but research on caregivers' exposures to hazards is limited. The current project evaluated the reliability and validity of an ergonomic self-assessment tool called Home Care STAT (Safety Task Assessment Tool). Participants (N = 23) completed a background survey followed by 10–14 days of self-monitoring with the STAT. Results showed that the most frequent task was house cleaning, and that participants regularly performed dangerous manual client moving and transferring tasks. Researcher in-home observations of 14 workers (duration ≤2 h) demonstrated that workers' self-assessments were moderately reliable. Correlational and multi-level analyses of daily self-assessment data revealed that several task exposures were significantly related to daily fatigue and/or pain. Other associations have implications for Total Worker Health™; for example, daily stress was positively associated with both pain and consumption of high calorie snacks. Findings support the STAT as a reliable and potentially valid tool for measuring home care workers' exposures to physically demanding tasks.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Home care workers (HCWs) are a priority population for ergonomic assessment and intervention. These workers, who may be classified as personal or home care aides (BLS, 2010), assist the elderly and people with disabilities with activities of daily living in residential settings. Home care occupations have been characterized as offering low pay, few benefits, unstable employment, limited training and equipment, irregular work hours, and overall poor working conditions (Askew and Walker, 2008; Galinsky et al., 2001; Hayashi et al., 1994). The job is physically demanding, and HCWs often perform dangerous tasks, such as moving and transferring clients, without the help of co-workers or assistive devices. HCWs employed by private agencies may benefit from some supervision and safety training. However, independent HCWs are isolated and dependent on their clients, who are generally untrained private citizens, to provide safe working conditions. Not surprisingly, HCWs have elevated musculoskeletal problems relative to other occupational groups (Jellema et al., 2002; Ono et al., 1995; Simon et al., 2004; Tuomi et al., 1991; Zeytinoglu et al., 2000), and a lost-time injury rate that is 3–4 times higher than the US average (Bureau of Labor Statistics [BLS], 2010). The need for safety interventions is magnified by projections that HCW employment will grow by 70% by 2020 (BLS, 2012) to meet the needs of the growing elderly population (Administration on Aging, 2011).Despite the need for assessment and intervention research with HCWs, there is a relative paucity of relevant safety studies. Prior research with HCWs has focused on measuring injury prevalence and worker perceptions about the causes of stress and strain (Baron and Habes, 2004; Kim et al., 2010; Meyer and Muntaner, 1999; Myers et al., 1993; Wipfli et al., 2012). This research shows that HCWs are at greatest risk of experiencing musculoskeletal injuries to the low back, shoulders, and knees, and that lost time injuries are likely to be triggered by manual material handling and client lifts/transfers (Ono et al., 1995; Hess et al., 2007; Nelson et al., 2003; Wipfli et al., 2012). Other physically demanding tasks that may generate unusual postures and contribute to injuries include changing bedding and assisting clients with bathing and toileting (BLS, 2012). Workers' perceptions about injury hazards are aligned with injury data. HCWs in two independent focus group studies identified several tasks as highly physically demanding or causing high concern for injury: unassisted client lifting and transferring; supporting clients while walking or catching while falling; push/pull/lift wheelchair; bathing; moving household objects; and cleaning bathrooms, floors, and kitchens (Baron and Habes, 2004; Wipfli et al., 2012).While certain caregiving tasks have been implicated as hazardous, we know little about actual task exposure levels among HCWs. Direct physical or observational measurement is ideal, but is rare among isolated working populations due to the effort and time required (Olson et al., 2009). If we are to gain a greater understanding of exposures and intervention needs among HCWs, observational methods for measuring worker postures and task exposures (e.g., Rapid Entire Body Assessment; Hignett and McAtamney, 2000) must be supplemented with validated worker self-assessment methods.Ergonomic self-assessment research has predominantly focused on the reliability, bias, and validity of one-time ergonomic self-assessment surveys or ratings (Barrero et al., 2009a, 2009b; Hollmann et al., 1999; Spielholz, 2006; Spielholz et al., 2001; Wiktorin et al., 1993), and using survey measures to model or predict objective outcomes (e.g., Trask et al., 2010). In general, this literature suggests that worker self-assessments can be systematically biased, but also that workers are able to reliably self-assess exposures to a range of events that are easily discriminated or intense, and that these self-ratings can predict safety-related criteria. As an example of systematic bias, Barrero et al. (2009b) found that workers overestimated the duration of physically demanding tasks and underestimated less physically demanding tasks, and that these biases were inflated among participants who completed the tasks in a discontinuous pattern. As an example of the validity of worker self-reports, Trask et al. (2010) found that workers reports of task exposures following their workshift explained 21–36% of the variance in electromyography (EMG) of lumbar muscles during the workshift (versus direct observation of work characteristics explaining 31–47% of variance in EMG activity).While one-time ergonomic self-assessment surveys are useful, the data produced do not provide information about variability in task exposures that occur over time. In this regard, ecological momentary assessment (EMA) methods may provide enhanced ergonomic self-assessment data. In EMA participants are cued by alarms or events in their environment to self-monitor events, behaviors, or psychological states as they occur over many days or weeks. EMA (Bolger et al., 2003; Green et al., 2006) reduces retrospective bias and improves the reliability and validity of self-report data (Stone et al., 1998). However, EMA remains a self-report method, and while computerized EMA programs time stamp each self-monitoring instance, the accuracy of a participant's isolated self-recordings about their behavior may be difficult to assess. While we are not aware of any previous EMA research with HCWs, the approach has been applied in similar working populations such as nurses (Johnston et al., 2006). Most relevant to the current project, two prior studies have evaluated the reliability of EMA to measure safety-related task exposures.Unge et al. (2005) used EMA to measure task exposures among office workers and hospital cleaners for 10 days, while experimenters observed several concurrent days. Workers produced reliable self-assessment data for most primary work tasks, including exposure to visual display unit work, which is a risk factor for musculoskeletal problems. In a study with a lone working population, Olson et al. (2009) evaluated truck drivers' self-assessments of non-driving work tasks and postures relative to video-based observations. Drivers were highly reliable at self-recording hazards that were environmental, relatively frequent, and easy to discriminate, such as receiving assistance from a forklift operator. Drivers were less reliable at self-assessing postural exposures, such as severe trunk flexion or rotation. These two studies demonstrate that workers can produce moderately reliable measures of work exposures using EMA methods, especially frequent and easily discriminated events. The research also demonstrates the practical value of EMA for measuring exposures among isolated and dispersed populations.To address gaps in research and practice and extend EMA findings to HCWs, we created and evaluated an ergonomic self-assessment tool named Home Care STAT (Safety Task Assessment Tool). The STAT was programmed into a handheld computer, and a daily diary style study was designed to: 1) measure daily task exposures in a sample of HCWs, 2) evaluate the reliability of the STAT by comparing worker self-assessments to data from researcher observations, and 3) evaluate the criterion-related validity of the STAT by conducting correlational and multi-level analyses of associations between person-level and daily work task factors with psychophysical symptoms and lifestyle behaviors.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The current project was designed to evaluate a new safety self-assessment tool for HCWs. Background surveys and workers' self-assessments confirm that HCWs are a priority population for ergonomic assessment and intervention research. The predominantly female sample was older, obese, experienced a high prevalence of musculoskeletal symptoms, and reported regularly performing dangerous and demanding tasks such as client transfers. In-home observations demonstrated that workers produced moderately reliable self-assessments of both task occurrence and duration using the STAT. The daily diary design and an evening symptom survey showed that exposures to tasks such as dressing clients and moving/lifting household objects were related to daily levels of pain, occupational fatigue, negative affect, and stress. We also observed significant hidden correlations between postulated outcomes of negative affect and stress with health factors, suggesting that work exposures in home care may have indirect effects on worker health behaviors. Limitations in the current study suggest areas for future research and practice, such as providing workers with devices with built-in timers to enhance the completeness and reliability of self-assessments. Altogether, our findings support the STAT as a reliable and valid exposure assessment tool for HCWs that researchers and practitioners are encouraged to use to measure HCWs' task exposures, evaluate risk, and guide intervention selection.Notes: This project was supported with funding from the National Institute for Occupational Safety & Health (grant # 5 T42 OH008433-03, Noah Seixas, PI; and grant # 1 U19 OH010154-01, Kent Anger, PI). The funding source had no involvement in designing and conducting the study or in preparing and submitting the manuscript. The authors declare no conflicts of interest.