@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Did a brief nap break have positive benefits on information processing among nurses working on the first 8-h night shift?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Shift workers frequently experience acute sleep deprivation on first night shift.We investigated impact of a nap on the visual attention ability on first night shift.There were no differences between those taking and not taking a nap.The effect size was medium in the information process between groups.Need increase sample size to draw the conclusion regarding the benefits of nap.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cognitive function,Nap,Night shift,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Shift workers frequently experience acute sleep deprivation on first night shift. This study compared the efficacy of 30-min nap (between 2 and 3 a.m.) on the visual attention ability of the nurses working at first 8-h night shift at the time of maximum fatigue (between 3 and 4 a.m.). In addition, we measured cognitive function (between 9 and 10 a.m.) in nurses working on daytime shift, which we defined as baseline wakefulness. The results showed that working on the night shift groups was associated with sleep loss, leading to a decrease in visual attention performance compared to the daytime shift group. There was no statistically significant difference in the visual attention performance between those taking and not taking a nap during the night shift, however the effect size was medium in the information process. It was still needed increase sample size to draw the conclusion regarding a 30-min nap break have positive benefits on perceptual speed during the first night shift.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Shift workers frequently experience acute sleep deprivation on first night shift (Kerstedt, 1998). Some studies have reported that acute night shift work degrades the performance on monotonous tasks and increases sleepiness (Porcu et al., 1998). Other studies have indicated that in rapidly rotating systems involving two to three consecutive night shifts, the impairment in performance is greatest on the first night shift (Lamond et al., 2004). In our previous study, we also found the perceptual and motor abilities on the last day of two consecutive night shifts were worse than those on the last day of four consecutive night shifts, indicating that fast rotating night shifts may lead to medical errors (Chang et al., 2011). Therefore, adaptation strategies are needed to prevent sleep loss impacting cognitive performance during acute changes in the wake–sleep cycle.Napping during a night shift is one strategy that can reduce sleepiness. It removes the worker from the time of maximum circadian-determined impairment in alertness and performance (Smith et al., 2007). As a nap directly addressing physiological sleep needs, it has potential advantages over alternative strategies, such as stimulant use, that predominantly mask sleepiness (Smith et al., 2007). Some studies had demonstrated that taking a nap break during a night shift resulted in fewer performance lapses, less fatigue and sleepiness (Smith-Coggins et al., 2006), reduced medical errors (Landrigan et al., 2007), and improved psychomotor performance which even persisted to the end of the night shift (Smith et al., 2007).However, the subjects in most of these studies were select individuals in a laboratory setting which cannot address issues of on-work performance demands or uncontrolled environmental conditions, which may limit the effectiveness of napping. In addition, many studies have investigated the influence of taking a nap in two-shift systems on night performance, but little is known about the influence of a nap in a three-shift system on night performance. It is therefore of interest to investigate whether the implementation of naps into the first night shift of 8-h night shift work has positive benefits on performance.During a night shift, the nurses are at an increased risk of falling asleep between around 3 to 5 a.m., when the core body temperature is at nadir and sleep tendency is greatest (Lilie, 2004). In this study, we investigated the differences in cognitive performance during the night shift in nurses working the first night (12 a.m.–8 a.m.) with a 30-min nap was taken between 2 and 3 a.m. and those without taken. We compared cognitive functions among the night shift groups at the time of maximum fatigue (3–4 a.m.) (Mitler et al., 1988). In addition, we measured cognitive function from 9 to 10 a.m. in nurses working on daytime shift, which we defined as baseline wakefulness.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
