@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
How does a lower predictability of lane changes affect performance in the Lane Change Task?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Effect of lane change predictability on lane change task (LCT) performance was tested.Lane change position and the required response where manipulated.Lower predictability resulted in substantial performance degradation.However, the overall pattern of results was unaffected.Results support the validity of the LCT as a method to assess driver distraction.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Inattention,In-vehicle information systems,Evaluation methods,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The Lane Change Task (LCT) is an established method to assess driver distraction caused by secondary tasks. In the LCT ISO standard, “course following and maneuvering” and “event detection” are mentioned as central task properties. Especially event detection seems to be a reasonable feature, as research suggests that distraction has profound effects on drivers' reactions to sudden, unexpected events. However, closer inspection of the LCT reveals that the events to be detected (lane change signs) and the required response are highly predictable. To investigate how the LCT's distraction assessment of secondary tasks might change if lane change events and responses were less predictable, we implemented three different versions of the LCT – an “original” one, a second one with lowered predictability of event position, and a third one with lowered predictability of event position and response. We tested each of these implementations with the same set of visual and cognitive secondary tasks of varying demand. The results showed that a decrease in predictability resulted in overall degraded performance in the LCT when using the basic lane change model for analysis. However, all secondary task conditions suffered equally. No differential effects were found. We conclude that although an ISO conforming implementation of the LCT might not be excessively valid regarding its depiction of safety relevant events, the results obtained are nevertheless comparable to what would be found in settings of higher validity.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In-vehicle information systems (IVIS) and other electronic devices than can be used while driving have seen an immense increase in popularity in recent years (Janitzek et al., 2010), and their prevalence is expected to grow even further (Buettner, 2009). The operation of such systems requires manual, visual, cognitive and auditory resources to varying degrees. The quantification of this resource demand is a vital aspect of IVIS interface design. Consequently, the assessment of their potential to distract drivers has become an important issue. Several easy-to-use methods have been developed to investigate the level of distraction associated with IVIS use already in the early stages of product development. One of these tools is the Lane Change Task (LCT; Mattes, 2003). The LCT is a simple and inexpensive dual task method which is specified by an ISO standard (ISO/DIS 26022, 2010).The task employs the look and feel of a simple driving simulation, which mainly consists of a three-lane road, with no other traffic present, and a set of signs appearing on both sides of that road which instruct the participants to change lanes. Participants are required to control a simulated vehicle and change lanes according to the information on the signs while maintaining a constant speed of 60 km/h which cannot be exceeded. The signs appear around every 150 m; time between lane changes is around 9 s. Recommended performance measure is the mean deviation (MDEV) from an ideal lane keeping and changing trajectory that is based on the participants' own baseline drive, which is called the adaptive model. Optional is the calculation of an MDEV value based on a normative lane change model (basic model), which is the same for all participants.One of the task's assets is the fact that it bears some obvious similarities to real world driving (while researchers are, of course, quick to point out that the LCT is not really a driving task, e.g. Mattes and Hallén, 2009). The LCT ISO standard states that the task is supposed to “contain elements important to the driving task”, namely “course following and maneuvering” and “event detection” (p. 21). In terms of safety relevance, especially the inclusion of event detection seems crucial. Victor et al. (2009) state that results obtained from object and event detection methods “have direct links to driving safety” (p. 145), whereas “the safety relevance of longitudinal and lateral control metrics […] is less direct”(p. 146). As Sheridan (2004) points out, “whether a particular distraction actually diminishes safety to any measurable extent clearly depends […] on unexpected events that occur when attention is not on driving.” (p. 593). Numerous studies have shown that different forms of distraction can impact negatively on event detection.In their meta-analysis of effects of cell phone use on driver performance, Caird et al. (2008) found that amongst various variables, reaction time to events and stimuli was affected most. Such events can be suddenly braking lead vehicles (e.g. Alm and Nilsson, 1995; Lamble et al., 1999a), a pedestrian stepping onto the driver's lane (Laberge et al., 2004) or changing traffic signals (Hancock et al., 2003). Others have used artificial tasks like the peripheral detection task (PDT, now detection response task, DRT; e.g. Patten et al., 2004) to present stimuli to the driver that require a response (usually a button press). But cell phone usage is far from being the only secondary task that has an effect on event detection. Speech based e-mail systems (Lee et al., 2001), visually demanding in-car tasks (Lamble et al., 1999b) and even climate control adjustment (Greenberg et al., 2003) were found to have an influence on event detection metrics.Given the profound effects distraction has on the detection of events and the driver's response to them, including elements of event detection in a task that is supposed to assess the effects of driver distraction is fairly reasonable. But are the events and the way they are presented in the LCT really safety relevant? The event detection element that the ISO standard refers to is the perception of and proper response to the lane change signs. While those signs are not evenly spaced, the standard states that “the mean distance from sign to sign is 150 m (a minimum of 140 m plus an exponentially distributed random variable with a mean of 10 m)” (p. 7). In practice, that means that none of the distances is shorter than 140 m, and that in more than 85% of all cases, the distance from sign to sign is between 140 and 160 m. Lane change intervals are between 8.4 and 11.4 s (Mattes and Hallén, 2009). Therefore, after passing a sign, participants can allocate at least 8 s to the secondary task without risk to miss the next one, and can be pretty sure this next one will appear not much later than 9–10 s after the previous. Even more problematic is the fact that “the lane change signs are always visible”, although they remain “blank until the lane indications on the signs appear (i.e., pop up) at a distance of 40 m before the signs” (p.7). So, the position of the event to detect is known well in advance, just as when the event will occur. Consequently, others have found before that the LCT runs into problems when it is supposed to assess secondary tasks that allow for “tactical” behaviour, i.e. timing secondary task operation according to the occurrence of lane change signs (Bengler et al., 2010; Petzoldt et al., 2011). The term “temporal uncertainty”, ascribed to Hick (1952) and Hyman (1953), is used to describe this aspect of response selection (usually summarised under the label “Hick's law” or “Hick-Hyman law”), which is “the degree of predictability of when the stimulus will occur” (Wickens and Hollands, 2000). If temporal uncertainty is low, reaction times are short. It appears that the LCT with its relatively regular, easily predictable events is hardly a reflection of a suddenly braking lead vehicle, much less a pedestrian stepping onto the street unexpectedly.However, the issues go even beyond the detection of events. Once an unexpected event is detected, a driver usually has to decide among a set of different behavioural options to respond. Depending on the distance to the hazard, he might brake, accelerate, steer to the left or right, or combine some of these manoeuvres. While this is still a fairly constrained response set, it is certainly richer in options than the LCT. Even without consideration of other context factors (Is the adjacent lane empty? Does the height of the kerb allow for a swerve to the right? etc.), a certain amount of processing is required to select an appropriate response. In the LCT, for two out of three possible lane positions (left and right), no information processing or decision making is required to initiate a response. When travelling in one of the outer lanes, the only behavioural option when arriving at a lane change sign is to steer towards the other side of the road. As Boff and Lincoln (1988) highlight, response time is affected by the “uncertainty about which stimulus will appear and/or which response will be required” (p. 1860). The signs might give information on how far to travel across (either the centre or the other outer lane), but initially, there is only one valid motor response, which is known before. As soon as the information pops up on the sign (or even before – however, participants are instructed “to begin a lane change as soon as the symbols appear on a sign, but not before”, ISO/DIS 26022, 2010, p. 17), participants can begin to steer. Processing of the information presented on the sign can be done while steering. Some researchers have already tried to avoid that issue, e.g. by introducing an unlimited number of lanes on their track, so that every time a lane change is required, it could be either to the left or the right (Hofmann and Rinkenauer, 2013). Although not directly an element of event detection, the fact that responses can be selected without or before processing information is another indicator for a certain disparity between actual safety critical events while driving and events as defined in the LCT.Given the aforementioned issues, it is at least debatable if the LCT is an event detection task that is really reflecting the detection of safety relevant events in real world driving. But what could be expected if LCT events were less predictable? How would results look like if signs were not visible all the time, and if the information had to be processed before a manoeuvre could be selected? It is reasonable to assume that as a result of lower predictability, performance would overall degrade (Green, 2000). That in itself is not a problem for the LCT – a simple, unspecific degradation of performance would not change the overall pattern of results and hence not change the conclusions drawn. But could the pattern of results when assessing different secondary tasks change as a consequence of increased unpredictability?With regard to an increased difficulty in the detection of an event, there is no clear picture to allow for a specific hypothesis. There are reports of cognitive distraction having a stronger effect on performance in simple event detection tasks (decelerating/braking in response to a slowing down/braking lead vehicle) than visual distraction (Jamson and Merat, 2005), just as there are reports of exactly the opposite (Liang and Lee, 2010). In a driving simulator study, Muhrer and Vollrath (2011) found that visual distraction negatively impacted on the perception of sudden events, however also went with compensatory behaviour (increase in distance to lead vehicle, decrease in speed), whereas under cognitive distraction, participants did not compensate. This suggests that the negative effects of visual distraction might be underestimated under the current LCT regime, which requires the perception of (and reaction to) rather predictable events which allow for compensatory strategies.With increased difficulty in response selection, cognitive distraction could be expected to have a stronger impact on LCT performance. Engstrom and Markkula (2007) reported on an LCT experiment in which they employed visual and cognitive secondary tasks. Their analysis showed that only with a concurrent cognitive task, there were several instances of erroneous responses in which participants performed a lane change to the wrong target lane. They concluded that the cause was either recognition or response selection failure. Choice reaction time, of which response selection is a central element, has a long history as a measure reflecting the processing of information (e.g. Merkel, 1885). It is reasonable to assume that once information has been perceived (which has to be the case in order to select a response), visual resources play a secondary role at best, whereas cognitive resources are required to facilitate the decision on an appropriate response.To investigate which consequences a reduced predictability of lane changes has on lane change performance, we created our own implementation of the LCT, to then manipulate relevant features of the task. We created our first version of the LCT according to ISO recommendations, and tried to reduce the predictability of lane change events in our second version. In the third version, we kept the reduced predictability of the events, and reduced the predictability of the required response in addition. We conducted three different experiments, all of which had exactly the same setup, the sole exception being the way the LCT was implemented. Consequently, in the analysis presented in this article, we treat the three experiments as three conditions in a between subjects design. However, we want to emphasise that the experiments were conducted one after the other, and not in parallel. The results of Experiment I were important for us to understand whether our implementation of the LCT worked or not, before we could proceed with any other experiment. Findings from Experiment II were taken into consideration when designing the LCT implementation for Experiment III.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
