@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Resilience skills as emergent phenomena: A study of emergency departments in Brazil and the United States

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Resilience in two EDs is investigated.Origins of resilience skills (RSs).Model of RSs as emergent phenomena.Instantiation of the model.Factors that support or degrade RSs.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Resilience skills,Resilience engineering,Complexity,Emergency department,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Although the use of resilience skills (RSs) by emergency department (ED) front-line staff is ubiquitous, the nature and origin of these skills tend to be taken for granted. This study investigates the research question “where do RSs come from”? Case studies in two EDs were undertaken in order to answer the research question: one in Brazil and the other in the United States. The case studies adopted the same data collection and analysis procedures, involving interviews, questionnaires, observations, and analysis of documents. A model for describing RSs as emergent phenomena is proposed. The model indicates that RSs arise from interactions between: work constraints, hidden curriculum, gaps in standardized operating procedures, organizational support for resilience, and RSs themselves. An instantiation of the model is illustrated by a critical event identified from the American ED. The model allows the identification of leverage points for influencing the development of RSs, instead of leaving their evolution purely to chance.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Healthcare systems are widely regarded as primary examples of complexity, due to characteristics such as uncertainty, diversity, tightly-coupled processes, large number of dynamically interacting elements, and resilience (Amalberti, 2013; Hollnagel et al., 2013). This research study is concerned with resilience, which is “the intrinsic ability of a system to adjust its functioning prior to, during, or following changes and disturbances, so that it can sustain required operations under both expected and unexpected conditions” (Hollnagel, 2011, p. XXXVI). In turn, performance adjustment means filling in the gaps of standardized operating procedures (SOPs), whatever their extent and reason (Saurin et al., 2014).Emergency departments (EDs) have been one of the main healthcare laboratories for investigating resilience (Stephens et al., 2011). This is due to the highly dynamic work environment of EDs, in which following SOPs is far from sufficient – and may sometimes be counterproductive – for providing effective care to patients. The most visible manifestations of resilience in EDs are associated with the performance of front-line employees, often without adequate support from organizational design (Wears and Vincent, 2013). Organizational support would imply system configurations and artifacts that become the instruments by which resilience is brought to bear (Fairbanks et al., 2014).One of the means for providing organizational support is to influence the development of the resilient skills (RSs) of the workforce. These are the “skills of any type necessary to adjust performance, in order to maintain safe and efficient operations during both expected and unexpected situations” (Saurin et al., 2014). In turn, a skill is a goal-oriented, well-organized behavior performed with economy of effort (Proctor and Dutta, 1995).Other terms have been used in the human factors literature to refer to similar concepts – e.g. improvisations (Trotter et al., 2013), tacit skills (Ambrosini and Bowman, 2001), and non-technical skills, NTS (Flin et al., 2008). Overall, commonalities between these concepts are the use of the individual or team as the unit of analysis, and their concern with performance for dealing with unexpected situations.We opted for RSs mostly because we approach this concept from the perspective of resilience engineering (RE), which is concerned with the observation, analysis, and design of resilient systems (Nemeth and Herrera, 2015). RE stresses the creation of organizational conditions that support resilient performance at the sharp end (Bergström et al., 2015). This is a distinctive commitment of RE, and therefore of RSs, in relation to the previously mentioned similar concepts. While RE does not deny that personal qualities matter (Reason, 2008), it counters the tendency to over-valuing “heroic” behaviors of practitioners (Schulman, 1996) and relying excessively on elite performers (Ericsson et al., 2006).Regardless of the ubiquitous presence of RSs in EDs, little is known on how they arise. RSs and resilience in general are often regarded as emergent phenomena (Bracco et al., 2008; Nemeth et al., 2011; Day, 2005). This conveys the idea that interactions between agents “set the stage” for resilient performance, which cannot be developed and deployed in a fully controlled manner. While it is intuitive that RSs arise from interactions, there is no framework for tracking the factors intervening in these interactions neither for analyzing how these can be influenced. Indeed, while observations of resilience in healthcare have been frequently reported in literature, these have not yet revealed where resilience comes from, neither what supports or degrades it (Nemeth and Herrera, 2015). Also, there is a need for providing empirical evidence to support the notion that RSs are emergent.This research deals with the gap aforementioned (“where do RSs come from?”) through the investigation of RSs in two EDs: one in Brazil, and the other in the United States. While both EDs share similar characteristics, they also have marked contextual differences, thus offering a rich empirical basis for investigating the origins and role of context on RSs. A model of the interactions leading to RSs is offered as an alternative for answering the research question.Healthcare and EDs in particular has been a domain of interest for RE. Wears et al. (2006) described how the resilient capacity of an ED was exceeded due to overcrowding. Stephens et al. (2011) reported how resilient performance relied on interactions with other areas of the hospital. Perry et al. (2006) described how shared decision-making, involving professionals who had never worked together, was crucial for the successful treatment of a pregnant patient in an ED. Anders et al. (2006) assessed five characteristics of resilience in the trauma area of an ED: buffering capacity, flexibility, margin, tolerance, and cross-scale interactions. Sujan et al. (2015) investigated how the study of everyday clinical work offered insights into patient safety in handover activities carried out in an ED. Anderson et al. (2013) proposed a framework for managing the four abilities of resilient organizations in an ED: anticipating, monitoring, responding, and learning. Wears and Perry (2008) explored the use of system dynamics for modeling resilience and brittleness in overcrowded EDs.Overall, previous studies on resilience in EDs had a stronger focus on the observation of resilience, placing less emphasis on analysis and design. Furthermore, while a number of contextual factors that trigger resilience may be identified from these studies, this information is mostly a by-product rather than the main research objective.Emergence is widely regarded as a defining characteristic of complexity (Dekker, 2011). Emergent phenomena arise from the interactions among several variables, and they have unique properties that are not found in any of the interacting variables (Cilliers, 1998). Such phenomena may be either desired or undesired (Buchli and Santini, 2005), and while they cannot be fully controlled they can be influenced to some extent.A metaphor commonly used to explain emergence is that the whole is more than the sum of the parts – less emphasized, but also noticed by Cilliers (1998) is the fact that emergence can imply the whole is less than the sum of the parts. Indeed, Heylighen et al. (2007) note that not only is the behavior of the whole influenced by the properties of its parts, but the behavior of the parts is to some degree constrained by the properties of the whole. Thus, given its nature, the investigation of emergence must stress the interactions between parts, rather than the parts themselves – of course, knowing the parts is important but not the key for understanding (Dekker, 2011). For the purposes of this study, investigating RSs as emergent phenomena means that we are concerned with how interactions between the elements forming a socio-technical system give rise to RSs.In order to investigate RSs, two case studies were carried out. This research strategy was chosen mostly because case studies (Flyvbjerg, 2011) are a means for developing context-dependent knowledge, which is a key for accelerating the learning process of novices. Premises of case study design were followed in order to increase the credibility of the findings, as follows: (i) identification of literature gap; (ii) development of data collection protocols (Eisenhardt and Graebner, 2007); (iii) intentional selection of cases (Flyvbjerg, 2006); (iv) delimitation of the boundaries of the case Flyvbjerg (2011); (v) triangulation of data and data sources (Noor, 2008); (vi) development of a database, allowing traceability and reinterpretation of data when necessary (Flybjerg, 2011); and (vii) use of visual representations to illustrate the contributions of the study (Eisenhardt and Graebner, 2007).The case studies were undertaken in the EDs of two University hospitals: one in Brazil and the other in the United States. The research project was approved by the ethical committees of both hospitals. The main reasons for selecting these cases were: (i) they had been objects of recent RE studies (Righi and Saurin, 2015; Righi et al. 2016; Wears et al., 2007; Wears and Perry, 2008), which made it easier access for data collection and facilitated acclimation of the researchers; (ii) they were EDs of reference in their respective regions, which suggested staff was highly qualified; and (iii) their academic nature, which could encourage critical thinking.The studies focused on the work of the three categories of professionals mostly involved in patient care, namely physicians, nurses, and nurse technicians. The focus on front-line staff was mostly due to immediate impact of their actions on patient safety and ED performance, in addition to the ease of observation.A premise for the field study was that the unit of analysis should be the joint cognitive system (JCS) formed by the interactions between the individual professional and their social and material environment. According to Hollnagel and Woods (2005), a JCS is a co-agency between people and technology that uses the knowledge about itself and the environment to plan and modify its actions in order to achieve a goal. A JCS not only uses what is inside people's minds, but also representations distributed along the social and material structures (Hollan et al., 2000). Therefore, data collection was not only concerned with the identification of RSs themselves, but also with the context in which they were deployed.Similar data collection procedures were adopted in both EDs, thus providing internal consistency for the study and allowing comparisons between both environments. Considering the intention of accounting for the context of RSs, sources of data involved direct observations, interviews, analysis of documents, and meetings (Table 1).Observations were carried out in varying times of the day and days of the week, in order to account for the variability of real work. Researchers used a diary to record both observed facts and insights from the observations. These observations contributed to acclimation of the researchers, understanding of work flows, and as a means for making sense of information from other data sources. Observing training sessions was also useful since it permitted realizing how professionals reacted to challenging situations included in simulations (e.g. simulations of handling mass casualties in the American ED).We used two types of interviews: critical decision method (CDM) and questerview. The CDM interviews (Crandall et al., 2006) started with the record of information about the profile of the interviewee (e.g. age, experience), followed by a request for an overview of the interviewee's tasks and then it moved on to the four stages of CDM: identification of a challenging event experienced by the interviewee, development of a timeline, deepening, and “what if” queries. As a drawback, some of the interviewees had difficult to recall discrete events from beginning to end; in these cases the CDM was abbreviated and two or more shorter stories were discussed in order to compensate for gaps in the reports. Crandall et al. (2006, p.84) mention that this may happen when people work under stressful conditions and handle very high workloads.The questerview (Adamson et al., 2004) involved asking subjects to complete a survey exploring complexity characteristics of the EDs that could influence RSs, and then going over their responses asking them to explain and deepen their answers. Both the CDM interviews and dialogs arising from the survey were tape-recorded and then fully transcribed. While this paper focuses on the qualitative data arising from the questerview, a detailed quantitative analysis of the survey is presented by Righi and Saurin (2015) – Brazilian ED, and Righi et al. (2016) – American ED. The document analysis was used to explore the distinction between work-as-imagined (contained in the written procedures) and work-as-done (enacted by the staff) (Hollnagel, 2012). This was important for the study of RSs since, by definition, these skills are deployed to fill gaps in SOPs.The feedback meetings consisted of presentations of preliminary results, made by one of the researchers to representatives of professionals. These meetings were useful both for giving feedback to professionals and for obtaining feedback from them, concerning the accuracy of the data analysis and interpretation made by researchers. Although obtaining new data was not the focus of the said meetings, this occurred opportunistically – e.g. in the USA, participants commented on the communication difficulties with patients who did not speak English. The researcher took notes from the meetings for subsequent analysis.Five categories of data analysis were defined upfront (Table 2). RSs account for only one of these categories, and three others refer to contextual elements identified from: Hendrick and Kleiner (2001) on the sub-systems forming a socio-technical system (category 1), and Wachs et al. (2012) on the identification of NTSs from a RE perspective (categories 3 and 4). Hidden curriculum (category 5, Chuang et al., 2010) is closely related to the research question, and it was explicitly and spontaneously mentioned by an interviewee in the USA, who had an important role in the emergency medicine program. Overall, such data analysis categories provided a context for RSs, thus operationalizing the notion of the JCS as the unit of analysis.The same procedures were adopted for analyzing data from all sources of evidence. Thus, when analyzing transcripts of interviews, diaries of observations, notes from meetings, and documents such as SOPs, researchers looked for excerpts of raw textual data that could support the identification of information related to the five data analysis categories mentioned in Table 2. An excerpt could consist of several lines of text, and be associated with all five categories. The identification of information related to data analysis categories (1), (3), (4), and (5) from excerpts was fairly straightforward. Concerning RSs (2), the search for evidence from the raw data was guided by identifying events in which professionals had to fill gaps in SOPs in order to achieve their goals, by relying on tacit knowledge and making sense of the interactions with other components of their broad socio-technical system.The decision to highlight excerpts, rather than isolated words or expressions, contributed to overall understanding and the successful retrieval from the database of the context in which the outcomes were obtained. The vast majority of excerpts (about 90%) originated from CDM interviews and questerviews, which is in line with previous studies that point out the richness of information provided by those techniques (Crandall et al., 2006).Excerpts, from the different sources, were recorded in two spreadsheets: one for each ED. Next, in a less abstract level of data codification, excerpts gave rise to examples (or instantiations) of RSs, work constraints, organizational support for RSs, and hidden curriculum that originated them – see the column on the right of Tables 4, 5 and 7. In a more abstract level of codification, examples were grouped according to their similarities – these groups correspond to the columns on the left of the Tables. Triangulation of data was made by comparing excerpts from different interviewees and different data sources.Several rounds of reading raw textual data, identifying relevant excerpts, spotting examples from them, and grouping examples according to similarities were made to reach the lists presented in this paper. Thus, analysis had elements of both description (i.e. describing factual information on the system characteristics) and interpretation (i.e. codifying raw data into examples and categories). It is also worth noting that, although data were collected from different professional categories, data analysis was aggregated for the staff as a whole. This was made since interdependence is an essential feature of JCS, whether or not agents intend to act collaboratively.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The question that guided this research had been stated as “where do RSs come from?” Case studies of EDs in two countries indicated that acquisition and use of RSs was largely a by-product of the interactions between factors that cannot be fully controlled by management, such as work constraints, hidden curriculum, and the inevitable gaps in work system design. As such, this work provides empirical evidence and a theoretical framework for describing RSs as emergent phenomena. Indeed, the key property of RSs (i.e. resilience) is not found in any of the interacting elements, thus being a novel property arising from interactions. In particular, this research is distinct from previous studies to the extent it has gone beyond detailed descriptions of resilience or its absence. It went beneath the surface to offer an explanation regarding where resilient performance comes from, and what factors support or degrade it. Another key aspect of the approach we followed, in comparison with other paradigms that stress the isolated individual worker or team as the unit of analysis, is the recognition of the role played by the work environment and by management. Thus, an important question raised by our approach is “how can we design a system that supports people and positively influences the acquisition and use of RSs”, instead of “how can we train people to use RSs according to SOPs”.While results indicate that the development of RSs is largely a spontaneous process this does not exclude the idea of intentionally influencing it. For instance, hidden curriculum could be made more explicit, such as by the creation of opportunities for reflection from practice (guided by a theoretical framework oriented by resilience engineering) and scenario-based training focused on RSs. Furthermore, data made it clear management can influence RSs in two other complementary ways: by tackling work constraints; and by providing organizational support for dealing with the remaining inevitable constraints.With regard to practical contribution, the data collection and analysis method adopted in this study is a means of generating descriptive knowledge that can be translated into prescriptions for managing operations in EDs. For instance, identification of RSs and work constraints sets an important basis for the re-design of training programs, since it indicates which skills should be trained and which factors should be included in training simulations. Similarly, the re-design of SOPs may benefit from the adopted method – e.g. realistic SOPs should account for work constraints. Lastly, the lists of constraints, RSs, and organizational support measures can be useful for other EDs, given that this study indicated the nature of front-line work seems to be similar across countries. It is worth noting that the mentioned lists need to be constantly updated and extended.