@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An objective method for screening and selecting personal cooling systems based on cooling properties

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Presentation of a personal cooling system (PCS) selection method.Provides ability to rank systems based on projected cooling ability.Integrates times, weights, and metabolic rates in a cooling effectiveness score.Method decreases testing costs by allowing better selection of systems for testing.Validation is performed against human subject PCS testing.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Personal cooling system,Evaluation tool,Heat stress,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A method is proposed for evaluation and selection of a personal cooling system (PCS) incorporating PCS, subject, and equipment weights; PCS run time; user task time; PCS cooling power; and average metabolic rate. The cooling effectiveness method presented is derived from first principles and allows those who select PCSs for specific applications to compare systems based on their projected use. This can lower testing costs by screening for the most applicable system. Methods to predict cooling power of PCSs are presented and are compared to data taken through standard manikin testing. The cooling effectiveness ranking is presented and validated against human subject test data. The proposed method provides significant insight into the application of PCS on humans. However, the interaction a humans with a PCS is complex, especially considering the range of clothing ensembles, physiological issues, and end use scenarios, and requires additional analysis.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Heat stress has long been recognized as a risk to personnel health and work performance, particularly in highly radiant or hot environments, and at high-activity levels. This is especially true in desert and jungle conditions, deep mines, firefighting situations, or other locations where high radiant loads, high air temperatures, high humidity, or a combination of these elements, can lead to heat stress incidents (Buller et al., 2008; Chou et al., 2008; Duncan et al., 1979). In high-temperature applications, where the ambient temperature is greater than body temperature, the physiological defense against heat stress is the evaporation of perspiration. Unfortunately, protective equipment and clothing limit the body's ability to evaporate perspiration and expel heat to the environment (Cadarette et al., 2001). This also contributes to the buildup of heat in the body, raising the body's core temperature, and eventually leading to heat stress.In recent years, numerous new technologies in protective fabrics, clothing systems, and cooling systems have been designed to help mitigate the onset of heat stress. Consequently, acquisition specialists, trainers, equipment developers, and researchers are faced with many product choices in the marketplace. For example, more than 300 different personal cooling systems for use in hot environments are available on the market (McCullough et al., 2013). Technical information available from manufacturers of these products is often incomplete, confusing, or misleading, so it is difficult to decide which products are appropriate for a particular application.Use of PCSs has been investigated for many years by the military, government agencies, private and public organizations, and universities (Barwood et al., 2009; McCullough and Eckels, 2009; McLellan et al., 1999). The analysis of PCSs for use in various industries is challenging due to the inherent variability in human physiology, range of expected work or activities, and variability in environmental conditions. A common method of screening PCSs is to use a thermal manikin to measure the cooling rate. In the standard, systems must meet a 50-W minimum, then systems are compared to one another based on their cooling power (ASTM, 2010b). The thermal manikin provides a cost-effective and timely alternative to testing each variation of PCSs on humans (Bogerd et al., 2010). Even with this economic advantage, 300 PCSs can't be screened for each end use scenario. Therefore, additional tools are needed.In previous studies, criteria used to select PCSs were often not reported or quantified. These were sometimes confined to cooling ability in watts (Endrusick et al., 2007), ergonomic factors (Goodman et al., 2008), or some combination. Selection criteria could include many different categories, which are necessary, but generally deemed ‘self-explanatory’ and not reported in literature. Obviously, some criteria will vary between applications. In past studies performed by the authors, potential systems have been removed from consideration when they didn't pass certain metrics such as system weight, tethered operation only, PPE compatibility, flammability, and other safety concerns. The work by Laprise (2012) provides a very inclusive list of selection criteria intended as a standard for PCS solicitations from companies for “emergency responder operations.” These can be very useful in narrowing systems based on safety and ergonomic factors, especially when paired with systematic selection methods such as those presented in Ullman (1992). More refinement can be added if this is coupled with the standards proposed by organizations such as ISO, NIOSH, OSHA, and NFPA. While this necessary step is important, a metric for evaluation of personal cooling system effectiveness is lacking.Currently there is a strong dependence on thermal manikin testing, which can be very expensive when evaluating large numbers of systems. Thermal manikin testing has inherent limitations and does not always include issues such as weight, PCS runtime, and availability of supplies. This paper proposes a unique cooling effectiveness metric that incorporates task time, PCS runtime, weight, and work rate for stationary tasks. There is interest in a comparative cooling effectiveness measure. Work by Xu and Gonzalez (2011) developed a relative efficiency measure for air circulation systems to compare measured power from the manikin to a modeled value. The proposed measure of cooling effectiveness in this paper will be introduced and defined. This will be followed by validation and discussion of the method incorporating existing standards for measuring PCSs, using thermal manikins and previously reported human subject testing.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
