@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Prevention of musculoskeletal disorders within management systems: A scoping review of practices, approaches, and techniques

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
There was little information on the integration of MSD prevention into management systems in the peer-reviewed literature.Incorporating MSD prevention into organizational level approaches could improve production in addition to preserving workers' health in workplaces.MSD hazard assessment and risk prevention are partially outside of the main management processes.Bringing ergonomics as a means of preventing MSD into organizations' management systems appears to be highly desirable.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Occupational Health and Safety Management Systems,Integrated management systems,Risk assessment,Ergonomics,Participative ergonomics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The purpose of this study was to identify and summarize the current research evidence on approaches to preventing musculoskeletal disorders (MSD) within Occupational Health and Safety Management Systems (OHSMS). Databases in business, engineering, and health and safety were searched and 718 potentially relevant publications were identified and examined for their relevance. Twenty-one papers met the selection criteria and were subjected to thematic analysis. There was very little literature describing the integration of MSD risk assessment and prevention into management systems. This lack of information may isolate MSD prevention, leading to difficulties in preventing these disorders at an organizational level. The findings of this review argue for further research to integrate MSD prevention into management systems and to evaluate the effectiveness of the approach.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Musculoskeletal disorders (MSD) represent a large proportion of work-related disabilities in most countries (NRC, 2001). MSD have a substantial work-related component and a consistent set of workplace risk factors including forces exerted, the postures required, the time history of the mechanical exposure, vibration, cold, contact stress, and a range of psychosocial factors (Bernard, 1997; NRC, 2001). MSD negatively impact the worker, firm, and the economy by increasing discomfort, pain, disability, and medical costs, as well as decreasing productivity and employee morale (Martin et al., 2003; Morse, 1999). Hence, as a result of these adverse effects, the prevention of these disorders should be a high priority.It is the responsibility of organizations to provide safe working conditions through anticipation, identification, assessment, and control of a wide range of hazards in the workplace. If these activities are performed within some organizational level framework, it may be considered a “management system”. More formally, a management system is defined as a framework of individual processes, procedures, and resources to ensure effective and efficient achievement of certain objectives (Karapetrovic and Willborn, 1998). Three key internal management systems are: Environmental Management Systems (EMS), Quality Management Systems (QMS), and Occupational Health and Safety Management Systems (OHSMS). Several standards and guidelines have been developed over the years to guide organizations in implementing these management systems, for instance, the Occupational Health and Safety Assessment Series (OHSAS 18001), BS 8800, International Labor Organization guidelines, Health and Safety Executive guide (HSE, 2007), QMS standard (ISO 9001) developed by International Organization for Standardization (ISO), and EMS standard (ISO 14001). OHSAS 18001 is a framework developed to provide a “recognizable” health and safety management system that has the potential to be assessed and certified against organizations’ management systems. This framework includes elements aiming to improve health and safety systematically. Often, organizations integrate separate management systems (quality, environmental, health and safety, etc.) to increase efficiency and reduce costs; this model is known as an integrated management system (IMS). These management system frameworks are typically based on the Plan-Do-Check-Act (PDCA) model (Deming, 1986) of continuous improvement.We adopted the definition of ergonomics provided by International Ergonomics Association (IEA), which includes aspects of physical, cognitive, and work organizational factors (IEA, 2000). In the literature, ergonomics appears to be frequently used as a synonym for MSD prevention. Therefore, where applicable, we will clarify which meaning has been used by different authors. Participative Ergonomics (PE) practices are commonly presented as a desirable approach for the prevention of MSD (Noro and Imada, 1991). Ergonomic programs for the prevention of MSD vary in complexity, but most of those reported in the literature appear to be set up in isolation from management system frameworks (Yazdani et al., 2015). This isolation was perhaps first conceived to highlight the work-relatedness of MSD and to increase the awareness that these disorders are as important as acute injuries. However, it is unclear why this general isolation still exists. Furthermore, there remain questions of the possible challenges and barriers that could obstruct the integration of MSD prevention into existing broader management systems.The purpose of this study was therefore to both identify and summarize the available evidence on embedding the prevention of MSD within OHSMS and thus integrating this specific aspect of prevention into an organization's management system.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
