@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Comparing the physiological and perceptual responses of construction workers (bar benders and bar fixers) in a hot environment

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
In a hot environment, energy expenditure of rebar work is 2.57 Kcal/min.Bar fixing induced higher physiological responses as compared to bar bending.Bar fixing induced non-significant but high perceptual response than bar bending.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Construction work,Oxygen consumption,Heat stress,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study aimed to (1) quantify the respective physical workloads of bar bending and fixing; and (2) compare the physiological and perceptual responses between bar benders and bar fixers. Field studies were conducted during the summer in Hong Kong from July 2011 to August 2011 over six construction sites. Synchronized physiological, perceptual, and environmental parameters were measured from construction rebar workers. The average duration of the 39 field measurements was 151.1 ± 22.4 min under hot environment (WBGT = 31.4 ± 2.2 °C), during which physiological, perceptual and environmental parameters were synchronized. Energy expenditure of overall rebar work, bar bending, and bar fixing were 2.57, 2.26 and 2.67 Kcal/min (179, 158 and 186 W), respectively. Bar fixing induced significantly higher physiological responses in heart rate (113.6 vs. 102.3 beat/min, p < 0.05), oxygen consumption (9.53 vs. 7.14 ml/min/kg, p < 0.05), and energy expenditure (2.67 vs. 2.26 Kcal/min, p < 0.05) (186 vs. 158 W, p < 0.05) as compared to bar bending. Perceptual response was higher in bar fixing but such difference was not statistically significant. Findings of this study enable the calculation of daily energy expenditure of rebar work.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Rebar work (or steel fixer) is one of the most physical demanding, labor-intensive and long duration tasks in construction (Balasubramanian and Prasad, 2007; Chang et al., 2009; Jarkas, 2010). In general, rebar workers cut steel bars and assemble the reinforcing bars or mesh by welding or clipping into the predetermined locations before the completion of formwork erection and concreting. In consideration of this, it has been reported that rebar workers spend 30% of their work time performing bar bending and 70% of work time performing bar fixing (Chan et al., 2012). Specifically, bar bending involves cutting and bending the reinforcement bars into the required length and shape. It is often done at a bar bending yard on-site. Bar fixing, on the other hand, involves putting the tailored reinforcement bars in the right position, in the right layer, and at the right spacing. In a typical high-rise construction site, once the reinforcement bars are cut and bent to the right shape, they will be hoisted up to the construction level and stored at a central location before being moved to the designated location where no shelter will be provided. Steel fixers will therefore need to take delivery of the reinforcement bars at the construction level, and store them up temporarily for subsequent use. Following that, they will move the bars manually to the designated location; erect and fix them into the right position. Since the reinforcement bars are heavy and are highly conducive to heat, bar fixing is perceived as a much more physically demanding job when compared with bar bending.Rebar workers usually work at the confined space at the top floor of the construction site making them very vulnerable to heat stress when working in a hot environment. Previous study conducted at the United Arab Emirates construction area reported environmental heat as Wet Bulb Globe Temperature (WBGT: 26.1–28.6 °C) and Thermal Work Limit (TWL: 189.3–237.7 W/m2) (Bates and Schneider, 2008). Under a full solar load, the body experiences radiative heat gains from the sun and the nearby hot surfaces. In addition, natural convective heat losses cease when air temperature approximates skin temperature, i.e. 31–33 °C (Taylor, 2006). In such a hot environment, the primary heat dissipation is the evaporation of sweat (Taylor, 2006). When heat dissipation is insufficient, heat stress may have a serious negative effect on the health and safety of workers (Fogleman et al., 2005). The incidence of heat stress in the construction industry has been alarming and caused a number of verifiable reported deaths which suggest that heat stress was the probable causal factor (Bonauto et al., 2007; Chan et al., 2012; Chang et al., 2009). These incidents have drawn the attention of the government, statutory bodies and the industry to investigate the health and safety problem of working in hot weather.Heart rate, oxygen consumption, energy expenditure and perceived fatigue have been used in previous studies to quantify the intensity of physical works in a hot environment (Bates and Schneider, 2008; Li et al., 2009; Maiti, 2008; Rodgers, 1986; Soer et al., 2014). The World Health Organization has recommended that an average heart rate over the duration of a working shift should not exceed 110 beat/min (WHO, 1969). Previous studies have examined the physical workload of electric arc melting workers and continuous casting workers in hot environment (Chen et al., 2003), and the manual lifting and lowering tasks of construction workers (Li et al., 2009). Surprisingly, rebar work, which is one of the most physical demanding and long duration tasks in construction (Balasubramanian and Prasad, 2007; Chang et al., 2009; Jarkas, 2010), receives little concern. It is believed that prolonged rebar work in a hot environment may result in fatigue and heat-related illness. However, to the best of our knowledge, there is no previous study quantifying the respective physical workloads of bar bending and fixing under hot environment. Specifically, simultaneous collections of environmental, physiological and perceptual parameters are needed in order to better understand the topic.Therefore, the purpose of this study was (a) to quantify the respective physical workload of bar bending and fixing; and (b) to compare the physiological and perceptual responses between bar benders and bar fixers when they work in a hot environment. Results of this study will facilitate the design of construction work procedure and work–rest schedule to adjust the physical workload of workers to prevent overstrain, fatigue, disorders and injuries (Hsie et al., 2009). In addition, this study will provide information for nutrition replenishment and recovery strategies for rebar workers. By doing so, the health and safety of the workers will be enhanced.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
