@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The impact of user- and system-initiated personalization on the user experience at large sports events

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Personalized mobile content improves spectator UX at large sports events.User and system-initiated personalization approaches each provide distinct benefits.User initiated personalization provides accuracy and a feeling of control.System-initiated approaches minimise interaction effort from participants.An integrated hybrid approach can capitalise on the merits of both approaches.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
User studies,Personalization,User experience,UX,Large sports event,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This article describes an experimental study investigating the impact on user experience of two approaches of personalization of content provided on a mobile device, for spectators at large sports events. A lab-based experiment showed that a system-driven approach to personalization was generally preferable, but that there were advantages to retaining some user control over the process. Usability implications for a hybrid approach, and design implications are discussed, with general support for countermeasures designed to overcome recognised limitations of adaptive systems.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Although large sports events are a rich and dynamic social and information environment, several studies have shown that the spectator experience at such events can be improved, e.g. at football matches, athletics meetings and swimming galas. Spectators can find it hard to access and assimilate the diversity of information present within a stadium (Sun and May, 2007).Esbjörnsson et al. (2006) describe the ‘viewers paradox’ encountered by sports spectators: although an event provides a rich experience, it is often difficult to put what is observed into the broader context, for example what a lap means for a particular race, an individual performance for a team, or the implications of a game for a wider competition. In addition, many sporting events are characterised by long periods of waiting. This can result in boredom for the spectator, but also an opportunity to support an active engagement with the event, and to treat an event as a ‘resource for conversation’ amongst spectators. Over a decade ago Olsson and Nilsson (2002) showed how much of the social interaction between spectators at events is actually quite limited and inactive. Even recent research such as Ko et al. (2011) has highlighted that the social experience should be enhanced at major spectator sports events.Personalized services and information have been proposed to accommodate individual differences at sports events (Macquet and Stanton, 2014). User-initiated personalization and system-initiated personalization are two scalable approaches to the design of personalization (Fan and Poole, 2006). User-initiated personalization is described as the adjustment of a system, initiated by the user to achieve a desired goal (Sundar and Marathe, 2010). By contrast, system-initiated personalization refers to the adjustment initiated by a system, based on a user profile, to guide content delivery according to what the user is believed to be interested in (Arora et al., 2008). The balance of user-initiated and system personalization is essential for personalization to work effectively.A number of studies (e.g. Martinez et al., 2009; Verpoorten et al., 2009; Sun and May, 2013) have shown that both user-generated and system-generated personalization have benefits within specific usage environments. ‘User-generated’ and ‘system-generated’ personalization are roughly equivalent to the terms ‘adaptable’ and ‘adaptive’ used in the user modelling literature – i.e either allowing users themselves to adapt content and layout to their preferences, or having a system undertake this automatically (Treiblmaier et al., 2004).Jameson (2005) has highlighted that although system-generated personalization approaches (user-adaptive systems) have specific advantages, they have been shown to have a number of usability implications which may compromise their benefits, and that the best overall design is very context dependent. Hybrid approaches to personalization or adaptation have been proposed (e.g. Tsandilas and Schraefel, 2004; Park et al., 2007), but there is currently still a lack of understanding of the specific benefits that each approach brings (Kwon and Kim, 2012), and how this approach can be applied in large sports environments.The main aim of this article is to study a specific usage environment (large sports events) and assess the potential for personalized mobile content to enhance the UX for a spectator. The benefits of both user and system-generated approaches within this environment are investigated, and the results discussed in terms of the challenges above and the usability of a hybrid approach that capitalises on the merits of each.Fan and Poole (2006) highlight how personalization means different things to different people in different fields. This makes it difficult to compare and contrast studies. Bonnet (2001), from a marketing perspective, suggests that personalization can recreate the human element that understands the customer and offers a ‘personalized touch’, and concludes that the ultimate aim of personalization is user satisfaction. Norman (2004) suggests that ‘we are all designers’ – and that users inherently want to personalize. Users can create a more engaging user experience by organising their thoughts, memories, and images that they find useful or pleasing. It has even been proposed by Christos et al. (2005) that the majority of mobile users think of it as a declaratory part of their personality.Customization is another commonly used term in previous studies. ‘Personalization’ and ‘customization’ have numerous definitions that are sometimes used interchangeably in the literature (Sunikka and Bragge, 2012). Personalization research has a strong focus on technology and the internet, emphasizing customers' needs and preferences, as well as information collection for user modelling (Kwon et al., 2010). Customization has traditionally focused on tangible products but has also initiated research in service fields which emphasises the user's role in specifying content (Montgomery and Smith, 2009; Wichary et al., 2005). Sundar and Marathe (2010) suggest that the key difference between personalization and customization is that personalization is system-initiated, whereas customization is user-initiated.This article uses the general term of personalization, and (contrary to Sundar and Marathe, 2010) makes the distinction between user-initiated personalization and system-initiated personalization. It employs the people-centred perspective of Kwon and Kim (2012) to define personalization based on understanding users' context-dependent preferences, goals and behaviours – therefore being able to satisfy their needs, and enhance their UX.This article focuses on content personalization (Wu et al., 2003) which provides tailored information within a particular node within the human-device navigation space. This is based on the key assumption that the optimal content for an individual is dependent on contextual factors relating to the individual, their activities and their situation, and that these factors can be used as the input or triggers for the adaptation of content for the individual (Norros et al., 2003) in order to enhance their UX. The aim of this paper is not to discuss how different forms of personalization may come about, which can be through a variety of approaches such as dynamic adaptation models or prediction, classification, clustering, association rule mining and sequential pattern discovery (Kiu and Tsui, 2011); instead this article seeks to show differences in user outcomes based on whether this personalization is essentially instigated by the user, or by the ‘system’.Despite a number of studies investigating better information provision to spectators at large sports events (e.g. Lim et al., 2009), there has been a lack of research into the role that personalized content plays in enhancing the UX within this specific environment. However, the benefits of personalization have been shown in a number of other scenarios – e.g. tourist guides (Souffriau et al., 2008), office applications (Bergman et al., 2004), e-commerce (Georgiadis et al., 2005), and learning systems (Economides, 2009). Although personalization (in its broadest sense) undoubtedly provides benefits, the evidence is not wholly unequivocal. For example, Loboda and Brusilovsky (2010) investigated educational applications employing personalized and non-personalized explanatory visualizations. Although students preferred the application which adapted learning content according to level of understanding, they found no difference in short term knowledge gain between the two applications.There have been relatively few studies that compare empirically the impact of user or system-initiated approaches. Some have found favour with user-initiated personalization and its focus on the natural intelligence of the user (Sundar and Marathe, 2010). Similarly, Coner (2003) found that user-initiated approaches were more effective for website personalization. Whilst user-initiated personalization is considered appropriate in many cases, most users actually fail to personalize effectively (Weld et al., 2003). Few are comfortable responding to requests to set personalization parameters, and individuals can spend time inputting personalization data that actually turns out to have little impact on them. Jameson (2005) describes how desirable usability goals are often threatened by the typical properties of user-adaptive systems (i.e. personalization which is system-initiated). He also highlights that although there are trade-offs between desired usability goals, the best overall design solution is very dependent on the user or their situation.Martinez et al. (2009) found that users performed better with, and reacted more positively to system-initiated personalization within digital libraries. In contrast, Park et al. (2007) examined the effectiveness of user-initiated and system-initiated menus in desktop applications. The results of a controlled study showed that the user-initiated menu was the best in terms of both performance and satisfaction. User-initiated menus provided a sense of control, and maximised the efficiency of interaction. The authors concluded that a hybrid combination of the user and system menus would be interesting future research. Verpoorten et al. (2009), within a learning environment, also highlighted the support that user-initiated personalization provides for perceived controllability and self-efficacy.Much previous work on personalization – e.g. Park et al. (2007), Verpoorten et al. (2009) – has focussed on relatively static information environments, where the contextual inputs used for system-initiated personalization may vary between users, but are relatively static for a specific individual. Therefore although this work can highlight the potential benefits of different personalization approaches, it may have limited applicability to a highly dynamic environment such as a large sports event, where the focus of attention is away from a mobile device, and there are scheduled and unscheduled temporal tensions (Tamminen et al., 2004).The term ‘user experience’ in this paper refers to the subjective experience that a spectator encounters within a stadium (Sun and May, 2007). Jameson (2005) has highlighted the usability trade-offs that occur when automatic adaptation of systems occurs. UX is a broader concept than usability, reflecting the fact that mobile devices are personal artefacts used by individuals with particular social and cultural norms, within an external context defined by their environment (Chamorro-Koca et al., 2009). At sports events, UX is defined by the spatial bounds of the stadium, and arises as a result of the interactions that occur between the individual and other entities within the stadium. These interactions can be between the user and the sporting action, the user and other individuals (including the crowd), the user and other information sources, and the user and their mobile device.There is much discussion of the nature and scope of UX within HCI (e.g. Roto et al., 2011); however there is general consensus that it is subjective, dynamic and context-dependent (Law and Sun, 2012). ISO 9241-110:2010 defines UX as ‘A person's perceptions and responses that result from the use and/or anticipated use of a product, system or service’. Hassenzahl and Tractinsky (2006) define UX as ‘a consequence of a user's internal state (predispositions, expectations, needs, motivation, mood, etc.), the characteristics of the designed system (e.g. complexity, purpose, usability, functionality, etc.) and the context (or the environment) within which the interaction occurs (e.g. organisational/social setting, meaningfulness of the activity, voluntariness of use, etc.)’.Many different perspectives on UX have evolved and a universal definition of UX is difficult to establish (Zahariasa and Mehlenbacher, 2012). Existing theories of user experience are useful at a general level; however, they are too general to be used as a practical tool in product design or the concept design context. Rasmussen (2000) argues that as society becomes more dynamic and integrated with technology, there is a need for greater multidisciplinarity in tackling human factor problems. Therefore a range of literature is useful in terms of identifying the user experience components that can be employed within a people-centred design process.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
