@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Physical exercise and burnout facets predict injuries in a population-based sample of French career firefighters

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Occupational burnout was an important role in well-being of firefighters.Problem-focused coping was a protective factor for firefighter injuries.Physical exercise was identified as risk factors of injuries.Cognitive weariness and social support seeking was positively related to injuries.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Physical activity,Emergency workers,Occupational burnout,Coping strategies,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Although firefighting is known to engender a high rate of injury, few studies have examined the contribution of physical exercise, burnout and coping strategies to firefighting-related injuries. Data were collected from a population-based sample of 220 male firefighters. In a descriptive study, the nature and site of the injuries and the relationships among firefighter injuries, physical exercise, burnout and coping strategies were examined. Sprains were the most prevalent type of injury (98%), followed by tendinitis (40%) and muscle tears (30%). More than two thirds of these injuries were located at the ankle. Weekly hours of physical exercise, cognitive weariness at work, social support seeking, problem-focused coping and emotional exhaustion were significantly related to these injuries. The findings suggest that physical exercise and cognitive weariness can be considered as risk factors for French firefighter injuries, whereas problem-focused coping can be seen as a protective factor. More research is needed to explain the relationship between social support seeking and injury.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Firefighting is a physically, mentally (Gledhill and Jamnik, 1992) and emotionally demanding job (Orris et al., 1995) that places significant stress on the musculoskeletal system (Reichelt and Conrad, 1994), increases cardiovascular risk (Melius, 1994), and often leads to fatigue and sleep disorders (Bos et al., 2004). Firefighting is also a hazardous occupation with a greater incidence of injury compared with most other jobs (Karter and Badger, 2001). Over the last 30 years, the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) reports indicate that firefighter injuries in the United States (US) mainly occur during fireground operations (>45%), followed by non-emergency incidents (∼20%) or other on-duty activities (∼20%), whereas training activities (∼10%) and responding to or returning from an incident (∼5%) show the lowest injury percentages (Karter and Molis, 2011). Although many studies have determined the incidence rate and the cause of injury among US firefighters (Jahnke et al., 2013a; Poplin et al., 2011), information about the types of injuries sustained by French firefighters has remained surprisingly low.In France, in addition to fireground operations, a substantial part of firefighter duties involves emergency medical services, which have been reported to show a higher injury rate than those of the fire services (Maguire et al., 2005). In addition, many mandatory sessions of physical exercise are scheduled during duty time in order to maintain high physical fitness, a key job requirement, as well as to reduce the risk of cardiovascular incidents and prevent job-related injuries (Smith, 2011). For example, it has been shown that frequent physical exercise has noteworthy beneficial effects on cardiovascular disease risk in US firefighters (Durand et al., 2011). In addition, firefighters with lower aerobic capacity are more likely to sustain an injury compared with their fitter counterparts (Poplin et al., 2014). Paradoxically, recent evidence indicates that physical exercise is the most frequent cause of injuries in US firefighters (Jahnke et al., 2013a; Poplin et al., 2011), particularly musculoskeletal injuries such as sprains and strains, even though exercise also contributes to better physical fitness and diminishes the risk of non-exercise related injuries (Jahnke et al., 2013a). Given the characteristics of firefighting duties, these findings highlight the importance of investigating the predictors or correlates of musculoskeletal injuries in French firefighters.Firefighters are among the employees who experience traumatic stressors and burnout with a relatively high frequency (Alexander and Klein, 2001). Burnout is viewed as an affective reaction to prolonged exposure to stress at work; that is, to situations in which job demands exceed the individual's adaptive resources. This affective reaction consists of feelings of emotional exhaustion, perceived physical fatigue, and cognitive weariness, all of which result from the gradual depletion of intrinsic energetic resources at work (Schaufeli and Buunk, 2003; Shirom, 1989). Recent research has shown that perceived stress may lead to burnout. More particularly, Lourel et al. (2008) found that job demands or job control positively predicted emotional exhaustion and depersonalization in rural French firefighters. These results indicate the importance of understanding the mechanisms related to psychological burnout among firefighters. However, the role of physical activity as a specific job demand and its relationships with firefighter burnout and musculoskeletal injuries remain to be established.Given the potential costs of traumatic stressors in the work of firefighting, it is important to examine the factors that might protect these professionals from their negative effects. A few studies have investigated the associations between coping strategies and workplace stressors or psychological well-being. Coping strategies have been defined as behavioral and/or cognitive attempts to manage situational demands that are appraised as taxing or exceeding one's ability to adapt (Lazarus and Folkman, 1984). According to the authors, coping efforts may be directed at the demands themselves (problem-focused strategies) or at the emotional reactions to those demands (emotion-focused strategies). Problem-focused coping is based on planning and action to change the situation, while emotion-focused coping is focused on distancing, self-accusation, and avoidance. Inconsistent results have been reported concerning the relationships between the type of coping strategy and the occupational stress of firefighters. Problem-focused coping has been associated with both high (Marmar et al., 1996) and low levels of psychological distress (Brown et al., 2002). Emotion-focused coping was associated with lower psychological distress (Brown et al., 2002), but seeking social support for emotional reasons and emotional venting were not (Clohessy and Ehlers, 1999). Prati and Pietrantoni (2010) showed that emotion and support-coping positively mediated the relationship between stress appraisal and compassion fatigue, and that problem-focused coping positively mediated the relationship between stress appraisal and compassion satisfaction. Although the role of coping strategies in explaining firefighter stress is well known, their relationships with musculoskeletal injury has not been documented.In light of these observations, the job of French firefighters can be characterized as a complex system of activities, including rescue and personal assistance, firefighting and physical exercise, all of which generate high constraints, stress and the risk of injuries. Although a French report from the Department of Public Safety (Pourny, 2003) indicated that most musculoskeletal injuries affect the lower limbs and mainly the ankle and knee joints, the types of injuries that French firefighters are subject to have not been systematically reported. Furthermore, burnout and coping strategies have been shown to be related to firefighter psychological well-being but no study to date has examined how these variables combine to explain firefighter injuries. Last, understanding how the physical exercise performed during sports sessions impacts injury rates is critical to developing workplace injury management and prevention programs. Thus, the goals of the present study were twofold: (a) to quantify and characterize the musculoskeletal injuries specific to French firefighters, and (b) to examine the contribution of physical exercise, burnout and coping strategies in explaining these injuries. We assumed that: (a) the majority of injuries would be to the lower limbs, and (b) adaptive coping strategies (i.e., problem-focused coping) would be negatively related to the number of injuries, whereas burnout would be positively related to the number of injuries. Given the contradictory findings in the literature, no hypothesis was formulated regarding the role of physical exercise.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
