@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The impact of color combinations on the legibility of text presented on LCDs

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Effect of color combinations on the legibility of text on LCDs is significant.Le Courier and CRTs legibility tables are not appropriate for LCDs.New legibility table for LCDs is proposed.Dark text generally leads to greater legibility when contrast ratio is greatest.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Color combinations,Liquid crystal display,Legibility,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The paper investigates the impact of text and background color combinations on the legibility of text presented on LCDs. The legibility of 56 elementary color combinations was tested by 308 participants. The first task required the participants to identify 21 uppercase alphabetic characters selected and presented in conformance with a Snellen chart in various color combinations. For each color combination, the number of correctly identified characters was recorded as a visual performance measure. In the second task, participants subjectively rated the legibility of color combinations on a ten-point Likert scale. The results show that neither the Le Courier legibility table nor the CRT legibility table is appropriate for LCDs. A new legibility table is proposed for LCDs where the highest ranked are contrastive color combinations with positive polarity whereas for CRT displays, the highest ranked are contrastive color combinations with negative polarity. The findings of this study can be used to determine the best possible color combinations when developing content displayed on LCDs.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
This paper examines the impact of text and background color combinations on the legibility of text presented on liquid crystal displays (LCDs). Displays based on liquid crystal technology are the most widely represented, being used with personal computers and other modern electronic devices. Due to the very intense development that started in 1968, they have reached a very high level of quality (Kubo et al., 2000) and have held a dominant market share since 2005.The legibility of the information presented is one of the main requirements of effective readability (Legge et al., 1987; Sanders and McCormick, 1993). Legibility is understood as the visual properties of a character or symbol that determine the ease with which it can be recognized with respect to the ANSI/HFS 100 (1988) standard. It is only affected by the spatial vision abilities of the observer. Legibility can be enhanced by high luminance and color contrast, larger targets, and increased inter- and intra-target spacing (Sanders and McCormick, 1993). Legibility can also be affected by different display angles (Cai et al., 2013) or in case of color LCD e-readers by text direction, screen size and character size (Lin et al., 2012). Readability can be measured by the reading rate, identification of misspelled words, searching for pre-specified letters/words within lists or passages, and so on. Because readability is considered a psychological response, several factors influence its performance. These factors are difficult to isolate when readability performance is being measured (Gradisar et al., 2010). Therefore, this research focuses solely on legibility.Human information processing when reading, learning, and making decisions depends on how information has been adopted, which is subject to various possible forms of presentation (Ghani and Lusk, 1981; Suh, 1999). Research on how color combinations affect visual perception dates back to the beginning of the 20th century. Researchers tried to determine which color combinations would make posters most visible from a distance (Le Courier du Livre, 1912; Luckiesh, 1923). The earliest experiments were conducted in bright sunlight and people were asked to read two rows of letters from various distances. It was determined that the most legible color combination was black letters on a yellow background. Based on the various color combinations tested, the experiment yielded what is known as the Le Courier legibility table which ranks 13 different combinations of text color on background color. Further research was needed given the ordinal ranking and lack of detail about the experiment. Accordingly, various legibility and readability studies were conducted (Tinker and Paterson, 1928, 1929a, 1929b, 1929c, 1929d, 1929e, 1932, 1940, 1942, 1944, 1946; Tinker, 1955, 1963); these also examined the influence of colors. Their findings led to the conclusion that readability does not depend on color as such, but on brightness differences. However, all of the researchers generally recommended dark characters on light backgrounds.With the development of computers and advent of electric displays, various studies were carried out on whether screen reading is more difficult than reading printed text (Mason and Mitroff, 1973). More in-depth research was soon conducted (Christ, 1975; Teichner, 1979; Gremillion and Jenkins, 1981; Silverstein, 1982). Experimental studies showed that reading from paper is easier and faster than from displays (Gould et al., 1987; Dillon, 1992). While some data reported otherwise (Oborne and Holton, 1988), by the early 1990s the matter was resolved and image quality was clearly identified as a crucial variable (Jorna and Snyder, 1991).However, the color combination of text and background has been proven to be an important characteristic of visual stimuli that may affect the visual performance of displays (Radl, 1980; Pace, 1984). Other studies have also pointed out that some colors such as red, green, and blue should not be used in combination with each other (Bruce and Foster, 1982; Murch, 1985; Matthews and Mertins, 1987). However, with the rapid development of various displays (Tombling and Tillin, 2001) and their widespread use, it is not so much a question of comparing legibility between paper and displays, but comparing different types of displays.Many researchers believe that TFT-LCDs (or LCDs for short) allow more effective visual perception (Menozzi et al., 1999, 2001; Nose et al., 1999; Shieh and Lin, 2000; Wright et al., 1999; Ziefle, 2001) in comparison to cathode ray tube (CRT) displays. LCDs also outperform CRTs when it comes to anti-glare effects (Choi and Miyasaka, 1993) and are also generally more popular than their CRT counterparts (Chen and Lin, 2004; Shieh and Lin, 2000). LCDs are the optimum choice when it comes to personal computer displays and television sets because of their better optical specifications (e.g., wider viewing angle, greater brightness), ever-growing size, and low energy consumption.The main difference between LCDs and other types of displays is how the screen generates colors: LCDs function as subtractive-color displays, whereas CRTs function as integrative-color displays (Post and Reinhart, 1997). The light in LCDs is generated by regular or cold cathode fluorescent lamps (CCFLs). Since the flow of light is constant, it must be limited or veiled on some parts of the display. However, the light cannot be veiled completely and hence LCDs cannot display black as well as other types of displays. Each dot on an LCD screen is composed of three different permeable colors beneath which lies a layer of liquid crystals. Their shape and polarization is managed by an electrical field that is switched on or off by a thin-film transistor (TFT).CRT displays have different optical traits than LCDs (MacKenzie and Riddersma, 1994; Post and Reinhart, 1997; Stix, 1989). The effects of contrast, brightness, and polarity measured while using CRT displays are thus not necessarily also valid for LCD displays.With the growing popularity of LCDs in the last decade there has also been growth in research on LCD legibility. Some of the more interesting researches relating to this paper are summarized below.Huang and Chiu (2007) investigated the effects of color combinations for figure/icon background, icon shape, and line width of the icon border on visual search performance on LCDs. Both icon color combination and exposure time have significant effects on the accuracy of icon legibility (Yeh et al., 2012). Shieh and Lai (2008) looked at the effects of target and background color combinations on subjective preference for stimuli presented on a visual display terminal under various ambient illuminations, luminance contrasts, and stimulus types. Their analysis showed that the main effect of color combination was significant for the three dependent variables. Black-on-white and blue-on-white were the most preferred combinations, whereas turquoise-on-green and turquoise-on-red were the least preferred. Fletcher and Sutherland (2009) together with Nugent (2009) sought to identify the luminance and contrast levels needed to minimize the threshold identification size of bright letters displayed over a dark background on LCDs under low and high lighting conditions. Lin and Huang (2009) studied the effect of color combination, which includes luminance contrast ratio and chromaticity contrast, and ambient illumination on visual perception time using LCDs. A normal ambient illumination level and high luminance contrast ratio seem to be the optimal choice for designing a workplace with LCDs. Chang et al. (2012) have shown that chromaticity and luminance have little effect on legibility speed, however they both significantly affect subjective preference. Participants in their research appeared to prefer medium luminance.Based on the above literature outline and the deficiencies of previous studies, the main research question we address in this paper is: does the color combination of background and text on an LCD screen affect the legibility?Since the effects of contrast, brightness, and polarity measured while using different types of displays are not necessarily valid for all of those types, there is an evident need for an empirical study on LCDs. Furthermore, we wish to compare the results across different electronic screen display types and printed text as a representative of traditional media.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
