@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Differences in vision performance in different scenarios and implications for design

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present data from a survey of visual acuity with 362 participants.We use a range of vision measures of particular relevance to product design.We give recommendations for text sizes to use in different situations.Text needs to be about 18% larger for comfortable rather than perceived threshold viewing.It needs to be a further 20% larger if users are not going to use reading glasses.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Visual ability,Text size,Product design,Inclusive design,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
To design accessibly, designers need good, relevant population data on visual abilities. However, currently available data often focuses on clinical vision measures that are not entirely relevant to everyday product use. This paper presents data from a pilot survey of 362 participants in the UK, covering a range of vision measures of particular relevance to product design. The results from the different measures are compared, and recommendations are given for relative text sizes to use in different situations. The results indicate that text needs to be 17–18% larger for comfortable rather than perceived threshold viewing, and a further 20% larger when users are expected to wear their everyday vision setup rather than specific reading aids.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Visual ability is often critical in product and service use, affecting many aspects such as the capability to read text, see warning signs and recognise icons. It is thus important to consider the visual ability of the target population when designing products and services. Otherwise, users may struggle or may even be excluded from using the product. This is particularly important in the context of accessibility and inclusive design, which aim to meet the needs of a wide range of users, and reduce the numbers of those who would be excluded (Keates and Clarkson, 2003).To design appropriately, designers need good population data on visual abilities and how they relate to product use. However, the currently available data often focuses on just a few vision measures, which are appropriate for some but not all design situations.Population-based surveys commonly use distance visual acuity to reflect visual function. This is important information for designing signage and advertising viewed at a distance, but products are often viewed close-up. Near vision ability is distinct from (not correlated well with) that at a distance (Lovie-Kitchin and Brown, 2000), and in older patients requires different refractive correction (Pointer, 1995).Furthermore, surveys of visual ability typically measure best corrected vision. However, there are many product use situations where users may not want to or be able to change their glasses, such as in the middle of cooking or on a date. It is also important that people should be able to discover and read warning labels and critical information without first putting on their reading glasses. Further, not everyone has spectacles that provide best correction, even in developed countries such as the UK (Evans and Rowlands, 2004).Lack of best correction can often be compensated for to some extent by changing the working distance of the task, i.e. the distance at which the items used are viewed at during the task. For example, people with uncorrected age-related long sightedness may hold text at arm's length. The distance does not matter as long as the text can be read at that distance without difficulty. Therefore near vision tests that examine physical print size, allowing the user to choose the working distance, are most relevant to product design. However, in clinical assessment, reading ability is usually assessed at standardised working distances (Bailey and Lovie, 1980; Mansfield et al., 1996) to determine the angular size of print that can be read.Vision studies typically measure threshold performance, often examining the smallest letters that can consistently be correctly identified (Bailey, 1998). This is often chosen as it is a standardised measure that can easily be compared across groups. However, from the perspective of product design, it is more important to understand what people can see comfortably (Porter et al., 2004; Legge and Bigelow, 2011). Comfort (or lack of comfort) can impact perceptions of and emotional response to a product, as well as the effective use of the product. For example, if users cannot read text on a product comfortably, they may not read it carefully, resulting in misreading of information. For example, Kenagy and Stein (2001) explain that problems with medicine labels and packaging can result in serious medical errors, citing as an example “two vials that appear to be virtually identical (except for the drug name, in 8-point type)”.For reading, the smallest print size that supports the maximum reading speed is termed the critical print size, and is often taken to indicate the print size that can be comfortably read (Legge et al., 1985; Whittaker and Lovie Kitchin, 1993). However, the size of print perceived as comfortable by an individual is different to measured values of critical print size (Friedman et al., 1999; Szlyk et al., 2001; Tejeria et al., 2002; Latham and Usherwood, 2010).A further issue of visual function studies is that vision measures are typically collected under clinical conditions with optimal lighting levels. However, products are commonly used in the varying and often poor lighting conditions of people's homes (Farrell, 1991; Percival, 2007). Since visual ability declines with reduced illumination (Hecht, 1927; Elton et al., 2013), a design that is usable in a clinical environment may not be usable in practice.These issues indicate that clinical measures of visual function may not correspond to visual ability as it relates to product use in the real world. This paper aims to address some of these issues, by presenting and comparing data on vision measures that have been intentionally chosen to be relevant to real-life product use situations. Vision measures were collected using printed vision charts in participants' own homes, which is a typical setting for product use. They include near as well as distance visual ability; perceived comfort as well as perceived threshold vision ability; and near vision with the vision aids participants wear on an everyday basis, and with the setup they choose for reading. Recommendations are given for relative text sizes to use in different design situations.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Clinical vision measures provide a good indication of people's vision ability in ideal situations. However, in everyday product use, people do not always wear the right correction, and may be unwilling to push themselves hard to read text or distinguish graphical elements. This paper presented data from a range of measures which may be more appropriate for such situations. These were used to calculate recommendations for how the sizes of graphical and text elements should change when products are intended for comfortable viewing instead of perceived threshold and when users are not able to (or do not want to) change their vision setup for reading, e.g. by putting on reading glasses.These recommendations are intended to encourage designers to think about the usage situation of their products, and the assumptions they make about how products are used, as well as providing actual figures for how much larger graphical elements should be.The results reported in this paper are from a pilot survey (Tenneti et al., 2013) and we hope to obtain funding for a full UK representative survey which will give more comprehensive results.