@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Reduction in predicted survival times in cold water due to wind and waves

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Recent marine tragedies have called into question immersion suit standards.Our participants were immersed in harsh environments consisting of wind and waves.We compared heat loss in calm water to that in wind and waves.Wind and waves caused significantly greater heat loss.Predicted survival times were lower in wind and waves compared to calm water.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Immersion suits,Heat loss,Survival time prediction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Recent marine accidents have called into question the level of protection provided by immersion suits in real (harsh) life situations. Two immersion suit studies, one dry and the other with 500 mL of water underneath the suit, were conducted in cold water with 10–12 males in each to test body heat loss under three environmental conditions: calm, as mandated for immersion suit certification, and two combinations of wind plus waves to simulate conditions typically found offshore. In both studies mean skin heat loss was higher in wind and waves vs. calm; deep body temperature and oxygen consumption were not different. Mean survival time predictions exceeded 36 h for all conditions in the first study but were markedly less in the second in both calm and wind and waves. Immersion suit protection and consequential predicted survival times under realistic environmental conditions and with leakage are reduced relative to calm conditions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Many industries require their personnel to work or travel over open water; the vast majority of which is too cold for unclothed humans to maintain their body temperature and prevent hypothermia (i.e. deep body temperature below 35 °C). Therefore, life saving appliances (LSA) are needed to provide thermal protection to improve the safety of individuals at sea. Cold water immersion (CWI) is a serious threat to survival in both the short (Tipton, 1989) and long term (Hayward and Eckerson, 1984). An immersion suit is an LSA designed to provide flotation, protect an immersed individual from the Cold Shock Response (CSR), and delay the onset of hypothermia (CGSB, 2005). As prescribed by the International Maritime Organization (IMO), a certified insulated immersion suit should minimize the CSR and prevent a drop in deep body temperature of no more than 2 °C after six hours in 0–2 °C “calm, circulating water” (IMO, 2010). Various standards across the world (e.g., Canadian General Standards Board (CGSB); International Organization for Standardization) specify a similar test protocol for certifying the thermal protective properties of insulated immersion suits.Despite these test standards, cold-induced immersion-related deaths still occur. In recent years, multiple marine accidents have called into question whether the level of thermal protection of immersion suits, as measured in a laboratory, is equivalent to that found in emergency scenarios in the open water. For example, in February 2008, the Check Mate III capsized off the North East coast of Newfoundland, Canada. The follow up report written by the Maritime Rescue Sub-Centre St. John's (Frampton and Savage, 2008) said that both crew members were able to don immersion suits and abandon ship into the 0.8 °C water, but had perished by the time search and rescue crews arrived less than two hours later. The subsequent investigation revealed that the immersion suits worn had failed “in a spectacular fashion”. If the suits had indeed met the thermal protective properties described in the Canadian immersion suit standard CAN/CGSB-65.16-2005 (CGSB, 2005), they should have prevented the victims from developing hypothermia for at least six hours.Similarly, in March 2009, Cougar Flight 491 crashed into the Atlantic Ocean approximately 50 km east of Newfoundland, Canada. The subsequent follow up report by the Transportation Safety Board of Canada (TSB) (2010) found that the sole survivor of the crash successfully escaped from the sinking helicopter and made it to the surface of the 0.3 °C water. But when he arrived at the hospital two hours after the crash, his immersion suit was found completely filled with water and his deep body temperature was 28 °C (TSB, 2010). Both tragedies took place in turbulent conditions with wave heights (Check Mate III: >2 m (Frampton and Savage, 2008); Cougar Flight 491: >2.5 m (TSB, 2010)) and winds (Check Mate III: 13–16.5 m s−1 (Frampton and Savage, 2008); Cougar Flight 491: 14.5–17.5 m s−1 (TSB, 2010)) exceeding those of the calm conditions specified in many standards. Such anecdotal evidence raises the possibility that turbulent conditions may compromise the performance capability of an immersion suit, reducing it to the level where the heat loss is uncompensable by the human thermoregulatory system leading to the development of hypothermia. If this is the case, the difference between the “calm, circulating water” that standards prescribe immersion suits to be tested in, and their performance in open water conditions that can include turbulent wind and wave conditions, can result in what Tipton (1995) referred to as “surprisingly poor performance in a real accident”.Tentative evidence to the contrary exists; work by Hayes et al. (1985) investigated the effect that wave action had on subjects with clothing ensembles ranging from swimming trunks and a lifejacket to a flight suit with insulated undercoveralls. The authors found that in eight out of the ten cases, the rate of fall of rectal temperature was not significantly higher in waves (∼0.6 m in height) compared to calm water. Hayes et al. (1985) concluded that the effect of waves is more evident when nude or wearing little clothing, and that with the immersion ensembles it was the face and neck seals that were consistently challenged. If the seals on the immersion suit failed, the leaking and flushing of water underneath the ensembles could cause a major difference between immersions in calm water and waves. The study authors concluded that their preliminary investigation demonstrated a trend for waves to increase cooling in some cases, but they stated that more definitive experimentation was required.A more detailed study was conducted by Steinman et al. (1987) shortly after in which eight subjects wearing a variety of clothing ensembles performed immersions in both calm water and rough seas (waves: 0.5–1.5 m in height; wind: 5.0–10.0 m s−1). The clothing ensembles included flight suits, wet suits, and insulated immersion suits. The study authors found that the rate of rectal temperature decrease was significantly greater in the rough conditions compared to calm water for the majority of the clothing ensembles tested.Both of these earlier studies (Hayes et al., 1985; Steinman et al., 1987) suggested that increased wave action can result in water penetrating immersion suit seals, leading to increased leakage underneath the immersion suit. Wave action may also disrupt the boundary layer of insulation provided by still water thereby increasing cooling rate and thermal strain. The disruption of the boundary layer by wave action was investigated in a subsequent study by Ducharme and Brooks (1998) who found that wave heights above 30 cm significantly increased heat loss compared to calm water. The results from the studies by Hayes et al. (1985), Steinman et al. (1987), and Ducharme and Brooks (1998) showed that wave action would increase heat loss but that it did not necessarily result in a greater fall in deep body temperature. The implications for survival time were not discussed, but the study by Tipton (1991) suggested that the addition of even relatively mild simulated environmental conditions of wind, waves, and periodic spraying (15 cm waves; 3 m s−1 wind) resulted in a 30% reduction in predicted survival time. Due to the equivocal nature of the literature to date, a more detailed study was considered necessary to examine the effects of wind and waves on immersion suit performance, thermoregulatory strain, and predicted survival time; the current study sought to examine these effects.Based on evidence from previous studies it was hypothesized that immersions with wind and waves would, when compared to calm water, cause significantly greater heat loss (H1) and decreases in deep body temperature (H2). Two studies were conducted to test these hypotheses. A prediction model was used to demonstrate the marked reduction in cold exposure survival time due to wind, waves, and water leakage.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
It is concluded that testing and certifying immersion suits with humans in calm water will result in an overestimation of survival performance in harsher, but more realistic, conditions such as those found offshore that often include wind and waves, and the possibility of water leakage, all of which will increase thermal stress. If this stress is not compensable by the thermoregulatory system, deep body temperature will fall resulting in the potential development of fatal hypothermia that might not be anticipated from tests undertaken in calmer conditions.None of the authors have any conflicts of interest associated with this study.