@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The effects of a passive exoskeleton on muscle activity, discomfort and endurance time in forward bending work

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A passive exoskeleton lowers back muscle activity by 35–38% during assembly work.The endurance time was found to be almost three times longer when using this system.The system reduced discomfort in the back but resulted in more discomfort in the chest.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Exoskeleton,Industry,Electromyography,Discomfort,Endurance,Trunk bending,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Exoskeletons may form a new strategy to reduce the risk of developing low back pain in stressful jobs. In the present study we examined the potential of a so-called passive exoskeleton on muscle activity, discomfort and endurance time in prolonged forward-bended working postures.Eighteen subjects performed two tasks: a simulated assembly task with the trunk in a forward-bended position and static holding of the same trunk position without further activity. We measured the electromyography for muscles in the back, abdomen and legs. We also measured the perceived local discomfort. In the static holding task we determined the endurance, defined as the time that people could continue without passing a specified discomfort threshold.In the assembly task we found lower muscle activity (by 35–38%) and lower discomfort in the low back when wearing the exoskeleton. Additionally, the hip extensor activity was reduced. The exoskeleton led to more discomfort in the chest region. In the task of static holding, we observed that exoskeleton use led to an increase in endurance time from 3.2 to 9.7 min, on average.The results illustrate the good potential of this passive exoskeleton to reduce the internal muscle forces and (reactive) spinal forces in the lumbar region. However, the adoption of an over-extended knee position might be, among others, one of the concerns when using the exoskeleton.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Work-related musculoskeletal disorders (WMSDs) affect a considerable proportion of the working population. Of all WMSDs 30% are located in the low back region (Eurostat, 2010). Low back pain (LBP) frequently results in sick leave and disability, and thus, puts a large burden on individuals and the society (Goetzel et al., 2003). The development of work-related LBP has been associated with several work factors, among others lifting and carrying of loads and awkward body postures like trunk flexion and rotation (Griffith et al., 2012; Da Costa and Vieira, 2010). Hereto, various preventive measures have been proposed, e.g. the training of workers, the adjustment of work stations, the re-organization of work processes, and the use of mechanical aids like cranes or balancers (Lavender et al., 2013). From the developments of new technologies, other potentially preventive strategies emerge. One of these could be the use of exoskeletons.An exoskeleton is a wearable device supporting the human to generate the physical power required for manual tasks. Exoskeletons could be useful, when (i) other preventive measures are not feasible, usable or effective, and (ii) where the automation of tasks is not feasible when tasks constantly change (e.g. the job of movers, unloading loose loads from containers, patient handling). Exoskeletons could be classified as ‘active’ or ‘passive’ (Lee et al., 2012). An active exoskeleton is comprised of one or more actuators (e.g., electrical motors) that actively augments power to the human body. A passive system does not use an external power source, but uses materials, springs or dampers with the ability to store energy from human movements and release it when required.Active exoskeletons have been particularly developed for the purpose of rehabilitating injured or disabled people. Active exoskeletons with an occupation or industrial purpose are being developed, but these are mainly in a laboratory stage now (e.g., Kadota et al., 2009; Lee et al., 2012; Luo and Yu, 2013; Looze de et al., 2015).On the other hand, several passive systems ready to be used in work situations, have been described in the literature. These include the Personal Lifting Assistive Device (PLAD) and the Bending Non-Demand Return (BNDR). Both devices consist of a frame that stores elastic energy when bending forward, which then helps a person to prolong bent-forward working postures or to erect the body again when lifting an object. The BNDR frame covers the trunk and pelvis and is supported by the upper legs and chest (Ulrey and Fathallah, 2013a). The final version of PLAD frame supports sharing of the load between the spine, shoulders, pelvis and feet (Whitfield et al., 2014).For the PLAD, significant reductions of the back muscle activity during lifting have been reported (Abdoli-Eramaki et al., 2008; Lotz et al., 2009; Whitfield et al., 2014) and during static bending (Graham et al., 2009). For the BNDR, the back muscle activity was studied in a constrained isometric posture by Ulrey and Fathallah (2013a). They found a reduction of muscle activation in a sub-selection of their study population (namely only in those subjects not experiencing the flexion-relaxation phenomenon when adopting isometric torso flexion postures).In the current study, the effect of a passive exoskeleton was studied on the activity of the back muscles during a simulated assembly task with the trunk in bent forward position. We additionally measured the muscle activity of the abdominal muscles and the hip extensor to study the occurrence of any potential negative side effects. We also measured local perceived discomfort. In a separate task, namely in static holding of the upper body in forward flexion, we studied the effect of the exoskeleton on endurance time.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
