@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The effectiveness of using pictures in teaching young children about burn injury accidents

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Preventing burns injuries can reduce home accidents for children under 6 in Taiwan.Sequence diagrams are an image type appropriate to children's cognitive ability.Burn stories using sequence diagrams aid a child's memory of burn injury severity.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Young children burn injury,5-Factor accident sequence,Storytelling,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study utilized the “story grammar” approach (Stein and Glenn, 1979) to analyze the within-corpus differences in recounting of sixty 6- and 7-year-old children, specifically whether illustrations (5-factor accident sequence) were or were not resorted to as a means to assist their narration of a home accident in which a child received a burn injury from hot soup. Our investigation revealed that the message presentation strategy “combining oral and pictures” better helped young children to memorize the story content (sequence of events leading to the burn injury) than “oral only.” Specifically, the content of “the dangerous objects that caused the injury”, “the unsafe actions that people involved took”, and “how the people involved felt about the severity of the accident” differed significantly between the two groups.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Burn injuries are the most severe and most prevalent accidents that lead to young children's deaths (Atiyeh et al., 2009). To avoid the threat of burn injuries, accident intervention procedures emphasize that key measures in the prevention of specific high-risk activities should be determined based on the features of “target-specific prevention” epidemiology, which focuses on the high-risk group with whom and places where injuries most frequently happen (Tarim et al., 2006; Poulos et al., 2009). In addition, the design of related warning materials should remind young children and their caretakers about the possible danger, unsafe activities, and the potential risk in the environment (e.g., design guidelines for warning signs for young children that mandate the use of pictograms that demonstrate “good” and “bad” behavior (Waterson et al., 2012)). We need to increase people's (or children's) knowledge of caution messages and their understanding of these warnings by focusing on what people should explicitly know to avoid danger and the possibility of injury from unsafe behavior based on the warnings. Research demonstrates that the presentation of the misbehavior that directly causes injuries as well as the results of the incident can indeed decrease the occurrence of accidents (Swuste et al., 2010; Trommelen, 1994, 1997; Waterson and Monk, 2014). A 5-factor accident sequence that is related to the chronological order of events that precipitate an incident is in accordance with the design principle. Therefore, a 5-factor accident sequence can clearly remind people of the linear chain of events that lead to an accident, including Pre-existing Factors (the environment and background in which the accident possibly occurs), the fault of a person (human error caused by various factors), the unsafe act (the improper behavior that causes the occurrence of the accident), the incident occurrence (the occurrence of the dangerous accident), and consequences (the injuries and casualties caused by the accident), as shown in Table 1. To explain the sequence of events that lead to accidents and the conditions that cause injuries, the U.S. Chemistry Process Safety Center uses a sequence chart to connect and organize the order of people, things, and objects related to the incident. Waterson and Monk (2014) also emphasize that using a sequence chart (or flowchart) in presenting information is particularly helpful in developing safety signs for children. In the development of warning materials that target young children, it is more appropriate to design and test visual information through a storytelling format.A story combines a chronological sequence of events and a narrative structure familiar to children (Lynch et al., 2008). Stories can help children generate ideas and understand intentions (Waterson et al., 2012). Similarly, a 5-factor accident sequence can also present the background, reasons, and results of an accident and the causal relationship among these items. Organizing a series of causal events into a story based on the 5-factor accident sequence creates a story structure similar to that produced by “sequential recounting”, whose elements include setting, initiating events, internal response, attempts, direct consequences, and outcome (McGregor, 2000). The narration therefore describes individual events in succession as they occurred. The 5-factor accident sequence comprises background, fault of a person, dangerous situations, incident occurrence, and consequence/toll and is characterized by the sequential recounting of the event's causal episodes. This study attempted to employ story grammar (Stein and Glenn, 1979) to encode and rate children's narrations based on the stories they generated using the 5-factor accident sequence.In addition, a story is a mnemonic structure that combines pictures and language (Lauritzen and Jaeger, 1997). “Illustrations that combine oral storytelling and pictures” can help children process and understand information (Lepola et al., 2012). A sequence chart is one type of picture pattern that fits with the cognitive ability of young children because it is a self-sufficient mechanism for the delivery of a story's meaning (Cassata and French, 2006; Cesarina, 2006; Gallenstein, 2005; Gomez, 2006). A sequence chart organizes sequential pictures according to the time at which the event happened, focusing on the use of a single picture to show the important parts of the incident, including the introduction, plot development (including event 1, event 2, event 3), and results (see Fig. 1). A sequence chart develops the lesson to be imparted by combining several sequential pictures, in which the events before and after are related and have a causal relationship. With respect to chronological order and the causal relationship events leading up to the accident, a sequence chart is very similar to a 5-factor accident sequence (as shown in the comparison in Fig. 1). Therefore, a sequence chart can be used as a 5-factor accident sequence to visualize and fictionalize aspects related to the occurrence of accidents. Hence, this study further discusses the epidemiology of burn injuries among young children to understand the high-risk factors that lead to the occurrence of accidents, targeting incident prevention, and this study uses a sequence chart to present warning messages one by one.In Taiwan, 75% of inpatients under the age of 18 are victims of burn injuries that were caused by hot liquid burns. Young children have an increased tendency to be hospitalized for burn injuries, with young inpatients under the age of 6 being admitted due to burn injuries reaching as high as 87% (Tung et al., 2006). Studies have shown that dangerous objects that easily inflict young children with burn injuries include, a kettle or hot soup located on a table or a gas stove; a water bottle or water bucket with hot liquid inside located on the kitchen floor; a hot water bottle or hot oil on a gas stove; and a hot drink on a kitchen counter. Most accidents are caused by a specific unsafe behavior, such as “pulling the tablecloth” and the most common burn injuries are caused by scalds from reaching and pulling. The male-to-female patient ratio is 7 to 3, and more than 90% of burn injuries happen in a home kitchen, with the most likely time period for the occurrence of accidents being during dinner preparation (Chien et al., 2003; Su and Childhood Burn Foundation of the Republic of China, 2008; Childhood Burn Foundation of The Republic of China, 2010; Tung et al., 2006; Yeh et al., 2007). To target the prevention of accidents among children under the age of 6, the 5-factor accident sequence shown in Table 1, including (1) pre-existing factors --the time and location of the accident: a home kitchen during dinner preparation; (2) negligence and dangerous objects: adults preparing dinner and putting hot soup on a table covered by a tablecloth; (3) common unsafe actions committed by the group who is most likely to have an accident: a boy who pulls the tablecloth to reach the hot soup; (4) the type of incidents that most frequently occur: the hot soup overturns and burns the boy; and (5) the result of the accident: the boy is severely injured and hospitalized. This study further develops a story with a sequence chart, including (1) during dinner time, the mother cooks hot soup in the kitchen (Introduction); (2) the mom puts the hot soup on a table covered by a tablecloth (Event 1); the boy pulls the tablecloth to reach the hot soup (Event 2); hot soup overturns and burns the boy (Event 3); and (3) the boy is severely burned and hospitalized (Results) (see Fig. 2).To improve young children's recognition of and familiarity with the message of danger delivered by the sequence chart (Wogalter et al., 1991), our study planned to apply the life experiences of young children to burn injuries as a symbol to represent the message of danger shown in the pictures. We mostly relied on photos of real objects in everyday life that can easily cause burn injuries, including boiling water in a hot water dispenser and a kettle heated on a gas stove, hot oil heated on a gas stove, hot soup heated on a gas stove, boiling soup, and a hot drink placed on a kitchen countertop (as shown in Table 2). We also used photos as a stimulus in one-on-one semi-structured interviews. After communicating with 22 kindergarten children, we learned that most 4- to 7-year-old children understand that objects with features such as “fire”, “steam”, “cooking pots”, and “cooking gestures” may burn and are therefore dangerous (Fang-Suey Lin et al., 2012).To target young children, the design of warning signs should use bright colors. At the same time, pictograms prove to be a highly effective method for communicating safety information. Visual information such as facial expression can also increase children's understanding of “bad” behavior. Therefore, we suggest that facial expressions should be used to enhance the results of misbehaviors. For example, the youngest children (4–5 year olds) especially relied on the emotion shown through facial expression to help them accurately interpret the meaning of the sign (Kashler and Wogalter, 2008; Waterson et al., 2012). Based on the above illustration of the principle of warning design and young children's life experiences, the message of danger and the picture design in the 5-factor accident sequence (the contents of the story as shown in Fig. 2) are shown in Table 3and illustrated as follows:(1)First picture: Dangerous messages are delivered mostly through “fire”, “steam”, “cooking pots”, and “cooking gestures” elements to warn young children about the latent risks related to burn injuries (Wogalter and Laughery, 2005).Second picture: A boy (approximately 6–7 years old) is used as the protagonist. He is a high-risk target, meaning that the picture contains a “specific target” that attracts the attention of young children, eliciting feelings of empathy toward the boy in the scenario and making them comply with the conveyed message (Kaskutas and Greenfield, 1991; Wogalter et al., 1994, 2002).Third picture: The focus is the inappropriate action of the boy who pulls the tablecloth (e.g., a girl is frightened by the boy's behavior and covers her eyes) to reach the warning effect (American National Standards Institute (ANSI), 2002; FMC, 1985; Westinghouse Electric Corporation, 1981).Fourth picture: The dangerous scenario is highlighted through the boy's facial expression, the spilling of the hot soup, and the burns all over the boy's body. It aims to focus young children's attention on the danger factors of burn accidents through simple, vivid pictures to improve children's understanding and memorization of the potential danger (ANSI, 1998; Houts et al., 2006; Murray et al., 1998; Young and Wogalter, 1988, 1990).Fifth picture: The results of the accident, including the severity of the injuries, are the focus, therefore preventing young children from performing the inappropriate behavior that caused the accident (ANSI, 1998; DeLoache, 1991).(1)Period 1: Test key points and modify pictures.This experiment was performed as a group discussion (e.g., Waterson et al., 2012). There were 3 groups with 5 young children in each group. All 3 group discussions were led by the same researcher. We collected data on the extent to which the 15 children (ages 6–7) understood the factors leading to the accident and the gestures and facial expressions of the protagonist in the 5-factor accident sequence shown in the sequence charts (shown in Table 3). The young children were also encouraged to describe the message of danger.We found that all the child subjects have seen their family members cooking and know that hot soup is dangerous. They were able to correctly answer the time when the incident happened (night) and the location where it happened (kitchen), and they were able to discern that the soup in the picture is hot, providing responses such as “there is fire”, “it is steaming”, “mom is wearing a glove”, “cooked on a gas stove”, “mom was cooking on this stove”. Furthermore, they were able to answer that mom put the cooked soup on the table (with tablecloth), and they understood that the boy misbehaved by putting his hand on the table even though “he wants to see the soup” or “he wants to drink”. Most children answered that “he is pulling the tablecloth” and considered it an unsafe act because “he'll get burned”. Two children noted that “the older brother wants to hit his sister's head with the spoon” or “he's playing with his younger sister” and said that “he shouldn't do that (bully his younger sister); as a result, those two children were not able to identify the boy's wrong behavior. On the subject of “Occurrence of Incident”, all the young children knew protagonist was burned by the hot soup, providing responses such as “he's burned, it hurts, he's crying”, “he's crying because it's hot”, “he's hurt, it's hot, he's crying”, “he's crying, he got burned, there's steam everywhere”. Eight children screamed at the first glance of the picture, saying, “wow, the soup is so hot, so much steam, he keeps crying” and “He's about to burn to death, so much soup, he keeps crying”. Also, all the young children knew that protagonist was burned by the hot soup, providing responses such as “because mom just finished cooking this soup, it is hot, he's crying because of the burn”, “there's a lot steam, he's burned and it's painful, he keeps crying”, and “because the soup is hot, it was just cooked, because he pulled the hot soup off, he pulled it off, he got burned, he's crying”. Furthermore, with the exception of the two young children noted above, all the children knew that the boy got burned because he “pulled the tablecloth”. With respect to the “results”, all the young children knew that the protagonist was hospitalized because of the burn (mainly because of the IV injection, the banisters around the bed, and the bandages around the boy, the children knew that the location is the hospital). The children described the severity of the injuries with responses including “he's all wrapped up”, “there's so much blood, it looks painful”, “he's suffering, with his eyes closed, I can see his teeth”, “there is so much blood on him, on his feet too, it looks painful”. Based on the responses delineated here, modifications were made to the pictures. Modifications included simplified information: The knife, gloves, dishcloth, the girl in the second and third pictures, and the scenario in the third picture in which the mother is talking on the phone were all deleted to avoid distracting the children's attention from the message, and the unsafe act, pulling the tablecloth, was enhanced (the image only shows the main character and the main action).(2)Period 2: Results of retest after modification of pictures.We again applied the format consisting of group discussions and questions of Period 1 (shown in Table 4) to collect data on the extent to which the 15 children (ages 6–7) understood the sequence chart after modifications (shown in Table 5). This time, we found that 95% of the young children were able to recognize the two main roles in the story correctly. Also, 90% were able to describe the unsafe act committed by the protagonist correctly. Furthermore, with respect to the children's ability to identify important information such as where and when the incident happened, the dangerous objects, how dangerous the objects were, what kind of injury happened to the boy, and how bad the injury was, the accuracy rate reached 100%. Additionally, all the young children were able to understand that the scenario in the second picture is the continuation of the cooking scenario in the first picture and that therefore the hot soup presented in the picture might cause burn injuries (responses included “the mom just put the cooked hot soup on the table” and “the soup just cooked is hot, there is steam”). In addition, all children were able to understand that the burn injury happened to the protagonist (responses included “he's crying, his feet are burned, his skin is peeling, the same with his body”).Picture increase the successful delivery of health information to individuals who have limited literacy. By comparing the effects of a message that is delivered with or without pictures as a supplement, the effectiveness of applying visual media to communication can be evaluated (Houts et al., 2006). Schneider and Dube (2005) presented a simple story in several different forms. Their result showed that, under the condition of the combined use of oral storytelling and pictures, young children can memorize more contents than through pictures alone. Story grammar can be applied to examine whether an illustrator has a clear target and plot in problem solving while telling a story through pictures (Hughes et al., 1997; Mandler and Johnson, 1977; Stein and Glenn, 1979). By examining the content of the stories that the young children tell while engaged in storytelling, we can understand their comprehension of the process of events. Therefore, this study analyzes the storytelling content material by using story grammar, comparing the differences between when the sequence chart was used and when it was not in helping the children retell the story of the burn injury. This study also discusses the effects of applying the 5-factor accident sequence in the form of sequence chart on young children's memorization of the sequence of events leading to the burn injury.The story retelling experiment subjects were 60 children (ages 6–7) from 2 public kindergartens in Pingtung District, Taiwan. A total of 30 children were included in the combined oral storytelling/pictures or oral message complemented by sequence chart group, and 30 children were included in the oral storytelling only or only oral message without sequence chart group. The ages of the subjects in the 2 group ranged from 5 years and 8 months to 6 years and 8 months, with an average age of 75 months (approximately 6 years and 2 months) (shown in Table 6). The researcher had invited a certified evaluation teacher to assess the IQs of the children according to the Test of Nonverbal Intelligence, third edition (TONI-3). The evaluation results showed that all children were normal (Karnes and Johnson, 1991), indicating that there were no children with special needs. According to the evaluation results, the children were divided into 2 groups (shown in Table 6); each group comprised 15 boys and girls with a similar level of problem-solving capability (t-test results indicated no significant difference regarding the IQs of the 2 groups, p = .608).This study focused on collecting the content material retold by the young children. The steps are as follows: in step 1, the researcher built a connection with the young children through playing games; in step 2, to make the young children focus on the experiment, the children were told they would need to retell the story to their parents, who were not present; in step 3, the burn story was told; in step 4, the children were allowed to play games for 15 min after the storytelling; in step 5, the researcher asked the young children to retell the story to their parents, which was recorded on tape.If the child had difficulty at the beginning of retelling the story in step 5, researcher helped the child by asking “What is the mom doing at the beginning of the story?” to facilitate the child's content recall (e.g., Lepola et al., 2012). The 2 groups were led by the same researcher.The two most important tools used in this research were (1) the text used for oral storytelling and (2) the Child Language Date Exchange System (CHILDES) (MacWhinney, 2000):Primarily referring to story grammar (Stein and Glenn, 1975), the text used for the oral storytelling consisted of 7 structural elements: setting (where and when the accident happened), initiating events (dangerous objects, negligence), internal response (the reason the protagonist performed the unsafe action), attempts (the unsafe action committed by the protagonist), direct consequences (the type of accident), outcome (the consequences of the accident), and reactions (the attitude towards the protagonist's misbehavior that led to the burn injury and feelings about the severity of the burn) (shown in Table 7). A linguistics scholar was invited to help examine the sentence structure and the accuracy of the corresponding story construction elements. Whether the text fits the recognition ability of the children is a key factor that influences their understanding and retelling of the story (Morrow, 2005). This study invited preschool teachers to observe and evaluate the children's responses during the test. The evaluation results confirmed that the story text qualifies as a “clear target” plot. Therefore, it is an appropriate story for the young children to listen to and retell.The Child Language Data Exchange System (CHILDES) (MacWhinney, 2000) was created by Brian MacWhinney and Catherine Snow, and this system has become an internationally recognized technique for processing children's linguistic material. It is also suitable for Chinese linguistic material. Therefore, this study used the Codes for the Human Analysis of Transcripts (CHAT) format for the transcription of the linguistic corpus and the FREQ formula to calculate the frequency of the coding.This study invited 2 researchers who are familiar with the CHAT interpretation format with CHILDES to analyze the storytelling corpus after transcription and verification. The coding system was based on the structure of story grammar (Stein and Glenn, 1979). Scoring was mainly based on the various story construction elements mentioned by the children, and a total score was given to measure the storytelling capability. In the story construction, whether the plots are completed was evaluated based on the protagonist's “intrinsic response”, “attempt”, “consequences” (Stein and Glenn, 1975). Therefore, weighted points of 2 were given if the 3 elements above were mentioned, and 1 point for each of the remaining elements. If the storytelling covers all 7 elements, a highest score of 10 was be given (the detailed scoring rubric is shown in Table 7).The researcher randomly selected 20% of the 60-item linguistic corpus (12 items) and invited people who have a linguistics background, have taken a narrative research class, and have also been involved in narrative research to code the linguistic corpus. To assess the consistency of the grader, Cohen's Kappa value was calculated. The results showed that the Cohen's Kappa value was as high as 96.9%. For the grading of the story construction elements, the calculated results for the 2 researchers were exactly the same.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
