@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Neck and shoulder muscle activity during standardized work-related postural tasks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A broad range of work-related postural tasks was standardized using a computer guided task paradigm.The sternocleidomastoid and upper trapezius muscles were mildly active during the majority of postures investigated.Certain head and neck tasks activated the sternocleidomastoid, whilst shoulder and arm tasks activated the upper trapezius.The muscle activity did not differ significantly between male and female participants.This study provides reference values for further investigation of these muscles in the natural work environment.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Electromyography,Sternocleidomastoid,Trapezius,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The aim of the present study was to assess the activity levels of the sternocleidomastoid muscle and upper trapezius muscle during static postures under controlled and standardized conditions, and to determine whether the muscle activity differed between sexes. Electromyographic (EMG) activity was recorded unilaterally from the sternocleidomastoid and upper trapezius muscle in 17 participants whilst they were performing various postural tasks. EMG amplitude was measured by the root mean square values of the raw signals and normalized to peak maximum contractile values for each muscle (%MVC). The intensity of muscle activity was ranked as light (<3%MVC), moderate (3%MVC ≤ EMG ≤ 8%MVC), and substantial (>8%MVC). During most tasks the two muscles contracted light to moderately. Head leaning and shoulder shrugging postures yielded substantial muscle activity in both muscles. Muscle activity did not differ significantly between male and female participants (F = 3.1; p = 0.078). Our findings provided normative values, which will enhance future studies of muscle activity during work in a natural, unrestrained environment.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Work-related musculoskeletal disorders (WMSDs) consist of a group of conditions that affect the muscles, skeleton, cartilage, ligaments and nerves, resulting in pain and functional impairment. These disorders are induced or aggravated by work and the circumstances of its performance (Staal et al., 2007). WMSDs represent a widespread occupational health issue, and contribute to sick leave, reduced productivity, reduced quality of life and premature retirement from the workforce (Åkesson et al., 1997; Burke et al., 1997; Mohl, 1998; Woolf and Åkesson, 2001).Work involving prolonged static postures may be a significant risk factor for WMSDs (Keyserling, 2000). Sustained muscle activity, especially of Type I motor units, is likely to be an aetiological factor of these conditions (Hägg, 1999; Veiersted et al., 1993). Human muscles are not well adapted to continuous long-lasting contractions, but require rest periods to recover from even very low-level exertion (Sjøgaard et al., 1985). It has also been suggested that during low intensity contraction, especially when the contraction imposed is static and long-lasting, muscle tissue may display changes in blood flow (Larsson et al., 1999), contractile activity (Jaspers et al., 1999; Larsson et al., 1990), and eventually changes in morphology (moth eaten fibres, ragged red fibres and zones lacking activity) (Lindman et al., 1990, 1991). Tissue damage during these sustained contractions may be attributable to the accumulation of calcium ions in the muscle tissue sarcoplasm (Gissel, 2000). Moreover, mechanisms akin to local nociceptor sensitisation can play a role in the pathogenesis and escalation of this condition via postulated feedback loops (Simons, 2004).There is some evidence which points to a gender difference in musculoskeletal disorders (De Zwart et al., 2001). Female workers have been reported to suffer more from upper extremity musculoskeletal disorder than their male counterparts (Treaster and Burr, 2004). WMSDs among female workers have been reported in various occupational groups such as among newspaper employees (Bernard et al., 1994), salespeople (Skov et al., 1996), or dentists (Marshall et al., 1997). The reason for these gender related differences is unknown. Biological factors such as a smaller cross-sectional area of the trapezius muscle and greater amount of Type I muscles fibres in females have been claimed as reasons for these gender differences (Lindman et al., 1990, 1991). One hypothesis could be that differences in muscle activity between sexes may account for this gender difference (Nordander and Ohlsson, 2008).The trapezius and sternocleidomastoid muscles are frequently involved in a large proportion of WMSDs associated with the upper extremity (Buckle and Devereux, 2002). The trapezius muscle spans the upper trunk and shoulder girdle, linking the shoulder and neck. It has a significant role in supporting and stabilizing the scapula for task-oriented work, and in movements of the upper limb relative to the axial skeleton (Brinckmann et al., 2002; Jensen et al., 1999). The trapezius is the most reported muscle in upper body WMSDs (Sommerich et al., 2000; Visser and van Dieën, 2006).Both the trapezius and sternocleidomastoid are also anatomically superficial muscles, and therefore readily accessible to surface electromyography (EMG). Quantitative EMG analysis of these muscles has been previously used to assess the activity patterns of workers in the natural work environment (Kleine et al., 1999; Mathiassen et al., 2003), as well as to compare the activity pattern of workers suffering from neck pain with healthy workers (Johnston et al., 2008; Szeto et al., 2009). Nonetheless, there are no data describing the amount of effort exerted by neck and shoulder muscles during a variety of postural tasks that are commonly observed in vocational activities. The intensity of muscle contraction can be estimated using surface EMG and then expressed as percentage of the activity produced during maximum voluntary efforts (Konrad, 2005; Netto and Burnett, 2006). Normative data are needed in order to interpret contraction levels of these muscles collected in a natural work environment and from there, to further investigate any possible causal links between muscle hyperactivity and WMSDs. To the best of our knowledge, no previous research has investigated contraction levels of the trapezius and sternocleidomastoid muscles across a broad spectrum of standardized postural tasks in healthy subjects.The aim of the present study was to assess the activity level of the sternocleidomastoid (SCM) muscle and upper trapezius (UT) muscle during static postures under controlled and standardized conditions. Effort was made to investigate a large number of tasks that reproduced static postures commonly seen during seated work. In addition, it was hypothesized that the muscle activity levels would differ between male and female participants.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
