@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Towards successful user interaction with systems: Focusing on user-derived gestures for smart home systems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The three experiments were conducted to identify the participants' decision for gestures of each command.As a result, 66% of the top gestures between the two experiments were different.Also, the selected gestures of the third experiment were similar to those from the second experiment.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Hand gesture,User-derived hand gestures,Gesture-command association,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Various studies that derived gesture commands from users have used the frequency ratio to select popular gestures among the users. However, the users select only one gesture from a limited number of gestures that they could imagine during an experiment, and thus, the selected gesture may not always be the best gesture. Therefore, two experiments including the same participants were conducted to identify whether the participants maintain their own gestures after observing other gestures. As a result, 66% of the top gestures were different between the two experiments. Thus, to verify the changed gestures between the two experiments, a third experiment including another set of participants was conducted, which showed that the selected gestures were similar to those from the second experiment. This finding implies that the method of using the frequency in the first step does not necessarily guarantee the popularity of the gestures.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Recently, many researchers have focused on developing more natural user interfaces that facilitate interaction between users and systems. More specifically, with advanced technologies, the trend has been geared towards developing more intuitive devices, and one of the efforts is a gesture-based interface that recognizes any physical movement without the help of a traditional device such as a mouse or a keyboard (Saffer, 2008).Previous studies on gesture-based interfaces have focused on either 2 dimensional (2D) gestures utilizing a touch-screen controlled by a finger or a stylus pen, or 3 dimensional (3D) motion-recognition systems accompanied by sensor-gloves or handheld devices. More recently, the trend of developing 3D gesture recognition technologies, such as Microsoft's Kinect, has allowed different gesture-based interfaces to provide users with easier control of the devices without any extra equipment (Bhuiyan and Picking, 2011; Kim et al., 2011). Consequently, recent research studies have begun to pay more attention to 3D free hand gestures (Henze et al., 2010; Kim et al., 2011; Mauney et al., 2010).Meanwhile, in the earlier studies, due to the limitation of the gesture recognition technologies, gesture interfaces could not recognize many postures or motions, and only a few gestures were suggested by designers or engineers based on their specialized knowledge (Buisine and Martin, 2007; O'Hagan et al., 2002; Sears and Arora, 2002). However, some of these gestures are difficult to discover and adopt because they are arbitrarily associated with commands (Yee, 2009).More recently, as the image processing technology for faster computation has become possible, and subsequently the number of gesture-activated functions has increased, intuitiveness has become an important consideration in gesture design (Blackler et al., 2010; Lee et al., 2010; Lepinski et al., 2010; Park, 2012). Therefore, the issue has expanded to determining the gestures for more intuitive interaction with the products. Lately, various researches have started to focus on matching gestures with commands by involving users in the initial stage of designing gestures to fully use the users' experiences: user-centered approach (Akers, 2006; Epps et al., 2006; Grandhi et al., 2010; Henze et al., 2010; Kuhnel et al., 2011; Lee et al., 2010; Mauney et al., 2010; Mitchell and Heap, 2011; Neβelrath et al., 2011; Nielsen et al., 2003, 2004; Stern et al., 2008; Wobbrock et al., 2009).The aforementioned studies followed a similar procedure to suggest gestures for commands (Fig. 1). In such case, the frequency ratio is commonly used to eliminate awkward gestures, and to select popular gestures among the users. More specifically, the users were asked to derive a gesture for each command. Once the gestures were collected from the users, similar gestures for each command were grouped together according to the physical shapes/motions of the gestures. Then, a gesture with the highest frequency (Top gesture) was suggested as the final gesture for a command. In addition some of the gestures with high frequency for each command were selected and then were estimated in terms of subjective measures such as suitability, ease of memory, and fatigue. Finally, one of them was selected as the final gesture for the command.However, these steps can introduce several issues. Firstly, users have a limited set of gesture candidates in their mind, and they end up selecting one of them as the best gesture for a command during an experiment. Therefore, if they observe other gestures that they had not thought about during the experiment, they could change their selection. Secondly, if a skilled user in designing gestures is included in a participant group; a gesture that he/she derives could be the most suitable gesture for a command. However, following the aforementioned step is likely to neglect the meaningful gestures due to their low frequency. However, there are no studies on these issues. Thus, we made hypothesis to identify the issues as follows.•Users may change their selection after observing other gestures.A gesture derived from only a few users might be a better gesture.To verify the hypothesis, two experiments were conducted. In the first experiment, we followed the procedure of the previous studies: deriving gestures for a command from users and selecting a gesture with the highest frequency (Top gesture) for each command. In the second experiment, we asked the same users to select the most suitable gesture for each command after observing all of the user-derived gestures acquired in the first experiment, and then, selected a top gesture for each command. Moreover, the top gestures between the two experiments were compared to identify whether the top gestures in the first experiment were maintained in the second experiment, and whether the gestures that a few users derived in the first experiment became popular gestures. Finally, in order to verify the changed gestures between the two experiments, a third experiment including another set of participants was conducted.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Many studies that focus on deriving gestures with the users have commonly utilized the frequency ratio to eliminate awkward gestures or to select popular gestures for commands. However, as the results of the three experiments in this study, we identified several limitations of the process suggested in the previous studies. More specifically, various users tended to change their selection after observing other gestures derived by the other users, and some of the top gestures in the first experiment were not even selected in the second experiment and were rarely selected in the third experiments. This implies that the frequency could not guarantee the selected gestures because users in the first step have only a limited set of gestures in their mind. In addition to this, some of the gestures which a few users derived in the first experiment were selected as top gestures in the second and the third experiments. This implies that some of the more significant gestures could be overlooked by following the previous method.However, this study has not covered the process of designing a final gesture set for each command or considered the technical feasibility of the gestures, because the primary purpose of this study was to investigate whether utilizing the frequency ratio would be the optimal solution for eliminating unnecessary gestures as the initial stage of deriving gestures. Therefore, in order to determine a final gesture set for each command, another user study should be conducted by involving a different set of participants with various age groups and experts in various fields which will be one of our future studies. The results of this study suggest a good starting point for the further research on designing gestures for commands.