@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Work exposure and vigilance decrements in closed circuit television surveillance

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Detection rates for inconspicuous events in real time surveillance are low.Surveillance background contributes to differences in detection.The nature of previous visual analysis experience contributes to detection levels.The type of sample influences the results of ecologically valid vigilance tasks.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Closed circuit television,Vigilance decrement,Operator performance,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The aim of this study was to examine operator effectiveness in terms of detection rates and potential vigilance decrements in a proactive or real time CCTV surveillance task. The study was conducted in two stages. During stage one, 42 operators who were employed full-time in CCTV surveillance observed a 90-min video and were required to detect four types of target behaviours. No vigilance decrement was found for this sample as a whole. Stage two involved collecting additional data from 31 novices and dividing the existing operators into two sub-samples, consisting of generalists and specialists depending on the type of surveillance they performed at work (total N = 73). Fifty percent of target behaviours were detected and false alarms were high. Vigilance decrements were found for novices and generalists, but specialists maintained their performance for the first hour and then increased it. Results are discussed in terms of surveillance background, work exposure, transfer of learning, selection, training and motivation and the impact of these on vigilance and CCTV performance.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Closed circuit television (CCTV) is used extensively as a tool for the remote monitoring of public safety and the protection of critical infrastructure in many countries, such as the United Kingdom, Europe, United States of America (USA), Australia, and South Africa. It is used throughout society including town and shopping centres, industrial and commercial settings, transport systems, and prisons (Neil et al., 2007). The use of CCTV has increased substantially in the USA since 9/11 and the threat of terrorism, and has been accompanied by subsidisation from the USA government (Cameron et al., 2008). In the UK, the House of Lords (2009) cite estimates that during the 1990's approximately 78% of the Home Office crime prevention budget was spent on installing CCTV, and they indicate that some £500 million of public money was invested in CCTV in the decade up to 2006. Yet researchers have obtained mixed findings regarding CCTV effectiveness (Greenberg and Roush, 2009; Keval and Sasse, 2006; Wells et al., 2006; Welsh and Farrington, 2002). It has been suggested that on balance, evaluations of CCTV effectiveness indicate that the value added by CCTV may not be commensurate with the finances invested or expectations regarding results (Squires, 2010), although CCTV does assist in reducing crime and other significant events on a daily basis (Donald, 2008a,b).Many of the studies on CCTV effectiveness have focused on aspects such as technological system requirements (van Voorthuijsen et al., 2005), public perceptions (Cameron et al., 2008), and changes in crime rates after the implementation of CCTV (Wells et al., 2006). While these aspects are important, less research attention has been devoted to the monitoring and detection process performed by CCTV surveillance operators (henceforth referred to as ‘operators’). Operator performance is crucial in that the operator's ability to detect significant events has a direct influence on the system's effectiveness, particularly in proactive, real-time surveillance. If an operator fails to detect a significant event, appropriate responses (e.g. alerting emergency services) are not triggered, and people or property are placed at risk. This indicates the need for a more in-depth understanding of operator performance. This study aims to examine operator effectiveness in terms of detection rates and potential vigilance decrements in a real time CCTV surveillance task.The overall purpose of the operator's job is to monitor, detect and respond to significant events that threaten the safety of people or property. This requires vigilance and the maintenance of attention for periods ranging from one to twelve hours (Donald, 2001). In vigilance intensive tasks, two processes influence performance – the overall level of vigilance and the vigilance decrement (Davies and Parasuraman, 1982). The overall level of vigilance is a steady state that operators bring to the task and is indicated by overall detection rates. The vigilance decrement refers to a decrease in performance over time (Parasuraman, 1984) and generally occurs from 20 to 35 min (Sawin and Scerbo, 1995) after engaging in the task. If the overall level of vigilance is very low, “vigilance performance is likely to be poor throughout the task, irrespective of whether performance declines with time on task” (Parasuraman, 1984, p. 253). Operators with a steady but low overall level of vigilance are likely to miss a larger proportion of significant events than people with high overall vigilance levels. However, the total number of significant events detected is also influenced by the vigilance decrement, which may be experienced by people with either high or low overall levels of vigilance. Anecdotal evidence suggests that operator attention drifts after 15 min (Security Park, 2001), but this has not been examined in relation to detection performance and it is not clear whether this applies to all operators. Although there is the potential for vigilance decrements in work requiring vigilance, inconsistent results regarding the existence of vigilance decrements have been found in complex tasks (Adams et al., 1961) and tasks that are similar to those performed in real world settings (Hollenbeck et al., 1995; Molloy and Parasuraman, 1996; Moray and Haudegond, 1998; Pigeau et al., 1995). In view of variations in the information processing requirements of different vigilance intensive jobs and the numerous factors that affect vigilance performance, this is not surprising. However, it is important to understand whether decrements are likely to occur in specific types of work, as this has implications for system and job design, selection, and training. In the case of CCTV it has implications for the provision of effective service delivery in respect of public and organisational safety and security.CCTV systems typically consist of numerous cameras, monitoring and recording systems, and control room operations. Operators may observe displays ranging from a couple of spot monitors to banks of multiplex displays, with each monitor possibly showing scenes from a number of cameras. Operators generally observe anything from 2 to 30 camera scenes, yielding multiple sources of data. The use of multiple sources of data is not unique to CCTV. However, with CCTV, significant events often cannot be detected at a glance due to the complexity and dynamic nature of the scenes being analysed and the visual inconspicuity of many significant events. The scenes are frequently cluttered, consist of 2-dimensional representations of 3-dimensional scenes, and include events and objects that are hidden or partially obscured. Consequently, detection is not merely a perceptual process but involves a high degree of interpretation and visual analysis (Donald, 2008a,b). This is particularly relevant to situations where people deliberately obscure objects and situations from the camera's view to avoid detection – a feature that is shared by contexts such as military surveillance. Consequently many significant events in CCTV are visually inconspicuous and are unlikely to draw attention unless the operator understands their significance.Existing research on CCTV surveillance has reported mixed findings regarding overall detection rates and vigilance decrements. The studies have used different experimental conditions (e.g. settings, camera configurations, significant events with varying degrees of visual conspicuity, samples, and time periods during which monitoring was required) that could account for some of the inconsistencies in results. In a study with 16 television displays and footage of prison scenes with very little movement, detection rates varied from 85% to 97%, depending on experimental conditions (Tickner et al., 1972). The significant events were conspicuous and involved two suspicious behaviours (running, and looking excessively at perimeters such as walls). A follow-up study with similar prison scenes but showing a lot of movement found that the range of detection rates decreased considerably in some instances (32%–100% across experimental conditions) (Tickner and Poulton, 1973). Perfect detection rates were achieved only when one display was observed at a time. The comparatively lower detection rates were consistent with a study of a traffic scene with lots of movement (Tickner and Poulton, 1968). Based on these studies, it was concluded that continuous activity distracts participants.A comparably high detection rate of 91% was obtained in a study where simulated city centre incidents had to be identified, such as the theft of a handbag (van Voorthuijsen et al., 2005). When participants were required to detect a person carrying a visually conspicuous open umbrella in scenes where no other umbrellas were present, an 85% detection rate was reported which declined to 54% as the number of monitors was increased to nine (Wallace et al., n.d.). This contrasted with the 25% detection rate obtained by operators who were required to identify transient, dynamic, inconspicuous incidents of theft in an industrial setting on a single display (Andrew et al., 2003). Incidents were made up of a number of suspicious behaviours, each of which was of short duration (no more than a few seconds). Lower detection rates were also found in a study involving the identification of particular individuals in simulated CCTV footage over 25 min, where correct detections varied from 15% when identification was based on memory, to 30% when observers could make comparisons with a still-frame image (Davies and Thasen, 2000). False alarm rates were high under both conditions (60% and 65% respectively). In both Andrew et al.'s (2003) and Davies and Thasen's (2000) studies, focal attention and detailed visual analysis were required for correct detection. CCTV research involving more complex and dynamic scenes contrasts with the studies by Tickner and Poulton (1968, 1973, 1975), Tickner and colleagues (1972), van Voorthuijsen et al. (2005), and Wallace et al. (n.d.) where much higher detection rates were obtained with more visually conspicuous significant events of longer duration.Regarding vigilance decrements, Tickner and Poulton (1973) found significant decrements in the two-hour CCTV task but not in the one-hour condition. However, no decrements were found in a three-hour traffic surveillance task (Tickner and Poulton, 1968) and a four-hour task involving the identification of particular individuals and actions in a street scene (Tickner and Poulton, 1975). The condition where vigilance decrements were found used scenes depicting only occasional movement. Tickner and Poulton (1975) concluded that vigilance decrements occur when there is little to observe. Andrew et al. (2003) did not find a statistically significant decrement in their three-hour study. Andrew et al.'s (2003) finding regarding the absence of a decrement is somewhat surprising as the complex information processing requirements of CCTV surveillance are similar to those of tasks where vigilance decrements typically occur (Donald, 2008a,b; Howard et al., 2009). However, it has been shown that the effects of practice can compensate for waning vigilance (Washburn et al., 2004). This suggests that in Andrew et al.'s (2003) study, the experience and work exposure of the participants could have prevented a decrement from occurring. All participants in their study were surveillance operators who worked in the same processing plant context from which the video was derived.The mixed results obtained in studies regarding vigilance decrements in CCTV surveillance suggest that a number of factors could be influencing performance over time, including for example, the types of samples, incidents, footage and task characteristics involved (Donald, 2010). In the current study we propose that the types of CCTV surveillance which operators are accustomed to performing could contribute to the vigilance decrement. This is based on evidence that task characteristics influence vigilance decrements (Parasuraman, 1984). We identified two types of CCTV surveillance functions through observation of the tasks performed by operators and discussion with operators and managers. This resulted in the identification of ‘generalist’ and ‘specialist’ surveillance and we refer to participants as ‘generalists’ and ‘specialists.’Generalist surveillance took place within a multifunctional role within a control room. Besides surveillance, it included alarm monitoring, access control, ongoing communication including call taking, and responses to parties on the ground such as police officers or security. Although monitoring was an important part of the generalists' role, there was fairly heavy reliance on external cues (e.g., alarms, requests to monitor certain targets) that facilitated knowing which cameras to monitor and where to look. This assisted them in perceiving and interpreting significant events. Operator surveillance involves a lot of dichotomous detection where decisions are required regarding the presence or absence of significant events. Generalists’ attention was therefore frequently divided between these multiple tasks and monitoring, and they were not accustomed to deploying focused attention to the cameras for long periods of time without interruption by other activities.Operators performing specialist surveillance were primarily focused on monitoring and detection, and communication was usually initiated from their side in response to observed conditions. They performed extensive dedicated or focused surveillance activities where they were responsible for identifying suspects through associated crime behaviour, made extensive use of behavioural indicators, observed people for long durations, and audited procedures and processes. They received few external stimuli to guide their monitoring of cameras and relied far more on visual analysis and monitoring to detect significant events. Their role required focused attention over long periods of time, with few interruptions by other tasks. These activities occur routinely in high risk company operations such as casinos and precious goods handling, but would require police authorisation as dedicated surveillance in UK town centres in terms of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act. As with generalists, specialists were required to make decisions regarding the presence or absence of significant events. However, these events were generally more inconspicuous, difficult to detect and required more interpretation in order to make the decision. For example, in generalist surveillance, significant events tended to involve larger movements (e.g., a person crawling under a fence) that were easier to detect than the small, inconspicuous and transient movements involved in specialist surveillance (e.g., quickly flicking a small diamond to another location while sweeping with a broom). The researchers speculated that subtle differences in the types of surveillance tasks conducted by participants could influence vigilance decrements.The categorisation of operators into specialists and generalists allowed for the examination of the vigilance decrement in relation to different samples. We extended the use of different samples to include novices with no previous exposure to the CCTV surveillance task.The current research is most similar to Andrew et al.'s (2003) study in that both use footage of theft in heavy industry; inconspicuous, transient significant events where perpetrators frequently try to camouflage or make detection more difficult, require one camera to be monitored at a time, and show continuous movement in most clips. However, the two studies are different in terms of the definition of significant events and instructions to participants. Andrew et al.'s (2003) study required participants to detect incidents of theft. Incidents typically consisted of a number of suspicious behaviours that preceded the theft, such as perpetrators getting into position. Several minutes or seconds passed between the suspicious behaviours, during which time people performed normal work activities. Some incidents involved a number of people whose actions unfolded over several minutes. Participants were told to report incidents of theft, but were not informed as to how theft could occur. This is likely to have influenced participants' attention sets for incidents. As all participants worked in the types of processing plant that was filmed in the video, participants probably applied the attention sets and knowledge of theft in this same context to the research task. The task required high levels of interpretation and situation awareness regarding the specific type of processing plant filmed in the video. In the Andrew et al. (2003) study, participants were given a break after each thirty-minute period, whereas no breaks were given during the ninety-minute video of this study. It is possible that breaks allowed for attention resources to be replenished and prevented the vigilance decrement from occurring.The research questions for this study were:•What is the detection rate and level of false alarms for transient, dynamic, inconspicuous target behaviours associated with theft in heavy industry, when one camera view with almost continuous movement is observed?Is there a vigilance decrement over a ninety-minute period for the above type of footage?Does past experience with the specific task impact on detection levels and the vigilance decrement?

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
