@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The ability of UK offshore workers of different body size and shape to egress through a restricted window space

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Up to 75% of successful small window egress outcome is size related.Bideltoid breadth, chest depth and weight combined explain ∼70% of egress outcome.25% or more of egress outcome relates to non-anatomical factors.Predictive testing will inevitably lead to false +ve and –ve results.Flexibility and tissue compressibility may also explain successful egress.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Offshore workers,Window egress,Binary logistic regression,3D scanning,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
404 male offshore workers aged 41.4 ± 10.7 y underwent 3D body scanning and an egress task simulating the smallest helicopter window emergency exit size. The 198 who failed were older (P < 0.01), taller (P < 0.05) and heavier (P < 0.0001) than the 206 who passed. Using all extracted dimensions from the scans, binary logistic regression identified a model (refined using backward elimination) which predicted egress outcome with 75.2% accuracy. Using only weight, bideltoid breadth and maximum chest depth, the model achieved ∼70% accuracy. When anatomical dimensions categorise individuals for small window egress, 25% or more will be misclassified, with false positives (those predicted to fail, but pass) slightly outnumbering false negatives (those predicted to pass, but fail), highlighting the limitations of a predictive approach which treats the body as a rigid object. Differences in flexibility and technique may explain these observations, which may be important considerations for future research.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Although the stature of humans has increased for the last six generations, in many northern European countries it has largely stabilised, while in southern and eastern European countries, it continues to rise (Cole, 2002). Alongside increased stature are increased girths, breadths and depths, although these do not precisely follow a pattern of geometric similarity (Nevill et al., 2004). Observed secular body weight increase necessarily reflects height and other dimensional increases, but in addition, the rising prevalence of global obesity (WHO, 2000). In addition to being a health risk, excess fat enlarges the body laterally, affecting posture, compromising locomotion (Wearing et al., 2006), and increasing the likelihood of adopting unusual or restricted postures in restricted space, with consequences for musculo-skeletal health (Gallacher, 2005). Physical body size and shape affects the ability of a person to function in any environment where space is restricted. The built environment, examples of which endure for centuries, if not millennia, expresses designs which never anticipated the physical size of adults today.In addition to the underlying trends for size to increase, certain professions are associated with larger individuals, such as truck drivers (Guan and Hsaio, 2012) and firefighters (Hsaio et al., 2014). Whether or not such enlarged dimensions arise via preferential recruitment of larger candidates, or result from wider cultural aspects of the role, these will add to any size burden imposed by the secular trend, and may present specific challenges for ergonomic applications such as accessibility, signage or comfort. Over more than four decades of operations, the UK offshore work environment has borne witness to a progressive size increase of its workers. The male UK offshore population has previously been surveyed (Light and Dingwall, 1985) and reported to be heavier and fatter than their onshore counterparts (Light and Gibson, 1986). At the time, offshore workers were approximately 3% heavier than the equivalent UK onshore population, but this discrepancy varied according to age. Since this time, the average discrepancy has nearly trebled in magnitude. Comparing the Size and shape of the UK Offshore Workforce 2014 (SASOW) findings (Ledingham et al., 2015) to those of Light & Dingwall, show that offshore workers are, on average, 19% heavier, 2% taller, and have 17% greater waist girth, 14% greater neck girth, 12% greater chest and hip girths and 11% greater wrist girth. The theoretical modelling of ability to pass in a narrow corridor using SASOW data suggested that male UK workers were 28% less likely to be able to pass one another than the general male population (Stewart et al., 2015).The ergonomic consequences of increased body size for emergency escape planning include all aspects of transportation, locomotion, mustering and personal protective equipment (Ledingham and Stewart, 2013). This is perhaps most apparent in helicopter window egress. Research performed in a military facility determined the minimum dimensions of rectangular opening which could be used as a secondary exit in an emergency (Allan and Ward, 1986). Four individuals of varying body size exited progressively smaller apertures underwater in a simulated helicopter escape exit, and the study concluded that an exit of 432 × 356 mm was compatible with the 99th centile of bidletoid breadth, (based on 1970–71 Royal Air Force aircrew size data). How highly trained such individuals were, and other demographic data were not included in the report. While the conclusions may be robust for military aircrew, the applicability to civilians assumes no underlying size difference between the two populations. While a range of human factors other than anatomical ones will govern the response to the successful escape from helicopters ditching in water (Brooks, 1989), it is virtually impossible to recreate authentic emergency situations experimentally due to unassailable practical and ethical considerations, and size-related factors have not been prominent in this consideration due to a lack of current information. As a result, the aim of this study was to provide current, context-specific information for the civilian UK male offshore workforce, relating body dimensions to simulated helicopter window egress.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
