@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The influence of active seating on car passengers' perceived comfort and activity levels

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Active seating is a promising concept to interrupt static sitting.Participants felt significantly more challenged, more fit and more refreshed.Heart rate indicated a light intensity, but nevertheless non-sedentary, activity.EMG variability in several muscles increased during active seating.Active seating might stimulate movements and hence help to reduce sedentary behaviour.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Vehicle interior,Passenger comfort,Seating,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
New technologies have led to an increasingly sedentary lifestyle. Sedentary behaviour is characterised by physical inactivity and is associated with several health risks. This excessive sitting does not only take place in the office or at home, but also during daily commute. Therefore, BMW AG developed an active seating system for the back seat of a car, consisting of sensors in the back rest that register upper body movements of the passenger, with which the passenger controls a game. This study evaluated three different aspects of active seating compared to other tasks (reading, working on laptop, and gaming on tablet). First, discomfort and comfort perception were measured in a 30-minute driving test. Discomfort was very low for all activities and participants felt significantly more challenged, more fit and more refreshed during active seating. Second, heart rate was measured, indicating a light intensity, but nevertheless non-sedentary, activity. Third, average and variability in activity of six postural muscles was measured by electromyography (EMG), showing a higher muscle activity and higher muscle variability for active seating compared to other activities. Active seating might stimulate movements, thereby increasing comfort and well-being.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the last decades, the amount of work-related physical activity has decreased considerably in the working population due to economic and industrial innovations, such as the introduction of computers and increased automation. As a result, physical inactivity of workers in many occupations is becoming an increasing problem (Straker and Mathiassen, 2009). This so-called sedentary work is associated with several significant health risks, such as musculoskeletal disorders due to prolonged static muscle exertions (Sjøgaard and Jensen, 2006), and an increased risk of chronic diseases including coronary disorders and type II diabetes due to whole body physical inactivity (USDHHS, 2008). Furthermore, there is increasing evidence that sedentary behaviour is an independent factor in the development of the metabolic syndrome: a combination of high blood pressure, diabetes, increased levels of cholesterol and obesity (Ekblom-Bak et al., 2010).Moderate-intensity physical activity, which requires a moderate amount of effort and noticeably accelerates the heart rate (WHO, 2012), has been shown to have a positive effect on health disorders like cardiovascular diseases, type II diabetes, colon cancer, depression and anxiety, and on health determinants like body fat, blood pressure, cholesterol levels and bone mineral density (Pollock et al., 1998). Increasing the amount of physical activity during leisure time therefore seems crucial in improving the health of sedentary workers (Holtermann et al., 2012). Several studies (e.g., Siegel et al., 2009; Grieser, 2010; Miyachi et al., 2010) have shown that an activity level of 3–6 Metabolic Equivalents (METs) is possible to achieve with activity-promoting video games such as Wii Fit from Nintendo. In order to reduce sedentary behaviour, stimulating people to move by means of a game seems a promising concept. On a local level, temporal changes in activity have also shown to have positive effects on fatigue development and discomfort. More temporal variability in the electromyography (EMG) amplitude of back muscles (Dieën et al., 2009) and more spatio-temporal variability of the EMG amplitude within the trapezius muscle (Farina et al., 2008) have been shown to be associated with slower development of electromyographic manifestations of fatigue.In the office environment, several studies have investigated the effects of dynamic workstations. Straker et al. (2009), for example, studied the effects of walking and cycling computer workstations on keyboard and mouse performance, while John et al. (2009) and Funk et al. (2012) studied the effects of a treadmill workstation on health and performance. However, besides work performance, these studies mostly focused on medical implications such as reducing obesity and preventing disorders on long term, while the effects on short term comfort and well-being were not studied.Because sedentary behaviour does not only occur at home or at the office, but also during the daily commute, car manufacturer BMW AG has developed a new concept, the active seating system. This active seating system consists of sensors in the back rest of the back seat of the car that can capture movements of the upper body and makes it possible for the passenger to control a game with his or her physical movements (Kamp, 2012). The goal of the active seating system is to promote a more active experience, to reduce the amount of static muscle activity and to increase the global level of activity, in order to increase perceived comfort and well-being of car passengers. However, due to the novelty of this system, effects of such a system are unknown, neither its acceptance.Therefore, the objective of this study is twofold: Is there a difference in perceived discomfort, perceived comfort and activity levels of active seating compared to normal seating on the back seat of a car when performing different activities? Furthermore, we investigated: How is the active seating concept perceived by its users?

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
