@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Using analytic network process for evaluating mobile text entry methods

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Presents a multi-criteria decision-making approach for preference evaluation of text entry methods.QWERTY is the most preferred method and arrangement of keys is the most preferred criterion for evaluation.The proposed method can be extended to user experience evaluations.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Text entry method,QWERTY,Analytic network process,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper highlights a preference evaluation methodology for text entry methods in a touch keyboard smartphone using analytic network process (ANP). Evaluation of text entry methods in literature mainly considers speed and accuracy. This study presents an alternative means for selecting text entry method that considers user preference. A case study was carried out with a group of experts who were asked to develop a selection decision model of five text entry methods. The decision problem is flexible enough to reflect interdependencies of decision elements that are necessary in describing real-life conditions. Results showed that QWERTY method is more preferred than other text entry methods while arrangement of keys is the most preferred criterion in characterizing a sound method. Sensitivity analysis using simulation of normally distributed random numbers under fairly large perturbation reported the foregoing results reliable enough to reflect robust judgment. The main contribution of this paper is the introduction of a multi-criteria decision approach in the preference evaluation of text entry methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Amplified market competition and the rapid progress of mobile technology enable advanced applications such as web browsing, electronic mail messaging, gaming, computing and advanced media services to be incorporated with the basic call and text messaging services in mobile phones. With the increasing number of functions in a phone maintaining an acceptable level of usability is a constant challenge. While product-related design requirements (e.g. basic requirements, physical characteristics, technical features) are widely studied in usability literature, user-related criteria (e.g. functionality, brand choice, customer excitement) are equally considered as part of design decisions (Isiklar and Buyukozkan, 2007).In designing mobile phones the choice of text entry method is crucial for efficiency and satisfaction of the users. Latest designs of mobile phones allow users to select the preferred text entry method. The choice of method is relevant for creating text messages and other auxiliary services such as searching on the internet, calendar entries, tweeting and other social media. Text messages using SMS that are sent daily are known to be at the order of 1 × 1012 (Bin, 2006). In the Asian region, text messaging draws its success in Singapore, Malaysia and the Philippines (Balakrishnan and Yeow, 2008). This motivated a vast area of research in mobile text entry over the years (Dunlop and Masters, 2008).Design issues in the area of text entry method include input speed, accuracy, physical form, learning time and cost (Green et al., 2004). Koivisto and Urbaczewski (2005) claimed that these issues could be grouped into two types of usability measurements: performance measurements and preference measurements. The former gathers quantifiable metrics to measure system performance typically that of speed and accuracy while the latter explores subjective preferences and opinion data, which may include physical form or aesthetics, learning time and cost that vary with individual judgments. While performance measurements provide quantifiable basis in design decisions, preference measurements are hardly explored due to the subjectivity of end-users' decision-making despite of their relevance in evaluation (Isiklar and Buyukozkan, 2007). When preference measurements become relevant in design decisions, several criteria must be brought into context. Preference evaluation is highly associated with user experience (UX) evaluation that encompasses user's interaction with a product including perception, feelings, and thoughts (Albert and Tullis, 2013). Furthermore, this is also related to the satisfaction dimensions emphasized by international standards (ISO, 1997) that require subjective measures. MacKenzie and Soukoreff (2002) highlight the importance of preference or subjective measures in addressing broad but highly relevant issues in loosely generated answers. However, MacKenzie and Soukoreff (2002) caution that unless qualitative analyses pass through rigorous empirical validation, results may fail to be reproducible and generalizable. Most scholars tend to construct statistical analyses in exploring preference measurement studies. For instance, Hsiao et al. (2014) provided an empirical evaluation of four miniature keyboards by way of measuring objective and subjective rating using statistical analysis. These intangible issues, such as comfort, ease of use, subjective impression, are often multi-dimensional and qualitative which definitely pose difficulty and complexity in the evaluation process.This work highlights a methodology in evaluating text entry methods in mobile phones in the context of preference measurements. Since such evaluation requires multiple criteria such as distance between keys, arrangement of keys, number of keys, sizes of keys, popularity and familiarity of users, with inherent interrelationships, a multi-criteria decision method (MCDM) was used. MCDM had been used as methodology in mobile text entry research in particular (Hsiao, 1998; Lin and Hwang, 1999; Isiklar and Buyukozkan, 2007; Chen et al., 2009; Delice and Gungor, 2009; Hsiao et al., 2010). Current approaches in performance evaluation of text entry methods published in literature typically involve the use of Fitts' law (Fitts, 1954), and in some cases an extended Fitts' law that incorporates Hick-Hyman law (Kim and Myung, 2013), to explore speed performance of a method. On the other hand, accuracy performance evaluations rely on the minimum string distance (MSD) method (Koivisto and Urbaczewski, 2005; Soukoreff and MacKenzie, 2001) and the keystroke classification method (KSM) (Koivisto and Urbaczewski, 2005). When speed and accuracy are incorporated with preference measures such as popularity and familiarity of users, little is known on how to integrate objective and subjective results. For instance, the evaluation of Hsiao et al. (2014) using both objective and subjective measures offers separate analysis on these two measures and lacks an aggregated measure that best describes the overall evaluation. Furthermore, exploring the interrelationships of these criteria present in real-life scenario, to our knowledge, has not been accomplished in current literature.This paper aims to present a platform for evaluation that captures objective and subjective criteria in a robust and reliable process. This study attempts to develop a decision framework which is sufficiently general that could be applied to other evaluations with similar settings. This preference evaluation is significant to fill in our understanding on the role of subjective measurements on the selection of text entry methods. Consequently, gaining insights on these measurements is fundamental to both researchers and practitioners. The contribution of this study is on evaluating text entry methods in the presence of subjective measures in a multi-criteria decision context.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
