@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Iterative user centered design for development of a patient-centered fall prevention toolkit

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A patient-centered fall prevention paper toolkit was redesigned with decision support.Based on the first intervention to demonstrate a significant reduction in patient falls in an RCT.Nurses, patients, and family members were included in the iterative design cycle.Redesigned paper Fall T.I.P.S toolkit shown to be easier to use and preferred by nursing staff.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Evidence-based fall prevention,Patient-centered design,Patient safety,RE-AIM,Usability,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Due to the large number of falls that occur in hospital settings, inpatient fall prevention is a topic of great interest to patients and health care providers. The use of electronic decision support that tailors fall prevention strategy to patient-specific risk factors, known as Fall T.I.P.S (Tailoring Interventions for Patient Safety), has proven to be an effective approach for decreasing hospital falls. A paper version of the Fall T.I.P.S toolkit was developed primarily for hospitals that do not have the resources to implement the electronic solution; however, more work is needed to optimize the effectiveness of the paper version of this tool. We examined the use of human factors techniques in the redesign of the existing paper fall prevention tool with the goal of increasing ease of use and decreasing inpatient falls. The inclusion of patients and clinical staff in the redesign of the existing tool was done to increase adoption of the tool and fall prevention best practices. The redesigned paper Fall T.I.P.S toolkit showcased a built in clinical decision support system and increased ease of use over the existing version.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Falls are a serious public health problem both within and outside healthcare settings (Chen et al., 2009; Kannus et al., 2005). As a leading cause of injury and death, falls can lead to painful and costly injuries such as fractures, lacerations, or internal bleeding (Sondik, 2009; Ganz et al., 2013). Hospitalization can increase the risk for falls and fall related injuries (Evans et al., 2001) due to the unfamiliar environment, illnesses, or treatments. While falls have long been recognized as an important patient safety issue, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) added an additional incentive to prevent fall injuries when they announced in 2009 that treatment for injuries from falls occurring during hospitalization would no longer be reimbursable (Ganz et al., 2013). Approximately 700,000 to 1,000,000 inpatient falls occur annually in the U.S, and the associated healthcare utilization costs make falls an important patient safety issue nationwide (Ganz et al., 2013). Fall risk assessment is currently required by The Joint Commission, with fall prevention interventions targeting a multitude of patient problems or root causes including toileting, mobility, and impaired cognition (The Joint Commission, 2015). Prior research suggests that about 92% of hospital-based falls are “preventable” (Morse, 2008). The Fall T.I.P.S (Tailoring Interventions for Patient Safety) toolkit was developed and tested to address barriers to fall prevention in hospital settings. Fall T.I.P.S used health IT to link routine nursing fall risk assessment with evidence-based interventions. The Fall T.I.P.S toolkit integrated electronic fall prevention decision support into the clinical workflow by generating tailored fall prevention plans, patient education handouts, and bed posters with intervention icons based on patient-specific fall risk factors (Dykes et al., 1912–1918). Because the evidence-based fall risk interventions were automatically selected by Fall T.I.P.S software as the nurse completed the fall risk assessment, the chance of human error in the selection of fall interventions was minimized. Fall rates were 22% lower in the Fall T.I.P.S intervention units than in the control units. The Fall T.I.P.S intervention was particularly effective with patients 65 and older; the patients at greatest risk for falls (Dykes et al., 1912–1918). The Fall T.I.P.S toolkit was the first intervention to demonstrate a significant reduction in patient falls in acute care hospitals (Dykes et al., 1912–1918). While this study demonstrated a significant reduction in falls, further work is needed to integrate fall prevention decision support into settings without access to sophisticated electronic systems.Recently an extension project, known as Developing a Patient-centered Fall Prevention Toolkit, was funded by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ). The goal of the project is to develop a suite of tools to support patient engagement in fall prevention practices in hospitals. One aspect of the project aims to revise a paper version of the Fall T.I.P.S toolkit. Since the original Fall T.I.P.S solution required electronic decision support and complicated informatics expertise, a redesigned paper Fall T.I.P.S toolkit with decision support will allow for broader adoption among hospitals that cannot implement the electronic solution. In addition, with the Joint Commission citing three of the most common contributing factors pertaining to patient falls - inadequate assessment, communication failures, and inadequate staff orientation – the redesigned paper Fall T.I.P.S toolkit must address these factors and not increase workload (The Joint Commission, 2015).The paper version of the Fall T.I.P.S toolkit was revised using Microsoft's conventional user-centered design cycle. User-centered design (UCD) can be defined as “design processes in which end-users influence how a design takes shape.” (Abras et al., 2004) With the development of any application or tool, the design process should be user-centered. As seen in Fig. 1, the user-centered design cycle consists of four main components: study, design, build, and evaluate (Harper, 2008). The extent to which end users are involved can vary based on the scenario; however, it is critical that end-users are involved to at least some extent. In addition, universal principles of design including symmetrical alignment, use of distinctly separate colors, and prototyping were applied throughout the study (Lidwell et al., 2010).For this study, paper versions of the Fall T.I.P.S toolkit intervention were developed and refined at Brigham and Women's Hospital (BWH) in Boston, MA and Montefiore Medical Center (MMC) in Bronx, NY. Prior to arriving at the final version of the paper Fall T.I.P.S toolkit, multiple iterations were required, keeping universal principles of design in mind. The purpose of this manuscript is to describe the production of the final version of the paper Fall T.I.P.S toolkit through the use of the user-centered design cycle.The institutional review boards at BWH and MMC reviewed the study protocol and due to minimal risk for patients and staff, it was deemed exempt status. The first step in our user-centered design cycle was the observation of nursing staff at both BWH and MMC. The purpose of these workflow observations was to study the current state related to how nurses do fall risk assessment, how a fall prevention plan was established, and if the patient or family members were involved in the process. At baseline there was a lot of variation between the fall prevention practices at BWH and MMC. BWH used an existing paper version of the Fall T.I.P.S toolkit that was implemented after the original Fall T.I.P.S study, whereas MMC lacked an established tailored fall prevention tool. Workflow observations were conducted by members of the research team with designated nursing staff at each hospital. The research team took note of any fall-related workflow, while also probing nursing staff with questions related to fall risk assessment and tailored fall prevention plans.Prior to any physical redesign, initial user requirements were identified. Specifically, the elements that the users would like to see in the application or tool were gathered. In this study, our end users were nursing staff and patients from all adult oncology units at BWH. Ideally nursing staff complete the entire fall risk assessment and prevention plan with the patient; however, each end user should be able to understand the completed risk assessment and plan individually. Patient feedback at times was difficult to receive due to their acute illness or treatment schedule. Nursing requirements were gathered during informal interviews of staff on the patient care units, as well as at three nursing practice committee meetings. Interviews with nursing staff were conducted with varying group sizes, ranging from 1 to 20 nurses; whereas interviews with patients were always held with a single patient. In order to gain an appropriate amount of feedback from all nursing staff interviewed, the existing paper version of the Fall T.I.P.S toolkit was demonstrated (Fig. 2) to solicit feedback during the interview. Complete informal interview guides for gathering user requirements from both nurses and patients are included in Appendix A. Nursing and patient interviews were voluntary and kept to less than 10 min in length. All participants provided informal verbal consent to participate.In addition to gathering user requirements regarding the physical design of the prototype, user feedback was also gathered regarding the icons used to represent the risk factors and fall prevention interventions. The icons used in the original paper Fall T.I.P.S toolkit were developed by a commercial illustrator and were tested and validated by nurses and nursing assistants in four Partners HealthCare (PHS) hospitals using content validity index (CVI) testing as part of a prior study (Lidwell et al., 2010). In this study we performed CVI testing to validate the icons with patients and families to ensure that they were understandable by this important group of end users. This approach incorporated the use of icon validity and ranking forms, with each icon being ranked on a 4 point Likert scale (1 = strongly disagree, 4 = strongly agree that the icon represents the concept). Multiple iterations of the icons were conducted until each icon received a mean CVI score of at least 3.0 by patients and families. For icons that received a score equal to or less than 3.0, patients and families were asked to provide feedback on how to improve the icon. This feedback was gathered, discussed by team members, and then relayed to the illustrator to iteratively refine the icons. CVI testing was then completed on the revised icons with nurses. Patient rankings were given a greater emphasis than nursing rankings due to the patients’ lower health literacy levels. Additional details about the icon validation methods have been described previously (Hurley et al., 2009).Prior to beginning another round of nursing staff and patient interviews at BWH, multiple versions of the paper Fall T.I.P.S toolkit were discussed among the research team. After coming to a consensus on a specific prototype, members of the team then conducted interviews with patients, families, and nurses to gain feedback on ways to improve. If a consensus was not reached on one specific prototype among the team, multiple prototypes would be referenced in the interviews. Fig. 3showcases four main versions of the prototype, each of which was developed based on patient and nursing feedback. Members of the research team gathered all feedback in order to discuss the potential changes, giving higher priority to recurring improvement ideas. These prototype comparison interviews were typically conducted in conjunction with icon CVI testing, as the new prototypes would feature the updated icons. This paper Fall T.I.P.S toolkit will serve as a care team communication tool and a patient education tool. Therefore, patient and family feedback was considered highly valuable. Patient and family feedback was important in evaluating if the toolkit could be seen from the bedside, as well as how effective the color mapping of risks and interventions was for helping end users understand which interventions would mitigate each individual risk factor. Additional patient and family feedback is included in Fig. 3. Root causes of inpatient falls include that patients do not believe they are at risk for falls and they do not know their fall prevention plan. To be most effective, the toolkit had to be easily understood by all team members, including patients and their family members.The final stage of the user-centered design cycle includes evaluation of what has been built. This evaluation should be completed by the targeted end users and in as realistic of an environment as possible (Abras et al., 2004). Ideally each prototype developed should incorporate some level of usability testing. For the purpose of this study, structured usability testing occurred only on the final paper Fall T.I.P.S toolkit at BWH due to limited availability of patients and nurses. While no structured usability testing occurred on the final paper Fall T.I.P.S toolkit at MMC, informal nursing and patient feedback was still gathered. The structured format at BWH took place in an oncology nursing practice committee meeting, a group of approximately 15 nurses were asked to compare the existing paper Fall T.I.P.S toolkit to the newly redesigned final paper Fall T.I.P.S toolkit. The nurses were each presented with a scenario involving a patient who exhibited all fall risk factors. After reading the scenario, each nurse first completed the fall risk assessment and assigned fall interventions using the existing paper Fall T.I.P.S toolkit. They were then asked to do the same using the redesigned paper Fall T.I.P.S toolkit. In addition, the nurses were asked to rate each paper version using a modified version of the System Usability Scale (Brooke et al., 1996). The survey consisted of eleven questions related to the ease of use and satisfaction with the tools, as well as a brief demographics section.For the purpose of this project, the RE-AIM framework (Reach, Effectiveness, Adoption, Implementation, and Maintenance) (Glasgow, Mckay, Piette, Reynolds) was used to help facilitate the translation and use of this research into clinical practice. While the framework has a variety of potential uses, it has been used to support evaluation of healthcare informatics projects (Glasgow). Although this study does not deal directly with the electronic version of the Fall T.I.P.S toolkit, we determined this framework to still be acceptable. Table 1illustrates the various measures examined for each component of the framework. For this publication, measures relating to implementation and maintenance will be examined after the redesigned paper Fall T.I.P.S toolkit is implemented on the clinical units.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
