@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Towards a new paradigm: Activity level balanced sustainability reporting

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Novel analytical framework.Real-life based case studies.Critical discussion of current practice.Approaches for advancing sustainability reporting.Roles for ergonomics professionals to combat global warming by compelling attention to human factors.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Triple bottom line,Global reporting initiative,Sustainability reporting,Human factors,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Technoeconomic paradigms based economic growth theories suggest that waves of technological innovations drove the economic growth of advanced economies. Widespread economic degradation and pollution is an unintended consequence of such growth. Tackling environmental and social issues at firm levels would help us to overcome such issues at macro-levels. Consequently, the Triple Bottom Line (TBL) reporting approach promotes firm level economic, environmental and social performances. Incorporating Zink's (2014) 3-pillar presentation model, this paper indicates that economic, social and environmental performances tend to be reported at firm level. All three pillars are not covered evenly at the activity levels. Thus, a loophole is identified whereby excellent environmental performance at activity levels could potentially leave poor social performance undisclosed. A refinement of the TBL paradigm, whereby all three pillars are covered at the activity level, is suggested, to enhance sustainability reporting.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
According to technoeconomic paradigms (TEPs) based economic growth theories, waves of technological innovations that drove economic growth of advanced economies in recent centuries (Daniels, 2005; Göransson and Söderberg, 2005) inadvertently unleashed large scale pollution and environmental destruction. Left unaddressed, these externalities could render planet earth inhospitable to human life. Sustainable development, defined as ‘development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs’ (United Nations, 1987), has emerged as a key to containing this widespread macro-level environmental damage.These environmental issues could be addressed at micro-levels, where firms could degrade the environment in a pursuit of profits, neglecting various unrecorded negative externalities. Economic profits could be boosted by cutting back on investments on safety, health and general well-being of workers and the general community. Customarily, commercial firms have considered investors, creditors and other contributors of capital as their most important stakeholders. The accounting discipline has traditionally focused on producing formal financial statements that serve the needs of these providers of capital, reporting little, if any, information on externalities that impact the society at large (Hines, 1988; Baker and Bettner, 1997). Concerns regarding the limitations of this capitalist orientation led to calls for new holistic reporting frameworks that cover various externalities, including the firms’ impact on the environment and social factors.Elkington's (1997) Triple Bottom Line (TBL) reporting conceptualises the disclosure of firms' performances in economic, environmental and social arenas. The Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) proposes an extensive number of metrics that can be used to report the environmental and social performance of various organisations (www.globalreporting.org/Pages/default.aspx, accessed 14th March 2015). Ideally, such disclosures would expose firms' shortcomings in their environmental and social performances. These exposures would, in turn, compel firms to pay attention to their shortcomings. Ultimately, such moves would lead to improvements in the firms' economic and environmental performance. Currently, some firms release sustainability reports based on the GRI ideology.Contemporary best practice in sustainability reporting is characterised by holistic firm-level reporting. However, such holistic coverage does not extend to the activity level. Firms could conceivably select a particular set of activities to report excellent environmental performance (e.g. firm wide recycling programmes) and a different set of activities to record superb social performance (e.g. excellent retirement benefits). Such reporting could theoretically belie poor human rights records. For instance, recycling of industrial waste involves the handling of hazardous waste and work postures that could lead to health issues. As such, the promotion of recycling activities should be associated with firm-level investments in recycling-linked safety training (including ergonomically safe work practices), staff with relevant certifications for establishing and enforcing staff safety protocols and recycling-specific protective gear. Disclosures regarding the success of recycling initiatives without related information on relevant staff health and safety issues limit the usefulness of such disclosures. In the worst case, such firm-level reporting could be meaningless, since there is no real optimisation in achieving sustainability in the human factor dimensions. This paper suggests that this limitation can be overcome by compelling holistic reporting of economic, environmental and social performance at the activity levels. A new paradigm that compels holistic reporting at the activity level would be able to enhance the effectiveness of sustainability reporting in addressing micro-level environmental and social issues.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Current sustainability reporting initiatives contain a loophole that allows firms record excellent environmental performance without revealing the related potential negative impacts on human factors and costs incurred, if any, to mitigate such impacts. Zink's (2014) 3-pillar graphical presentation framework, applied at the activity levels, would help to address this loophole. Ergonomics professionals could contribute economic sub-sector specific metrics on worker and community health and safety, which can be incorporated into holistic activity level sustainability reporting. As such, ergonomics could lift current sustainability reporting practices to the next level by promoting a balanced activity based sustainability reporting paradigm.