@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Effect of gait on formation of thermal environment inside footwear

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The relation between the gait conditions and foot temperature distributions inside footwear was studied.The metabolic heat generation was found to have a basic impact on the temperature profile.High-temperature-elevation regions coincided with high-contact-load regions.The relation between the temperature elevation and contact load was clarified.The key aspects of a thermally comfortable design concept and applications were described.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Skin temperature,Foot contact,Heat transfer,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this study, the relationship between the gait condition and foot temperature distributions inside footwear was investigated using subject experiments. Mechanical, physical, and physiological variables such as the foot contact force, landing speed, and metabolic heat generation were also measured. Gait motion measurements showed that a large contact force was concentrated in the small area of the heel at the initial contact and later at the forefoot. A faster gait produced a larger contact force, higher landing velocity, higher skin temperature, and larger metabolism during gait. The temperature at the bottom of the foot increased, and the temperature on the upper side decreased. The metabolic heat generation had a basic impact on the temperature profile, and skin temperatures tended to increase gradually. In addition, high-temperature-elevation regions such as the big toe and heel coincided with regions with high-contact loads, which suggested a relationship between the temperature elevation and contact load.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
People normally wear shoes in daily life, and research on footwear is of interest to many people. The foot has an important thermal radiator function for human thermoregulation (Day, 1969). Therefore, when feet are contained within footwear for long periods, the temperature and humidity inside the footwear rise. In one study, the midsole temperature became greater than 50 °C while running during daytime in summer (Kinoshita and Bates, 1996). This can cause discomfort, especially during summer or in hot and humid regions. Skin temperature contributes to the thermal comfort of the entire body and the autonomic thermoregulatory response (Frank et al., 1999). A significant weighting value of 0.07 is used for the foot temperature in a common expression of whole body skin temperature (Hardy and DuBois, 1938), and a whole-body thermal sensation evaluation can be performed using the skin temperature (Takada et al., 2013). The thermal environment such as the temperature inside footwear becomes important in this respect. Moreover, the temperature and humidity elevations inside footwear are recognized not only as a source of discomfort but also as a severe problem that can cause injury or bacterial infection in some cases.In the context of thermal comfort, many measurements and assessments addressing footwear have been carried out. The foot-skin temperature, air temperature inside footwear, and humidity have commonly been measured, and elevations in these values have been recognized (Kawabata and Tokura, 1993). An in-shoe portable device for plantar pressure, temperature, and humidity measurement was invented (Maluf et al., 2001), and shoe comfort assessments and product evaluations have frequently been conducted (Schols et al., 2004). However, no studies have considered the basics of the heat transfer and temperature distribution inside footwear. Therefore, the authors were interested in the formation of the thermal environment inside footwear.The heat transfer inside footwear is mainly divided into two mechanisms: (1) expelled heat generated inside the body and (2) heat transfer to/from the footwear surface or through the surface. Thus, a hot feeling may be the result of inner heat generation due to metabolism. In general, heat transfers from a higher to lower temperature region. Therefore, another possibility when feeling uncomfortably warm or hot is that the person's surroundings have a higher temperature than their skin. When considering the conservation of energy, one mechanism that could potentially cause heating inside footwear is the transformation of the mechanical energy of the gait motion into thermal energy. In fact, the maximum contact force at landing was reported to be more than the body weight during running at 3.3 m/s (Chuckpaiwong et al., 2008). This contact force seems to have enough potential energy to heat the inside of footwear. Normally, the walking speed strongly affects the peak plantar pressure (Pataky et al., 2008), and this may cause the formation of a different thermal environment in footwear.The purpose of this study was to identify the influence of the heat generation and transfer changes associated with the gait speed on the formation of the thermal environment inside footwear. A second purpose of the study was to provide a database for walking or even running to be used for thermal comfort optimisation in footwear design.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In order to identify the factors influencing the formation of the thermal environment inside footwear, experiments with subjects were conducted at four different gait speeds to evaluate the skin temperature changes and mechanical gait parameters.Basically, metabolic heat generation had an impact on the temperature profile. Therefore, the skin temperatures tended to gradually increase. In addition, high temperature elevation regions such as the big toe and heel coincided with the regions with high contact loads. Faster walking resulted in a larger contact force, higher landing velocity, higher skin temperature elevation, and larger metabolism during gait. Considering the time-dependent temperature changes, the results suggested a relationship between the temperature elevations on the big toe and heel and the contact force. The foot temperatures in other regions were mainly affected by the thermal insulation, which retained the inner heat inside the footwear. The upper-side temperature dropped as a result of the convective heat loss and ventilation due to foot movement. Sweat evaporation had a beneficial effect on the instep temperature, but a limited effect on the entire thermal environment formation. Future experiments could investigate factors such as socks and individual differences to design comfortable footwear.