@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A model for developing job rotation schedules that eliminate sequential high workloads and minimize between-worker variability in cumulative daily workloads: Application to automotive assembly lines

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Job rotation schedule was proposed to reduce cumulative workload from the successive use of the same body region.Workloads on automotive assembly lines were assessed with REBA.Workstations on assembly line were classified into high and low workload workstations with the median score of body parts.Mathematical job rotation model was developed and solved with CPLEX.Job rotation schedule was designed to prevent workers from working at high workload stations sequentially.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Job rotation,Musculoskeletal disorder,Cumulative workload,REBA,Assembly line,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The aim of study is to suggest a job rotation schedule by developing a mathematical model in order to reduce cumulative workload from the successive use of the same body region. Workload assessment using rapid entire body assessment (REBA) was performed for the model in three automotive assembly lines of chassis, trim, and finishing to identify which body part exposed to relatively high workloads at workstations. The workloads were incorporated to the model to develop a job rotation schedule. The proposed schedules prevent the exposure to high workloads successively on the same body region and minimized between-worker variance in cumulative daily workload. Whereas some of workers were successively assigned to high workload workstation under no job rotation and serial job rotation. This model would help to reduce the potential for work-related musculoskeletal disorders (WMSDs) without additional cost for engineering work, although it may need more computational time and relative complex job rotation sequences.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Work-related musculoskeletal disorders (WMSDs) create significant financial costs for medical treatment and lead to losses in productivity and higher workforce turnover (Goggins et al., 2008; Leigh, 2011). WMSDs have many causes, including severe force, non-neutral posture, repetition, and vibration. Thus, ergonomics researchers and practitioners have focused on identifying a variety of preventive intervention measures for WMSDs (Karwowski and Marras, 2003). NIOSH (1997) recommended an ergonomics program to identify and prevent WMSDs in the workplace. This ergonomics program included looking for signs of WMSD problems, developing personal equipment and engineering and administrative controls, and health care management.Job rotation is an administrative control for preventing WMSDs and has many positive effects in the workplace, including training opportunities for a multi-skilled labor force and eliminating the boredom and monotony of simple repetitive tasks. To maximize job rotation efficiency, a proper scheme should be developed based on the workload levels and characteristics of each task. To assess the workload level, Jonsson (1988) measured workers' physical workload using electromyography to establish a job rotation scheme and evaluated the effect of job rotation. Triggs and King (2000) recommended the use of quantitative techniques to develop a job rotation schedule, such as the NIOSH lifting equation (NLE), job strain index (JSI), and rapid upper limb assessment (RULA). Horton et al. (2012) investigated the effects of task rotation, rotation frequency and order, and gender and showed that muscle fatigue was reduced when rotation between tasks involving different levels of exertion. Schneider et al. (2005) recommended that the same body region should not be used after job rotation so that workers could perform a reasonable workload by rotating through low- and high-demand jobs. Leider et al. (2014) systematically investigated previous studies and suggested that task characteristics and involved body parts were should be considered in order to reduce the physical workload and musculoskeletal complaints during job rotation.Studies on job rotation could be divided into field studies and line-balancing studies. Field studies focused on the effectiveness of job rotation as an intervention strategy for WMSDs in various workplaces. Jorgensen et al. (2005) performed a survey on the prevalence of job rotation in the Midwestern United States and found that 42.7% of companies utilized job rotation to reduce the incidence/cost of work-related injuries and risk exposure. Aptel et al. (2008) found that the job rotation system had positive effects on reducing task monotony but did not eliminate complaints of WMSDs. The workers considered the handling tasks as a higher risk factor for WMSDs, though within the safe limits recommended in the ergonomics literature, while ergonomic experts consider extreme or awkward posture as a higher risk factor. In addition, the worker's rating of perceived exertion could discriminate between workload levels after switching tasks during job rotation (Sato and Coury, 2009).Many studies suggested the job rotation schemes on automotive assembly lines that were generally composed of conveyor production system. Freiboth et al. (1997) found that job rotation improved workers' process knowledge, enabling a continuous improvement process. They recommended that the number of jobs and the cycle time should be determined by the task characteristics and that the jobs in the rotation should have similar work content. Frazer et al. (2003) developed a job rotation scheme to reduce high peak force based on the biomechanical model described in Norman et al. (1998), and suggested that the cumulative force from repetition or prolonged low-force work should be considered together to effectively reduce risk factors. Möller et al. (2004) quantified the exposure similarity of risk factors within and between individuals performing electronics assembly work and noted that the different exposure profile could provide a positive effect on decreasing the prevalence of musculoskeletal disorders. Weichel et al. (2010) applied job rotation to a sample workgroup for two months and found that the workers rotated between fewer workstations than scheduled because they preferred certain workstations and lacked understanding of job rotation. Rodrigo and Okimorto (2012) calculated workers' fatigue by measuring lactic acid levels, and suggested a job rotation scheme with 1 and 2 h intervals to prevent muscle fatigue.The application cases of job rotation scheme could be found in various industrial areas as well as automotive industry. Job rotation for refuse collectors led to different postures and activities, reducing recovery time. However, job rotation could not decrease the physical workload level and had no effect on the peak mechanical load (Kuijer et al., 1999, 2005). Job rotation for female cashiers positively affected muscle activity in the neck and shoulders, but psychophysiological measures and pain were only partly affected (Rissén et al., 2002). Gallis (2006) recommended job rotation for forest workers in order to reduce the strain on muscular load because different muscle groups would be employed in different tasks.On line-balancing problems, Carnahan et al. (2001) incorporated the physical demand into the assembly line-balancing problem (ALBP) with integer programming and a genetic algorithm, and showed the potential to design assembly lines that incorporated both production concerns and ergonomic criteria. Lodree et al. (2009) established a scheduling framework that considered human characteristics, and identified human behavioral characteristics that were not discussed in the traditional scheduling models. Moreover, it would be useful to integrate various human criteria into traditional line-balancing problems and scheduling models, such as human errors, cumulative workload, and resting time among others.Optimization techniques in the operations research area were employed to develop job rotation schemes considering human criteria. Assembly line design using the mixed integer programming (MIP) model considering productivity and upper extremity workload could effectively reduce the ergonomic hazard exposure while maintaining line efficiency (Xu et al., 2012). Several studies used subjective assessments of workload to incorporate human criteria into the conventional ALBP (Chang and Chen, 2006; Choi, 2009; Mutlu and Özgörmüs, 2012).Heuristic approaches were employed in order to design the job rotation scheme because the total number of potential job rotation schemes was large, and all possible solutions were hard to evaluate for long computation times. To reduce the computation times and to consider human criteria concurrently, various heuristic approaches were employed such as simulated annealing algorithm (SA), ant colony optimization (ACO), genetic algorithm (GA), and fuzzy algorithm. Seçkiner and Kurt (2007, 2008) used SA and ACO to minimize each worker's workload and the workload deviation between workers. Diego-Mas et al. (2009) used GA in generating job rotation schedules while maintaining the maximum job diversification during the rotation. Asensio-Cuesta et al. (2012) used GA for job rotation schedules using the occupational repetitive action tool (OCRA) to expose workers to an acceptable level of risk. Otto and Scholl (2011) measured the workload with the NLE, OCRA, JSI, and European assembly worksheet (EAWS) and developed a line-balancing model with ergonomic criteria using SA. A model with ergonomic criteria could be a solution for leveling workload among workstations without additional financial and engineering costs. Cheshmehgaz et al. (2012) used the Ovako working posture analysis system (OWAS) to measure workload to develop a job rotation scheme using a fuzzy-genetic algorithm to minimize the maximum cumulative risk.Attempts to minimize the risk of WMSDs could be found in both areas of ergonomics and operation research, but the approach methods of each area were different. Ergonomists showed many epidemiological cases and applications of job rotation in various industries (Freiboth et al., 1997, Frazer et al., 2003; Gallis, 2006; Aptel et al., 2008; Jorgensen et al., 2005; Rodrigo and Okimorto, 2012). Operations research studies developed job rotation models using subjective methods or observational tools for workload assessment (Asensio-Cuesta et al., 2012; Diego-Mas et al., 2009; Otto and Scholl, 2011). Previous studies demonstrated job rotation's positive effects on WMSD risk prevention (Jonsson, 1988; Carnahan et al., 2001; Kuijer et al., 2005; Michalos et al., 2010; Xu et al., 2012). However, the cumulative workload from successive use of the same body region in the job rotation was not considered and repetitive movements over prolonged work periods could be a critical risk factor for WMSDs.Many observational techniques were developed to measure the physical workload under various workplace conditions. OWAS was developed based on ratings of working postures taken in several divisions of one steel factory (Karhu et al., 1977). RULA was proposed to investigate the workplaces where work-related upper-limb disorders were reported (McAtamney and Corlett, 1993). Rapid entire body assessment (REBA) was developed to be sensitive to the type of unpredictable working postures found in health care and other service industries (Hignett and McAtamney, 2000). The REBA is similar to RULA, but is the REBA classified the leg posture more detail than RULA. Therefore, REBA can be used effectively in many industrial sectors with various working posture such as engine oil company workers (Motamedzade et al., 2011), forging industry workers (Singh et al., 2013), and order fulfillment packer (Lasota, 2014).The aim of this study is to develop a job rotation model considering the physical workload resulting from whole body posture. The REBA is used to measure the workload of each workstation at automotive assembly lines. REBA is an observational tool for assessing the entire body in a variety of tasks, and provides scores for each body segment including force, coupling, and activity for worker. The job rotation model aims to reduce the cumulative workload on the same body region and to minimize the daily workload variation among workers.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This study presented a job rotation scheduling process that could reduce cumulative workloads from the successive use of the same body region. First, the mathematical model was developed to compute the optimal job rotation schedule. Second, the workloads of automotive assembly lines were assessed with REBA, and the impact of each workstation on parts of the body were classified into high and low workload groups. Finally, the assembly line workloads were incorporated to the job rotation model to prevent WMSDs. A job rotation schedule was successfully designed to prevent workers from working at high workload stations sequentially, without additional costs for engineering work.The proposed job rotation model can be applied to job rotation scheduling in various industrial sectors. It will be especially useful for practitioners with job rotation scheduling challenges from assembly lines with similar tasks. Moreover, a well-designed job rotation schedule may help to improve the effectiveness of administrative controls in the ergonomics program.