@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Route complexity and simulated physical ageing negatively influence wayfinding

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Route complexity negatively influences wayfinding performance in terms of route efficiency and walking speed.Simulated elderly participants have higher heart rates and respiratory rates during a wayfinding task.Simulated physical ageing and route complexity do not interact on wayfinding performance and physiological outcomes.Physical ageing was simulated in an age-simulation field experiment by using gerontologic suits.A portable heart rate monitor was used to assess physiological outcomes like heart rate and respiratory rate.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Hospital environment,Route complexity,Physical ageing,Simulation,Wayfinding,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The aim of this age-simulation field experiment was to assess the influence of route complexity and physical ageing on wayfinding. Seventy-five people (aged 18–28) performed a total of 108 wayfinding tasks (i.e., 42 participants performed two wayfinding tasks and 33 performed one wayfinding task), of which 59 tasks were performed wearing gerontologic ageing suits. Outcome variables were wayfinding performance (i.e., efficiency and walking speed) and physiological outcomes (i.e., heart and respiratory rates). Analysis of covariance showed that persons on more complex routes (i.e., more floor and building changes) walked less efficiently than persons on less complex routes. In addition, simulated elderly participants perform worse in wayfinding than young participants in terms of speed (p < 0.001). Moreover, a linear mixed model showed that simulated elderly persons had higher heart rates and respiratory rates compared to young people during a wayfinding task, suggesting that simulated elderly consumed more energy during this task.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Wayfinding – that is, “determining and following a path or route between an origin and a destination” (Golledge, 1999, p. 6) – in complex building settings can be a difficult and stressful task, particularly in anxious and uncertain situations like a hospital visit. Route complexity is a growing problem in hospitals because hospitals are expanding in size due to the increasing demand for health care, more specialized care, and more diagnostic techniques. Consequently, hospital environments comprise more floor levels and multiple buildings, which make routes towards destinations more complex. A wayfinding technique, such as signage, is used in buildings to compensate for complex settings (O'Neill, 1991). Furthermore, wayfinding strategies differ when persons find their way in a multi-level building or a multi-level multi-building setting which effects wayfinding performance in terms of wayfinding time and efficiency (Hölsher et al., 2006; Hölsher et al., 2009). Floor strategies (firstly moving to the correct floor) have found to be more effective in multi-level settings while in multi-level multi-building settings people find their way more efficient when they firstly move to the correct building during a route. In addition, the majority of wayfinders choose to turn left when they arrive at a T-intersection (Tang et al., 2009). Strategies that people use to find their way efficiently depends mostly on route complexity, that is depending on whether building or floor changes were required during a route (Hölsher et al., 2009).Wayfinding in complex building settings might be particularly difficult and challenging for elderly people. The memory of elderly is not as good as that of younger people (Belsky, 2013) and their physical capacity is reduced. Therefore, especially elderly people may experience problems with dual-task-performance, which requires cognitive and sensorimotor skills (Li et al., 2001). Wayfinding can be seen as a divided-attention-task: people need to memorize the address of their destination while they are actually moving through the environment in order to reach the destination. A navigational study showed that elderly people perform worse than young people in cognitive navigational skills like route learning, route drawing, and especially in photo and video location (i.e., locate a photo or video on a map after a tour through a hospital) (Cushman et al., 2008). Knowledge about the impact of physical impairments on wayfinding, however, is lacking. Several studies have shown that few elderly people take the shortest route during virtual wayfinding tasks (Harris and Wolbers, 2014) and real-world wayfinding tasks (Borst et al., 2009), which suggests that most elderly people find their way less efficiently than young people do, but it remains unclear whether this is due to physical or cognitive impairments. We believe this justifies the stance of the study in understanding exclusively potential physical effects through simulated ageing.Elderly people experience several physical challenges, for example, visual impairments, hearing loss, and limitations in motor skills, and therefore, elderly people fear losing their independence and experience even basic movements, such as walking, as challenging (Davis, 2012). Consequently, walking speed decreases 7% per decade of age (Bendall et al., 1989). However, the energy expenditure of elderly people is not significantly different during walking compared to young people, because elderly people walk slower and their stride length is shorter (Abadi et al., 2010). It is known that high color contrasts can help and complex pictograms in signage can hinder wayfinding in participants wearing glasses that simulate visual impairments (Rousek and Hallbeck, 2011) and in blind and partially sighted people (Chandler and Worsfold, 2013). Elderly people spent more time following signs due to poor visual searching ability, decreased motor skills and longer information processing times (Liu and Ho, 2012; Hashim et al., 2014). Therefore, wayfinding involves both sensory and motor skills such as following signs, searching for the destination, and walking to reach the destination. If the wayfinding process cannot be completed successfully, persons may become distressed and disoriented in the building and, consequently, they may get lost. Therefore, support from the environment is important for elderly persons to be able to function at their best (Belsky, 2013). Consequently, involving patients can be considered of major importance in studying and designing a built environment (Hignett and Lu, 2009).The aim of this study is to assess the influence of route complexity and physical ageing on wayfinding (i.e., efficiency and walking speed) in a hospital setting. It is unknown whether the effect of route complexity (i.e., number of building and floor changes) on wayfinding differs for elderly people with ageing-related physical impairments in both sensory and motor skills. To assess exclusively physical ageing, participants for this study were young people wearing gerontologic suits that simulate the physical limitations of elderly people.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
