@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Integrating user centered design, universal design and goal, operation, method and selection rules to improve the usability of DAISY player for persons with visual impairments

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This study integrated and synergized the UCD process, UD rules, and GOMS method as a new product development process.Redesigned DAISY player has better usability according to subjective and objective performance of participants.The proposed methodology can design user friendly products for both visual impaired and normal individuals.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
User centered design,Universal design,GOMS,DAISY player,Visually impaired,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The Digital Accessible Information SYstem (DAISY) player is an assistive reading tool developed for use by persons with visual impairments. Certain problems have persisted in the operating procedure and interface of DAISY players, especially for their Chinese users. Therefore, the aim of this study was to redesign the DAISY player with increased usability features for use by native Chinese speakers. First, a User Centered Design (UCD) process was employed to analyze the development of the prototype. Next, operation procedures were reorganized according to GOMS (Goals, Operators, Methods, and Selection rules) methodology. Then the user interface was redesigned according to specific Universal Design (UD) principles. Following these revisions, an experiment involving four scenarios was conducted to compare the new prototype to other players, and it was tested by twelve visually impaired participants. Results indicate the prototype had the quickest operating times, the fewest number of operating errors, and the lowest mental workloads of all the compared players, significantly enhancing the prototype's usability. These findings have allowed us to generate suggestions for developing the next generation of DAISY players for people, especially for Chinese audience.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
While technology has accelerated the development of new products, only a small number of these are being designed for use by persons with visual impairments. In 1996, the DAISY (Digital Accessible Information SYstem) Consortium was formed by individuals and organizations throughout Europe, North America, and Asia with the aim of helping persons who have visual disabilities to read and publish, with a primary goal of converting analog data into Digital Talking Books (DTBs). One of the Consortium's objectives was to develop and apply DAISY tenets as a set of standards for DTBs; another was to help maintain DAISY libraries for use by persons with visual impairments. The Consortium is committed to developing equitable access to information for people who exhibit any sort of print interpretation disability (DAISY Consortium, 2014), regardless of their native language.According to a Department of Statistics report issued by the Ministry of the Interior, Taiwan (Statistical Yearbook of Republic of China Interior (2014)), there were 56,817 persons with visual impairments in Taiwan as of January 2014. The actual number of impairments may be higher, as the calculation discounted visually impaired persons with multiple disabilities. The report noted that approximately 1500 Taiwanese become permanently visually impaired every year and observed in particular that there is a significant difference among people with adventitious blindness, congenital blindness, and those with normal vision.In response to these conditions, the government has pledged to help the Taiwan Digital Talking Books Association (TDTB) build a DAISY e-book platform capable of converting 3000 standard print books to DAISY books in three years. To read these DAISY books and to use other DAISY resources, a portable mobile device known as the DAISY player is essential. The DAISY player is a portable device, facilely enabling visually impaired persons (and even those without visual impairments) to use it as a learning tool. However, the present challenge is that all existent DAISY players are programmed to use English language. In addition, the layout, dimension, size and weight of the existing players have been designed for the anthropometric dimensions of Caucasian users rather than for those of Chinese heritage. Based on interviews with visually impaired Taiwanese persons, these factors are significant drawbacks to the operating procedures and interfaces of the existing DAISY players. This study integrates and summarizes the limitations of the four existing DAISY players, as shown in Table 1.The goal of this study is to develop a DAISY player prototype designed to ameliorate the limitations identified above by incorporating the supportive element of Chinese pronunciation for visually impaired Taiwanese. In order to involve the customers, users, and users requirements into the design process, this study utilized and UCD process that integrate the UD principles and GOMS method to develop the DAISY player prototype. UCD develops a framework which expands scope from customers to users. UD provides seven principles to enhance the usability but causes reiterations in design process. GOMS can improve the efficiency of tasks on each product function. Integration of UCD, UD and GOMS could maximize the strengths of these three techniques while minimizing their weaknesses. In addition, the prototype was designed according to American National Standards Institute/National Information Standards Organization (ANSI/NISO) Z39.86-2005 (2012) specifications based on the digital talking books specifications and UD principles. Following its development, a usability test was conducted on the new prototype.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This study incorporated the use of established research tenets to remodel an existing reading tool for use by persons with visual impairments: specifically, to develop a DAISY player prototype for use among members of the Chinese population who are visually impaired.This study presented the superior performance of a redesigned DAISY player prototype that has the potential for development as the next generation DAISY player. According to experiment results, the prototype exhibited lower NASA-TLX scores (p = 0.002 < 0.05) and the best user performance among all the players. Data indicates users will expend a lower mental workload to operate the prototype. The actual difference between prototype and the 2nd rank DAISY player in NASA-TLX scores is 28%, in the operation time is 39%, and the operation error is approximately 50% less.Data indicates users will expend a lower mental workload to operate the prototype. Furthermore, this study successfully integrated the use of UD principles, GOMS analysis and UCD, suggesting this development process could be used to design and develop other user-friendly products for the visually impaired or disabled.Future research could take user experience into consideration to continue enhancing the functions of the DAISY player, especially with regard to its physical size, its programmable features and its network functions. Other new technologies such as GPS and RFIDs could also be incorporated into future research tangents, leading toward a seamless guidance system that could improve performance of the DAISY player and assist the visually impaired in their daily lives.