@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Can a glass cockpit display help (or hinder) performance of novices in simulated flight training?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Flight naïve participants performed more poorly with a simulated glass cockpit display than a traditional flight display.This was largely the case irrespective of whether they had previous experience with the glass cockpit display or not.Participants preferred the glass cockpit display and associated it with better performance.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cockpit displays,Flight performance,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The analog dials in traditional GA aircraft cockpits are being replaced by integrated electronic displays, commonly referred to as glass cockpits. Pilots may be trained on glass cockpit aircraft or encounter them after training on traditional displays. The effects of glass cockpit displays on initial performance and potential transfer effects between cockpit display configurations have yet to be adequately investigated. Flight-naïve participants were trained on either a simulated traditional display cockpit or a simulated glass display cockpit. Flight performance was measured in a test flight using either the same or different cockpit display. Loss of control events and accuracy in controlling altitude, airspeed and heading, workload, and situational awareness were assessed. Preferences for cockpit display configurations and opinions on ease of use were also measured. The results revealed consistently poorer performance on the test flight for participants using the glass cockpit compared to the traditional cockpit. In contrast the post-flight questionnaire data revealed a strong subjective preference for the glass cockpit over the traditional cockpit displays. There was only a weak effect of prior training. The specific glass cockpit display used in this study was subjectively appealing but yielded poorer flight performance in participants with no previous flight experience than a traditional display. Performance data can contradict opinion data. The design of glass cockpit displays may present some difficulties for pilots in the very early stages of training.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Glass cockpit avionics first started to appear in light aircraft towards the end of the twentieth century as non-certified systems installed in amateur-built aircraft (NTSB, 2010). They were then formally introduced into Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)-certified light aircraft by the Cirrus Design Corporation in 2003 (NTSB, 2010). The glass cockpit displays quickly became standard equipment for the Cirrus Design Corporation and eventually other manufacturers including Piper, Cessna and Mooney followed suit (NTSB, 2010). By 2005, even basic training aircraft such as the Cessna 172 and Piper Cherokee were shipped with glass cockpits as options (McDermott, 2005). The majority of customers opted for the glass cockpits over traditional dials, while customers purchasing the newest general aviation aircraft (e.g. Diamond DA40; Cirrus SR20) are no longer given the option (McDermott, 2005).The glass cockpit replaces the traditional electro-mechanical cockpit dials (altimeter, airspeed indicator, turn and bank indicator, vertical speed indicator, attitude indicator and heading indicator) with two large (6′–10″) LCD screens; the primary flight display (PFD) and the multifunction display (MFD). The PFD displays all of the information provided by the separate dials found in the traditional cockpit. Most notably, altitude and airspeed information are conveyed by moving vertical tapes instead of circular dials. Electronic displays were first developed for military aircraft starting with the F-18 (Liggett, 2010). The differences between the conventional ‘six pack’ of electro-mechanical instruments and the electronic display can be seen in Figs. 1 and 2. These changes represent a major alteration in general aviation aircraft design with important human factors implications (Smith, 2008).Whilst these new electronic displays have generally been greeted with enthusiasm by commercial and military pilots (Hopkins, 1992) concerns have been raised about the potential for attentional capture by large, visually compelling displays. Some eye-movement data obtained from pilots flying an Airbus A330 simulator showed that much (35%) of the pilot's attention was focused on the PFD compared with the navigation display (18%) and other areas (Anders, 2001). Most research on the ‘glass cockpit’ however has been concerned with the human factors of the associated automated systems (e.g., Sarter and Woods, 1995; Baxter et al., 2007) and advanced display technologies such as head-up displays (HUDs), helmet mounted displays (HMDs) and synthetic vision systems (Liggett, 2010; Schnell et al., 2004).A preliminary study (NTSB, 2010) found that between 2002 and 2008 light single-engine aircraft equipped with glass cockpit displays experienced higher fatal, but lower total, accident rates, than the same aircraft types fitted with traditional cockpit displays. Accidents involving aircraft equipped with traditional cockpit displays were more likely to be linked with shorter flights, instructional flights and two-pilot operations. In contrast, accidents involving glass cockpit equipped aircraft were more likely to be associated with longer flights, instrument flight plans, personal business flights and single pilot operations. Furthermore, pilots involved in accidents with glass cockpit equipped aircraft were found to have higher total flight experience and pilot certification than those involved in accidents with traditional cockpit equipped aircraft.Manufacturers claim that the new glass cockpits are designed to enhance situational awareness and make flying simpler and easier. Pilots tend to agree with these assertions as shown by survey studies (Mitchell et al., 2009). However, few empirical studies comparing pilot performance between glass and traditional cockpits have been published. McCracken (2011) surveyed flight training students who underwent a check flight in a glass cockpit aircraft a semester after a previous check flight in a conventional aircraft. Nearly half (43%) found the glass cockpit aircraft more difficult to fly than the conventional aircraft and over half the students obtained a lower check ride score in the glass cockpit aircraft than in their previous check ride. McCracken (2011) also cites an unnamed study that showed that “students training in glass cockpit aircraft with no prior experience were forced to repeat more lessons and had a greater number of setbacks …than those students who trained in analog cockpit aircraft” (p.6).Previous research suggests that general aviation pilots may have difficulty with the interpretation of glass cockpit displays leading to diminished situational awareness (Adams et al., 2001). A specific glass cockpit display that pilots find problematic is the vertical tape display used to show airspeed and altitude (Hiremath et al., 2009). Hiremath et al. (2009) examined pilots' unusual attitude recovery performance using either traditional or glass cockpits. The results showed that pilots using the glass cockpit took longer to recover from unusual attitudes than pilots using the traditional cockpit. Hiremath et al. (2009) proposed that in the traditional cockpit the position of the airspeed and altitude indicator needles can be picked out at a glance. In contrast, glass cockpit tape displays do not present the whole data range, so to get an idea of the airspeed or altitude, the pilot has to focus longer on the numerical readout thus, increasing workload and subsequently reducing situational awareness (Hiremath et al., 2009).Since most current general aviation pilots were trained with older analog displays, it is important to determine what human factors issues these pilots might encounter when they transition to glass displays. At the same time, as many new pilots are now trained on glass cockpits, it becomes equally important to find out what issues these pilots might face when they transition to traditional displays as would be the case of total electrical failure where the pilots would have to rely on the standby traditional instruments alone. It is also likely to be the case for some time to come that many pilots trained on glass cockpit aircraft will be asked to fly older generation aircraft as they build hours in the general aviation (GA) sector.Lindo et al. (2012) compared the performance of low time instrument-rated pilots on a simulated flight flown in either a conventional display simulator (Elite) or a glass cockpit simulator (Frasca). Half of the pilots had received their instrument training in conventional cockpits and half in glass cockpits. It should be noted however that some of those trained in glass cockpits also had up to 40 h instrument time in conventional cockpits. The test flight involved carrying out a simple instrument landing system (ILS) approach. The results showed that performance in the glass cockpit simulator was significantly better overall than performance in the conventional simulator with significant differences in control of airspeed, altitude and glideslope. The authors interpret this to suggest that the transition from glass cockpit back to conventional displays may be especially problematic. Unfortunately the use of two different simulators to test performance; the non-random assignment of subjects to the training conditions, and the potentially confounding effects of pilot experience with both types of display present major threats to the internal validity of these findings.To address the issues of transitioning between glass and traditional cockpit displays, the present experiment was designed to measure flight performance, situational awareness and workload using both cockpit display types. Participants were given training on a simulated Cessna C172 equipped with either a Garmin G1000 glass cockpit display configuration or a conventional display configuration. Performance was then measured in a criterion flight with either the same cockpit display configuration used in training or a different cockpit display configuration.Previous work has suggested that traditional cockpit instrument displays may be inherently slightly easier to use than modern glass cockpit displays although this may be moderated by training and experience (Hiremath et al., 2009). Since familiarity with a display also affects its ease-of-use it is predicted that participants will find the glass cockpit displays slightly harder to use but that this will be moderated by previous experience with the same type of display. In other words we expect to find an interaction between display type used in training and that used in the criterion (test) flight on a range of dependent variables including flight performance, situational awareness and workload.It should be noted that several different manufacturers produce glass cockpit displays for GA aircraft. There are some differences between the primary flight displays (PFDs) produced by different companies that might affect user performance. Despite these differences there are substantial similarities in layout and instrument design (e.g. use of linear-tape displays for altitude and airspeed) that make glass cockpit PFDs as a whole markedly different from conventional cockpit displays. Van west and Lane-Cummings's (2007) observation about the Garmin G1000 glass cockpit that: “It's actually a little more intuitive to read in some ways and a bit harder in others” (p. 249) could also apply to the glass cockpit displays of other manufacturers.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
