@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The influence of officer equipment and protection on short sprinting performance

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We examined officer equipment weight and a lateral focal point influences on a short sprint.The belt averaged 11.47 ± 1.64% of subject body mass.Significant decreases in velocity and acceleration were found for all weight belt trials.No performance decreases were observed with a focal point.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Law enforcement officers,Sprinting performance,Equipment belt,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
As advances in protective equipment are made, it has been observed that the weight law enforcement officers must carry every day is greatly increasing. Many investigations have noted the health risks of these increases, yet none have looked at its effects on officer mobility. The primary purpose of this study was to examine the influence of both the weight of officer safety equipment, as well as a lateral focal point (FP), on the stride length, stride velocity, and acceleration of the first six strides of a short sprint. Twenty male law enforcement students performed two maximal effort sprint trials, in the participating college's gymnasium, from each of four starting positions: forwards (control position), backwards, 90° left, and 90° right. Subjects placed in the FP group (n = 9) were required to maintain focus on lateral FP during the 90° left and 90° right trials, and a forwards FP during the backwards trials. On a second testing date, subjects repeated the sprint tests while wearing a 9.07 kg weight belt, simulating officer equipment and protective gear. The belt averaged 11.47 ± 1.64% of subject body mass. A significant main effect of weight belt trials was found (F = 20.494, p < 0.01), in which significant decreases were found for velocity and acceleration. No other significant effects were found as a result of starting position or focal point and no significant interactions were found between independent variables. Conclusively, the results of this study show the increasing weights of duty gear and protective equipment have detrimental effects on officer velocity and acceleration, impeding their mobility, which may be dangerous in use of force or threatening situations.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In comparison to previous years, law enforcement officers, internationally, are beginning to carry more weight in equipment and protective clothing due to the addition of non-lethal capabilities (i.e. tasers) and improvements in body armor. Studies examining the musculoskeletal health and performance of officers have reported the combined weight of an officer's duty belt and safety vest may range from 7.65 kg to over 9.07 kg (17 to 20+ lbs) (Dempsey et al., 2013). Although these increases in weight offer additional protection and equipment to help officers on a daily basis, the amount of resistance placed on their bodies has begun to reach a point where mobility and health are suffering. Many studies have examined the influence of officer gear on musculoskeletal health (Adams et al., 2010; Burton et al., 1996; Czarnecki and Janowitz, 2003; Holmes et al., 2013), but only one known study has observed the effects of gear on officer movement (Dempsey et al., 2013).Competitive athletes tested while wearing resistant belts or vests, often weighing less than the average officer's protection and equipment, have been noted to experience decreases in stride length, flight time, speed, and acceleration, as well as increases in ground contact time and forward trunk lean (Alcaraz et al., 2008; Letzelter et al., 1995; Lockie et al., 2003; Myers and Steudel, 1985). These performance decreases are observed with resistive weight as little as 7–8% of an athlete's body mass and substantial detriments have been noted with resistance greater than 10% of an athlete's body mass (Letzelter et al., 1995; Lockie et al., 2003). One study examining the biomechanical changes in running patterns noted that with a 10% decrease in performance (stride length and velocity) athletes begin to alter their running form drastically to compensate for the excess weight (Lockie et al., 2003). Military research also has demonstrated that carrying excess weight over extended periods of time, primarily in the form of body armor and equipment, decreases performance and results in greater physiological demands (Cheuvront et al., 2008; DeMaio et al., 2009; Hasselquist et al., 2008; Larsen et al., 2011; Myers and Steudel, 1985).A recent study, specific to officer mobility, examined the amount of performance reduction New Zealand officers experienced while wearing their protective vest and a weighted belt (7.65 kg; ranging from 7% to 11% subject body mass), in comparison to only athletic clothing (Dempsey et al., 2013). Subjects were tested on their balance, acceleration out of a “vehicle”, upper body strength, grappling, tactical mobility, and endurance, based on previous police job task analyses (Bonneau and Brown, 1995; Hooper, 1999). Researchers found officer mobility task performances were decreased significantly for all tasks (Dempsey et al., 2013). Another recent study examining officer performance, reported 94 American law enforcement officers, of a wide range of ranking, to have average body mass of 92.43 ± 17.44 kg (Lewinski et al., 2013). This general demographic data implies that officers carrying the U.S. average 9.1 kg in protection and equipment are wearing over 8–12% of their body mass – resistances greater than what competitive athletes are recommended to train at (Alcaraz et al., 2008; Bosco et al., 1986; Young et al., 2001). Pivoting, or lateral movement, and acceleration are two defensive components officers regularly use and are likely to be affected by this excessive weight carried by officers.When necessary, officers are trained to take cover behind the closest and most effective “shield”, as quickly as possible (Adams et al., 1980; Garner, 2005; Johnson, 2007; Rayburn, 2001). One example of this is while officers perform a traffic stop from standing at the driver's window, cover behind the suspect's vehicle is usually only 4–6 m away; thus an officer's speed in their first six strides is critical gaining protection (Dysterheft et al., 2013; Lewinski and Redmann, 2009). In a recent study observing officer movement at a simulated roadside traffic stop, officers faced with a gunman took an average of less than 2.12 s to take cover in a safe zone, most often located behind the vehicle (Lewinski et al., 2013). However, in the same amount of time, a suspect in the driver's seat was able to first draw, aim, and fire his weapon within 0.53 s and, according to previous research, would be able to fire an additional 4–6 rounds, depending upon their weapon choice (Lewinski et al., 2013; Lewinski, 2000).In addition to maneuvering to cover, officers performing roadside duties, most often traffic stops, face the threat of being struck by an oncoming vehicle. In total, from 2001 to 2012, 205 officers were killed by oncoming motor vehicles while conducting traffic stops, directing traffic, or other roadside duties, while it is estimated that thousands more were injured (The Federal Bureau of Investigation [FBI], 2001, 2002, 2013; The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration [NHTSA], 2011). Although evading the path of an approaching vehicle may only take a few strides, given the average standard vehicle width is 2 m (NHTSA, 1999), officers must react and move rapidly to escape the path of the approaching vehicle, as to avoid injury or death. It is estimated that an officer has less than 2 s to escape the path of an oncoming vehicle accelerating from a stationary position, 6 m (20 ft) away (Ashley and Aveni, 2005), and even less time when vehicles are already traveling at highway speeds. Although the average person can complete nearly six strides in 2 s, moving well out of the path of an oncoming vehicle, the time it takes officers to react and initiate movement with their equipment reduces that time frame immensely, especially when factoring in a startle response and the limits of information processing (Dysterheft et al., 2013; Lewinski et al., 2013; Marois and Ivanoff, 2005; Pashler, 1994; Sime, 1985).A final aspect of officer performance that is likely influenced by excess weight is movement during close contact encounters. Whether an officer is attacked by or in pursuit of a suspect on foot, movement forwards and laterally, or backwards, is import for both offensive and defense maneuvers. When confronted with an armed suspect in too close of proximity to draw their weapon, officers are trained to evade attacking suspects, or put distance between them, by sidestepping, or moving laterally and/or forward, in either a “J” or “L” shape (McKenna, 2013; Calibre Press, 1988). This movement gives officers additional time to draw their weapon for defensive purposes and put additional distance in between them and the suspect (Calibre Press, 1988; Remsberg, 1986). In contrast, offensive moments in close contact rapidly close the gap between officers and suspects, often in an attempt to disarm suspects and neutralize the threat (McKenna, 2013; Remsberg, 1986). These require officers to either move forwards, laterally, or change direction quickly, often in a “sweeping and disengaging” motion (Calibre Press, 1988).Overall, performance of these law enforcement defenses is important for officer safety and survival; however, little research has been published examining the effects of excess weight on officer movement performance. The primary purpose of this study was to examine the influence of officer duty belts and vests on short sprint acceleration and turning ability. Because previous literature has observed significant decreases in performance when an individual maintains eye contact with a focal point (Dysterheft et al., 2013), for example an officer watching a suspect for movement or an oncoming vehicle, a secondary component was added to make the results as realistic as possible. Therefore, a secondary purpose of this study was to examine the influence of a lateral focal point while sprinting to simulate officers maintaining focus on a suspect, threat, or oncoming vehicle.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
