@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Acceptability of robotic manipulators in shared working environments through human-like redundancy resolution

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Resolution of the kinematic redundancy in robotic manipulators inspired by human movements.Experimental campaign on volunteers to gather physiological signals.Assessment of physiological comfort/discomfort as a function of the adopted redundancy resolution criterion.Human-like movements of the robot alleviate the stress during human-robot coexistence.Non human-like movements are responsible for a more stressful affective state of humans.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Human–robot interaction,Redundancy resolution,Physiological ergonomics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Next generation robotic manipulators are expected to resemble a human-like behavior at kinematic level, in order to reach the same level of dexterity of humans in operations like assembly of small pieces. These manipulators are also expected to share the same working environments with humans without artificial barriers.In this work we conjecture that making robots not only kinematically similar but also able to move and act in the same way as humans do, might facilitate their social acceptance. For this the kinematic redundancy of such new generation manipulators can be exploited. An experimental campaign has been organized to assess the physiological comfort/discomfort perceived by humans working side-by-side with robots. For comparison, a human-like and two alternative redundancy resolution strategies have been implemented. The analysis confirmed the hypothesis that a human-like motion of the robot helps in facilitating social acceptance, by reducing the perceived stress by humans in human-robot coexistence.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Despite the availability of humanoid robotic platforms, their social acceptance is still a challenging open issue. First studies like the so-called “uncanny valley” proposed in (Mori, 1970) (see Fig. 1) or the one proposed in (Kaplan, 2004), agree in classifying the social integration of robots in human environments as a non-trivial task.In industrial environments, where humanoid robots might be adopted to complement human labor, the problem of integrating humans and robots in the same workspace might turn to be even more challenging. Human-robot cooperation should not just be physically safe, (De Santis et al., 2008), but also psychologically comfortable to the humans. Beside the human-like appearance of robots, which is discussed e.g. in (Hwang et al., 2013), a better and natural cooperation could be achieved if humans are, at all times, assured that they understand what the robot's intentions are, and that the robot executes its tasks with motion profiles that humans perceive as safe, (Kulic and Croft, 2007a). This requirement must comply with the production constraints, which require an accurate task execution.The availability of many degrees of freedom (DOF) might facilitate the achievement of all these requirements. Humanoid robots are in fact redundant manipulators (i.e. composed by robotic arms having more DOF than those strictly necessary to perform a certain task) and are, in principle, able to cooperate with humans in the same way as humans co-operate with co-workers. In fact, since the same task can be performed in several ways without any task performance degradation, redundant manipulators offer a wide range of flexibility in motion planning. Besides optimizing some performance criteria (energy consumption, manipulability, distance from joint limits, etc.) redundancy can be exploited to synthesize (i.e. reproduce with an articulated manipulator) the motion of human arms. The motion of the human arm has already been investigated in several prior works, ranging from pure kinematic approaches to more complicated neuromuscular analyses, often with focus on redundancy resolution. A brief review of related studies will be given in the Section 2.From an ergonomics standpoint, in view of the layout of new production lines populated by both robotic manipulators and human operators, it is important to assess in an objective way the impact of different redundancy resolution techniques to the psychological state of nearby humans. Assessment of the quality of the HRI by measuring the affective state of humans is an interesting and emerging topic. A survey of physiological methodology to assess the quality of the HRI is given in Section 2.This paper contributes to these issues by discussing a methodology which has been used to analyze the affective state of humans working side-by-side with human-like robotic manipulators, as a function of the strategy used for redundancy resolution. Experiments have been performed on 18 volunteers whose physiological response to different motions of the robot has been measured using a dedicated instrumentation and a well-defined protocol. Data have been analyzed using statistical tools. As a result, it is shown that there is a clear correlation of the emotional state of the volunteers with the adopted redundancy resolution criterion. We believe that the methodology described in this paper and the related outcome represent a significant contribution in the field of assessment of human–robot interaction, and may open the way to more articulated methodologies to study ergonomic issues of the envisaged future production lines, populated by both humans and robots.The remainder of this work is organized as follows. In Section 2 some background material on human motion analysis and synthesis, as well as on state of the art methodologies to assess the affective state of human volunteers is presented. Section 3 describes the experiments performed to gather all the physiological data needed for subsequent analyses as well as the methodology adopted to post-process the acquired data. Section 4 describes factual results from the statistical analysis, while Section 5 finally discusses their interpretation.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
For the same assembly-like task performed by a dual-arm robot, the effects of three redundancy resolutions on a human fellow co-worker were compared by means of physiological signals. The human-like redundancy resolution strategy, characterized by lower elbow elevations, induced a quantified reduction of the emotional arousal and was responsible for reduced EMG activity and LF to HF ratio on ECG signal. For these reasons, human-like motion profiles are the candidate to effectively reduce the robot-induced stress in human fellow co-workers, resulting in a more ergonomic interaction. Further and deeper investigations are still needed to address the effect of long-lasting exposition to robot motions.