@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Constructive generation of the medial axis for solid models

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel constructive method is given based on reuse of the existing MA.Only the MA in the local re-dilation region needs to be regenerated.Some new properties of MA are analyzed for the constructive MA generation.The local re-dilation region is incrementally determined for Boolean subtraction operations.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Medial axis,Boolean operation,Constructive method,Euclidean distance transform,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The medial axis (MA) is a simplified representation of complicated models which is widely used in current research. However, the efficient generation of the MA for complicated solid models continues to pose a challenge. In this study, a constructive approach for the generation of the MA is proposed for solid models after they are voxelized. With this method, the MA of the model constructed from two operand models via a Boolean operation is efficiently generated by merging the MAs of the operand models in a certain way, instead of regenerating them from scratch. To support the proposed method, the affected region of the resultant model is computed first using a Boolean operation. Second, only the MA in the affected region is regenerated by distance dilation. Third, the complete MA of the resultant model is constructed by combining the newly generated MA with the unchanged MAs of the operand models. In this study, the accuracy and complexity are analyzed for the final MA and some examples are given to illustrate the performance of the proposed method.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The medial axis (MA) of an object is the set of all points having more than one closest point on the object’s boundary  [1]. It is useful in many engineering fields because of its beneficial properties  [2]. Much research has been conducted regarding the generation of MAs  [3–5]. However, the computational efficiency is still not satisfactory for complicated models, even though some strategies have been proposed for special types of models  [6]. One common characteristic of almost all the existing approaches is that the model is regarded as one single part. In that case, the MA is generated each time from scratch, even when only a small modification is made to the model, which induces an intolerably low computational inefficiency. The efficient generation of the MA of solid models is still a challenge in engineering applications. Complicated engineering models often are constructed progressively using Boolean operations. Therefore, the MAs for these models can be obtained incrementally and efficiently by combining the MAs of the operand models.Based on the above analysis, a constructive method is proposed which generates the MA of the resultant model obtained by a Boolean union or subtraction operation efficiently. In this method, the region that will be changed, hereafter called the affected region, is analyzed first. Then, the double queues based distance dilation (DQDD) algorithm is applied to the affected region. The output of the DQDD algorithm, the Euclidean distance transformation (EDT), formed by the distance values of the voxels of the model, is computed by distance dilation from outside to inside. Finally, the MA is generated using the computed EDT. The distance value of a voxel is calculated between the centers of the voxel and its touch voxel. Here, the touch voxel of a given voxel is the nearest voxel of the given voxel on the model boundary. The proposed method can also be used on a single model when the affected region is the whole model. The EDT and the MA in the affected regions only need to be regenerated when Boolean operations are performed on the operand models, dramatically improving the computational efficiency.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section  2, the related work is summarized. The motivation for the study, an overview of the proposed DQDD method and some concepts are described in Section  3. Several fundamental properties are discussed in Section  4. The construction of the voxel map and the distance update of the affected region are described in Sections  5 and 6, respectively. Section  7 describes the process of MA generation. The accuracy and complexity analysis and some example results are given in Sections  8 and 9, respectively. Finally, the conclusions and the directions for future work are given in Section  10.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
An efficient constructive MA generation method for solid models is proposed in this study. The major contributions include:(1)An approach to generating the MA efficiently is proposed. With this method, only the MA of the affected region needs to be regenerated for the resultant model based on the reuse of the MAs of the operand models. In most cases, the computational efficiency can be improved dramatically.A novel method that is based on the double-queue representation of the voxels is devised deliberately to efficiently support the constructive generation of the MA when Boolean operations are performed. With the help of the double queues, the minimum affected region can be obtained automatically.Some properties of the MA are developed to support the proposed constructive MA generation method.Future work will proceed in three directions. The first is to consider the influence of voxel size and multi-resolutional voxels. Based on those results, Boolean operations on unaligned voxel models will be considered. The second is to extend the method for parameter modifications on 3D models. The third is to extend the method to other types of 3D models, such as the meshing models that are widely used in engineering and animation, etc.