@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Modeling flow features with user-guided streamline parameterization

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We describe a streamline-based aesthetic feature creation method for product styling.Stroke-based editing handles mimic fluid streamlines.A fast linear method for field-guided parameterization is described.Aesthetic flow-like surface features can be generated with ease.Application results are shown in industrial product design examples.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Constrained mesh parameterization,Vector field,Sketch-based modeling,Streamline,Displacement mapping,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Streamline-like, free-form features that “flow” on a base shape are often utilized in the design of products ranging from automobiles to everyday consumer products. Providing computational support for the design of such features is challenging, because of the open-endedness of the design explorations involved, and the necessity to rapidly and precisely capture the design intents expressed in very simple forms, such as free-form sketches. We present a novel approach for designing streamline-based, free-form surface features in the context of product design. Using our approach, the user first designs a network of streamlines on the base shape, by performing a stroke-constrained mesh parameterization. Then, the user utilizes these streamlines as a curvilinear scaffold for creating 3D free-form features that are bounded and parameterized by these streamlines. The user is able to apply fine-grained control of the outline, profile and extent of the resulting 3D features by manipulating the streamlines. We demonstrate the capability of this approach on several product models.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Many shape features in product design can be abstracted as streamline-like features that “flow” on the base shapes. This abstraction encompasses a wide range of geometric features, such as creases, channels, ridges and bulges, which bear critical implications on the aesthetic and ergonomic aspects of the product  [1,2]. They are prevalent in various media and stages in conceptual design. Examples include those shown in Fig. 2.Developing aesthetically pleasing, streamline-like surface features on product forms has been a long standing challenge in industrial design. Designers approach this challenge by strategically prototyping and evaluating many shape design alternatives, especially in the early conceptual stages  [3]. Computational design tools should support the rapid creation and exploration of such shape features. However, the existing free-form modeling systems, such as parametric surface modeling tools, subdivision modeling tools and mesh sculpting tools, do not cater to such needs. With those tools, the designer will have to rely on indirect and incremental editing metaphors such as parametric control points, or mesh sculpting tools and engage in tedious trial-and-error of shape editing workflow, or distractive workflows such as UV editing and re-topology.We provide an approach for streamline-based, free-form modeling that enables direct prescription of the desired streamline patterns and shape profiles, the rapid exploration and the fine-grained user control of the resulting shapes.Our approach is built on “streamlines”. Mathematically, the streamlines refer to the isolines in the(u,v)parameterization, visualized using a red–blue grid texture. Practically, the streamlines are the geometric scaffold for constructing free-form, 3D features that are aligned, bounded and parameterized by them.In a typical editing scenario shown in Fig. 1, our system works on a 2-manifold, triangular meshM, and alternates between two modes: surface streamline design (Fig. 1(b)) and 3D feature editing (Fig. 1(c)). Both modes are driven by the input strokes drawn by the user.In the streamline design mode, the user controls the shape of the flow by drawing constraint strokes. The system will populate two sets of isolines over the user-selected region of interest on the base shape. One set, the streamlines, will interpolate the constraint strokes, and vary in between the constraints. The other set, the equipotential set, will be approximately orthogonal to the streamlines. The details are described in Section  3.In the 3D feature design mode, the user utilizes these streamlines as a curved scaffold to sketch and build 3D free-form features. The user specifies the extremity and profile of the resulting features by drawing outline strokes along the streamlines, and drawing cross-section strokes across the streamlines, respectively. The system deforms the base surface with a displacement mapd(u,v)parameterized by the streamlines(u,v), such that the created feature interpolates the strokes. The details are presented in Section  4.Our technical contributions include the construction of smooth surface editing handles through the interactive prescription of characteristic streamlines, a linearized technique for fine-tuning the alignment of the field-guided parameterization, and a streamline-based curvilinear scaffold for unprojecting shape editing sketches and driving 3D free-form feature creation.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
