@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Parametric CAD modeling: An analysis of strategies for design reusability

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We analyze three formal CAD modeling strategies for history-based parametric design.User performance was studied using three industrial CAD models with different levels of complexity.Formal modeling methodologies offer significant advantages over non-structured approaches.Modeling methodologies significantly affect reusability.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
CAD reusability,Parametric modeling,Modeling methodologies,Design intent,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
CAD model quality in parametric design scenarios largely determines the level of flexibility and adaptability of a 3D model (how easy it is to alter the geometry) as well as its reusability (the ability to use existing geometry in other contexts and applications). In the context of mechanical CAD systems, the nature of the feature-based parametric modeling paradigm, which is based on parent–child interdependencies between features, allows a wide selection of approaches for creating a specific model. Despite the virtually unlimited range of possible strategies for modeling a part, only a small number of them can guarantee an appropriate internal structure which results in a truly reusable CAD model. In this paper, we present an analysis of formal CAD modeling strategies and best practices for history-based parametric design: Delphi’s horizontal modeling, explicit reference modeling, and resilient modeling. Aspects considered in our study include the rationale to avoid the creation of unnecessary feature interdependencies, the sequence and selection criteria for those features, and the effects of parent/child relations on model alteration. We provide a comparative evaluation of these strategies in the form of a series of experiments using three industrial CAD models with different levels of complexity. We analyze the internal structure of the models and compare their robustness and flexibility when the geometry is modified. The results reveal significant advantages of formal modeling methodologies, particularly resilient techniques, over non-structured approaches as well as the unexpected problems of the horizontal strategy in numerous modeling situations.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
One of the contributions of modern 3D CAD to accelerate the product development process is the ability to reuse and make alterations to existing models in an efficient and relatively easy manner. Many authors have identified the ability to apply previous designs and processes to new situations as an essential factor in modern engineering and product development scenarios [1–3]. With the increasing popularity of model-based engineering approaches, where the majority of design information are stored digitally within CAD models, design reusability has become largely dependent on CAD reusability. CAD models serve as the central point of the development process and the main data source used and shared by most stakeholders.In the CAD domain, reusability refers to the extent to which CAD data can be effectively altered so it can be used in or adapted to different applications or designs with minimal effort. In today’s industrial environments, where engineering design relies heavily on digital product representations, CAD reusability demands an efficient management of three-dimensional CAD data. Making changes or reusing a particular CAD model may be simple, difficult, or impossible, depending on the semantics associated to the modeling procedure chosen by the original creator.From an industrial standpoint, feature-based parametric CAD is currently the industry standard technology to create geometric models and assemblies, and is widely used across many engineering fields. In a parametric model, the geometry is mainly controlled by non-geometric features called parameters  [4], which can be defined by dimensional, geometric, or algebraic constraints. If properly used, parametric CAD enables the addition of design semantics to the model, which translates into the rapid alteration of existing models by simply editing the values of some parameters.Current parametric CAD is dominated by the history-driven approach, where a record of how the model is built is automatically saved and made available as the model is being created. History-based parametric modeling systems rely on data structures that maintain three-dimensional information of specific aspects of the model (features) in an associative manner (parent/child). In other words, all features in the model are connected hierarchically, creating a network structure where every node represents a feature and every connection represents a dependency between two features. This structure is commonly known as design tree, feature tree, or history tree. The adaptable nature of the design tree allows CAD users to quickly model complex parts with relative ease while increasing the flexibility and reusability of their designs. When feature dependencies are properly defined, alterations performed to a parent node will automatically propagate to its child nodes, i.e., the CAD model will react to changes in a predictable manner  [5]. Unfortunately, parent/child interdependencies between features are also the root of many regeneration problems in parametric modeling. The size and complexity of a parametric CAD model can grow rapidly and significantly depending on the application. As the number of dependencies grows, so does the interconnectedness of the design tree, which may negatively impact maintainability and model reuse. When feature interdependencies are not defined properly, even minor alterations may cause the CAD model to become unstable, forcing designers to rebuild the model to some degree to re-establish new design intent  [6].Despite the powerful parametric tools available in modern CAD packages, the responsibility of creating efficient models that can be easily altered and reused still lies on the designer  [5–7]. Authors Rynne and Gaughran  [8] point out that CAD software is “of limited use to engineers and technologists who do not fully understand fundamental graphics principles and 3D modeling strategies”. Problems related to modeling strategies can easily be observed in practical scenarios, where the same part modeled by two different expert designers will likely have a different construction history and ability to adapt to design changes  [5].In this regard, identifying the most appropriate modeling practice for a particular design situation and understanding how the design tree can be structured are critical factors to guarantee success. Therefore, it is essential to select a well-thought modeling methodology to ensure an efficient functional model and minimize the time and effort involved in performing modifications based on the characteristics and requirements of the part  [1,2]. The process, however, is not easy. Selecting a specific strategy and making modeling decisions are activities that strongly depend on the user’s cognitive abilities and her experience and skills to understand and break down the design  [8,9]. To exacerbate the situation, most CAD trainings are aimed at learning how to use a specific software tool rather than how to create robust and reusable CAD models  [5].In industrial settings, some companies define internal CAD modeling methods and guidelines (oftentimes dictated by previous experiences and/or senior designers’ expertise) that must be followed by designers to ensure a certain level of consistency and standardization. However, this type of information is often kept private, protected, or patented  [10], as it may lead to competitive advantages for organizations. As a result, there is a limited amount of published scientific literature about effective parametric CAD modeling methodologies and their practical application in production environments.In this paper, we address some of the difficulties inherent to parametric CAD model structures and examine three major modeling methodologies used in feature-based parametric design: horizontal modeling, explicit reference modeling, and resilient modeling. We present a series of experiments aimed at comparing these strategies by using three industrial CAD models with different levels of complexity and analyzing the internal structure of the models. To determine their effectiveness, we study user performance and model behavior when the geometry is modified, emphasizing the correctness of the model after changes and the time employed to complete the task.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
