@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An efficient word typing P300-BCI system using a modified T9 interface and random forest classifier

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A Text on nine keys (T9) based efficient word typing P300-BCI system is proposed.We integrated a smart dictionary into the P300-BCI system for word suggestions.We propose a novel Random Forest (RF) classifier to improve accuracy.Words typing speed is improved by 51.87% in comparison to the conventional character speller.Accuracy of RF is significantly higher than the conventional SVM classifier.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Brain computer interface,BCI,EEG,P300 speller,Word typing paradigm,Dictionary,Random forest,Human–computer interaction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundA typical P300-based spelling brain computer interface (BCI) system types a single character with a character presentation paradigm and a P300 classification system. Lately, a few attempts have been made to type a whole word with the help of a smart dictionary that suggests some candidate words with the input of a few initial characters.MethodsIn this paper, we propose a novel paradigm utilizing initial character typing with word suggestions and a novel P300 classifier to increase word typing speed and accuracy. The novel paradigm involves modifying the Text on 9 keys (T9) interface, which is similar to the keypad of a mobile phone used for text messaging. Users can type the initial characters using a 3×3 matrix interface and an integrated custom-built dictionary that suggests candidate words as the user types the initials. Then the user can select one of the given suggestions to complete word typing. We have adopted a random forest classifier, which significantly improves P300 classification accuracy by combining multiple decision trees.Results and discussionWe conducted experiments with 10 subjects using the proposed BCI system. Our proposed paradigms significantly reduced word typing time and made word typing more convenient by outputting complete words with only a few initial character inputs. The conventional spelling system required an average time of 3.47min per word while typing 10 random words, whereas our proposed system took an average time of 1.67min per word, a 51.87% improvement, for the same words under the same conditions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Brain computer interfaces (BCIs) are systems that provide direct communication with a computer through signals generated by the brain. P300 event related potentials are a commonly used EEG signal for BCI known as a P300-BCI. A typical P300-based character-spelling BCI system consists of a stimulus-presenting paradigm and a classifier. The most widely adopted paradigm for character spelling was first introduced by Farwell and Donchin [1]. Their speller paradigm involved a 6×6 matrix of characters and numbers in which each row or column is randomly intensified. A user looks at a target character and the resulting intensification of either the row or column containing the target character evokes P300. Classification of the row and column containing the evoked P300 leads to the recognition of the target character. Most later research followed the same scheme and focused on improving classification accuracy and speed.In recent years, there is a growing interest in designing more efficient paradigms. Multiple attempts have been made to modify the Farwell and Donchin (FD) paradigm. These modifications include using different matrix sizes [2], changing visual aspects such as color, symbol dimensions, and distance between the symbols [3,4], single character flipping instead of row and column intensification [5], and using a checkerboard paradigm [6]. Some works suggested the potential of region-based [7] or submatrix-based [8] paradigms.A common drawback of all these conventional P300 spelling systems is the requirement to spell out each character of a word one at a time. This spelling process is slow and can take several minutes to finish a single word. A new paradigm is needed so a user can type a whole word with less typing time. Ryan et al. [9] proposed a predictive spelling scheme to improve the word-typing speed. Their proposed predictive spelling increased the typing speed, but decreased the classification accuracy because of higher workload in their displays. Kaufmann et al. [10] also used a predictive speller with some commonly used German words. Their proposed paradigm showed six suggested words in the first column of the matrix. Their results also indicated that predictive spelling could significantly decrease spelling time. Ahi et al. [11] used a dictionary-driven P300 speller. They integrated a custom dictionary into the classification system of their P300 speller for automatic correction of misspellings. However, the dictionary was used only for word correction and the user still had to spell every character of a target word. Akram et al. [12] integrated a custom dictionary with the conventional FD paradigm to give word suggestions to the users, speeding up the typing speed. Höhne et al. [13] used a German-language Text on Nine keys (T9) system with an auditory event related potential-based speller. The user spelled on a 3×3-scheme with audio stimuli and suggestions were shown after the user spelled a complete word. Word typing using their system was slow because when typing a five-letter word, the user must go through five character inputs and at least two additional inputs: one for switching to the control mode and the other for the selection of a target word.To improve classification accuracy, many techniques for P300 extraction and classification have been used, including support vector machine (SVM) [14,15], linear discriminant analysis (LDA) [16], neural network [17], independent component analysis (ICA) [18], and, lately, constrained independent component analysis (cICA) [19], and adaptive neural networks [20].In this study, we propose a modified T9 interface with a dictionary to give word suggestions as the user types. In the mobile text messaging system, the T9 is used to compose text messages at high speeds using a keypad with twelve keys. Each of the eight keys is associated with several unique characters and the dictionary is used to suggest words according to the sequence of keys a user presses. Four other keys are used for other functions. In this study, we have modified it to use only nine keys: eight keys are associated with characters and one key for a delete function for errors. Word typing is done in two steps. A user spells a few characters of a target word using the 3×3 matrix of the modified T9 keys, and then the dictionary module suggests some words starting with the spelled combination of keys. Finally, the user can select one out of the given suggestions using the same 3×3 matrix. The suggested paradigm reduces the typing time significantly.Based on the analysis of the previously used classifiers, we propose a random forest (RF) classifier for P300 detection. RF has been well developed in many fields, but is relatively unknown in the field of BCI. RF is a machine learning technique developed by Breiman [21]. RF consists of a number of decision trees where each tree is grown independently and it casts a vote in favor of one class and the class with a majority vote wins.We have tested our P300 words typing BCI with 10 healthy subjects and each subject was instructed to type 10 randomly selected words. Our results show that the proposed P300 word typing paradigm takes an average of 1.67min to type a word, whereas the conventional paradigm required 3.47min for the same words. The proposed scheme reduces the word-typing time by 51.87%, thereby increasing the information transfer rate considerably.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
