@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Spectral Heart Rate Variability analysis using the heart timing signal for the screening of the Sleep Apnea–Hypopnea Syndrome

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Screening of SAHS using spectral Heart Rate Variability analysis is assessed.Comparison between Heart Timing, Heart Rate and Heart Period signals.Analysis of LF/HF and VLF features derived from clinical HRV spectral bands.Statistical differences found between patients and controls.Different spectral estimation methods analyzed: no statistical differences found.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Heart Rate Variability,Heart timing signal,IPFM model,Spectral analysis,Sleep Apnea–Hypopnea Syndrome,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Some approaches have been published in the past using Heart Rate Variability (HRV) spectral features for the screening of Sleep Apnea–Hypopnea Syndrome (SAHS) patients. However there is a big variability among these methods regarding the selection of the source signal and the specific spectral components relevant to the analysis. In this study we investigate the use of the Heart Timing (HT) as the source signal in comparison to the classical approaches of Heart Rate (HR) and Heart Period (HP). This signal has the theoretical advantage of being optimal under the Integral Pulse Frequency Modulation (IPFM) model assumption. Only spectral bands defined as standard for the study of HRV are considered, and for each method the so-called LF/HF and VLFnfeatures are derived. A comparative statistical analysis between the different resulting methods is performed, and subject classification is investigated by means of ROC analysis and a Naïve-Bayes classifier. The standard Apnea-ECG database is used for validation purposes. Our results show statistical differences between SAHS patients and controls for all the derived features. In the subject classification task the best performance in the testing set was obtained using the LF/HF ratio derived from the HR signal (Area under ROC curve=0.88). Only slight differences are obtained due to the effect of changing the source signal. The impact of using the HT signal in this domain is therefore limited, and has not shown relevant differences with respect to the use of the classical approaches of HR or HP.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The Sleep Apnea–Hypopnea Syndrome (SAHS) is a common disorder characterized by the repeated occurrence of involuntary breathing cessations during sleep. Studies carried out during the last years have estimated the prevalence of SAHS to range between 4% and 6% in the average adult population. Lack of treatment is associated with excessive daytime sleepiness, fatigue, development of cardiovascular diseases, hypertension, or brain damage [1]. The standard diagnostic procedure requires of a polysomnographic (PSG) study to be carried out in which the physiological activity of the patient is monitored during the night. The analysis of the PSG data, however, requires a lot of effort from the clinician and is expensive, especially when carried out in-hospital attended conditions. Therefore automatic diagnosis of SAHS has become an important area of interest. Specially, there is a growing interest in the recent years toward finding quicker screening procedures that also allow ambulatory patient monitoring. These procedures would help reducing the current long waiting lists for clinical PSG examinations, the associated diagnostic costs, and would allow for better patient scheduling and prioritization.The work published in 1984 by Guilleminault et al. stated for the first time the characteristic cyclical variation of the heart rate in sleep apnea patients. In this work it was observed that at the beginning of an apneic event the subject would suffer from progressive bradycardia followed by a period of tachycardia while the breathing resumes. It was concluded that the changes observed in SAHS were caused as a consequence of the autonomic nervous system mediation. In the same paper it was suggested that this cyclical variation of the heart rate could by detected by computer analysis and used as a screening tool for SAHS [2]. Such a hypothesis motivated further research on whether the respiratory information contained in the electrocardiogram (ECG) could be used for the detection of apneic events, both in the clinical and in the engineering domain [3,4]. In this regard, it is our interest in this paper to focus over the so-called spectral methods for the analysis of the Heart Rate Variability (HRV).Standards of measurement and interpretation of the HRV at this respect decompose the frequency spectrum in a series of spectral components of clinical interest. Specifically the High Frequency band (HF, 0.15–0.4Hz) is related to the parasympathetic regulatory component of the heart rate, whereas the Low Frequency component (LF, 0.04–0.15Hz) can reflect both sympathetic and parasympathetic modulation. It is generally accepted, however, that when LF is expressed in normalized units, the sympathetic regulatory component is reinforced [4,5]. The LF/HF ratio, as a consequence, was traditionally considered by many to be an indicator of the sympatho-vagal balance that regulates the heart rate [5]. This interpretation however is nowadays questioned, and therefore, although commonly reported and potentially meaningful, outcomes of the LF/HF ratio have to be interpreted with caution [4]. Finally, the Very Low Frequency component (VLF, 0.003–0.04Hz) although still controversial, it is generally associated with various slow mechanisms of the parasympathetic function, and it has been shown to be increased during sleep-disordered breathing [4,6,7].When applied to SAHS, several works have been published in the past that explored statistical differences in the standard HRV spectral components between patients and controls [6,8–13] or between apneic periods and normal breathing [14–18]. Among these works some have found the LF/HF to be a relevant discriminating feature, whereas some other have reported more important differences in the range of the VLF band [6,12,13,18]. Literature is however controversial with some studies conditioning significance only to certain severity groups [8,10,11] or even ruling it out [17].The use of spectral HRV features to differentiate patients from controls in the SAHS domain can also be found in several works throughout the literature [19–24]. Nevertheless no standard method has been established and therefore there is a big variability regarding, for instance, the series of data subject to spectral analysis, the power spectral estimation method, the handling of artifacts or the specific spectral components relevant to the analysis [23–25]. Variability in the methodology and the lack of standardization makes somewhat difficult to make comparisons in order to derive meaningful medical interpretations. The use of mathematical physiological models and clinical standard guidelines would be preferable to overcome this issue.The integral pulse frequency modulation (IPFM) model has been assumed for many authors to explain the mechanisms of the autonomic regulation of the heart rate [26–28]. This model assumes a modulating signal which influences the sino-atrial node generating the beat occurrences. Classical spectral analysis methods of the HRV, actually, implicitly assume the existence of such a modulating signal whose spectral properties are usually estimated through the use of subrogate signal sources like the Heart Rate (HR), the Heart Period (HP), the tachogram, or the spectrum of counts [5]. Mateo and Laguna [25] have shown that these approximations introduce a certain distortion in the spectrum as compared to the expected spectral information carried by the modulating signal according to the IPFM model. In the same work, on the other hand, they introduce the new Heart Timing (HT) signal, which is optimal in the same IPFM sense (i.e. the difference with the expected spectrum is minimal as compared with the above mentioned approaches) [26].Given this context, it is our aim to test the usefulness of the HT signal in the discrimination of healthy controls and patients affected by SAHS. Specifically we make a comparison between the LF/HF ratios and the so-called VLFnindices obtained from this signal, and those derived from the HR and the HP signals using different spectral estimation methods. For this purpose we follow the standard HRV spectral band definitions as recommended in the clinical guidelines [5]. Finally we test the different HRV-derived features to classify individuals of the two populations using a public standard database [29] investigating their usefulness in the screening of SAHS. To our knowledge, this is the first work investigating the use of the HT signal in the field of SAHS diagnostics. Even more, that we know of this is also the first time that the HT signal is applied to discriminate patho-physiological states in a practical domain.The Apnea-ECG database is used for validation purposes in this study. This database was created as part of a competition organized in the context of the Computers in Cardiology (CinC) 2000 conference [30]. The aim was to study the viability of using the respiratory information contained in the ECG for the diagnosis of SAHS. Originally the Apnea-ECG database was composed of a total of 70 recordings, divided into two sets (training and test) of 35 recordings each [29]. Expert’s annotations on apnea and hypopnea events are available on a minute-by-minute basis for each recording, which are further classified into three subgroups on the basis of the amount of minutes containing apneic events: group A (100min or more), group B (between 5 and 99min), and group C (less than 5min). A total of 20, 5 and 10 recordings, both in the training and in the testing sets, are respectively classified in the three groups. A sleep standard single-lead derivation was used to record the ECG which was sampled at 100Hz. [29].Since its publication, the Apnea-ECG database has become very popular and it has been used as standard benchmark by many researches to compare the performance of different ECG-based algorithms in the scoring of sleep apnea. [3,20–24,31–33].For our study, we take the recordings belonging to the subgroup A in Apnea-ECG as representative of Obstructive Sleep Apnea (OSA) patients (OSA group), while the recordings within the C subgroup are used as the control group. The mild severity group corresponding to category B in the Apnea-ECG database is not used here. Resulting data are summarized inTable 1 in which the corresponding SAHS severity per recording is characterized using the standard Apnea–Hypopnea Index (AHI) which determines the number of apneas and hypopneas per hour of sleep.The Integral Pulse Frequency Modulation (IPFM) model explains the generation of beat occurrences based on the hypothesis that the sympathetic and parasympathetic influences on the sino-atrial (SA) node can be represented by a single modulation signal m(t). This input signal m(t) is integrated until a certain threshold, R, is reached. The former can be viewed as the charging process of the sino-atrial membrane potential. When the threshold of the membrane is reached, the system triggers an action potential that materializes in the generation of a beat. At this point the integrator is reset to zero, and a new cardiac cycle begins [28].We can represent the operation of the IPFM model through the following equation:(1)k=∫0tk1+m(t)Tdtwhere k is an integer number representing the k-th beat and tkreflects its time stamp. The time T is the mean interbeat interval and (1+m(t))/T can be seen as the instantaneous heart rate. The m(t)/T part in (1) represents the zero-mean modulating term, which is presumed to be small (m(t)≪1) reflecting that Heart Rate Variability is usually smaller than the mean heart rate. Also in general, it is considered that m(t) is band-limited with negligible power for frequencies above 0.4Hz.In Mateo and Laguna [25] the authors introduced the generalization of the IPFM model to the continuous time by which (1) can be rewritten as(2)x=∫0t(x)1+m(t)Tdtwhere t(x) is a continuous function that solves the IPFM model equation, and whose samples at x=k=1,2,…,n are t(k)=tk. Using the generalization given in (2), the continuous heart timing signal, ht(t) or HT, is defined as follows [25]:(3)ht(t)=x(t)T−t=∫0tm(τ)dτIndeed, according to (3), the continuous HT signal can be simply defined as the integral of m(t). Also from (3) derives that the relationship between ht(t) and HRV is straightforward, being ht(t) also linearly related to m(t).In the frequency domain, taking into account that m(t) is causal and with zero-mean, the following equation holds:(4)HT(w)=M(w)jwwhere HT(w) and M(w) are, respectively, the Fourier transforms of ht(t) and m(t). In other words, if we know ht(t) or its regularly spaced samples satisfying the Nyquist criterion, the spectrum of m(t), M(w), can be exactly determined [25].In 1981, Akselrod et al. introduced power spectral analysis of heart rate fluctuations as a tool to quantitatively evaluate beat-to-beat cardiovascular control [34]. Methods for the spectral analysis of the HRV look for differences in the spectral components of HRV-related signals, which are usually defined in the time domain based on the processing of the ECG beat sequence. In the literature, several sources signals can be found on this regard subject to spectral analysis [5,25]. Among them, the HR and the HP have been widely used which can be defined as:(5)hr(tk)=60tk−tk−1(6)hp(tk)=tk−tk−1Note in (5) HR has been defined in beats per minute (bpm) but it actually can be simply defined as the inverse of HP, thus in beats per second. The former is though more extended and thus it will be preferred. Both, the HR and the HP signals are used in this work for comparison purposes.The term “Heart Rate Variability”, indeed, is arbitrarily accepted to refer to the variations produced in the interval between consecutive heart beats as well as the oscillation between consecutive instantaneous heart rates [5]. In this sense, HR and HP are intuitively related to HRV, and even though empirical results have shown the usefulness of these two signals when analyzing HRV [5], there is still the lack of a mathematical model that allows a complete characterization of such relationship.The use of the HT signal, on the other hand, allows making predictions and interpretations in the context of the IPFM model. HRV analysis in this sense implies in practice obtaining as much information as possible about the modulating signal m(t) using the sequence of observed beats. At this respect, and using (3) the unevenly spaced samples of the HT signal can be derived at the beat times tkas [25]:(7)ht(tk)=kT−tk=∫0tkm(τ)dτThe fact that signals (5)–(7), and whichever signal generated from the beat sequence, are unevenly spaced, matters, and especially if the objective is to analyze HRV in the spectral domain. At this purpose several methods have been proposed in the literature to overcome this problem, namely assuming that HRV signals are evenly sampled, using direct spectral estimation methods (e.g. Lomb) and by using interpolation methods to generate an evenly sampled version from the irregularly sampled input. At this respect it has been shown in [25], that when the IPFM model is assumed, an appropriate interpolation method with adequate frequency response is the option that best preserves the modulation properties of the m(t) signal. Specifically, it has been shown that the method that produces the best spectrum estimates is obtained when the Fourier Transform (FT) of the HT series interpolated by high order splines is used.Indeed, once the regularly spaced samples HT series is obtained, the spectrum of the IPFM modulating signal m(t), M(w), which is the focus of our interest, can be directly retrieved as stated in the previous section by using (4).The quality of the QRS detector output is compromised by the presence of artifacts and the occurrence of ectopic beats. The first can produce false positives or false negatives in the beat sequence that will affect both the morphology and the spectral properties of the derived HRV signals. Artifacts due to the presence of ectopic beats on the other hand, can generally be classified in ventricular or supraventricular depending on the ectopic focus. Ectopic beats with a ventricular origin do not reset the normal activity of the SA node. Usually the normal beat would be replaced by a morphologically different ectopic beat. Supraventricular ectopic beats, however, have a similar morphology to normal beats, but reset the SA node activity.These abnormalities are frequent and considerably compromise the reliability of the of the derived HRV signals, and therefore of their corresponding spectral estimates. To avoid this problem in the framework of the IPFM model, Mateo and Laguna [35] have proposed a method based on the fact that, under this model, the variation produced in the instantaneous heart rate r(t) due to the presence of normal beats is band limited.Hence, using this assumption, it is possible to impose a threshold U on the derivative of the instantaneous heart rate r′(t) to enable the acceptance of a beat as belonging to the normal SA sequence. This condition can be implemented using the following equation [35]:(8)|rk′^|=2|tk−1−2tk+tk+1(tk−1−tk)(tk−1−tk+1)(tk−tk+1)|<UClassification of the anomalous beats detected by this method as False Positives (FP), False Negatives (FN), or ectopic, can be then accomplished by iteratively modify the anomalous candidates and rechecking the condition in (8)[35].Computation of HT in the presence of ectopic beats should not be performed directly by using (7). Indeed, the estimated mean heart period T would be affected by the ectopic gap and the HT values in the neighborhood of an ectopic beat would be largely mistaken due to the regular concordance lost between the integer k and the beat position tk. Instead, the proposed solution involves the extension of the IPFM model to include the resetting of the SA node in the presence of ectopic beats. In this respect, given a series of heart beats with an ectopic beat detected at the keposition, (7) can be rewritten as follows to compute the correct values of HT for the beats preceding and following the ectopic occurrence:(9)ht(tk)={ht(t(k))==kT−tk,fork<keht(t(k−1+s))==(k−1+s)T−t(k−1+s)=(k−1+s)T−tk,fork>kewhere s is an unknown real quantify (s≤1) corresponding to the value reached for the integral in (2) at the resetting time t(ke−1+s), and T is the actual mean heart period. These two a priori unknown s and T values can be estimated (see [35], Section II.B), after which (9) can be used to obtain the HT series at the irregularly spaced beat times tk. Finally, by using spline interpolation, the continuous estimate of the HT signal can be derived and the spectrum of m(t) can be obtained according to (4).The following sections describe the processing steps followed to derive the features of LF/HF and VLFnfrom the source signals of HR, HP and HT, and using different spectral estimation methods. The Apnea-ECG database is used as benchmark as described in Section 2.1. We are interested in studying the differences between the obtained indices and evaluate their usefulness to perform subject classification for the screening of SAHS.For each recording QRS detection is performed over the ECG using an algorithm based on filter banks as proposed in Alfonso et al. [36]. Fiducial points corresponding to the R peaks are used as the tkpoints, k=0..nqrs-1, where t0is the time occurrence of the first detected beat. From the tkseries the unevenly spaced samples of HR and HP are straightforward obtained respectively according to (5) and (6). The same fiducial points are used to compute the unevenly spaced samples of HT according to (7), where T is taken as the mean interbeat interval,T=tnqrs−1−t0nqrs−1.As explained in Section 2.4 false QRS detections (FP or FN) and ectopic beats would seriously affect both time and spectral properties of the derived HRV signals. To solve this problem and get rid of these anomalies, the detection method described in Section 2.4 is applied in order to identify and classify the artifacts in the beat series, which are then removed from the sequence of normal beats. Detection thresholdU=min{0.5,4.3σrk^}is applied in (8), where the upper limit U=0.5s−2 is imposed to reject possible episodes of atrial fibrillation or other arrhythmias.It is worth to mention that for stability of the artifact classification process subsequent to (8) (see [35], Section II.A for details) and of posterior interpolation processes (described here next in Section 3.3), we have found useful to impose the requirement that the first 10 samples of|rk′^|must be considered artifact-free (i.e.|rk=1..10′^|<U). That means that until this condition is not satisfied, all the preceding beats will be automatically discarded from the sequence of normal beats and will be no longer considered.As the output of this process, we get the beat series where each beat has been classified either as normal (N), as FN, as FP, or as ectopic. The resulting sequence containing only N beats is used to recalculate the HR and the HP series by using (5) and (6). In this case, however, only sequences derived from normal-to-normal (NN) intervals are admitted and concatenated. For HT, as explained in Section 2.4, the series needs to be recomputed. For this purpose and using only the sequence of normal and ectopic beats (detected FNs and FPs are removed from the list) Eq. (9) is applied using the ectopic occurrences as the kepoints, where for each one, the corresponding estimate of the jump s is calculated, as well as the resulting mean heart period T (see [35], Section II.B for details). A new unevenly spaced series of HT is obtained as a result, where the effects due to the presence of artifacts and ectopic beats have been corrected.Spline interpolation is used on the previous irregularly spaced series of HR, HP and HT to obtain the corresponding evenly sampled signals for the purpose of performing subsequent spectral analysis. In [25,35] it has been shown that signal interpolation with high order splines followed by Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) provides the best spectrum estimates of the sino-atrial node modulation signal. Comparison includes most of the state-of-the-art methods such as the spectrum of counts, linear interpolation, the Berger’s method, parametric autoregressive estimation, or direct estimation methods such as the Lomb spectrum.In our case we use spline interpolation both of order three “cubic” and fourteenth, as suggested in [25] and for comparison purposes. We use an output interpolation frequency of 4Hz. Specifically it is our interest to see whether the theoretical improvement achieved by the use of high-order splines may influence the derived HRV features extracted from the resulting spectra (in our case, the LF/HF ratio and the VLFnindex).We have imposed a limit to the interpolation gap of UintGap=2s. Indeed, spline interpolation of a sequence (HR, HP or HT) when the time gap is bigger than 5s would produce a result that could be regarded as purely speculative. Thus sequences where the interpolation gap is greater than UintGapare discarded and do not contribute to the subsequent spectral estimation.DFT-based power spectral density (PSD) of the interpolated series is estimated using two different variants: (i) regular periodogram estimation using the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) applied to the full (artifact-free) series, and (ii) using a modified version of the Welch method. In any case (full or Welch) a Hamming window is used and zero-padding is applied to reach the next power of 2 that resulted from each N-length input segment. In the case of (i), we take N as the maximum length amongst all the recordings since zero-padding does not modify the resulting spectra. For (ii) default window size of 5min is used as recommended by HRV analysis standards [5] with a 50% window overlap at each step. This results in a resolution of at least 0.003Hz per bin in each window, but note than in (i) this resolution is normally much higher. DC component removal is performed in either case (full or Welch) by subtracting the mean value from the corresponding input segment before the FFT application.As outlined in Section 3.3, sequences resulted from the interpolation of gaps over UintGapare not considered for spectral estimation. For this purpose, in (i) from the whole series, we only consider as input to the FFT the longest consecutive sequence that contains interpolation gaps below UintGap. In (ii) the analysis is performed in the basis of 5-min windows, and therefore we remove (skip) from the Welch calculation those windows overlapping sequences affected by such interpolation gaps.Finally, note that in the case of HT, before the spectral transformation, we apply (3) from which is derived that m(t)=ht′(t). In fact we are interested in studying the spectral properties of m(t), rather than ht(t), thus in the case of HT, the interpolated m(k) series is actually used as the input for the FFT. This is equivalent to apply (4) in order to obtain M(w).As a result of the above described process, we obtain two different spectral estimators for each evenly-spaced HRV derived signals (i.e. HR, HP or HT), respectively for (i) using the regular periodogram, and for (ii) using the Welch spectrum. The following notation will be used: HRP, HPP, HTP in the case of (i), and HRw, HPw, HTwrespectively in the case of (ii). In addition for each of these estimates two versions are obtained dependent upon the order of the interpolating splines. In this case, when relevant, the corresponding order of the splines will be specified at the end of the notation: for instance, HRw3, to refer to the spectrum obtained from the HR signal interpolated with cubic splines, and using with the Welch method. Likewise, HTP14 will refer to the spectrum obtained from the HT signal interpolated with 14th order splines, and using the periodogram, and so on.Over the resulting spectra, power in relevant frequency bands (VLF, LF and HF) is extracted according to standard HRV rules [5] and the LF/HF is calculated for each spectrum estimate. In addition the VLFnindex feature is computed as follows:(10)VLFn=∑Hz=0.0030.04PSD(w)∑Hz=00.4PSD(w)−∑Hz=00.003PSD(w)thus representing the power in the VLF spectral band normalized to the total power minus the power in the ULF band [5].InFig. 1a period of 10min is shown in which the different HRV source signals are displayed for a real subject. Notice the HT series in this case is positive, meaning in this period the beat positions are positively deviated in reference to the mean RR interval. Last row in Fig. 1 shows the m(t) signal resulting from the differentiation of the HT series. As explained before, this is the actual signal that is used as input for the spectral analysis in the case of HT. Also, in Fig. 1 (left) an artifact is noticeable around the eighth minute affecting all the time series. In the same figure (right) the resulting time series are shown once the artifacts have been corrected.Fig. 2 shows an example where the different spectra and the corresponding indices are presented for a patient in the OSA group (a01) and for a patient in the control group (c01) using the periodogram.Fig. 3 shows the results for the same patients using the Welch approach. Only results using cubic splines are shown since the pattern in the case of 14th order splines is very similar. Two clear peaks are appreciable for the apneic patient in the VLF and low LF regions in contrast to the healthy case. The peak around 0.22Hz observable in the control subject corresponds with the baseline respiratory frequency.The objective here is to achieve the best possible separation between patients and controls on the basis of the different HRV features calculated as described in the previous sections.In order to find the best separating threshold, we use Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curves. For that purpose we take the absolute maximum and minimum from each feature (LF/HF ratio, VLFnindex) in the TR set and divide the space into 100 equidistant regions. The resulting frontier values are taken as the potential thresholds, and for each one the corresponding sensitivity and specificity values are computed. We thus obtain 100 different operating points in the ROC curve by plotting sensitivity in the ordinate and 1-specificity in the abscissa. Using the ROC procedure we can compare each feature in terms of “general separability”. At this respect, the area under the ROC curve (AUC) can be calculated. For that purpose we use a trapezoidal approximation using all the operating points (in our case 100) and computing the resulting area (AUC100). The best feature would be the one with the highest AUC value. This is also known as the AUC criterion.To perform subject classification then the optimal threshold in TR can be calculated for each feature by selecting the best single operating point PAUC-bestin the corresponding ROC curve. PAUC-bestcan be calculated as the closest point (x,y) in Euclidean distance to the point (0,1). This point maximizes the quantity (sensitivity+specificity)/2 which is equivalent to the area under the triangle connecting PAUC-best with the points (0,0) and (1,1). Notice therefore the same AUC criterion is being applied, but from the curve that results from one single operation point (instead of 100). The resulting threshold is then used to evaluate the separation performance both in TR and in TS.Besides the ROC approach, a Naïve-Bayes (NB) classifier with kernel density estimation of the probably distribution function (pdf) is used for comparison purposes. Specifically, given a set of nki.i.d. data points{xik}i=1nkdrawn from a random variable Xk, with pdf (fxk), its Parzen window estimate is:(11)fx;skk^=1nk∑i=1nkκsk(xk−xik)whereκsk(xk−xik)is a kernel function with bandwidth sk. In our case we use a Gaussian kernel, and skis approximated using the Silverman׳s rule:(12)sk=1.06σk^nk−15whereσk^the standard deviation of the samples{xik}i=1nk. The subindex k refers in our case to the class index k={0=patients, 1=controls}.The resulting NB classifier is then trained using the TR set and tested using TS. Note, though, that in this case a numerical separating threshold cannot be obtained for which classification of a samplexikdepends on the shape of its estimated pdf which varies over the domain of Xk.It is worth to remark as well that the two above mentioned classification procedures offer robust solutions in the case of an unbalanced class problem such as in our case:n0=20,n1=10. Prior probabilities in the case of NB classifier are nevertheless considered equiprobable to avoid bias of the classifier toward the most frequent class in the Apnea-ECG database.In order to study statistical relevance of the different spectrum estimation methods, non-parametric Kruskal–Wallis test is used separately in the OSA and in the control group, to check whether the corresponding LF/HF or VLFnfeatures from each method can be considered to come from different populations. Non-parametric test is used given that both Kolmogorov-Smirnov and Lilliefors tests, both at the 5% significance level, revealed general non-normality among the different populations. A multiple comparison test using the Tukey’s honestly significant difference criterion is applied to investigate pairwise effects. In addition, to test statistical significance between the OSA and the control groups, the Mann–Whitney U–test statistic is used for each derived feature.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
