@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
ARWAR: A network approach for predicting Adverse Drug Reactions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We apply an existing approach to build a network of highly related drugs.We consider the informative knowledge hidden in the relationships among drugs.We augment the original Human Drug Network by adding new nodes and edges.We apply random walk with restart to relate each drug to its side-effects.Our method outperforms the existing approach significantly.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Side effects,Adverse Drug Reactions,Network approach,Human Drug Network,Multi-label classification,Graph augmentation,Random Walk with Restarts,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Predicting novel drug side-effects, or Adverse Drug Reactions (ADRs), plays an important role in the drug discovery process. Existing methods consider mainly the chemical and biological characteristics of each drug individually, thereby neglecting information hidden in the relationships among drugs. Complementary to the existing individual methods, in this paper, we propose a novel network approach for ADR prediction that is called Augmented Random-WAlk with Restarts (ARWAR). ARWAR, first, applies an existing method to build a network of highly related drugs. Then, it augments the original drug network by adding new nodes and new edges to the network and finally, it applies Random Walks with Restarts to predict novel ADRs. Empirical results show that the ARWAR method presented here outperforms the existing network approach by 20% with respect to average Fmeasure. Furthermore, ARWAR is capable of generating novel hypotheses about drugs with respect to novel and biologically meaningful ADR.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A typical drug discovery cycle, from target identification to clinical use, can take approximately 14 years [1] with an associated cost of 800 million US dollars [2]. One of the main causes of failure in the process of the drug development is the existence of Adverse Drug Reactions (ADRs). ADRs are known as a serious clinical problems and are estimated to result in more than 2 million hospitalizations [3] and more than 100,000 deaths in the United States per year [4]. Additionally, in case of serious ADR pharmaceutical companies are forced to withdraw their drugs from the market, which involves significant danger for patients, as well as major financial implications to the companies involved. Therefore, predicting the ADRs prior to market introduction of the drug is necessary and has been considered as a very challenging issue in drug development.Laboratory-based approaches for predicting and evaluating the potential ADRs are very costly and time consuming. Therefore, using computational approaches for early identification of potential ADRs in the drug discovery process gained much attention in the recent years.The general pattern for computational methods is as follows: First, they consider different chemical and biological properties of the drugs. Second, they transform the considered properties into numerical features. Third, they develop a systematic way of understanding, predicting and interpreting the desired and undesired effects of drugs [5–16]. The main difference among these methods lies in the type of properties they consider for the ADRs analysis.In the most domains, more interesting knowledge can be mined from the relationships among entities [17]. For example, several studies [18–21] showed that considering the relationships among different diseases reveals informative patterns and is indeed useful for different prediction tasks. To the best of our knowledge, most of the existing methods focus on each drug individually neglecting the informative knowledge that could be gained from the hidden relationships among different drugs. However, there are some more recent approaches that follow “similar drugs have similar ADRs” pattern and consider relationships among drugs for predicting ADRs [22,23]. For example, Vilar et al. [22] and Luo et al. [23] calculated similarity between two drugs according to drugs’ 3D molecular structure and their docking profiles, respectively, to predict potential ADR for new drugs.Extending upon previous approaches, we now in this work consider also information hidden in the relationships among drugs. We apply the previous method [24] (as described in Section 6.2) to discover hidden relationships among drugs. Rahmani et al. [24] consider target proteins of drugs, Protein–Protein Interaction (PPI) networks, functional and structural information of PPI networks to discover the most informative relationships among drugs and accordingly, build a network among highly related drugs. Network representation of relationships among drugs provides the unique opportunity to apply the successful off-the-shelf network-based classifiers in other domains for predicting novel ADRs. The effectiveness of the network approach for generating novel hypotheses about drugs has been shown in previous studies [24–29].In this paper, we explore methods implementing the network approach for predicting the novel ADRs. We examine two classifiers for this purpose. The first classifier is called the Majority Rule Method (MRM) [30] and considers the ADR of neighboring drugs in the network for the prediction. MRM has been used as a baseline method in different domains [31–33]. Considering the limitations of MRM, we propose a second classifier that is called Augmented Random WAlk with Restarts (ARWAR). Our empirical results show that ARWAR outperforms MRM significantly with respect to Fmeasure and is capable of generating novel hypotheses about ADR.This paper is structured as follows: Section 2 discusses the previous methods on ADR prediction. We model, formally, the task of ADR prediction as a multi-label classification problem in Section 3. Section 4 discusses MRM and its limitations as one of the prominent methods for the multi-label classification problem. We describe our proposed ARWAR approach in details in Section 5. In Section 6, a drug network is constructed and then evaluated in terms of interpretability and novel ADR predictions. Section 7 concludes.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
One of the main causes of drug failure not only in the market, but also during clinical studies (before drugs come to the market), is the existence of serious Adverse Drug Reactions (ADRs). Accordingly, much attention has focused on ways to detect, and predict, Adverse Drug Reactions as early as possible during discovery and development. To the best of our knowledge, most of the existing methods for ADR prediction focus on each drug individually, predicting ADRs based on the chemical and biological properties of a drug. However, we strongly believe that there is an informative knowledge in the relationships among drugs that could be taken into consideration for the ADR prediction process. To discover the relationships among drugs, we applied the method proposed by Rahmani et al. [24] to our dataset and we succeed to discover 1767 relationships among 146 drugs. Next, domain experts manually confirmed (in Section 6.2) the accuracy and biologically meaningfulness of the predicted relationships. Having found the informative drug–drug relationships and accordingly, build a network among highly related drugs, then we were able to examine different multi-label network-based classifiers. Considering the main limitations (discussed in Section 4) of existing classifiers, we proposed an Augmented Random WAlk with Restarts (ARWAR) method that is capable of resolving the shortcomings of the previous method, outperforming the Majority Rule Method (MRM) by 20% with respect to average Fmeasure and predicting novel and biologically meaningful side-effects, even for drugs with no initial side-effect information in the SIDER [45] database. The main limitation of our proposed method is that the proposed method by Rahmani et al. [24] may not discover informative relationships for drugs with a limited number of target proteins and accordingly, the performance of our proposed ARWAR method decreases in such cases. In addition to this, the ARWAR method only is capable to identify general side effects associated directly associated with the drug structure or pharmacological effect, but overlooks idiosyncratic drug reactions (also known as type B) or those associated with allergies. This limitation results from the fact that allergies and many idiosyncratic reactions are patient-dependent, this information not taken into account in this method.Regarding future research induced by our work, we see two important directions for refinement and extension of our approach. First, further exploration of possibilities for extensive validation of the achieved results. We have already discussed and validated our results in Sections 6.2 and 6.5 using literature mining, however, validation of the findings is still challenging and needs separate clinical studies. Second, by further analysis of the augmented graph, we could cluster side-effects according to their graph connectivity and then use the co-cluster information to predict more precise and complete set of ADRs. Additionally, we could use the augmented graph to relate the side-effects to other biological elements such as the target proteins of drugs or Gene Ontology (GO) of the target proteins.None declared.