@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Complex concrete structures

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An overview is given that combine existing casting techniques with digital fabrication for the fabrication of complex concrete structures.The focus is set on Smart Dynamic Casting a technique that combines digital fabrication with slipforming and building material science.An overview of the experimental set up and procedure is given.Experimental prototype results are described.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Complex concrete structures,Casting techniques,Formwork,Slipforming,Digital fabrication,Smart Dynamic Casting,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Over the course of the 20th century, architectural construction has gone through intense innovation in its material, engineering and design, radically transforming the way buildings were and are conceived. Technological and industrial advances enabled and challenged architects, engineers and constructors to build increasingly complex architectural structures from concrete. Computer-aided design and manufacturing (CAD/CAM) techniques have, more recently, rejuvenated and increased the possibilities of realizing ever more complex geometries. Reinforced concrete is often chosen for such structures as almost any shape can be achieved when placed into a formwork. However, most complex forms generated with these digital design tools bear little relation to the default modes of production used in concrete construction today. A large gap has emerged between the possibilities offered by the digital technology in architectural design and the reality of the building industry, where actually no efficient solutions exist for the production of complex concrete structures. This paper presents construction methods that unfold their full potential by linking digital design, additive fabrication and material properties and hence allow accommodating the construction of complex concrete structures. The emphasis is set on the on-going research project Smart Dynamic Casting (SDC) where advanced material design and robotic fabrication are interconnected in the design and fabrication process of complex concrete structures. The proposed fabrication process is belonging to an emerging architectural phenomenon defined first as Digital Materiality by Gramazio & Kohler (2008) or more recently as Material Ecologies by Neri Oxman  [1].

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The technological development of reinforced concrete11In 1867 the invention of reinforced concrete changed this material into a fireproof material, which could take both tensile and compressive loads. This invention has radically changed the way buildings have been conceived throughout the 20th century. Further information on the topic in the book by  [2]. Additional in  [3].has been one great enabler of modern architecture. It is still one of the preferred materials for realizing all kinds of structures, simple and complex.22“Complex geometries” in this text refers to a large number of distinct parts where little or no repetition occurs. Complex is not constrained to formal qualities but also have the intention of projects to be structurally optimized and unique in direct contrast to industrial ‘standard’ projects. Complex was discussed in a similar way at the exhibition at Centre Pompidou, Paris by  [4].In 2011 alone, 3.4 billion tonnes of cement were produced to make concrete  [5]. However, concrete itself is only half the picture, since it is the formwork that determines what is possible to build. It represents 35%–60% of the overall costs of concrete structures  [6] and represents a significant source of waste, given that all formwork is discarded sooner or later, contributing to a generally increasing production of waste worldwide.33According to a study from 2011, 80% of the total waste production is created in the construction industry, of which 1.97% comes from the formwork timber. Further details can be found in  [7].By integrating digital technologies and new insights from material science, well-established casting techniques could be modified to create formwork-efficient and waste reducing approaches for the construction of complex concrete structures. This paper describes construction techniques–static casting, concrete extrusion and slipforming–in a brief historical overview, to emphasize how they have influenced the way architecture is conceived today, and might impact its future by integrating digital design and fabrication methods. In this context different ongoing research projects are discussed, that represent the emerging change in architecture, where artefacts evolve through interplay between the digital tool and physical material properties.The paper is divided into three parts. The first part gives an overview on standard static formwork systems as well as on the current research, which aims to enhance its versatility towards complex concrete forming by applying digital fabrication techniques to traditional casting processes. The second part presents ongoing research that applies computer-controlled layer based extrusion process with concrete for complex concrete structures. The third part, the main subject of this paper, discusses the well-established dynamic construction system, Slipforming and introduces the pioneering fabrication method Smart Dynamic Casting (SDC). SDC is a robotic slipforming process which exploits the formability of concrete in the delicate period when it changes from a soft to a hard material. This process is informed by the physical properties of the material, which are tracked by a feedback system during the production. In this process the dynamic relationship of the formwork geometry, the robotic trajectory and the material properties directly determine. The aim of SDC is to investigate how the cost of forming complex concrete elements could be reduced by eliminating the need for custom-made formwork, with the added value of opening up completely new and unexpected design possibilities. In addition this fabrication method has the potential of becoming a low-waste and ecologically sustainable construction technique for complex concrete construction.The most common casting technique for concrete uses static formwork systems.44Examples for typical static forms in construction are: slab cast, jump-form, wall forms or column forms. Depending on the application, these forms can be constructed out of steel, wood or plastics, further description can be found in  [6].Static formwork refers to a temporary structure into which fluid concrete is poured. After the concrete has cured the formwork is removed. At the end of the 19th century and outset of the 20th century such formwork were custom made out of timber shuttering, supported by wooden frames which were discarded after a single use.In order to increase the efficiency of such systems some of the first standardized, and thus reusable metal formworks were commercially produced by 1910 for road construction  [8]. Architects and engineers of the 1920s took advantage of these new modular formwork systems for concrete construction, both by applying them on the construction site as well as in prefabrication. Their results are exemplified by Le Corbusier’s Domino system or the housing by Ernst May (1886–1970) in Praunheim, Germany  [2]. The latter example helped laying the basis for prefabrication techniques adapted on a larger scale for housing in the 1950s  [9].Taking full advantage of the prefabrication technology, the architect Pier Luigi Nervi, mainly known for his innovations in structural design  [10], introduced what he named “structural prefabrication” for the construction of a large number of differently shaped structural building elements.55The invention of “ferror cementi” consisted of various layers of metal netting formed by small diameter (1 mm or less) steel wire, where mortar was pressed into by using a trowel for the production of non-standard structural panels. The invention is further described in the article  [11].Structural prefabrication was the result of empirical studies, integrating material and structural properties with fabrication logics. The system was used for the construction of some dome structures for the 1960 Rome Olympics, including the spherical vault of the Sports Palace, a structure composed of 19 different kinds of prefabricated elements  [11].Despite these early examples, the investigation of the architectural potential of such innovative approaches towards structure and fabrication remained isolated phenomena. Resulting in the fact that, most advances that occurred since the 1950s and up till today in prefabrication as well as in on-site construction with concrete have mainly been directed towards more efficient and rapid serial mass production of similar and standardized building components.Rapid developments in CAD technology have in the last decades augmented the design possibilities for geometrically complex concrete structures. Such non-standard concrete elements are generally produced by applying custom made inlays onto a standard static formwork system. A pioneering example using this technique is the Nationale-Nederlanden Building in Prague by Frank Gehry  [12], or more recently the Spencer Dock Bridge in Dublin by Future Systems  [13]. The formwork inlays needed to erect such structures are generally fabricated by milling a homogeneous block of foam or wood into shape with a CNC router—a production method which allows almost any form to be made. Despite the costs and energy consumption resulting from the extensive milling process and the waste produced by their disposal after a single use, this wasteful and expensive production process is until date the most efficient technique for making custom formwork for concrete constructions with complex geometries.With regard to these problems, a number of companies and research institutions have developed innovative approaches that combine digital technology with static formwork systems, such as those developed by PERI  [14], a German producer of traditional scaffolding systems; ADAPA66Also described at: www.adapa.dk. (Accessed on 26. 01. 2014.)a Danish spin off company for adaptive concrete construction; or TailorCrete,77For further information: http://dfab.arch.ethz.ch/web/d/forschung/164.html33.a research project of the Chair for Architecture and Digital Fabrication at ETH Zurich.PERI88For further information on PERI flexible formwork system  [15].has introduced a flexible mould system illustrated in Fig. 1which is ideal for the construction of single curved elements, beginning with a minimal radius of 1 m. The system applies a re-adjustable scaffold system onto which e.g. fibreboards, metal plates or plywood can be bent and attached in one direction. For very low curvature, fibreboards can be bent in two directions. This requires a lot of expertise and is complicated to execute. The system of PERI is applied for the construction of silos, water tanks, pipes or recently for buildings such as ADAC Headquarters in Munich, by Sauerbruch and Hutton, a building consisting of a curved 5-storey plinth with an 18-storey curved tower  [16,15]. For the construction and planning of such geometries PERI has developed a software tool for architects and planners, which allows to optimize a structure according to a feasible formwork division, hence a software which has the potential of influencing both the design and construction process in the early design phase.99For further information  [17], Peri software, ELPOS and PERI CAD for formwork and scaffolding planning.Nonetheless the formwork system is limited to creating single curvatures.Another system for a flexible formwork is developed by ADAPA. This system aims to efficiently prefabricate non-structural double-curved concrete façade panels. The flexible mould consists of a membrane that is supported and adjusted by CNC controlled actuators. The membrane is flexible enough to form smooth double curved shapes and stiff enough to avoid sagging between the actuators under the load of the concrete. The concrete is first poured on the planar surface—after it has cured for a while the actuators deform the surface into the defined double curved geometry  [18].To obtain optimal results and avoid cracks a precise timing and control of the viscosity of the concrete is required. This poses a major challenge to the fabrication system since it is difficult to precisely quantify the precise time to shape due to the fact that concrete hydration is sensitive to the smallest environmental changes. Nonetheless this system demonstrates a high potential for an integrated digital design and production technique for producing a large variation of double curved panel elements, without the need for a custom formwork.A similar approach is taken by the research project TailorCrete, for which a digitally controlled flexible mould was also developed. But in difference to ADAPA this system aims for an in-situ construction of double curved structural elements. Instead of casting the concrete directly on the mould, TailorCrete uses the flexible mould to cast recyclable double-curved formwork inlays made of wax. These wax inlays are subsequently brought on site and applied onto a standard static formwork system. This innovative system for the construction of complex double-curved concrete structures combines the advantages of standardized modular in-situ formwork technology with the efficient and waste-free production of recyclable wax formwork inlays  [19].The systems described are not exactly comparable. While PERI is a leading supplier of formwork technologies for the construction industry which limits its flexible mould catalogue to single curvature structures, ADAPA, a recently started spin-off company, limit its catalogue to non-structural double curved panels. In contrast to these already available technologies Tailor Crete, although it is an on-going research project that has not yet reached industrial applicability, has the potential to raise the productivity of the flexible mould by allowing a high throughput of prefabricated reusable formwork inlays with complex geometry and thus to reduce the cost price per element produced. Despite the differences of the three projects, they all demonstrate how contemporary digital technologies can integrate with century-old techniques for the economically and ecologically sustainable fabrication of complex concrete structures.In a concrete extrusion process, still formable concrete is continuously pressed through a die1010Die is the term used in the extrusion industry. The term refers to shaping tool which the material is forces through when it is still in a formable state  [20].or nozzle of a predefined cross-section. The complexity of the produced elements depends on the geometry of the used die. One of the first concrete extruders was invented in 1884 and applied for the construction of underground conduits  [21].Today concrete extrusion is used for both on-site production and prefabrication of concrete elements. Common examples here are large scale pipe elements and pre-stressed elements such as hollow floor slabs  [22]. For on-site construction this technique is extensively used for extrusion of curb stones and paving of roads  [23]. In a larger scale this technique has recently been reinvented for the construction of the twin-tube metro line in Lyon  [24], for which a tunnel boring machine (TBM), with an circumference of ∼6.5 m extruded 300 mm thick steel-reinforced concrete for the construction of a 350 m long tunnel. This in-situ construction system could in future reduce the need for transport and production of prefabricated elements commonly used in the tunnel construction.In summary, concrete extrusion is today mainly applied for producing simple geometrical forms. The use of this technique for the production of complex concrete structures has only recently explored in research context through layer based extrusion systems.Only about one decade ago, architectural research projects began to combine concrete extrusion with digital fabrication techniques for the construction of complex concrete structures. Such approaches, which in principle correspond to scaling up a desktop 3D-printer to the size of a building, have nonetheless transformed the mono layered extrusion process into a system that allows extruding multi-layered concrete elements in complex geometrical shapes.One of the pioneers of this system is Prof. Behrokh Khoshnevis from the University of Southern California, whose project Contour Crafting   [25] uses a digitally controlled die which extrudes a rather dry cementitious material against trowels in layers of about 10 cm. The system is constrained by the fact that the deposited material must harden enough to sustain the weight of the next deposited layer. This creates a particular challenge on the bonding of the layers, putting various constraints in terms of the size, height and geometrical freedom of the elements that can be produced. Nevertheless, this technique has succeeded in producing wall elements 2 m high with a width of 13.5 cm, at a speed of approximately one square metre per hour  [26–28].A similar approach is taken in the project Free Form Construction at the Construction Research Centre at Loughborough University. However, unlike Contour Crafting, this research project applies a wet concrete mixture in thinner layers ranging from 6 to 24 mm. As a proof of concept a curved bench was extruded with a footprint of 2 m by 0.9 m and 0.8 m tall. It consists of 128 layers, extruded with a velocity of approximately 20 min/layer, which means that the production time of the bench was about 41 h  [20].These two techniques face three major issues: the first is the bonding between the layers. The second relates to controlling the processing and hardening time of the material, which has a direct impact on the third issue; the long production time. This resulted in the fact that the systems discussed above are still not ready for an industrial application. Nevertheless, these layer-based extrusion techniques hold the promise to develop towards efficient and environmentally sustainable production techniques, capable of being employed at an architectural and civil engineering scale.The dynamic casting process of slipforming was invented in 1899 by the engineer Charles F. Haglin in collaboration with the grain company owner Frank Peavey. It is a single-step process, in which the concrete is continuously placed into a delimited formwork that moves vertically at a velocity set according to the hydration rate of the concrete, ensuring that the material is self-supporting when released by the formwork.1111Jump-forming, which will not be discussed in this text, is often mistaken with slipforming. But jump-forming is a discontinuous process where the formwork is jumped or moved to the next level of the construction after the concrete has cured. Due to high cost jump-forming is mainly applied to simple structures such as cores and silos, detailed description on Jump-form or Climbing-forms can be found on  [6].In contrast to extrusion, the concrete is not forced through the formwork with pressure.One of the first known structures erected with this technique is a 20-m-high reinforced-concrete grain elevator (Fig. 2), for which the slipforming was driven by hand  [29,30].In 1944, the invention of centrally controlled hydraulic jacks [32] transformed slipforming into an almost automated casting system, which enabled to erect tall structures efficiently. Today slipforming is mostly applied for the construction of tower cores, bridge piers, power plant cooling towers, chimney shafts, pylons, the legs of oil-rig-platforms and structural facades of high-rise buildings  [6]. It is notably used to construct some of the tallest free standing structures in the world, such as the CN Tower in Toronto, Canada, finished in 1974  [33] or more recently for the 245-m-high core of the Shard Tower in London  [34].Slipforming is a technique extensively used in practice, as it enables a faster rate of construction with little use of formwork. However, it is constrained with respect to the freedom necessary for producing complex concrete geometries. Furthermore, this technique is generally limited to structures taller than 10 m, because of high initial set-up costs.Re-evaluating this robust and efficient construction technique in conjunction with digital fabrication could not only make this system economically viable for smaller structures, but also help to unlock the freedom of forming, which is inherent in dynamic processes. Such an approach promises an almost waste-free construction technique for complex concrete structures.Smart Dynamic Casting is a novel patented fabrication process resulting from an interdisciplinary research conducted by the research groups of Prof. Dr. Flatt, Prof. Dr. Hermann and Prof. Gramazio & Prof. Kohler at ETH Zurich,1212Further information: [35] Gramazio F., K.M., Lloret Kristensen E., Flatt R.J., http://dfab.arch.ethz.ch/web/e/forschung/223.html, in www.dfab.arch.ethz.ch. 2012. [36] Shahab, A., http://www.ifb.ethz.ch/pcbm/people/ashahab. 2012.which has pioneered the first known combination of slipforming with digital fabrication techniques  [37].In this process a formwork, significantly smaller than the structures produced, is attached to a 6-axis robotic arm. The robotic arm replaces the hydraulic jacks commonly used in slipforming, allowing for precise control of velocity and movement in space. This enhanced robotic control is informed by the physical properties of the material, which are monitored by a feedback system measuring the setting and hardening kinetics of the concrete and allowing for optimal formability during the very delicate phase when the material changes from being soft to hard. In this process the complex dynamic relationship of the formwork’s geometry, its trajectory and the rheological properties of the material are directly determining the possible geometrical results.As such, SDC integrates the material properties and the dynamic nature of the process as design parameters, allowing for the fabrication of complex and custom shapes, which would otherwise require custom-made formwork for the production of each individual element. This promises an efficient and inherently waste free fabrication technique for complex custom concrete structures.With SDC, the possible formal and structural spectrum of the fabricated element is defined by the trajectory and velocity of the formwork in relation to hydration rate of the concrete applied. The applied research method shown in Fig. 3consists of empirically conducted experiments aimed at understanding the mutual relationship between material properties, material simulation and digital fabrication. Through multiple production iterations of physical architectural prototypes, possible morphologies can be identified and validated.This paper discusses two groups of experiments. The first group, which was needed to kick-start the research, focused on identifying the narrow time frame in which a high strength fibre reinforced and self-compacting concrete is both formable and self-sustaining. The second set of experiments focused on the implementation of a new concept which integrates a custom made feedback system to guide production in accordance to the material strength evolution of a heavily retarded fibre reinforced concrete. The material applied has been developed during the thesis project Formwork Free Concrete1313The initial experiments revealed challenges in the formability when using a single batch of fibre reinforced concrete. To solve this problem PI of SDC Prof. Dr. R. J. Flatt, proposed to use a highly retarded concrete which was subsequently accelerated over time. Based on the concrete used in the first experiments a retarded fibre reinforced concrete was developed. This was done during the Bachelor Thesis project supervised by Prof. Dr. R. J. Flatt, Sara Mantellato, Amir Reza Shahab and Ena Lloret Kristensen  [38], p. 63. In this same bachelor project a validation of new measuring method for the static yield stress, replaced the large scale compression test with a digital penetrometer. The digital penetrometer is currently used for the feedback system discussed in 4.5.as well as in the on-going research of SDC. Details of the material can be found in the first published paper on this issue by Shahab et al.  [39].To prove the fundamental feasibility of the process and to collect first insights in the material behaviour, the initial experiments focused on the curing time needed for any column section of the selected concrete to support itself, as well as the additional load bearing capacity of a column section once the formwork was removed. In the second stage, this was validated on a prototypical scale in the robotic slipforming process, which aimed at producing a series of curved column sections using a cylindrical rigid formwork.The compression load tests were performed on a Zwick machine,1414Zwick, refers to a testing machine which is used for the standard testing of tensile and compression tests on a large variety of materials. Further information can be found on  [40].with specimens produced using a cylindrical PVC formwork (d=200mm,h=200mm) with a lubricated inlay.After mixing one batch of 80 L, the fresh concrete was cast into 8 individual cylindrical formworks of 10 L each. After the material had hydrated just enough to self-sustain the formwork was manually slipped off from the first specimen. The specimen was then placed centrally in the Zwick machine, whereafter pressure was applied vertically onto the column with a constant velocity of 5 mm/min. The test would run until a maximum force had been reached which was determined by a decrease in the force resistance or by visual observation of cracks. In the same tests sequence the additional 7 specimens where subsequently slipped manually and compressed in time intervals of 5 min over a period of 40 min.The results of the experiments allowed to identify three distinct periods and material states, which are summarized in Fig. 4.The compression test results served to determine the time frame in which a column section can sustain its own weight without formwork as well as its load capacity in that moment. Based on this, slipping times were selected for a series of robotic slipforming experiments. These aimed at understanding the formability of the concrete and identifying the ideal velocity for slipping and shaping. Following an overview of the experimental methodology along with the major finding is described:For these preliminary experiments a cylindrical steel formwork with a diameter of 200 mm and a height of 1000 mm, coated with a lubricant foil of polypropylene, was attached to a 6-axis robotic arm shown in Fig. 5. For each experiment a batch of 30 l of fibre reinforced self-compacting concrete was mixed and placed to a height of 600 mm in the formwork. After a resting time of approximately 130 min the robotic slipforming would start.For each experiment the formwork was slipped along the same curved trajectory as illustrated in Fig. 6. To evaluate an optimal speed for slipping and shaping the time-based evolvement of the formworks velocity was individually programmed for each experiment based on the following rules: slow in the beginning, allowing the material to gain strength, then accelerating after the material could carry more than its own weight. The iterative experiments allowed fine-tuning of the velocity parameters empirically.In summary, the experiments allowed to draw the following conclusions:•velocity A: too high in the initial phase causes the material to creepvelocity B: too low, hydration advances too much in the mould and generates too much friction and therefore breakages occurvelocity C: the optimal velocity, slow in the beginning, to allow the material to obtain the strength with an exponential velocity, adjusted to setting of the mixture used.Despite the discrete curvatures in the columns and the occurrence of creep and cracks, these experiments were still considered as successful, since they identified the narrow time frame in which the selected concrete is both formable and self-supporting. The results revealed an ideal velocity distribution along the slipforming trajectory (Figs. 6 and 7), which enabled the fabrication of a first column 650 mm tall in 19 min. This is more than 100 times faster than the previously discussed layer-based techniques.Additionally, the experiments revealed that the fibre reinforced concrete could only be formed optimally for approximately 15 min after the period of time where the material is sufficiently formable and self-sustaining. After this period, friction in the formwork is significant resulting in cracks. Hence, the experiments showed the necessity of developing concrete in which hydration can be controlled over time in order to maintain an optimal formability during the entire production.In order to respond to the limitations in particular in regards to the formability in the initial experiments, a new concept was introduced. The concept employs retarded fibre reinforced self-compacting concrete. In addition it applies a custom-made feedback system which measures the material properties during production. Finally, it introduces a new formwork system, which allows to easily modify the cross section of the formwork and thus to investigate different geometries. The concept has been tested and has allowed fabricating columns with an elliptical section rotated through180∘over its 1800 mm height. Recently this concept has also been used to produce columns with different geometries.The 1:1 experiments described in the following chapter uses the production process, illustrated in Fig. 8: A; a large batch of retarded fibre reinforced self-compacting concrete is prepared. As the production starts the batch is divided into smaller batches and accelerated at different times with dosages of accelerator B; the batches of accelerated material are sequentially placed into the formwork E; simultaneously a small sample of the batch is placed into an feedback system, consisting of a digitally controlled penetrometer, measuring the setting and hardening kinetics of the material C; the data measured by the feedback system on the physical material reflect the properties of the material inside the formwork. The feedback system continuously sends real time data regarding the material properties via a custom program D; which automatically adjusts the slipping velocity of the formwork along the path E; and doses the accelerator of the subsequent batch in accordance with the current hydration of the concrete batch inside the formwork.To trace the period of time during which the material changes from soft to hard the production process relies on continuous measurement of the material strength evolution, in order to guide production. The measurements determine when to start the production, with which velocity to slip and shape as well as when to add accelerator to the next batch and place it in the formwork.The integrated custom-made feedback system consists of a digital penetrometer attached to a digitally controlled tri-axial table as illustrated in Fig. 9. The model of the mounted penetrometer is a Mecmesin, (AFG 1000N), using a cylindrical needle head with a diameter of 19.4 mm and a height 4.1 mm. The feedback system is controlled via custom software, which performs two functions simultaneously. First, it measures the material properties of a batch in time intervals of 5 min by submerging the needle head into the material with a predefined velocity of 2 mm/s. Second, it automatically transmits the data to the robotic controlling system, which adjusts the slipping and filling velocity in accordance with the measured setting kinetics of each batch.To integrate the feedback system into production, quantitative and qualitative experiments were conducted. These determined the load bearing capacities of the material using the penetrometer. Together with the experiments described in Section  4.4 this served to define the limiting values of section height, shaping time and rate as well as their interdependence  [39,41].To produce a column with successive batches two main conditions must be met. First, when a new batch is cast into the formwork the already present material must still be soft enough to bond with the new material casted. Second, adding a batch must not lead to an excess load that cannot be sustained by the previously placed batch. These two conditions have opposite requirements with respect to the rate of placing new material. The first requires adding accelerator and placing batches at a rate that allows the lower batch to be soft enough to assure good bonding. The second requires waiting for the placed batch to have enough strength to sustain itself, avoiding that the material flows because of its own weight. This is where the measurements performed by the feedback system play a crucial role in the decision making during production. However, to implement the feedback system in the production process and to validate the quantitative and qualitative results  [38,40] additional 1:1 experiments had to be conducted.The 1:1 experiments had two major objectives. First of all to produce an elliptical column with a rotation of180∘over its full height (1800 mm), without cracks or flow of material. This geometry was selected as it offers a well-defined challenge for the formability approach, while it nevertheless keeps the problem within well-defined boundaries. The second objective was to define the optimal placement rate and height of the batches in relation to the slipping velocity defined by the feedback system. An overview of the methodology is given below along with the major findings.The 1:1 experiments applied the production process described in Section  4.5.1. For this set-up a new formwork system was developed. It consists of a generic space frame into which a formwork of any geometry can be inserted e.g. a square, star or triangle. The frame is attached to the robotic arm as illustrated in Fig. 10. In these experiments an elliptical formwork with a radius of 125 mm×80 mm and a height of 600 mm was used.For each experiment the formwork was moved vertically and rotated by180∘over the entire height of the column. As the formwork was moved layers of accelerated concrete were placed in a rate defined by the measurement provided by the feedback system. Each experiment examined a particular batch height, placing rate and slip velocities. The velocity of the robotic slip forming was synchronized to the hydration kinetics of the concrete by the custom-made feedback system measuring the material properties in real time. In summary, the velocities were programmed to slip with:•slow velocity: 0.4 cm/min when feedback measurements sent a value between 2–4 N/cm2. Indicating that the material was too soft to carry its own weight;medium velocity: 1.2 cm/min when feedback measurements sent a value between 4–6 N/cm2. Indicating that the material could carry its own weight, hence the optimal period forming;fast velocity: 2.4 cm/min when feedback measurements sent a value between 6–8 N/cm2. The material could carry more than its own weight and started to lose its formability.Iterations of experiments allowed to conclude that to obtain the optimal formability the batches had to be reduced to approximately 3–5 cm and placed at intervals of 2–5 min. The optimal slipping velocity ranged between 1.2 to 2.4 cm/min. Here it is important to emphasize that already small variations in the concrete composition and in particular in the room temperature can modify these variables and make the difference between the layers that would fail (flow or crack) and ones that could be properly shaped.However, thanks to both quantitative and qualitative load analyses of the material in the initial experiments along with the development of a custom-made measuring and feedback system, it was possible to develop a robust production process  [20], with which, a large elliptical column without cracks or flow of material could be produced (as illustrated in Fig. 11).To prove the robustness of the system and to validate the formability of the material with other geometries, three cross sections (a square, a cross and again an ellipse with the same volume) were tested, and were used to produce three full-scale columns with the method described in Section  4.5.1. The columns were slipped in a rotational trajectory of180∘around the central axis of the formwork with an average velocity of 1.2 cm/min with layers of approximately 3–5 cm. The results in Fig. 12show the three columns at their final height of 190 cm.These structures clearly demonstrate that the implementation of feedback-driven, computer-controlled systems, which can determine the physical properties of the concrete, allows new production and design processes to be employed for the production of complex concrete structures.The aim is to develop SDC into a highly predictable and fully automated feedback driven fabrication system. To reach this goal a computer model is currently being developed1515The program is being developed by Ph.D. student Linus Mettler, specialized in computational physics for building materials in the group of Prof. Dr. H. Herrmann who is also research partner in SDC  [45].by the group of Prof. Dr. Herrmann  [44]. At the moment this model functions as a conditional tool in the feedback system which predicts the load capacities of the material in the transition from liquid to solid allowing to precisely predict the dosage of chemical admixtures needed, the amount of material to cast and to adjust the robotic slip velocity accordingly. In a future perspective the aim is to develop this tool to a level that it can be used to automatically control this production. In addition this tool must function as a digital design tool in which the physical material and fabrication parameters are integrated. This will allow planners to explore the design space while producing rationalized and responsive designs which are in sync with the material properties and fabrication parameters of the robotic slipforming system.A challenge will therefore be to validate and optimize this simulation model based on quantitative and qualitative analyses gathered through the physical experimentation of this on-going research.Another major part of the research relates to the material design, developed in the group of Prof. Dr. Flatt—where a particular focus will be on the adjustment of the chemical admixtures, their impact on each other and with the cement hydration.Last but not least, the current investigation is focused on the development of a flexible formwork. This formwork should allow to dynamically adjust the formwork geometry during the slipping process, hence increasing the range of possible architectural morphologies and thus radically enlarge the design space of this robotic fabrication system.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
