@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Machine learning classification of medication adherence in patients with movement disorders using non-wearable sensors

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Data driven methodology to detect adherence using non-invasive sensors in PD patient.Effectiveness of approach illustrated with case study.Solution for non-hospital remote monitoring of patients.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Parkinson's disease (PD) diagnosis,Smart healthcare system,Machine learning,Healthcare data,Multimodal sensor,Healthcare delivery,Decision support system,Medication adherence,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstractfx1

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Medication non-adherence is a widespread problem in the United States, increasing safety risks for patients and placing a significant financial burden on the healthcare industry [1]. Poor adherence to medication often results in substantial worsening of a disease, increased mortality, and unnecessary healthcare costs [2,3]. For the purposes of this paper, we limit the definition of adherence to the medication regimen a physician prescribes, and a patient's commitment to taking those medications as prescribed. When evaluating patients having neurologically-induced movement disorders, clinicians often rely upon self-reports to determine medication adherence. For example, the patient may be asked whether he or she is taking medication as prescribed or whether he or she is attending physical therapy as planned. In the clinic, adherence can be assessed subjectively by trained healthcare professionals. However, a given patient's presentation during office visits may not accurately reflect his or her typical daily function. Non-adherence is widespread and can be very difficult to determine during brief clinical visits.Medication non-adherence is particularly problematic in patients with Parkinson's disease (PD), a disease that often affects elderly individuals. The cognitive deficits associated with PD may exacerbate this problem. A recent study revealed that 61% of PD patients were non-adherent to their medical prescriptions. Additionally, the average medical cost per non-adherent patient was $15826, compared with $9228 for adherent patients [4]. Furthermore, the shortage of movement disorders subspecialists limits the availability of in-office visits for PD patients. Technologies that can help monitor patients' overall health and motor symptoms may allow for improved quality of care, reduced costs, and more efficient office visits. One existing technology, for example, AutoCITE [5] is used to automate partially constraint-induced movement therapy in stroke victims. However, such approaches are highly customized and are physically invasive because they require patients to use wearable devices. Non-wearable approaches are needed so that physical contact with devices may be reduced or eliminated. Finally, since patients spend the majority of their time away from a healthcare provider's supervised environment, there is a need for systems that can monitor medication adherence outside the clinic or hospital [6].In order to overcome these challenges, the authors of this work propose a data mining driven methodology that uses low-cost, non-wearable sensors such as the Microsoft Kinect, to quantitatively evaluate adherence to medication and drug responses among movement disorder patients. The proposed methodology can be adapted easily to a patient's home setting, allowing for the measurement of adherence in a non-office based setting. The methodology presented in this paper will be solving the following scenario:Parkinson's disease (PD) patient (i) goes to the hospital to visit his/her physician. Since physicians cannot rely on patients to provide consistent and accurate information pertaining to their medication adherence, the physician prescribes the proposed motion sensor system to the patient with instructions on how to use it. Each sensor system will be customized to a specific patient using their initial setup data as the ground truth. The initial calibration/ground truth data can either be captured at the physician's office or at home in the patient's location of choice. Given the baseline/ground truth data, the data mining models will determine anomalous gait patterns, hereby indicating that a patient is non-adherent to his/her medication protocol. The availability of quantifiable evidence of medication adherence through the presence/absence of gait dysfunctions will enable healthcare decision makers to know how adherent their patients are and what intervention strategies enhance/diminish adherence. The physician will also know whether a patient is utilizing the system, based on a time log stored on the system itself, hereby minimizing a patient's ability to “game the system” by not using it.The methodology proposed in this work first uses remote sensor hardware to capture patient gait data. Machine learning algorithms are then employed to help healthcare practitioners detect PD patients' medication status as “taking” (“on”) medication and “not taking” (“off”) medication, based on gait features. It has been reported that visual evidence of gait dysfunction are observed in Parkinson's disease patients that are “off” medication, compared to when they are “on” medication [7–9]. While these gait dysfunctions are readily observable by a trained medical expert, there exists a knowledge gap in terms of whether these variations in gait (between “on” and “off” medication) can be captured by non-wearable sensors and data mined for patients' adherence to medication protocols. This works aims to fill this knowledge gap by demonstrating the feasibility of non-wearable data capture and data mining of patient gait during “on” and “off” medication states. The methodology described herein has allowed for high discriminative ability using gait data and, in the future, may be used to predict medication adherence in the home setting.For the purposes of this paper, we limit the definition of adherence to the medication regimen a physician prescribes and a patient's commitment to taking those medications as prescribed. This paper advances the field of remote detection of adherence by:1.The ability to use low cost, non-wearable data acquisition techniques that concurrently maintain patient privacy by collecting only the three-dimensional (3D) geospatial data pertaining to a patient's skeletal node location.The ability to quantify movement abnormalities at a non-office/non-hospital location, allowing for use within the home setting.The ability to act as both an early warning and active monitoring system that can provide relevant information to patients, clinicians, and healthcare decision makers.The organization of this paper is as follows. This section provides a brief introduction and motivation pertaining to the problem. Section 2 describes previous work related to the current research. Section 3 outlines our methodology for patient adherence monitoring. A clinical study involving PD patients and controls is presented in Section 4, with the results and discussion. Section 5 concludes the paper and outlines some future work and areas for expansion.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, a remote data mining based methodology is proposed to differentiate between “on” and “off” medication states among PD patients using low-cost, non-wearable sensor hardware. Using whole-body movement data readings from the patients, the authors were able to discriminate between PD patients on and off medication, with accuracies greater than 97% for some patients using an individually customized model and accuracies of 78% for a generalized model containing multiple patient gait data. This shows that remote sensing coupled to data mining approaches may provide feasible techniques for healthcare providers to determine medication adherence among PD subjects from a non-clinical location. Moreover, this system may serve as a platform to provide early warnings if non-adherence is detected. These goals are particularly important among PD patients, since cognitive [65] impairment is common within this population and may increase risk for medication adherence. In addition to their potential role in the classification of medication adherence, machine learning techniques may reveal information regarding highly relevant yet undiscovered motor patterns in neurologic diseases (i.e. specific patterns of joint positions, velocities, and accelerations). Interestingly, the feature selection process yielded a remarkably smaller subset of informative features across all four experiments. This large reduction in dimensionality indicates that relatively few variables are required to discriminate between “off” and “on” medication gait patterns in PD. The relatively low number of variables required for classification is encouraging because it may lead to faster and more accurate learning and classification. Notably, the data collection step for each patient took less than 10s, including calibration of the sensor. The methodology proposed herein, accordingly, may provide a feasible and low-cost implementation for remote detection of medication adherence.In future work, the proposed methodology can be extended to incorporate measures of movement disorder severity. These data may be of particular use in medication management and adjustment. In addition, the placement of sensors and their directionality in a given room can be optimized to reduce costs and improve detection. Future studies may focus upon the robustness of kinetic measurements across multiple sensors and classification accuracy according to directionality and multi-sensor modalities. Moreover, longitudinal in-home data collection may reveal novel gait features and improve classification accuracy of PD adherence and non-adherence. Additionally, further studies can explore exploiting the temporal nature of the data captured by using techniques such as dynamic time warping to further improve classification. Future work may explore the feasibility of expanding the proposed methodology to include other neurological diseases and movement disorders.On behalf of my co-authors, I would like state that we have no conflict of interest to declare for the manuscript entitled: “Machine Learning Classification of Medical Adherence in Patients with Movement Disorders Using Non-Invasive Sensors” submitted to the “Computers in Biology and Medicine Journal” for possible evaluation.