@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Advising patients on selecting trustful apps for diabetes self-care

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A proposed method to help patients identify trustful apps for diabetes self-care.A pictorial identification schema is used to review diabetes self-care apps.This method does not require specific skills.Two different profiles apply the tool on the selected apps and discuss the results.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Medical informatics computing [L01.700.568],Data display [F02.784.412.221],Mobile applications [L01.224.900.685],Diabetes mellitus [C18.452.394.750],Self care [N02.421.784.680],

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundThere has been a dramatic increase in mobile apps for diabetes self-care. However, their quality is not guaranteed and patients do not have the appropriate tools for careful evaluation.ObjectiveThis work aims to propose a tool to help patients with diabetes select an appropriate app for self-care.MethodsAfter identifying the conceptual framework of diabetes self-care, we searched Apple US app store and reviewed diabetes self-care apps, considering both generic and diabetes-specific features. Based on an existing tool for representing the benefits and weaknesses of medical apps, we created the pictorial identification schema/Diabetes Self-care tool, which specifically identified medical apps in the diabetes domain.ResultsOf the 952 apps retrieved, 67 were for diabetes self-care, while 26 were excluded because they were not updated in the last 12 months. Of the remaining 41, none cost more than 15 USD, and 36 implemented manual data entry. Basic features (data logging, data representation, and data delivery) were implemented in almost all apps, whereas advanced features (e.g., insulin calculator) were implemented in a small percentage of apps. The pictorial identification schema for diabetes was completed by one patient and one software developer for 13 apps. Both users highlighted weaknesses related to the functionalities offered and to their interface, but the patient focused on usability, whereas the software developer focused on technical implementation.ConclusionsThe Pictorial Identification Schema/Diabetes Self-care is a promising graphical tool for perceiving the weaknesses and benefits of a diabetes self-care app that includes multiple user profile perspectives.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Diabetes mellitus (DM) is a major public health concern worldwide. A recent report from the International Diabetes Federation, an organization with about 230 diabetes association members, noted that about 387 billion people are affected by DM globally, and that related health expenditures were estimated to be at least USD 612 billion in 2014 [1].The concept of DM patient self-care, including the use of mobile applications or “apps,” has proved to be beneficial for patients [2]. While agreement on the definition of self-care is still being discussed [3], the concept of self-care is about the active involvement of patients in their own care and modifying their lifestyle behaviors. Patient self-care, including regular monitoring of blood glucose, was shown to improve glycemic control [4–6] and decrease glycosylated hemoglobin values. Recent evidence shows that the use of smartphone interventions to support self-care and blood glucose monitoring have beneficial effects that are even better than those obtained with other computer-based tools [7,8]. Support from mobile technologies is effective in promoting physical activity in patients with diabetes [9], and is associated with a better control of the progression of ketosis to diabetic ketoacidosis in young people [10]. Even though this evidence has yet to be confirmed [11], smartphone apps that provide reminders, disease monitoring, management, and education tools are thought to benefit both patients and health-care professionals [12,13], especially if combined with a telemonitoring approach [14–16].However, the literature shows that these results were based on apps and mobile interventions evaluated in controlled environments using safe and reliable mobile tools and applications. Conversely, the app market is currently exploding [17] and about 100,000 health mobile apps are available in the major app stores [18], including apps for diabetes self-management. In addition, the problem of the reliability and safety of such apps is still being underestimated [19–27] and there is a huge gap between the scientific results for the development and use of medical apps and the apps available in the stores [28]. In this scenario, patients searching for an app to assist in their diabetes self-care are likely to find hundreds of options and experience difficulties selecting the appropriate one for their needs.The problem of app selection is not only related to the cost of the app, but also the need to carefully evaluate the functionalities made available, its responsiveness to the patients’ needs, the reliability of the underlying information sources, and its usability and understandability [29,30]. Mobile apps also suffer from several limitations that are not easily detectable by an inexperienced user, including poor underlying clinical evidence and its integration with health-care information systems [31]. Regulatory bodies, despite the recent publication of Food and Drug Administration (FDA) guidelines on medical mobile apps [32], are still far from providing valuable tools that are able to identify, in an easy and understandable way, the weaknesses and benefits associated with a single app, and helping patients in selecting the best-suited or the least-risky app [33]. Scientific reviews [26], reviewing site opinions (see 〈http://medicapp.info/appmediche〉 and 〈http://www.imedicalapps.com〉), and some attempts by UK National Health Services (NHS) to catalog medical apps (〈http://www.nhs.uk/pages/healthappslibrary.aspx〉) are the only available choices for patients to perform responsible decision-making about the appropriate apps to download and use. Reviewing initiatives like iMedicalApps and MedicApp provide app ranking and evaluations from health-care professionals or students who tested and used the app. They categorize apps according to their medical specialty and operating system, and the apps are ranked by specialized health-care professionals (see 〈http://www.imedicalapps.com〉). Even though this information is useful for patients, they are written from a health-care professional perspective, which may not have the same focus. In addition, it seems that the NHS catalog is under discussion for improvements. The new objective for the catalogs is to provide the consumers/patients an endorsed set of health and social care mobile apps (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-information-boards-workstreams). Furthermore, a few apps are currently available in the catalog for diabetes self-care.The Pictorial Identification Schema (PIS) for medical apps [35] proposes a one-shot user-oriented identity card able to represent the weaknesses and benefits associated with an app. The PIS was designed as an evaluation tool that can be completed by any user profile (such as patients, health-care professionals, mHealth app developers, mHealth app promoters, or students) according to their specific skills and experience. Therefore, the value of the PIS is related to the “signature” of the author who completed the schema forms. The PIS identifies six attribute families (responsible promoters, offered services, searching methods, application domains, envisaged users, and qualifier and quantifiers) that each contain attributes defined from the review of the available apps. The schema uses a traffic light color code to represent whether the implementation of a certain attribute represents a strength (green) or a weakness (red) for the app under evaluation. In its present stage, the PIS is still being validated and its dissemination strategies have yet to be exploited [35]. However, the PIS was designed by reviewing the apps in three medical domains: cardiology, oncology, and pharmaceutical. Even though the PIS included attributes that are relevant for all medical apps, it still needs to include specialized focuses for other relevant medical conditions, including diabetes. Despite this limitation, given its graphical and intuitive interface, the concepts and the practicalities of the PIS could be well suited to give patients advice in the selection of appropriate apps for diabetes self-management. This requires the schema’s attributes be submitted to a validation and revision process.In this work, we propose and test a Pictorial Identification Schema/Diabetes self-care, specialized for diabetes apps that can be used as a simple and easily understandable graphical tool to represent the strengths and the weaknesses related to apps for the self-care of diabetes. This specialized identification schema is created by adapting the previously proposed PIS [35], building on a model for diabetes self-care [36], and reviewing the diabetes-related apps available on Apple’s US app store to extract the app characteristics. The schema is intended to be used to give advice to patients willing to select an app for their diabetes self-care.To define the specialization of the PIS for diabetes self-care, we followed an approach similar to that adopted for the definition of the original version of the schema [35]: 1. Definition of the conceptual framework for diabetes self-care, which aimed to identify the critical patient actions that can be supported by functionalities in mobile health applications; 2. Review of the available apps (in Apple’s US app store) for diabetes self-care according to a set of defined characteristics; 3. Matching the diabetes self-care conceptual framework using mobile health apps to the characteristics identified in the available apps to define the specific attributes for the Pictorial Identification Schema/Diabetes self-care tool; 4. Exemplary use of the one-shot pictorial schema/diabetes self-care tool by two user profiles (a patient and a developer) for the evaluation of a small sample of apps.A conceptual model for the self-care of a chronic disease, heart failure, was presented by Riegel and Dickson [37]. Maintenance and management are the main concepts in that model. Maintenance relates to the monitoring of symptoms and treatment compliance to pursue and follow physiologic stability [37]. Management relates to the patients’ decision-making actions when some symptoms occur [37]. A third component, i.e., confidence, is included in the model for representing the relationship between self-care and outcomes. Higher levels of self-care confidence relate to better patient self-care abilities [37]. In other research, this model has been adapted to describe DM self-care [36] with the objective to uncover the relationship between self-care and DM health outcomes; glycemic control was the main target and patient decision-making a crucial factor [36] in terms of maintenance and management as described by Riegel and Dickson’s [37] model. In our design of a Pictorial Identification Schema/Diabetes self-care, specialized for, we propose a model of DM self-care that highlights the aspects of data collection and analysis as key to improving DM self-care when the process is mediated by mobile health apps.According to the American Association of Diabetes Educators, managing diabetes includes several actions, such as making healthy food choices, being physically active, monitoring blood sugar, and taking proper medications as prescribed [38]. Regular communication with the diabetes care team is also important to support problem solving, to reduce risks of complications, and to cope with lifestyle changes [38].Multiple factors and activities to manage the disease properly were described on different time scales ranging from daily to long-term (Fig. 1). These include blood-glucose tests, food intake, and physical activity management, which patients should perform daily, as well as their compliance with therapies or medications for comorbidities, which are conversely followed on a long-term basis. In Fig. 1, these activities are considered as input for patients to integrate all information and decide the best actions to control their disease according to their best knowledge (e.g., to select the proper medication). Information is tracked during this decision-making process; e.g., if the patient performs a blood-glucose test, this information is traditionally noted in a paper diary. Other useful data are related to activities and food intake. This tracked information (called “logs”) represents the present behavior of the patient and is an output of the process (see bottom of Fig. 1). Some of the information collected in the logs can be part of the process inputs, which help patients with their decision-making process, as represented by the “Feedback from ongoing status” arrow in the top of Fig. 1.More specifically, the term “logs” refers to the fact that data are automatically stored without human intervention and are intended to be used by a computer or another device. For example, due to the hardware characteristics of smartphones, some mobile apps are able to record the smartphone owners’ physical activity and their related calorie consumption. In Fig. 1, the patients’ ongoing status acts as feedback, which influences their decision about the action to take. Comparing our model (Fig. 1) with DM self-care [36], patients decision-making about their self-care is affected by their current health status, daily evidence (self-care maintenance), and long-term evidence (self-care management). Process logs are used to support patients’ decisions about their self-care. At each iteration, composed by the pairs of “decision” and “action to take,” patients self-care ability increases (self-care confidence).Therefore, a mobile application for diabetes self-management must, at the very least, implement data logging for heterogeneous types of data (blood-glucose, medication, activity, nutrition) [34]; however, when considering mobile devices, we also expect some additional functionalities, such as graphically representing the data collected on the screen (e.g., graphs, charts) and delivering it using e-mail, text messages, or cloud services. These other functionalities can be summarized as data representation and delivery. The above-mentioned functionalities do not include any kind of “algorithm” or “intelligence” devoted to the interpretation or analysis of the data collected, represented, or delivered. An insulin dose calculator is an example of such “intelligence.” Since decision-making models for the automatic interpretation of patient-related data in diabetes are still being developed [39], we considered functionalities that provide direct advice to patients as “advanced” features and did not include them in the “basic” features expected for a mobile app for diabetes.Considering the framework shown in Fig. 1, we identified the basic features that a mobile app for diabetes self-management must implement, which are: 1. Data logging, storing data in a permanent way for later use; 2. Data representation, reliably representing the previously stored data on the device; and 3. Data delivery, allowing data to be shared with other people (e.g., family member, health-care professional) in multiple forms (e.g., text message, e-mail, cloud file).Our research began by considering all related iPhone apps available in Apple app store on April 1, 2014 returned by searching the Apple app store using the keyword “diabetes.” Since the keyword was generic, but the main target of our study was multifeatured apps dedicated to diabetes management for both patients and health-care professionals, we introduced some exclusion criteria. Apps were excluded from our analysis by the following criteria: they were a limited version (i.e., lite or free app) of an available fully featured version; they were supported only a single feature (e.g., insulin calculator only); they did not support any diabetes-specific data collection, archiving, and analysis for time-monitoring (e.g., glycated hemoglobin converter, pills reminder); their target was not diabetes self-management (e.g., generic health trackers, activity trackers, cooking apps, educational apps) or if diabetes self-management was an incidental-only element within the app; or if they were a content-consumption-only app (e.g., magazine, journal). Considering the fast evolution of the app market, we also excluded apps that did not receive any updates during the 12 months prior to the search (i.e., from April 1, 2013 to March 31, 2014). All apps meeting the inclusion criteria were used for our review. Among these apps selected for our study, a subset including the apps freely available from the Italian Apple app store were downloaded to test the apps directly. We decided to download only the free apps to let the users participate in the study without incurring additional costs.According to our conceptual framework, we reviewed all the apps meeting our inclusion criteria by considering general features related to the mobile market (such as app pricing, app updates), diabetes-specific features including basic features (data logging, representation, and delivery), and advanced features (e.g., community services, insulin calculators) [26,34]. We considered whether the app was reviewed by one of the known reviewing initiatives (〈www.imedicalapps.com〉, 〈http://medicapp.info/appmediche/〉, or 〈http://apps.nhs.uk/〉). The full list of these attributes is reported inTable 1.The PIS is a graphical classification tool for mHealth apps that we proposed previously [35]. It defines six main families, which each include different attributes:1.Responsible promoters (medical systems companies, drug companies, national services, hospitals, pharmacies, medical associations, publishing company), representing who holds the major perceived responsibility on the app, which does not necessarily mean the developer.Offered services (handbooks, guidelines, newsletters, calculators, forecasters, GeoHealth, simulators, others), representing the type of services/functionalities available in the app.Searching methods (alphabetical order, images, predefined comparisons, multiple sources, chemical structures, list scrolling, others), representing the tools for “consuming contents” available in the app.Application domains (complex prescriptions, education, mobility, emergency, drug shortage, specific domain specialty, video manual), representing, besides the medical area, the domain in which the app is intended to be used.Envisaged users (students, citizens, professionals, others) that are the main user categories.Qualifiers and quantifiers (download number, user satisfaction index, timing, significant testimonial), representing the factors that are mostly considered by nonspecialized users in evaluating the app.To classify an app, a traffic light color-coded score is assigned to each attribute. Attributes coded as red are to caveats for the potential user, whereas those coded as green are the strengths of the app. The yellow code means “something-in-between.” The interpretation of the green and the red coding depends on the attribute family. For instance, “offered services” are coded green when they are useful and appropriate for the field, whereas “searching methods” are coded green when they are not trivial and the result-set presentation is effective [35]. This implies that the schema was not intended to describe only what is provided by the app, but also to provide a judgment, from the viewpoint of the signee, on whether or not the feature/attribute is appropriate/works well. Any potential user type, who is required to “sign” the filled-in schema, can fill in the PIS. This signature is important because different profiles can judge the app differently (e.g., developer vs patient vs therapist).A more detailed description of the PIS, including the rules for color coding, is provided in [35].According to the methodology developed in [35], starting from the review of the apps selected for our work, we defined new attributes specific to the diabetes domain and removed those that were not relevant to it. For example, in the “searching methods” family, the “chemical structures” attribute is not relevant for diabetes self-care. That attribute indicates the possibility to browse chemical structures of drugs or other entities, e.g., proteins.We then asked a patient with diabetes and a software developer to evaluate the subset of apps downloaded for free from the Apple’s Italian app store, and to complete the PIS forms specific to diabetes. As for the color-coded score, we adopted the same methods as described in [35]. For instance, considering an app update, a red label will be assigned if the app has not been updated for more than the average updating time we defined above, a green label will be assigned if the updating time is equal to or less than the average (updates are more frequent), and a yellow label if the updating time is somewhere in the middle of the earlier or later times.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
