@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Adaptive image inversion of contrast 3D echocardiography for enabling automated analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Contrast 3d echocardiography suffers from high speckle.The automated analysis from contrast 3d echocardiography is a difficult task.Contrast image inversion is proposed to match appearance with non-contrast image.An automatic threshold estimation method is proposed to enable image inversion.The contrast image inversion enables LV segmentation using non-contrast methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Contrast 3D echocardiography,3D echocardiography,Image inversion,LV segmentation,Histogram analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
IntroductionContrast 3D echocardiography (C3DE) is commonly used to enhance the visual quality of ultrasound images in comparison with non-contrast 3D echocardiography (3DE). Although the image quality in C3DE is perceived to be improved for visual analysis, however it actually deteriorates for the purpose of automatic or semi-automatic analysis due to higher speckle noise and intensity inhomogeneity. Therefore, the LV endocardial feature extraction and segmentation from the C3DE images remains a challenging problem.MethodsTo address this challenge, this work proposes an adaptive pre-processing method to invert the appearance of C3DE image. The image inversion is based on an image intensity threshold value which is automatically estimated through image histogram analysis.ResultsIn the inverted appearance, the LV cavity appears dark while the myocardium appears bright thus making it similar in appearance to a 3DE image. Moreover, the resulting inverted image has high contrast and low noise appearance, yielding strong LV endocardium boundary and facilitating feature extraction for segmentation.ConclusionsOur results demonstrate that the inverse appearance of contrast image enables the subsequent LV segmentation.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is the leading cause of deaths worldwide [1]. To reduce the number of CVD mortality rate, it is necessary to have an efficient diagnostic method for timely detection and monitoring of disease status. For this purpose, cardiac imaging is frequently used by the cardiologist for the diagnosis of CVD and the study of cardiac structure as well as its function by automatic or semi-automatic analysis. Moreover, the segmentation of left ventricle (LV) endocardium or epicardium boundaries is an active area of research.Among the cardiac imaging modalities, the echocardiography is generally accepted as a quick, non-invasive, cost effective and practical method for examining and exploring the cardiac structure as well as its function at rest and during stress. Real-time three-dimensional echocardiography (3DE) is a relatively recent addition to the echocardiography imaging scene [2] with success in providing more accurate and useful results. Despite the fact of being widely used in a large proportion of patients, the 3DE occasionally fails to produce diagnostically useful images [3]. The image quality is known to be affected by ultrasound physics and influenced by factors such as fat, rib spacing, ultrasound reflection angle, and lung breathing [3,4]. Therefore, the echocardiography suffers from intensity dropout, missing features and speckle noise. These artefacts may further lead to inaccurate assessment and anomalous interpretation of the cardiac structure.Fig. 1 presents some examples of 2D cross-sections from 3DE images with intensity dropout, where the arrows point to the missing anatomical structures.To tackle these limitations, contrast enhanced 3d echocardiography (C3DE) scans are acquired as an alternative choice with relatively improved image quality for patients with poor acoustic window. In contrast echocardiography, the contrast agent drugs containing hyper-echoic micro-bubbles are injected intravenously. The ultrasound characteristics of these contrast agents are distinctly different from the blood and the cardiac tissue. The contrast agents intravenously mixed in the blood produce strong backscatter to the ultrasound waves, thus causing an increase in the echocardiographic signal and resulting in better image quality [6].The concentration of micro-bubbles in the LV blood pool is much higher than in vessels of the cardiac muscles, thus resulting in inverted image appearance (seeFig. 2) compared with routine 3DE image and often provides a clear LV endocardium boundary [7]. The visual appearance of endocardial delineation is often improved in contrast echocardiography, thus enhancing the cardiologist׳s diagnostic ability. Cardiologists often choose the contrast images over non-contrast images, when corresponding non-contrast image quality is poor due to poor acoustic window.Although the image quality in C3DE is perceived to be improved for visual analysis, it seems to deteriorate for the purpose of automatic or semi-automatic analysis due to high speckle noise and intensity inhomogeneity within the LV cavity. In the C3DE images, due to this inverted appearance compared to the 3DE, the LV segmentation methods proposed for 3DE images fail on the C3DE images. Moreover, the commercial software (QLAB [8] and TomTec [9]) do not presently support automatic or semi-automatic C3DE segmentation. Therefore, the LV endocardial feature extraction and segmentation from C3DE images remain challenging problems. In the previous literature, no considerable work has been done to address these issues. Hence, there is a genuine need for the exploration of C3DE pre-processing technique to enable automated image analysis.The C3DE image analysis appears to face the following difficulties, due to image quality, which hinder the subsequent automatic or semi-automatic image analysis:a)Contrast intensity inhomogeneity within the LV cavity, as a result of reflection and scattering of the ultrasound beam by many uncorrelated free moving contrast microbubbles (seeFig. 3(a)).There is a relatively low contrast or slow intensity change between brighter LV cavity and the myocardium border (see Fig. 3(b)). This low contrast between myocardium border and the LV cavity can obstruct the traditional LV edge driven feature extraction.This work proposes an adaptive automatic pre-processing technique for image inversion in which the new inverted representation of a C3DE image is constructed to overcome the abovementioned difficulties. This inverted representation facilitates the further automatic or semi-automatic analysis.This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the relevant research work. Section 3 briefly elaborates the proposed work. Further, Sections 4 and 5 present and discuss the results, respectively. Towards the end, the paper ends with concluding remarks in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Even though the image quality in C3DE is perceived to be improved for visual analysis, but it seems to deteriorate for the purpose of automatic or semi-automatic analysis due to two main issues: (i) the contrast inhomogeneity within the LV cavity, and (ii) the relatively low contrast between the LV cavity and the myocardium border. Thus, the LV endocardial segmentation from C3DE images remains a challenging problem with little published work in the literature. To deal with this challenge, we presented an adaptive pre-processing method to invert the appearance of the C3DE image. This inverted appearance yielded low noise appearance, strong LV endocardium boundary and facilitated feature extraction for segmentation. The image inversion mapping was carried out by using intensity threshold value for which an automatic estimation method by histogram analysis was proposed. This technique was validated through qualitative and quantitative means and favourable results were found. We highlight that the proposed method is the first attempt of its kind towards enabling automatic or semi-automatic LV segmentation from C3DE images. In this work, the data analysis, training and validation was conducted on limited number of C3DE images. This work can be extended in future by applying and validating the proposed inversion technique on a larger size dataset. The proposed image inversion approach is primarily reliant on image histogram and thus the application seems specific to C3DE images. However, we consider that the approach may be suitable for application on images in ultrasound imaging with similar intensity characteristics.None declared.