@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A triangulation-based hole patching method using differential evolution

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new hole patching method is proposed to repair the defective model.The information on both sides of the boundary around the considered hole is used.The points in the hole region are predicted by differential evolution.The operations of mesh optimization are used to improve the quality of the mesh.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Hole patching,Triangulation model,Differential evolution,Point correspondence,Mesh optimization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this work, a new hole patching method (namely as, HPDE) is proposed to repair the damaged or ill-scanned three dimensional objects in real engineering applications. Our method differentiates from other related algorithms mainly on the following three aspects. Firstly, our algorithm sufficiently utilizes the point information around the considered hole for each prediction by constructing point correspondences on both sides of the boundary curve of the hole; secondly, the missing points in the hole region are predicted by the algorithm of differential evolution (DE), which is used to obtain the topological and geometrical structures of the mesh in the hole region; thirdly, operations of mesh optimization are adopted for improving the quality of the obtained triangulation mesh. Numerical results on kinds of holes with complex shape and large curvature, and a comparison with two recently proposed algorithms verify the effectiveness of the algorithm, further experiments on the noisy data points illustrate the robustness of the algorithm against noise.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Methods for constructing a mathematical model from a given set of three dimensional (3D) points have been applied into a wide variety of fields, such as engineering design, virtual reality, movie making and data visualization. Surface reconstruction has drawn much attention from last decades of years and a lot of methods are reported  [1–4]. It is more often that the provided points are represented with piecewise triangles (namely as triangulation model), such as the Marching Cubes method in  [5], the crust algorithm in  [6], direct advancing front method and modified decimation method in  [7], and a divide and conquer Delaunay triangulation in  [8].However, the constructed model may not be directly applicable for the real application. In one case, the provided triangulation model is damaged or the points in the considered model are ill-scanned. In another case, the provided 3D points can also be the measured parameter values from the simulation experiments, and it may come up that the data referring the parameter values in the abnormal conditions is difficult to be obtained by the simulations, which may be the result from the difficulty of these experiments or the high cost and time-consuming of the simulation. For these two cases, there still exist concerned regions (hole regions) where the point information is unknown and needs to be predicted based on the constructed model, thus, the hole patching method is resorted to.In this work, a new hole patching method (HPDE) based on defective triangulation model is devised to patch challenging holes with large curvature. Based on the boundary points and boundary directional vectors, the proposed HPDE utilizes algorithms of differential evolution (DE) and constrained triangulation sequently to obtain the topological and geometrical structures of the triangulation mesh in the hole region, which is further resorted to the algorithms of smoothing and mesh optimization to improve the mesh quality. The proposed HPDE differs from other hole patching methods mainly on the following aspects. (1) The proposed HPDE combines the frequently used algorithms of DE, constrained triangulation and mesh optimization in the application of hole patching. (2) Different from other algorithms obtaining the topological structure in advance, our method obtains the topological and geometrical structures of the mesh in the hole region at the same time. (3) HPDE sufficiently utilizes the directional vectors at each two corresponding base points on the boundary curve around the considered hole for the prediction, which is different from other algorithms either using only one side of boundary information or not using the directional vectors at the boundary points.This paper is organized as follows. Some related work of hole patching are introduced in Section  2. Section  3 presents the description of the classical DE algorithm. The proposed HPDE is described in Section  4. Section  5 presents all the numerical results on some kinds of test models. Finally, some discussions and conclusions are given in Sections  6 and 7, respectively.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
