@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multiple views system to support awareness for cooperative design

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We devise a cooperative awareness model to describe cooperative awareness information in product design.We propose concept of awareness intensity and an object-oriented method to identify and filter overloaded cooperative awareness model.A mechanism which responds to changes of lean cooperative awareness information is proposed to plan and execute task in product design.A navigation net managed by a multiple views system is proposed to browser lean cooperative awareness information set.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multiple view,Cooperation awareness,Cooperative design,Information overload,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
It is acknowledged that multiple views technology improves designer’s work efficiency by filtering redundant information. However, the increased need of cooperative activities in product design process requires views incorporating Cooperative awareness information (CAI), content of which should be lean for understanding and sortable according to importance. To achieve this target, this paper proposes an Object-based cooperative awareness model (OBCWM) and corresponding multiple views system. Requirements of CAI in product design are firstly analyzed. Then OBCWM is proposed, which consists of a CPM (Core product model) based concept framework. By use of CPM, an algorithm to calculate awareness intensity is developed based on object-oriented method. To support the mechanism of OBCWM, a multiple views system is then designed with “flexible view”, content of which is adjustable according to awareness intensity between CAI objects. After introduction to the system, application on a case is presented, followed by the evaluation of this system.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
To perform a cooperative design task, designers need to know situation information of cooperative environment and other designers involved as basis of decision making  [1]. In the domain of Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW), the situation information is called Cooperative awareness information (CAI). CAI plays a significant role in concurrent engineering  [2,3] and favors efficient cooperation of professionals from different disciplines. An efficient cooperative design system has two basic requirements:(1) Define CAI. Namely, the system shall first define CAI according to designers’ requirements.(2) Filter overloaded CAI. It shall provide accurate CAI to designers by filtering overload CAI. With sharp increase of product complexity, designers need to interact with lots of CAI sourced from mass cooperative activities in the same cooperative environment. This explains the generation of information overload. Information overload makes it hard to provide accurate information for designers and their attention will be badly distracted. To avoid negative influence of CAI overload, an improved CAI support system is needed to provide designers with a lean CAI set.To meet the two requirements of cooperative design system, this paper propose an object-oriented Cooperative awareness Model and a multiple views system based on this model.Innovations of this paper are as follows:(1) This paper proposes an object-oriented Cooperative awareness model (CWM) and algorithms to describe design task and awareness information, and hereby calculate the lean CAI set for a specific task.(2) This paper proposes a concept of “flexible view” to acquire CAI according to awareness intensity between the CAI and design task.This paper is organized as follows: Some related works with regard to overload CAI filtering and CAI definition are briefly introduced in Section  2. In Section  3, we address detail information of Object-based CWM (OBCWM), include awareness requirements of CWM, foundation, framework and mechanism of OBCWM. Section  4 introduces multiple views system based on OBCWM, followed by a case study in Section  5 to exemplify the application of this model and system. Evaluation of the system is presented in Section  6 before we reach the final conclusion.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
