@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Fast automated segmentation of wrist bones in magnetic resonance images

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Magnetic resonance of wrist is used in the diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis (RA).Segmentation of wrist bones is necessary for automated evaluation of RA lesions.A framework for automated segmentation of wrist bones was developed.An excellent agreement with gold truth data was reported.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Image segmentation,Rheumatoid arthritis,Magnetic resonance imaging,Watershed from markers,Wrist,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
PurposeAccording to current recommendations in diagnostics of rheumatoid arthritis (RA), Magnetic resonance (MR) images of wrist joints are used to evaluate three main signs of RA: synovitis, bone edema and bone erosions. In this paper we present an efficient method for segmentation of 15 bones present on MR images of the wrist which is inevitable for future computer-assisted diagnosis system for RA lesions.MethodThe segmentation procedure consists of two stages. The first stage is evaluation of markers (parts of bones working as seeds for the watershed algorithm) for bones in every joint: the distal parts of ulna and radius, the proximal parts of metacarpal bones and carpal bones. In the second stage the watershed from markers algorithm is applied based on the markers determined in the previous stage and the wrist bones are segmented. The markers were found using Multi Otsu algorithm along with custom method for filtering bones from other tissues.ResultsWe analyzed 34 MR images. The automated segmentations were compared with manual segmentations using metrics: accuracy ACC derived from area under ROC curve AUC, Dice coefficient and mean absolute distance MAD. The mean (standard deviation) values of ACC, Dice and MAD were 0.99 (0.02), 0.98 (0.04) and 1.21 (0.39), respectively.ConclusionThe results of this study prove that our method is efficient and gives satisfactory results for segmentation of bones on low-field MR images of the wrist

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The purpose of this study was to create a fully-automatic, reasonably fast tool for segmenting wrist bones present on 0.2T low-contrast MR images of the wrist that are used in diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). RA is a chronic systemic inflammatory disease of unknown cause. The hallmark feature of RA is the progressive and irreversible destruction of articular and periarticular structures, that usually starts in the wrist [1]. The prevalence rate is approximately 1%, increasing with age (peak between the age of 35–50), depending also on gender, race/ethnicity, and calendar year. Extra-articular involvement of organs such as the skin, heart, lungs, and eyes can be significant. The risk of death of people with RA is therefore significantly higher compared with age- and sex-matched controls without RA due to increased risk from gastrointestinal, respiratory, cardiovascular, infectious, and hematologic diseases among RA patients [2]. An early diagnosis of RA is essential for delaying irreversible joint destruction resulting in functional disabilities. Sensitive diagnostic tools are necessary for efficient antiarthritic therapy and accurate monitoring of disease activity. RA starts with autoimmune reaction to some external trigger that causes inflammation of the synovium (synovitis) that further leads to destruction of various tissues: bone, cartilage, tendons, ligaments, and blood vessels. The earliest symptoms are therefore synovitis, bone edema and bone erosions. Currently, the most promising image-based diagnostic tool in RA is magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). In 2005 Outcome Measures in Rheumatology Clinical Trials MRI working group (OMERACT) developed an RA scoring system (RAMRIS) [3] for assessing the earliest symptoms on MRI images of the wrist. RAMRIS is reproducible and sensitive to changes due to therapy or disease progress that outperforms other common methods of assessing RA. However some of its limitations are also recognized. Firstly, RAMRIS scoring is time-consuming since it requires analyzing and quantifying multiple, frequently small details in three dimensions (e.g. erosions and bone edema in 15 bones). Secondly, RAMRIS is a semi-quantitative scoring system (e.g. the actual volumes of erosions or edema are not reported), and thus it may seem too rigid, especially for quantifying early changes or therapy monitoring. A limited set of RAMRIS scores can be also a source of a substantial inter-operator variability [4].Recently there have been some efforts to develop quantitative methods of assessing RA-related changes and comparing them with RAMRIS outcomes [5–7]. These methods were however essentially based on manual outlining of wrist bones or joints borders in 3T MR images of wrist. Other recently published studies [8,9] used semi-automatic methods for quantifying lesions. Those methods [8,9] require however substantial manual work related to extraction of bone regions from a MR image (later we compare our results with one of them).In immediately follows from the trends of the recent studies that the most important feature of the future CAD systems for supporting RA diagnosis would be segmentation of wrist bones that would enable subsequent detection of joints (i.e. inter-bone regions) for the quantification of synovitis and marrow space for the search and quantifying of bone edema. Comparison of the external surfaces of bones with anatomical models will enable detection and quantification of bone erosions.Apart from our algorithm presented in [10] there is no comprehensive framework for automated segmentation of wrist bones in MR images designed for low resolution low-field MR images. There are a few studies focused on segmentation of eight carpal bones in CT [11,12] or high-field MR images [13], while RA diagnosis requires evaluating 15 wrist bones. Moreover, apart from our previous study [10], there is no wrist segmentation framework designed for low resolution low-field MR images. Low-field (0.2T) extremity scanners are more popular primarily because they are less expensive, more comfortable for patients, and better accessible than high-field scanners. They offer, however, lower image quality due to lower signal-to-noise ratio and worse resolution. For these reasons they are more demanding for automatic processing.The algorithm presented in [10] was essentially based on registering atlas images to actual images. On the output of the algorithm described in [10] there were markers of all 15 wrist bones. The markers were then used by the watershed from markers algorithm to produce the final segmentation of bones. A substantial part of the processing was performed in 3D space, resulting in a long computation time. In the present paper we present improved and faster segmentation framework for low-field MR images as compared with [10]. The main effort of the present study was to improve the method of calculating markers used in watershed from markers algorithm.The remaining part of this paper includes two sections. In Section 2 we describe details concerning the analyzed MR data and processing tools and the segmentation algorithm itself and, finally, the algorithm is evaluated and conclusions are drawn in Section 3.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
