@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#


@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The HIGDB act as a single access point source for Haemophilus influenzae genomes.It provides a dynamic interface to execute varied searches for genes and proteins.The database facilitates the comparative study of H. influenzae genomes.It allows dynamic viewing of the genomic content of H. influenzae strains.It aids in the identification of DNA motifs within H. influenzae genomes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Haemophilus influenzae,Annotation,Genome,Database,Resistance,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundHaemophilus influenzae (H. Influenzae) is the causative agent of pneumonia, bacteraemia and meningitis. The organism is responsible for large number of deaths in both developed and developing countries. Even-though the first bacterial genome to be sequenced was that of H. Influenzae, there is no exclusive database dedicated for H. Influenzae. This prompted us to develop the Haemophilus influenzae Genome Database (HIGDB).MethodsAll data of HIGDB are stored and managed in MySQL database. The HIGDB is hosted on Solaris server and developed using PERL modules. Ajax and JavaScript are used for the interface development.ResultsThe HIGDB contains detailed information on 42,741 proteins, 18,077 genes including 10 whole genome sequences and also 284 three dimensional structures of proteins of H. influenzae. In addition, the database provides “Motif search” and “GBrowse”. The HIGDB is freely accessible through the URL: http://bioserver1.physics.iisc.ernet.in/HIGDB/.DiscussionThe HIGDB will be a single point access for bacteriological, clinical, genomic and proteomic information of H. influenzae. The database can also be used to identify DNA motifs within H. influenzae genomes and to compare gene or protein sequences of a particular strain with other strains of H. influenzae.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Haemophilus influenzae is an important community-acquired bacterial pathogen, causing respiratory tract infections in both children and adults [1,2]. Even though, H. influenzae is a member of normal respiratory bacterial flora in the human upper respiratory tract, particularly nasopharnyx; it causes invasive infections by extending the organism from nasopharnyx to the lower respiratory tract [3,4]. Among the different serotypes, H. influenzae type b capsular strains are predominantly associated with severe systemic infections such as pneumonia, septicaemia, meningitis, empyema and septic arthritis [5–9]. The non-type-able H. influenzae strains commonly cause sinusitis, otitis media, acute lower respiratory tract infections and conjunctivitis [10]. The prevalence of antibiotic resistance in H. influenzae is rising and the optimum treatment for these severe infections has became more complicated [2,11]. The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that around 386,000 child deaths occur annually due to H. influenzae meningitis and pneumonia in developed countries [11,12]. Thus, the infections by this bacterium are a major global public health problem, and therefore H. influenzae is being broadly investigated at the genome level [11,13]. Presently, 10 strains of H. influenzae have complete genomes and 15 strains have high throughput genome data. Thus, the number of H. influenzae genomes being sequenced is increasing subsequently leading to significant interest in comparing the genome of each strain with other strains. Strain level comparisons leads to better understanding of strain specific characteristics that may play an important role in virulence and antimicrobial resistance. The first bacterial genome to be sequenced was that of H. influenzae; however as per our understanding there is no database available exclusively for H. influenzae. Hence, in view of the above, we have attempted to develop a database, Haemophilus influenzae Genome Database (HIGDB). The HIGDB database provides a dynamic, user-friendly interface to execute varied Boolean searches or sequence based searches. The database provides links to tools like BLAST and DNA motif search that facilitate the comparison between multiple genomes of H. influenzae and identification of DNA motifs in H. influenzae genomes. The database is also interfaced with the genome map of H. influenzae strains and the three-dimensional structures of proteins of H. influenzae available in Protein Data Bank (PDB) [14]. These structures can also be exploited further for structural analysis based on the user requirements. Also, the database provides detailed information on the bacteriological characteristics, laboratory diagnosis, virulence factors and pathogenesis of H. influenzae. The purpose of HIGDB is to act as the universal single point access (one stop shopping) for researchers studying complete genomic and proteomic information of H. influenzae and to perform comparative studies on H. influenzae genomes. This analysis may give vital clues to understand the functions of most putative genes and to recognize the genome components of medical importance.The HIGDB database was developed with PERL/DBI and PERL/CGI modules and it has been hosted on Solaris server. This server has been particularly chosen for its adaptability, security and performance and it has been power-driven by 2.66GHz Xeon (R) processor with 4GB FDIMM main memory. The complete data of HIGDB were implemented in MySQL relational database. The front-end input data part was coded in HTML, JavaScript and Ajax which allows user-friendly web forms. The complete genomes of H. influenzae strains available in NCBI genome FTP site [15] were downloaded in Genome Feature Format (GFF3) and FASTA format. Then, they were loaded into GBrowse. The database has been completely validated and displays the results rapidly; however, it may differ based on the user network speed and traffic. The database has been tested on multiple platforms (iOS, Linux, Windows and Solaris) with different web browsers (Firefox, Chrome, IE and Opera).The HIGDB database affords a powerful and user-friendly search engine. The complete annotations of genes/proteins of different strains of H. influenzae may be scrutinized by using either simple or advanced Boolean-based search tools. In simple search, the user can browse for various strains, genes and proteins of H. influenzae by entering strain/gene/protein name in text box, respectively. In addition, the hypothetical genes can be identified by entering the gene number in “gene search”. The advanced search has the options to return the list of proteins, localizing to a particular cellular localization. To serve downstream system level analysis, the database enables searching of proteins based on the Cluster of Orthologous Groups (COGs) category and on a specific pattern/profile. Further, it facilitates the user to fetch proteins, based on status (review/unreviewed) and virulence.The DNA sequence motifs with major biological function have been becoming an important factor in the analysis of gene regulation [16] and they are located non-randomly in the genome [17]. We provided a search tool, “DNA Motif search” in HIGDB. This search tool is used to identify user-specified DNA motifs within the coding sequences of genes of H. influenzae strains. The tool accepts a stretch of DNA sequence with varying lengths in IUPAC format as an input sequence which is then converted into a regular expression. Additionally, BLAST tool [18,19] is also interfaced in HIGDB with which the user can perform the sequence similarity searches for both nucleotide and protein sequences against a particular or complete H. influenzae strains. When working with protein sequences, the BLAST tool locates the known domain within the sequence of interest. The tool allows users to set parameters like word size, gap open and extension penalty and substitution matrix. The links out from the BLAST results allow the researchers to look in further detail at a gene/protein of interest and a link to NCBI BLAST is provided; in case if the user wishes to perform the search against other genomes. The results generated by both DNA motif search and BLAST search can be stored in the hard disk of a local computer as a text document or in a Portable Document Format (PDF) file.One of the important characteristics of H. influenzae is the preferential binding of its own DNA over foreign DNA [20–22]. Smith et al. deduced that the consensus uptake signal sequence in H. influenzae is “AAGTGCGGT” which is supported by Mell et al. [21,23]. The DNA motif “A{2}GTGCGGT” has been searched through the HIGDB DNA motif search tool against all H. influenzae strains and the results are shown inTable 1. The H. influenzae 10,810 genome has the highest number of occurrences (382) of this binding signal compared to genome of other H. influenzae strains (Fig. 1). This is just one example of how integration of this tool can led to new insights through the H. influenzae genome analysis.In recent decades, the amount of genetic material available for H. influenzae related study is increasing due to the increasing number of genomes being sequenced. To ease this, a platform-independent web based application, Generic Genome Browser (GBrowse) has been incorporated in HIGDB. The GBrowse is a feasible and interactive viewer and it was developed by Stein et al. [24] of the Generic Model Organism System Database Project (GMOD). The browser has features like scroll, navigate and zoom in and out over the random regions of the genome. The user can fetch the region of genome or a landmark by specifying them in a search text box provided at the top left corner of the page. The search results show five tracks (i) genes (ii) proteins (iii) GC content (iv) 3-frame translation and (v) 6-frame translation. The landmark on each track carries a link to the corresponding information in HIGDB database or NCBI [15]. Thus, the HIGDB GBrowse makes the user to efficiently view the genomic content of different strains of H. influenzae.The H. influenzae Rd KW20 is the first free-living organism to have its complete genome sequenced by the Institute for Genomic Research [25]. The strain is a derivative of a serotype d strain and it is considered to be avirulent as it lost the genes encoding its capsule. The genome comprises of 1830,138 base pair with 38.2% of GC content [26,27]. The genome of this strain is visualized in GBrowse.Fig. 2A shows the various tracks in the genome browser from the position 937,849 to 1036,694 where the GC content is notably high.H. influenzae secretes immunoglobulin A1 (IgA1) proteases which is recognised as an important virulence factor in causing meningitis. IgA1 protease is an extracellular bacterial enzymes and it cleaves the hinge region of human IgA1’s heavy chain [28]. In GBrowse, the IgA1 (locus tag: HI0990) of H. influenzae Rd KW20 has been searched and it is found to be positioned from 1048,666 to 1053,241. Interestingly, it is observed that the IgA1 gene is encoded on the reverse strand. When the gene track is zoomed out, the adjacent genes are found to be leuD (locus tag: HI0989) and recF (locus tag: HI0991). In addition, GBrowse displays a track of its corresponding protein (Fig. 2B).As of September 2, 2014, 284 three dimensional structures of H. influenzae proteins were available in PDB [14]. Due to the increasing number of protein structures in PDB and to study the functionally active proteins structure of H. influenzae, it is necessary to include these structures in HIGDB database. This can be helpful to the scientific community working on H. influenzae for the structural analysis of proteins. These structures can be visualized using the interactive graphics JAVA based plug-in, Jmol.Fig. 3 shows an example of Jmol viewer displaying the three-dimensional structure of an enzyme, aspartate-semialdehyde dehydrogenase (PDB ID: 1Q2X) [29].The genome map, a pictorial representation of genomic sequence data and its bioinformatics analysis, were downloaded for available H. influenzae strains from the Genome Atlas Database [30]. These genome maps were incorporated in HIGDB under ‘Search’ menu. The links for varied resources related to H. influenzae are provided in the ‘Related links’ menu. Additionally, from various literatures, the information on cultural characteristics, virulence factors, pathogenesis and laboratory diagnosis of H. influenzae has been collected and included under ‘Bacteriology’ menu. This information helps the users to acquire the preliminary knowledge on H. influenzae and the several diseases caused by the organism.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
