@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Separation force analysis and prediction based on cohesive element model for constrained-surface Stereolithography processes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We formulate cohesive zone model to characterize the separation process.We establish an optimization model to evaluate the mechanical parameters.The effectiveness of the proposed technique is validated by computer-simulated experiments.Fabrication performance can be significantly improved by the proposed approach.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Additive manufacturing,Constrained-surface projection-based Stereolithography,Finite element method,Cohesive zone model,Optimization and parameter identification,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Constrained-surface based Additive Manufacturing (AM) processes have been widely used in both academia and industry for the past few years. Despite the advantages of constrained-surface based AM processes, it has not been widely used in practice. A main reason for this is that a substantial separation force is required to separate the cured part from the material vat during the pulling-up stage, which may damage the cured part and reduce the reliability of the process. The solutions proposed previously to reduce this separation force recommend using an intermediate coating material (e.g., Teflon and silicone films) between the cured part and the vat. This, however, has only negligible effects in reducing the separation force. In this work, the pulling-up process is modeled within the framework of mechanics-based principles. In particular, the cohesive zone model (CZM) is adopted to characterize the separation mechanism, and finite element (FE) simulation is carried out to investigate the separation process using the commercially available FE software, Abaqus. A new simple optimization scheme is also proposed to estimate the constitutive cohesive stiffness parameters from experimental measurements. These constitutive parameters are very difficult to estimate using the standard mechanical tests. The proposed work based on sound mechanics-based principles can be used for reliable prediction of pulling-up speed, and thus, is likely to be useful in devising an adaptive closed-loop system to control the pulling-up process and achieve a reliable AM approach.Additive Manufacturing (AM) is a new manufacturing technology that fabricates complex three-dimensional objects by adding materials layer upon layer. In a recent special report of the Economist magazine, AM was hailed as the third industrial revolution  [1]. However, despite all the significant advancements of AM technology  [2], especially in the last decade, some technical challenges, e.g. poor surface quality, expensive machines, low reliability and reproducibility, and limited compatible materials, still need to be addressed. Novel solutions for improving the AM processes have been proposed by researchers through investigating different materials and parameters, combining different processes, and applying various post-processing techniques  [2]. Most of them are, however, still at the state of trial and error, primarily due to the lack of research on fundamental characterization of AM processes, though some study focusing on deformation behavior involving heat transfer has been carried out  [3,4]. Investigations with focus on mechanics-based characterization (for example, constitutive law, linear/non-linear structural behavior) are still missing. There is clearly an urgent need to address these issues to promote wide adoption of AM technology and achieve a full industrial revolution.Among different AM technologies, the focus of this paper is on bottom-up constrained-surface projection-based Stereolithography (SLA). The SLA process is a photo-polymerization based AM process that was the first to be commercialized among other AM processes  [5]. Solid parts fabricated using SLA have the highest accuracy and the best surface quality when compared to other AM techniques  [5]. There are two light projection techniques that are currently used in SLA processes to cure/solidify the liquid resin or photopolymer: free-surface (top-down)  [5] and constrained-surface (bottom-up)  [6]. One of the most important factors that influences the throughput and reliability of the AM processes is material filling. The constrained-surface process can achieve better vertical resolution and higher rate of material filling and is more widely used in practice  [7–10].In addition, the differences between the free-surface and constrained-surface based techniques are in the build orientation and method of polymer curing. Fig. 1(a) shows a typical top-down or free-surface SLA process. In this process, a pattern is fabricated by solidifying a thin layer of liquid resin at the free surface of the liquid using a computer controlled laser beam or a digital light projector. The layer of resin exposed to light is cured to a pre-determined pattern and adheres to the platform. After a layer is cured, the platform is moved down in small increment and the liquid surface is again exposed to light and the next layer is cured. This process is repeated until the entire solid object is fabricated in a layer-by-layer fashion. In the bottom-up or constrained-surface SLA process, the light is projected from bottom allowing a thin layer of liquid in the small gap between the platform and vat to be cured (see Fig. 1(b)). The platform along with the solidified layer (which is attached to the platform) is then pulled up some distance causing the liquid resin to smoothly flow into the gap. The platform with the attached solidified layer then moves down leaving only a thin layer of liquid between the solidified layer and the vat underneath. The thin layer of liquid is then cured and the process continues until the entire solid object is built.The bottom-up or constrained-surface SLA process is being used increasingly and has several advantages over the top-down or free-surface process including less production time, less material waste, faster curing process and higher resolution. Despite all the advantages, solid parts built by the constrained-surface SLA techniques require significant pulling-up forces to separate the cured part from the bottom surface of the resin vat after each layer is cured. This may cause breaking or significant deformation of the cured part when the platform moves up during the fabrication process (see Fig. 2). To mitigate this problem, substantially slow moving speed and long waiting time are often set to improve the reliability in practice. This obviously compromises efficiency of the SLA processes. In order to fundamentally solve this problem, a mechanics-based study is carried out in this work to investigate the pulling-up process. This will help achieving the highest reliability and throughput of the constrained-surface SLA processes.The objective of this work is to characterize the separation mechanism of the cured part from the bottom surface of the resin vat from the purview of mechanics-based principles to gather fundamental understanding about the process. The interfacial mechanism between the built parts (e.g. solidified photopolymer) and intermediate coating media (e.g. Silicone film, Teflon film) attached to the bottom of the resin vat is modeled based on the concept of cohesive zone model (CZM)  [11] that can realistically model the separation process eliminating stress concentration or stress singularity that occurs (if modeled within the framework of classical fracture mechanics) because of the material property mismatch  [12]. The material property mismatch is crucial in the present work because of the difference between material properties of the two separating parts (e.g. hard solidified photopolymer and soft Silicone film). It should be noted that the cohesive zone in the present work does not represent any physical material. This zone can be rather perceived as a zone of vanishing thickness at the interface between the two separating parts. Adjacent surfaces of the two separating parts at the interface are called cohesive surfaces that separate according to the cohesive law that governs the behavior of the cohesive zone. The cohesive law relates cohesive traction or cohesive stress between two cohesive surfaces and the relative displacement between them. As loading increases, both the relative displacement and the cohesive traction increase until a maximum is reached. The cohesive traction then reduces to zero resulting in complete physical separation of the two parts (see Fig. 4 for an example of cohesive law). The cohesive law characterizes constitutive behavior of the separation process and can be inferred to represent the physics of the separation process at the molecular level  [13]. Finite element (FE) method is also employed in the present work to study the initialization and propagation of the separation process. This can be useful to develop a predictive methodology and in-situ feedback control system to substantially improve the throughput and reliability of the bottom-up constrained-surface based AM processes.In the present work, a simple new optimization-based scheme is additionally presented to estimate the constitutive parameters of the cohesive law from experimental measurements of the response. These parameters (known as cohesive stiffness parameters) are difficult to estimate using the existing analytical results or/and standard mechanical tests even for simple shaped objects. This difficulty is particularly worth mentioning here since AM processes can be used to fabricate fascinating complex shaped objects. The proposed optimization scheme is readily amenable for estimation of cohesive constitutive parameters even for such complex shaped objects. Since the foundation of the proposed work is based on a rigorous and well-accepted mechanics-based concept, it is likely to significantly advance the knowledge and understanding of the separation process encountered in the bottom-up constrained-surface based AM processes.This paper is organized as follows. Section  2 discusses the separation processes used by various existing constrained-surface stereolithography based AM processes and analyzes their advantages and disadvantages. Section  3 describes the cohesive zone model and damage mechanism associated with the separation process. Section  4 establishes the optimization framework that is used to estimate the cohesive parameters from experimental data, and presents and discusses the results obtained from the FE-based computational model. Section  5 concludes by summarizing the main contributions of the present work.Separation of the cured part form the intermediate coating medium during the pulling-up process is illustrated in a sequence of figures in Fig. 3(a)–(d).  The cured layer is sandwiched between the previously built layer and the top surface of the medium as shown in Fig. 3(a). As the built part moves up with the platform, the coating medium begins to deform and separation initiates at the boundary of the interface as shown in Fig. 3(b). In Fig. 3(c), the separation propagates inside from the boundary of the interface gradually reducing the interfacial area as the platform continues to move up. The separation is completed after the platform moves up a sufficient distance, as shown in Fig. 3(d).During the pulling-up stage, the cured layer might not levitate together with the previously cured layers already attached to the platform and may stick to the bottom of the resin tank because of the strong adhesive forces between the coating medium and the cured layer. As a result, the part built-up so far might break causing material/financial and time loss. Several approaches have been described in the literature to resolve this issue. One such approach is to over-cure the current layer by significantly increasing its exposure time. This approach results in an increase in the bonding strength between the current and previous layers. However, the bonding strength of the current layer with the vat bottom surface also increases simultaneously. Another possible and more common approach to address this problem, as already mentioned earlier, is to apply a suitable coating medium (e.g. Silicone film, Teflon film) to the bottom surface of the resin vat so that its bonding strength with the cured layer becomes relatively less which leads to alleviating the separation process  [3,14]. Denken Co.   [15] and EnvisionTec   [16] have used a coated Teflon glass as a medium. Denken Co. has developed Digital Light Processing (DLP) system that works based on the constrained-surface based SLA processes. This system can marginally reduce the pulling-up force, but the cured part may still be damaged  [17]. Another constrained-surface based process was developed by Autostrade   [18]. The performance of this process called EDARTS is similar to DLP. However, instead of Teflon, a layer of silicone film has been used as a medium between the part and the resin vat. The silicone film is a hyper-elastic material that has constitutive parameters (e.g. shear strength) that are several orders less than that of the cured part providing an ease of the separation process. We have, therefore, used silicone film (in particular, Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), Sylgard 184, Dow Corning Co.) in the present work.In a recent work, the adhesive force between the coated silicone film and the cured part has been investigated and a direct mask curing system, that uses silicone film for easy separation of the cured part, has been developed  [3]. The exposed liquid resin becomes solid and a vacuum state is created at the interface between the silicone film and solidified resin. During the platform levering up, a tiny crack occurs along the profile of the cured layer so that the liquid resin or air could go in for releasing the vacuum state. Therefore, the degree of curing and the cured area are two important factors to determine the pulling force. A measurement system has been designed to analyze this pulling force  [3].In another approach, EnvisionTec developed the Perfactory Systems   [5] to reduce the large adhesive force, where one side of the platform is moved up slowly before the other side during the separation. As a result, the part is peeled off from the vat surface instead of being pulled up and the required force to detach the built part reduces significantly. However, this method can only work for the cases where the parts are located close to the tilting side. A two-channel system  [14] and a two-way linear motion system  [19] have been proposed based on this fact and have significantly reduced the separation force between the cured layer and the resin vat. The two-channel system introduced by Zhou et al.  [14] was utilized by an open-source personal 3D printer (B9 Creator). However, adding another motion system increases the building time and the shearing force also deforms the part in horizontal direction. To remove the extra motion for tilting and sliding, the direct pulling approach is used by EnvisionTec in itsUltra2and Micro Printer Systems. The common strategy used to conquer the large separation force is to move the platform up very slowly and allow the separation to be successfully initiated and then propagated along the interface. However, this strategy cannot be reliably applied to more intricate parts with multi-scale features. Furthermore, the slow moving speed reduces the building speed.Recently, Tumbleston et al.  [20] proposed a continuous liquid interface production approach by using an oxygen-permeable window that creates a “dead zone” to inhibit photopolymerization. This approach uses exactly the same bottom-up constrained process, while the thin inhibited layer allows the platform to move up continuously, therefore it has proven to be 25–100 times faster than what is available on the market today and has the potential to revolutionize manufacturing. However, till far, only the parts with thin wall structures have been printed using this technology and the parts with large cross sectional area cannot be reliably fabricated due to the large separation force.Attributed to high accuracy and fast speed, the bottom-up projection-based AM process is widely used in mass customization applications, e.g. medical (Siemens Inc.) and dental area (Invisalign Inc.). However, the drawbacks and challenges associated with this process hinder the further development of this technology. As a result, there is an urgent need to address these challenges in order to more efficiently and effectively promote its wide adoption to various industries.Different methods can be used for modeling the separation process. Virtual Crack Closure Technique (VCCT) and Cohesive Zone Model (CZM) are two such methods  [21–25]. While VCCT is a mature fracture mechanics-based technique, this technique has not yet widely been implemented in commercially available general finite element (FE) software implying their acceptability is relatively less popular than the CZM. The VCCT technique is typically available for highly specialized publicly available FE codes.Comparing to VCCT, a major advantage of CZM is that it has been well accepted by mechanic community. CZM has been extensively used for the simulation of delamination  [6,7,26–31]. The methodology is based on the assumption that a cohesive damage zone develops near the crack tip. This modeling technique links the microstructural failure mechanism to the continuum fields governing bulk deformations. Thus, it is characterized by the properties of bulk materials, the crack initiation, and the crack evolution function  [23]. The CZM relates the cohesive surface traction to displacement or separation at the interface where a crack may occur. This relationship is often referred to as the traction–separation law. The CZM is also available in commercially available FE software (e.g., Abaqus  [32]) and is generally applied in two ways: (1) cohesive elements method, and (2) surface-based cohesive behavior. The surface-based cohesive behavior is primarily intended for situations where the thickness is negligibly small. In this work, the thickness of the cohesive layer is zero. Therefore, the surface-based cohesive model is used to characterize the adhesive force between the cured photopolymer and the intermediate coating medium. Fig. 4 shows a typical bilinear traction–separation model. This model assumes a linear elastic behavior until the criterion for the initiation of damage is met. The delamination/separation beyond this point is modeled through a linear or non-linear damage evolution law (in Fig. 4, linear damage evolution law is shown). In the present work, linear damage evolution law is adopted. The linear cohesive constitutive law relating the normal and shear traction/stresses to the respective normal and shear separations across the interface is shown below,(1)t={tntstt}=[KnnKnsKntKnsKssKstKntKstKtt]{δnδsδt}=KδwhereKis the matrix of cohesive stiffness parameters andtis the nominal traction stress vector that consists of three components (two components in two dimensional problems):tn,ts,ttwhich represent the normal and two shear tractions, respectively. The corresponding separations are denoted byδn,δs, andδt. The separation happens as the material is loaded by a pure tensile normal stress (mode-I) or sliding shear stress (mode-II or III), or both (mixed-mode). In the present work, only the normal mode is active because the pulling-up force acts in the normal or vertical direction. Thus, a pure mode-I delamination/separation is considered in this work.Damage initiation is related to the interfacial strength, i.e. the maximum traction on the traction–separation law (e.g.,tn0as shown in Fig. 4). Once traction reaches this critical point, crack starts to grow. Many constitutive laws have been proposed in this context to characterize this damage evolution phase (i.e., the crack or delamination growth) including, but not limited to, trapezoidal law  [8], perfectly plastic law  [9], polynomial law  [10], exponential model  [33], and bilinear law  [7,30,34–36]. In the present work, bilinear cohesive law (Fig. 4) is chosen for further study for illustration purpose. Other suitable models as deemed suitable and consistent with any available experimental results can also be adopted in the proposed framework.Different methods have been proposed for the calculation of the cohesive stiffness parameters  [37,38]. The effect of mesh sensitivity  [23] and elastic–plastic materials  [8] have also been investigated. In the bi-linear cohesive law (Fig. 4) that has been employed in the present work, the initial phase (before damage initiation starts ortn0is reached) is defined using the critical separationδi0and is given byKi=ti/δi0. The cohesive stiffness and damage parameters (e.g.,Ki,tn0, andδi0) must be consistent with the separation force between the silicone or PDMS film and the cured layer as measured in physical experiments (described in Section  2). The setup for measuring this separation or pulling-up force is shown in Fig. 5. The existing techniques to estimate the cohesive stiffness and damage parameters (also known as the constitutive parameters) are not readily amenable to the AM processes. In the present work, a hybrid computational–experimental framework is, therefore, proposed to estimate the constitutive parameters. Before describing the proposed estimation scheme, the physical experimental setting as shown in Fig. 5 is briefly described next.Consider Fig. 5. The platform is raised up slowly at typical speed of 0.1 mm/s and the readouts of the two force sensors are recorded. Different image patterns with the same area were designed and tested to investigate the effect of the image shape. Fig. 6shows the measured separation forces of a sensor for different patterns. The horizontal axis indicates the distance in thez-direction (in the unit of 10 μm), and the vertical axis indicates the recorded pulling force (in ounce).The area of the test pattern as shown in Fig. 6 isA=625mm2. Consider, for example, square cross-sectional area. From Fig. 6, it can be seen that the damage initiation starts atδn0=0.4mmfor a shape with a square cross sectional area. This is associated with the pick force of 65 oz. (or,Fmax=18.07N). Therefore, the maximum traction when damage is initiated can be estimated astn0=Fmax/A=0.029MPa, and the associated cohesive stiffness parameter in the normal direction can be estimated asK=Knn=tn0/δn0=0.0729MPa. It is evident that the cohesive stiffnessKdepends on several factors including the shape. In the present work, only the square cross section will be considered to illustrate the proposed hybrid computational–experimental estimation technique for constant pulling-up velocity although the proposed estimation technique can be readily adapted to other settings with variable shapes and pulling-up speeds. In Section  4, we will describe the proposed computational–experimental framework for more accurate estimation ofKto better characterize the experimentally observed separation behavior (Figs. 3 and 6).A quadratic traction criterion has been chosen to define the damage initiation. In this criterion, damage is initiated when a quadratic traction function{tn/tn0}2+{ts/ts0}2+{tt/tt0}2=1involving the contact stress ratios reaches the value of one. According to the experiment that was described in Section  3.1, only the separation in the normal or vertical direction is of interest in the present work and the associated maximum traction based on square cross-sectional area is taken astn0=0.029MPa.To characterize the damage evolution beyond this point, there exist several linear or non-linear damage evolution laws. There exist several schemes particularly for composite materials that can be adopted to characterize the damage evolution laws  [39,40]. The damage evolution law describes the rate at which the cohesive stiffness parameter is degraded after the damage initiation has occurred. Let us denote byDa scalar damage variable with value between 0 and 1. During damage evolution phase,Dmonotonically evolves from 0 to 1 upon further loading after initiation of damage  [41]. The relationship between the traction stress components and scalar damage variable can be given by:(2)tn={(1−D)t̄nt̄n≥0t̄notherwise(3)ts=(1−D)t̄s(4)tt=(1−D)t̄twheret̄n,t̄s, andt̄tare the contact traction stress components predicted by the elastic traction–separation behavior for the current separation without damage  [41]. In the implicit FE analysis, material models exhibiting stiffness degradation as in the present case often lead to severe convergence difficulties. It is typically overcome by using a viscous regularization scheme  [32] that requires a numerical viscosity coefficient to be specified during FE simulations. In the present work, a value of 10−15 is considered for this viscosity coefficient. In the following, the proposed optimization scheme to estimate the cohesive stiffness parameter, in particular,K=Knn, is presented.An accurate computational model capable of predicting quantities of interest associated with separation process should be calibrated with available data to obtain a realistic characterization of the model parameters like cohesive stiffness and the material properties. This section covers the procedure of development of an optimization model to estimate stiffness parameters of the cohesive layer between photopolymer solid and the PDMS silicone film as these parameters cannot be calculated using direct mechanical tests and should be extracted from experimental data of the response. The objective of the optimization is to minimize the sum of squares of the error between the displacements obtained from the model,u(FE)={ui(FE),i=1,…,n}and the corresponding experimental measurements,u(exp)={ui(exp),i=1,…,n}, wherenis a set of points where experimental measurements are taken. The objective function is given byError=100∑i=1n(ui(exp)−ui(FE))2/∑i=1n(ui(exp))2, where Error is a function that measures the relative error between the experimentally measured data and the FE outcome. Similar optimization schemes have been developed employing the finite difference method (FDM)  [42] as well as the FE method  [43,44]. These schemes, however, depend on gradient-based optimization algorithm and require repeated solving of the governing partial differential equations (through the FDM or FE method as appropriate) within the optimization algorithm. This can be a severe computational bottleneck particularly for problems involving stiffness degradation that causes convergence difficulties of the FDM or FE method (FEM). In addition, the effects of discretization (e.g., mesh size) produce multiple spurious local minima in the FDM or FEM based predictions as the material parameters are varied, causing further difficulty for the gradient-based optimization scheme to reliably estimate the constitutive material parameters. To bypass these difficulties, a smoothed response surface is first constructed only from a few FE simulation runs using different material properties. The smoothed response surface is subsequently used to estimate the appropriate material properties that minimize the Error function defined above.In the present work, displacement component only in the direction of the pulling-up force (i.e., normal or vertical direction) is considered as our desired output variable, i.e.,uiin Error function represents the displacement only in the normal direction. This is acceptable since the other two displacement components in the horizontal plane are negligibly small. As mentioned above, the local gradient-based optimization scheme will not be useful to estimateKnnsince the objective function non-linearly depends onKnnand may yield a local minimum. A simple and efficient heuristic scheme (that makes uses of the smoothed response surface) similar to global optimization methods is then adopted to estimate the cohesive stiffness parameter.The optimization scheme is first implemented on a 3D static bottom-up model without considering the cohesive behavior to estimate the material properties of the silicone film and the photopolymer. This will set the stage for the presentation of the more difficult estimation problem of the cohesive stiffness parameter. In this section, the silicone film is assumed to be a solid block with dimensions 120 mm × 100 mm × 2 mm, and the fabricated photopolymer as a block of 20 mm × 20 mm × 10 mm (Fig. 7).In the absence of experimental data, a set of ‘proxy’ experimental data is generated first based on a run of FE simulation using material properties for the silicone film and cured photopolymer as tabulated in Table 1. Since cohesive behavior is neglected in this section, two parts were merged together in running the FE simulation. The bottom surface of the silicone film has fixed boundary conditions. The solid block was moved up under a uniform pressure. A uniform pressure of 0.5 MPa is applied on the top surface of the solid part and is determined using trial and error in such a way that the predicted maximum stresses for both the solid photopolymer and the silicone film are less than their respective yield stresses and tensile strengths (see Table 1). This ensures that the built part and the silicone film can be modeled as linear elastic materials.Under uniform pressure of 0.5 MPa, the solid is subjected to a maximum stress of 2.667 MPa which is less than its yield stress (12 MPa) while the maximum stress in the film is found to be 1.7 MPa which is also less than the film’s tensile strength (2.24 MPa). The maximum displacement at the interface between two parts is found to be 0.94 mm (i.e., less than 1 mm) that is also consistent with the typical experimental observation.Since the experimental data is not plagued by any discretization error resulting from the numerical discretization scheme such as the FE method, a sufficiently fine mesh should be used to generate the ‘proxy’ experimental data. The optimization model to subsequently estimate these constitutive material properties should, however, be based on a relatively coarse FE model. To generate these two different FE models, the adaptive remeshing technique is adopted. Adaptive remeshing algorithm allows one to achieve or approach a target normalized or relative measure of the error in FE solutions. This relative error is typically defined ascˆe=100×ce/cbwherecbis the base solution variable (for example, displacement, stress, strain energy density, etc.) of interest for which the user decides to achieve a target solution accuracy in the FE results, andceis the corresponding error indicator which is calculated based on the error estimation technique available in the current literature  [45]. In the present work, element strain energy density is chosen as the base solution variable since the associated error indicator is capable of accounting for the effects of complex load history regardless of the material type. This leads to an adapted mesh that provides an accurate solution through the analysis. A uniform error distribution criterion is also selected to ensure that a specified error targetcˆeis met in every element in the domain where adaptive remeshing technique is applied  [32].The silicone film (see Fig. 7) is partitioned into two different portions in order to achieve relatively high solution accuracy in the portion of the film around its interface with the cured photopolymer by selecting a value ofcˆe=5%for the photopolymer and the inner part of the film (that results in a fine mesh; see Fig. 7) and a value ofcˆe=10%for the outer part of the film (that results in a coarse mesh). The material properties as specified in Table 1 are used to generate the ‘proxy’ experimental data or the target data. This ‘proxy’ experimental model consists of 48799 nodes.In order to estimate the constitutive material properties (which will be unknown for real experimental data) through the proposed simple and heuristic optimization scheme, a coarse FE mesh must now be chosen as ‘computer-based’ model. In the present case, a FE mesh based oncˆe=6%for the solid part and inner portion of the film andcˆe=10%for the outer portion of the film is selected as the ‘computer-based’ model which consists of 42076 nodes. In determining the Error function,nis thus 42076 and the experimental displacement in the vertical direction at these nodes in the ‘computer-based’ model is simply determined by linear interpolation of the displacement field obtained from the fine FE mesh-based ’proxy’ experimental model. To illustrate the proposed simple optimization scheme, the following four cases are considered: (1) Changing Young’s modulus of the photopolymer while other parameters are fixed at the values specified in Table 1, (2) Changing Young’s modulus of silicone film while other parameters are fixed at the values specified in Table 1, (3) Changing Poisson’ ratio of photopolymer while other parameters are fixed at the values specified in Table 1, and (4) Changing Poisson’s ratio of silicone film while other parameters are fixed at the values specified in Table 1. In a selected range for each of these parameters, FE simulations are carried out for a set of few discrete parameter values and the value of the objective Error function is directly determined (it only requires a few FE simulation runs; no optimization is required here). The results are pictorially depicted in Fig. 8, where ‘interp1’ simply defines the objective Error function as an approximating interpolated function in terms of the corresponding material parameter in the chosen range. The optimal material parameter can now be readily determined from this approximating ‘interp1’-based objective function. The estimated optimal material parameters are determined as 1989.9 MPa, 0.35 MPa, 0.445, and 0.4871, respectively, from Fig. 8(a), (b), (c), and (d). These estimated values match very well with respective material parameters (i.e., 2000 MPa, 0.36 MPa, 0.45, and 0.5; see Table 1) that are used in generating the target ‘proxy’ experimental data.In this section, the optimization scheme is now employed to estimate the cohesive stiffness parameter (K) in the normal direction. Here, it is assumed thatK=0.09MPaand the other material parameters as shown in Table 1 for the purpose of generating the ‘proxy’ experimental data for the displacement field during the pulling-up or separation process. In a practical application, the other material parameters as shown in Table 1 can be separately determined by following the standard mechanical testing for each of the materials or from the readily available literature. The focus of the present section or one of the main focuses of the current work is to characterize the cohesive law by estimating the associated cohesive stiffness parameter within a computational setting using the available experimental data since estimating the cohesive parameters is very difficult. Unlike the setting discussed in Section  4.1, the experimental data here is a time history data of the displacement field. The ‘proxy’ experimental model is run for 20 s to gather the experimental set of data. This temporal analysis, however, necessitates significant number of adaptive remeshing. In this case, the uniform error distribution criterion is again selected to ensure that a specified error targetcˆeis met in every element of the domain where adaptive remeshing algorithm is applied. In order to ensure a finer mesh for ‘proxy’ experimental model (relative to the mesh of the ‘computer-based’ model), a FE run is carried out with the values ofcˆeas 8%, 15%, and 18% for solid, inner portion of the film, and outer portion of the film, respectively. The error distribution targets for the film were not attained within 100 iterations at which the simulation was terminated. However the error distribution of the film at the 100th iteration was sufficiently close to its target while the error distribution for the solid was attained. The deformed displacement contour of 3D model is shown in Fig. 9. The planar symmetry of the displacement contour indicates that a 2D model would be sufficient to conduct further study, and thus, is considered in the ensuing discussion.A 2D model was developed based on the geometry and properties of the original model. The process of remeshing was done for three iterations. The uniform error distribution target values were chosen to be 10%, 10%, and 15% for solid, inner portion of film, and outer portion of film, respectively. After three iterations 8%, 15%, and 18% were attained. The final error percentages for the film portions were sufficiently close to the targets and the data obtained from the third iteration was designated as the target experimental data. Fig. 10shows the change in the FE mesh after each iteration.It is worth noting the onset time of the stiffness softening at a point on the interface of the solid and PDMS silicone film. This refers to the time instant when that point experiences the maximum traction or stress and can be determined from the temporal variation of the stress at that point. Fig. 11shows the stress—time plot for one of the nodes on the interface. The maximum stress is found to be at around 4 s and the complete delamination at around 5.5 s. The displacement components in the vertical direction only at 4 s are considered in computing the Error function. In addition, only a subset of nodes between pointsAandBat the interface between the two objects (solid and film) as shown in Fig. 10 are used to compute the Error function. The length of this interface is 20 mm. This interface area experiences the most stress as well as the largest displacement in the vertical direction, and thus provides only practically and numerically useful contribution to the Error function (see Fig. 13). The simulated results are in good agreement with the experimental data (Fig. 6).The FE model obtained after the 3rd iteration (Fig. 10(c)) with the material properties mentioned at the beginning of this section is used to generate the ‘proxy’ experimental data (with 169 FE nodes between pointsAandBat the interface as explained above), while the both FE meshes after the 1st and 2nd iterations are used as ‘computer-based’ models (respectively, with 11 nodes and 44 nodes between pointsAandBat the interface) to estimate the normal cohesive stiffness parameter,K=Knn, presuming that the other constitutive material parameters of the model (see Table 1) are available directly from separate standard mechanical testing or literature. The results of the optimization are pictorially presented in Fig. 12. The optimized value ofKis equal to0.0855N/mm3for the 1st iteration based ‘computer’ model and0.09455N/mm3for the 2nd iteration based ‘computer’ model. These estimated parameters are very close to the value of the original cohesive stiffness parameterK=0.09MPaused to generate the ‘proxy’ experimental data.The effect of FE discretization is also readily apparent in Fig. 12 with the presence of several spurious local minima. This also explains why the standard local gradient-based optimization scheme as used in other FDM based or FEM based inverse analyses for material parameter estimation will be inappropriate to determine the cohesive stiffness parameter in the context of the present work. The cohesive stiffness parameters are important constitutive parameters required for reliable prediction of the separation behavior for SLA based AM processes.The main target of developing an optimized and coarse ‘computer-based’ model is to efficiently reproduce the experimental behavior with acceptable accuracy. This can be then integrated into the SLA machine to control the pulling-up process and achieve a reliable AM approach. This demands additional validation of the predictive response behavior of the optimized model. To investigate along this line, FE simulation results of the 2nd iteration based optimized ‘computer’ model (coarse mesh) with the cohesive stiffness parameter,K=0.09455N/mm3, are further investigated. The resulting time-dependent displacement profiles over the cohesive interface for a set of discrete time instants are contrasted with the corresponding ‘proxy’ experimental data (finer mesh) in Fig. 13.It is evident from Fig. 13 that the target displacement profile has been captured qualitatively very well and quantitatively with acceptable accuracy. They both reach a maximum displacement of nearly 0.04 mm and their displacement behavior follows the similar pattern. First, it gradually increases until it gets to the maximum displacement att=4s, and then a sudden drop (or softening with sharp slope) happens reflecting the effect of the degradation of the cohesive stiffness parameter during the damage evolution stage. The time-dependent FE-predicted deformation behavior of the silicone film shown in Fig. 13 also captures the experimentally observed behavior of the silicon film (see Fig. 6) very well, and thus, testifies that the proposed work can be used to increase the time efficiency of the final online force control system.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
