@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Finite element analysis of uncommonly large renal arteriovenous malformation—Adjacent renal cyst complex

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This study investigate hemodynamics of RAVM and corresponding clinical implications.A case of a 50-year-old patient with a large RAVM and adjacent renal cyst was studied.Calculated physical quantities were velocity, pressure, shear stress and drag forces.Unstable hemodynamics of RAVM made attempts for embolization risky and unsuccessful.The computer methods could be used to overcome current clinical diagnostic limits.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Renal arteriovenous malformation,Instability,Hemodynamics,Finite element analysis,Modeling,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundRenal arteriovenous malformation (RAVM) represents abnormal communication between the intrarenal arterial and venous system. The purpose of this study was to investigate hemodynamics and biomechanics quantities which may influence the instability of RAVM and imply clinical complications.MethodsA detailed 3D reconstruction of RAVM was obtained from the patient CT scans, aortic inlet flow was measured by color-flow Doppler ultrasound, while material characteristics were adopted from the literature. A numerical finite element analysis (FEA) of the blood flow was performed by solving the governing equations for the viscous incompressible flow. The physical quantities calculated at the systolic and diastolic peak moment were velocity, pressure, shear stress and drag forces.ResultsWe reported a case of a 50-year-old patient with a large RAVM and adjacent renal cyst, who unsuccessfully underwent two attempts of embolization that resulted in the consequent nephrectomy. FEA showed that the cyst had a very low pressure intensity and velocity field (with unstable flow in diastolic peak). For both systolic and diastolic moments, increased values of wall shear stress were found on the places with intensive wall calcification. Unusually high values of drag force which would likely explain the presence of pressure in the cystic formation were found on the infero-medial side where the cyst wall was the thinnest and where the flow streamlines converged.ConclusionsFEA showed that the hemodynamics of the cyst-RAVM complex was unstable making it prone to rupture. Clinically established diagnosis of imminent rupture together with unfavorable hemodynamics of the lesion consequently made additional attempts of embolization risky and unsuccessful leading to total nephrectomy.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Renal arteriovenous malformation (RAVM) represents an abnormal communication between the intrarenal arterial and venous system [1]. This communication is established through a network of abnormal vessels (often referred to as “nidus”). RAVM may either be congenital, idiopathic, or acquired, with latter being the most common (70% to 80%) usually resulting from trauma, malignancy, inflammation, or percutaneous procedures [2]. In cases of sustained RAVM, there is nearly always a single, markedly dilated intrarenal arterial branch supplying the malformation and communicating with the vein. Congenital lesions account for 14% to 27% of cases and are composed of multiple, tortuous arterial and venous structures [3]. Idiopathic forms are type of acquired RAVM with no apparent cause. To the best of our knowledge, only few case reports describing a concomitant presence of large RAVM and adjacent renal cyst could be found in the literature [4–6].Surgical excision is recommended for: malformations >2cm in diameter, in women of child-bearing age, with an expanding size on serial angiograms, with an incomplete ring-like calcification on radiography, in the presence of uncontrollable hypertension, or in the presence of high output heart failure [7]. Recent studies have suggested that transarterial embolization may be regarded as the first-line treatment of RAVM in order to avoid nephrectomy, reduce pre-operative risk and shorten hospital stay [8,9]. Embolic materials used for embolization include gelatin sponge, metallic coil, absolute ethanol, plastic polymers, lipiodol, and n-butyl 2-cyano crylate [10]. Another study reported that high-flow RAVMs can be technically difficult to manage by embolization because the torrential flow through these lesions increases the risk of loss of the embolic device into the pulmonary circulation [11]. Due to these complications, high-flow RAVMs are usually treated by surgery. Endovascular techniques have also been used recently to treat giant aneurysms with arteriovenous fistulas [12]. Surgical treatments such as partial nephrectomy, total nephrectomy, renal auto-transplantation, vessel ligation are also potentially viable options.However, none of these studies focused on the investigation of biomechanical conditions which precede malformation complications. In the recent literature, mechanical response and interaction of medical devices, human tissues and blood flow are commonly studied by using finite element method (FEM) or finite element analysis (FEA) [13–16]. FEA represents a cost-effective tool in situations where precise analysis and evaluation of physical quantities (such as stress, strain, displacements, velocity, temperature, etc.) requires expensive equipment which usually may not provide results for a complete structure. Regarding the modeling of arteriovenous malformation, FEA has been used and validated for studying arteriovenous fistula (AVF) flow in patients with end-stage renal disease (ESRD) in whom AVF was created for hemodialysis access [17,18]. An in-vitro study that investigated local hemodynamics in a model of AVF with a 30 degree anastomotic angle and vein-to-artery diameter ratio of 1.6 showed that the flow properties during pulsatile flow were similar to those seen in steady flow with no significant qualitative changes over the cardiac cycle [19]. The study that focused on the investigation of correlation between calcification occurrence and shear stress reported that there were no associations between calcification occurrence and areas of oscillating shear stress, whereas potential associations between calcification and high temporal wall shear stress gradients was observed [20]. Another study that included six ESRD patients undergoing primary AVF formation studied the contribution of hemodynamic parameters to the remodeling of the venous limbs of the AVF [21]. The conclusion was that the venous limb of the AVF is subjected to a high blood-flow and a low blood-pressure environment and that the venous wall undergoes eccentric hypertrophy as a result of increased circumferential stress due to higher shear forces.The aim of this study was to perform extensive analysis of biomechanics properties and their correlation with the stability of RAVM by using FEA. Particularly, considering the patient-specific model and conditions, we aimed to investigate the influence of hemodynamics parameters (blood-flow velocity, pressure, shear stress and drag forces) on the RAVM stability and corresponding clinical implications.A 50-year-old Caucasian male was admitted to our hospital with complaints of minor right flank pain and gross hematuria with signs of hemodynamic compromise (blood pressure 90/50mmHg and heart rate 100beat/min). A history of significant renal trauma or prior surgery was excluded. The patient confirmed that no medical intervention involving a percutaneous procedure had been carried out. The presence of cystic lesion on the right kidney was established during the previous ultrasound studies that had shown no evidence of renal nor bladder stones. Laboratory values were unremarkable except for haemoglobin (71g/L). The patient was initially treated with indwelling catheter and a blood transfusion. Ultrasound and computerized tomography (CT) confirmed the presence of a cyst in the lower pole of the right kidney measuring 10×8cm with signs of hemorrhage in the cyst and renal collecting system (Fig. 1). Contrast CT examination revealed arteriovenous malformation originating from the renal artery.A decision to embolize the RAVM was made. Angiography was performed using a right transfemoral approach. The angiogram showed that the right kidney was vascularized by a single right renal artery (Fig. 2). The main trunk of the renal artery was normal while the ventral branch appeared ecstatic and tortuous with direct communication with the cystic lesion. The anterior branch was selectively cannulated. Embolization was performed using Trisacryl microspheres (Embosphere; Biosphere Medical, Rockland, MA) (700μm). The control angiogram showed that the ventral branch was only partially occluded due to its dilatation (5mm). Beginning at the origin of the RAVM from its feeding vessel, a 10×15 Nester coil was then deployed. Multiple 3×5 Nester and 10×5 Tornado (Cook Inc. Bloomington, IN) coils were then placed along the length of the branch, up to the main renal artery. The larger coil was placed first as it was thought to be less likely to embolize into the malformation and could provide a scaffold into which the smaller coils could be more safely deployed later on.Five days later, the ventral branch was additionally embolized through the right transfemoral approach. The RAVM remained partially occluded. During the course of recovery, the patient maintained good urine output without hematuria. A follow-up CT showed no flow through the malformation and a sustained flow through the right main renal and accessory arteries. There was no loss of parenchymal perfusion.Control color-flow Doppler ultrasonography showed the presence of flow in the malformation. Surgical treatment (nephrectomy) was consequently carried out, with the aim to obviate the risk of rupture, prolonged treatment and uncertainty, and discomfort in the right lumbar area. The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged on the 7th postoperative day. Six months after the surgery the patient is feeling well with a sustained renal function.Pathologic examination confirmed the diagnosis of aneurysmatic extension of terminal part of the renal artery, with atherosclerotic changes in intima, calcium deposits in its wall, thrombotic material inside its cavity as well as thinned fibrotic media and adventitia.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Rupture of RAVM is an uncommon and potentially life-threating condition that has to be promptly recognized and adequately treated. Several therapeutic approaches are available, with percutaneous embolization considered as a first-line option, while nephrectomy is a reasonable option when dealing with unstable patients or those with unsuitablerenal vascular anatomy. This study presented the use of computational fluid dynamics simulation for the analysis of the RAVM, with emphasis on the investigating velocity and pressure distribution, wall shear stress, drag force and flow streamlines. Previously unpublished specific case of large RAVM was reported and discussed in this study. The analysis of the data obtained by FEA revealed that the cyst had unstable hemodynamics nature making RAVM prone to rupture. Estimation of RAVM instability is difficult or impossible to be detected by the conventional diagnostic procedures. Therefore, therapeutic effects on hemodynamic interactions with the RAVM can only be predicted prior to surgery/intervention by using numerical simulations. It may be concluded that computer methods presented in this study intended to provide support to surgeons to overcome clinical diagnostic limits and help them during the process of medical decision making.The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.All procedures performed in studyinvolving human participants were in accordance with the ethical standards of the institutional and/or national research committee and with the 1964 Helsinki declaration and its later amendments or comparable ethical standards.