@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Median prior constrained TV algorithm for sparse view low-dose CT reconstruction

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A Median prior constrained TV algorithm is proposed for sparse view low-dose CT reconstruction.The median gradient proves to be sparse as well gradient image.The proposed algorithm can not only ensure a higher SNR but also a higher resolution.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Low-dose CT,Total variation,Sparse-view,Median prior,Reconstruction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
It is known that lowering the X-ray tube current (mAs) or tube voltage (kVp) and simultaneously reducing the total number of X-ray views (sparse view) is an effective means to achieve low-dose in computed tomography (CT) scan. However, the associated image quality by the conventional filtered back-projection (FBP) usually degrades due to the excessive quantum noise. Although sparse-view CT reconstruction algorithm via total variation (TV), in the scanning protocol of reducing X-ray tube current, has been demonstrated to be able to result in significant radiation dose reduction while maintain image quality, noticeable patchy artifacts still exist in reconstructed images. In this study, to address the problem of patchy artifacts, we proposed a median prior constrained TV regularization to retain the image quality by introducing an auxiliary vectormin register with the object. Specifically, the approximate action ofmis to draw, in each iteration, an object voxel toward its own local median, aiming to improve low-dose image quality with sparse-view projection measurements. Subsequently, an alternating optimization algorithm is adopted to optimize the associative objective function. We refer to the median prior constrained TV regularization as “TV_MP” for simplicity. Experimental results on digital phantoms and clinical phantom demonstrated that the proposed TV_MP with appropriate control parameters can not only ensure a higher signal to noise ratio (SNR) of the reconstructed image, but also its resolution compared with the original TV method.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Low-dose computed tomography imaging has been particularly used in modern medical practice for its advantage on reducing the radiation dose to patients. Lowering the X-ray tube current (mAs) or tube voltage (kVp) and simultaneously reducing the total number of X-ray views per rotation around the body is an effective means to achieve radiation dose reduction [1,2].However, given the noisy and sparse-view projection measurements, the associated image quality would degrade by the conventional analytical reconstruction methods. Therefore, to achieve high-quality CT images from low-dose sparse-view acquisitions is a hot research topic in CT field.Up to now, various techniques have been extensively investigated to improve the reconstruction of low-dose scanned data [3–21]. Among them, statistical iterative reconstruction (SIR) algorithms, which take into account of statistical properties of the data, have showed their superior performances in maintaining image quality in various CT applications compared with FBP reconstruction algorithm. Generally, the cost function of the SIR consists of two terms, the “data-fidelity term” and the “penalty term” or “regularization term”. The data-fidelity term models the statistical measurements, and the regularization term reflecting a priori information penalizes the solution. Many prior options have been proposed in the past decades, including smoothing and edge-preserving regularization terms. And numerous iterative algorithms with varying degrees of success have been studied to obtain high-quality CT reconstruction images from low-dose sparse-view projections. A typical example is the total variation (TV) minimization. Accurate reconstructions can be accomplished by TV minimization algorithm, in which the sparse gradient magnitude image (GMI) after discrete gradient transform (DGT) is regarded to be a constraint.In order to reconstruct CT images from under-sampling datasets, Sidky et al. improved the traditional TV minimization algorithm by considering the conditions of piecewise constant and sparse source distribution, and then proposed the TV minimization based projection on convex sets (TV-POCS) algorithm [11]. Chen proposed a radiation dose reduction algorithm called prior image constrained compressed sensing (PICCS) [15–17], which was first proposed to realize sparse-view CT reconstruction for under-sampling projections where X-ray exposure levels were considerably reduced. Then a series of PICCS applications were proposed, such as DR-PICCS [18], NC-PICCS [19], PICCS-4DCBCT [20], TRI-PICCS [21] and so on. Such TV-based algorithms answered the question that whether there is a mathematical foundation to enable accurate image reconstruction from highly under-sampled datasets.In this work, we developed and investigated an iterative median prior constrained TV regularization for the application in low-dose sparse-view CT. First, we introduced an auxiliary vectormin register with the objective function of TV, so that the target pixel was close to its local median in each iteration process. Next, we used the SIR process to enforce the statistical knowledge, then a series of simulation experiments, in order to verify the effectiveness of this new algorithm, were designed and the obtained results were also analyzed in detail. Experimental results demonstrated that the proposed algorithm can ensure the reconstructed image with higher SNR from low-dose sparse-view projection measurements, while ensuring the resolution of the reconstructed image.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we first briefly review the relationship between theℓ1-norm minimization and the TV model in medical and other tomographic imaging applications, and then we describe the proposed algorithm and its implementation. In Section 3, we analyze the simulation experiment results. Finally, in Section 4 we conclude the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
