@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Laser path calculation method on triangulated mesh for repair process on turbine parts

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Apply geodesic methods in laser path generation for repair of turbine components.Improve MMP and FMM algorithms on STL considering requirements of laser process.Propose an approximate algorithm to rapidly generate laser paths within tolerance.Methods are applied to repair cases on tip, platform and aerofoil of turbine blade.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Laser metal deposition (LMD),Triangulated mesh,Geodesic path,Turbomachines,MMP method,FMM method,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Laser metal deposition is a very effective and precise technology applied by the manufacturers of turbomachinery parts to repair damages on parts in service or reclaim quality during manufacturing of new parts. The process chains to repair or refurbish turbomachinery parts are based upon a 3D laser scanning process which acquires digitalized models in the format of triangulated-meshes to represent the geometry of parts. This paper firstly studies a discrete geodesic method proposed by Mitchell, Mount and Papadimitriou (MMP) and based on this method proposes an optimized exact algorithm to generate precise laser paths on triangulated-mesh data of part geometry. Furthermore this paper presents an approximate method based on Sethian’s Fast Marching Method (FMM) and constructs vertex-based geodesic distance field on triangulated-meshes to divide the part surface in equal-distant stripes morphed from boundary curves. These two methods are compared and error condition is evaluated. During the research the methods are implemented into an automated LMD process planning software, which is utilized into industrial applications and obtained satisfactory results. The results from application of LMD process planning software are also demonstrated in this paper.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Defects like cracks, cavities, and voids are known causes of failure in turbomachine components (e.g. blade and blisk). These defects are caused by either a failure during manufacturing process or from deterioration after prolonged operation of turbomachines. Laser metal deposition (LMD) is an efficient method to repair such defects. It realizes the deposition of metal powder on part surface by the application of heat from a laser source. LMD is becoming a widely applied process in turbomachinery manufacturing industry to repair defects in order to extend lifetime of components and reclaim product quality by refurbishment.In most practical applications of LMD process, material is first removed at the defected area by employing a suitable machining process such as milling. An accurate parametric geometric modelling of defected region is not possible. Therefore, a simplified geometric shape that bounds the defected area is used for computer aided manufacturing (CAM) planning of a machining process to remove material from defected area. An accurate geometric model of remaining part surface is absolutely vital for the effective planning of the LMD process. For this purpose an equally fine process of measurement that moves a 3D laser scanner over the surface of part to measure the part geometry within an interval of a minute or less is applied. A data model of point cloud is the outcome of the measurement. Afterwards available methods and software are applied to calculate a continuous surface geometric model of the remaining part surface consisting of a series of adjacent triangles with common vertices. This model is called a triangulated mesh of part surface. Fig. 1shows the simulation of a process-chain for the refurbishment of a blade of a turbine blisk (Blade Integrated Disc) in which simulation of a 3D laser scanner being controlled by a 5-axis CNC machine followed by a simulation of an LMD process is depicted.LMD process must be performed in a closed and fully automatic equipment in order to protect shop floor environment from the harmful effects of laser and the metal powder used during the process. An integrated laser machine system consists of a laser source, laser guidance and focus mechanisms, commonly named laser head, powder feeder and gas conveyor. In this paper we apply a powder feeder that feeds powder co-axial with laser beam and is integrated in the laser head. This type of laser nozzle achieves an isotropic distribution of metal powder on the part surface in movement. As depicted in Fig. 2during the laser metal deposition process the heat from applied laser power melts part surface, the powder coming from powder feeder falls inside the molten pool of base metal and also melts. Upon cooling the powder builds up a deposit of the metal on the base surface. Repeated build up in several layers onto the part surface fills up a cavity area or builds up an extruded shape.In order to establish a mechanically strong bond between base metal and deposited metal powder; relative movement of laser over parts surface, speed of laser travel, feed rate of powder and the power of laser are key factors to be controlled. These parameters are combined into a data structure and named laser path. An integrated laser machine receives laser path as input data to execute the LMD process.In the following sections of the paper we discuss about the input data and approaches involved in the calculation of laser paths. The most significant input to the calculation is the format and accuracy of input geometry data that also determines and controls the process related factors. The input geometry in all repair and refurbishment applications is the triangulated mesh of part surface, outcome of 3D laser scanning measurement.Triangulated mesh model of the geometry contains the polyhedral form of a free-form geometry model with faces, edges and vertices. Compared to CAD model, the mesh model cannot provide continuous and analytic information of part geometry, but only discrete data of geometric elements, and furthermore it contains fluctuation of the geometric positions due to the given data acquisition accuracy. Therefore the LMD planning process to calculate laser path for laser deposition has to handle the following aspects:1.adaptive to various types of geometriestolerant to certain level of noise in triangulated mesh modelfully automated calculation with minimum inputshigh calculation time-efficiency.In the field of laser processing technology, Keicher et al. introduced laser-aided direct metal deposition and analysed the materials and mechanical properties based on experiments with different laser set  [1]. Shepeleva et al. examined laser cladding to treat the surfaces of turbine blades and compared the result in the substrate and cladded layers with that of traditional plasma cladding  [2]. Mazumder et al. studied in the field of laser direct metal deposition with close loop control and demonstrated the whole process including CAD preparation and experiment procedure  [3]. F. Klocke and C. Brecher from Fraunhofer IPT carried out research in scanner-based laser wire cladding with flexible adaption of specific requirements on variable parts’ geometries, and laser deposition rate is enhanced and automated adaption of laser power regarding processing speed is achieved  [4,5]. In  [6] laser surface treatment technology with integrated computer aided technology has been researched by Fraunhofer IPT to improve the wear resistance and increase lifetime of deep drawing tools for automobile industry.In the previous studies of CAM solution for polyhedral surfaces, Jianghuang Wu analysed the precision of milling tool’s cut position on√3subdivision surface and also presented a method to generate tool path for ball-end milling process  [7]; Huan Qi and Magdi Azer describe a solution to create laser operation by defining tool path parameters based on laser technical requirement  [8]; J. Radej, L. Budin and A. Milanovic examined the relation between the characteristics of triangulated mesh and accurate tool path calculation and in addition gave a method to partition triangulated mesh in order to create some basic geometries for tool path computation  [9]. Another research conducted by Hongyun Du presented a geodesic path calculation method based on mesh topology, which outputs the shortest path on a mesh between two points  [10]. However, these works cannot be directly applied to the laser cladding because they only partially cover the requirements of the use cases in this research.In the field of computational graphics and topology, J. Mitchell, D. Mount and C. Papadimitriou initiated the research of discrete geodesic problems by introducing a number of lemmas that describe the geometric properties of triangle mesh and the geodesic path on discrete triangulated faces. Based on these lemmas, they proposed an algorithm (labelled “MMP”) to calculate exact optimal geodesic path by constructing a data structure (so-called “intervals”) on the edges of the triangles, which record the previous edge and the geodesic distance from the continuous points on the current edge to the source point, and then by back-tracing all the intervals all the way through the shortest path back to the source point  [11]. J.A. Sethian proposed a widely applied algorithm named “Fast Marching Method” (FMM) that was initially designed for simulating propagating of heat distributions in condensed matter  [12–15]. This method has been proven to be very efficient and accurate, and also applied into diverse application cases. For example, R. Kimmel and Sethian extend this method into the geodesic path calculation on manifolds  [12]; Based on the work of Mitchell and Mount, Vitaly Surazhsky presents a successive research on a similar Dijkstra-based method for calculating geodesic path on triangulated meshes, but simplified the data structure of interval (called “window” in this paper) and the propagation/back-tracking procedures  [15]; Martinez et al. proposed a correction method to MMP to calculate geodesic path on manifolds  [16].Different as MMP method inherited from the so-called “continuous Dijkstra” technique, J. Chen and Y. Han present a method to calculate shortest path on polyhedron, not by maintaining priority queue but by organizing windows in sequence tree structure  [17]. Ying and Xin extend the method of Chen and Han (CH method) to parallel settings in order to accelerate computation of geodesic field on huge amount of polyhedral faces  [18]. Xin and Wang improved the CH method by filtering out useless windows based on estimation of distances from vertices to source and by maintaining priority queue in a Dijkstra way  [19]. Besides, Ying and Wang introduce a new method to calculate geodesic distances on triangle faces, using a sparse undirected graph called Saddle Vertex Graph (SVG) to record geodesic distance between saddle vertices, hence to break down geodesic paths into segments between saddle vertices on the path and gained significant improvement  [20].In the area of geodesics with non-point source on polyhedron, Xin and He present a method to calculate exact geodesic loops from an initial loop  [21]. D. Bommes and L. Kobbelt at RWTH Aachen researched a computational method to generate geodesic distance field for polygonal curves on triangle meshes  [22]. Based on the previous work of MMP in  [11], this research extends the algorithm of V. Surazhsky to propagate the front wave from point source to other types of sources like curves and polygons.The authors of this paper from Fraunhofer IPT also developed a series of numerical methods to calculate laser paths on moulds and dies regarding requirements of laser surface treatment  [23].The research in this paper investigates an applicable efficient solution to solve the laser path generation on discrete polyhedral surface. Based on previous work of discrete geodesic problem and other relevant numerical methods, we analyse the previous research of discrete geodesic problem proposed by J. Mitchell  [8] and D. Bommes  [22] which establishes an “edge-based” geodesic field, and introduce an improved method by optimizing the iteration sequence of the “windows” on front. Afterwards a new approximated method by constructing geodesic field on vertices is introduced by extending the FMM method  [12] to establish the geodesic field that records the distance from each triangle to the boundary, and then use a rapid sorting method to construct tool path’s slice from intersection points. Additionally, several numerical adaptions must be used to achieve required precision and the error condition is analysed.According to the requirements of laser surface processes, the clad material should be uniformly deposited on the surface. The interval between two neighbouring paths is determined by the laser focal diameter. Variations of distances between paths can cause either over-welds or cracks after cladding. In the repair cases for turbine blade or blisk, free-form surfaces are very common in the processing area. This demands a new algorithm to generate precise tool path on discrete facet with equal geodesic distance between neighbouring paths uniformly on the surface. Hence the method to solve the geodesic distance on polyhedral data is the key of our solution.The problem to find the minimal distance between two geometric elements (point, curve and face) on a surface of polyhedron is called discrete geodesic problem. MMP method proposed in  [11] is an exact algorithm to solve discrete geodesic problem inspired by Dijkstra algorithm, and it is also the basis to solve all the other extended conditions. The exact algorithm to find the shortest distance between two points consists of two main steps: STEP1: forward propagation of geodesic distance-field from the starting point, as so-called source, to the whole surface, and STEP2: back tracing the path from the destination point to the source.In detail, STEP1 calculates the geodesic distances from the points on all the vertices and edges of polyhedra to the source point, in a specific order from near edges to further ones like a wave front propagation; Mitchell et al. has proven that an edge can be divided into a series of segments, in each of which all the points have their shortest paths to the source passing through the same sequence of edges and vertices  [11]. If a geodesic path passes through a vertex, this vertex is called “root” for this path. A path can have several roots. Based on this fact, every edge can be partitioned into a number of segments, and a data structure called “Windows” records the common geodesic parameters within the range of each such partition of an edge  [12]. The Dijkstra-like iteration will continue until either the whole surface is covered with recorded faces or the destination point is reached.In STEP2 the algorithm firstly iterates all the opposite edges of the destination pointE, and finds the window with the shortest distance back to source. The approach differs slightly depending on whether the destination is a vertex, which we will discuss in detail later.If we unfold a series of triangles to a common plane according to certain edge sequence, as shown in Fig. 3, and assume that the vertexris a “root” of a geodesic path, windows are the segments illustrated with yellow range on the edges that can be “seen” from the root in the perspective range of a wedge limited by the ends of edges lying on the unfolding sequence. In MMP method the data structure of window is defined asI=([a,b],(e,f),R,R̄,d,C,β,Ī), in which[a,b]are the parameterized limits(∈[0,1])of the window, the pair(e,f)records the belonging of edgeeto facef,RandR̄are the original root and the unfolded image of the root (unfolding is to rotate a trianglef1around a common edge withf2to flatten them onto a same plane),dis the depth (the geodesic distance from the source to the root),Cis the frontier point (the closest point on the edge to the root),βnamed access point which is the other end of line segment lying in the facefconnecting theRandC, and at lastĪis the previous window ofI[11].In the literature  [12] another type of data structure is introduced as([ab],d0,d1,σ,τ), wherediis the distance from the two ends of the window to the root,σis the depth (called pseudo distance in this paper) andτis a Boolean variable that labels on which side of the edge lies the root.The window data structure is the key factor in the MMP and its derived algorithms. Since the algorithm complexity in relation to the number of facesnis determined by the propagation method, which is Dijkstra pattern in the MMP and its derived methods, the elements in a window data structure is not changing the degree of the algorithm complexity. In contrast to this, different types of window structures do influence the efficiency of propagation of the geodesic field on the surface. By testing different such data structures of window, we propose a new data structurew=([a,b],R,fPrev,σ), in whichRis the unfolded image of root on the facef,fPrevis the edge-adjacent face offthrough which thewis propagated tof, andσthe depth to the source fromR(see Fig. 4). For any pointPin this window, the geodesic distance isd(P)=‖PR‖+σ.Compared to the data structure in  [11], this window format has relative smaller size and more intuitive meaning. Additionally it reduces the complexity of the merging of the window, since it does not contain the elementsC,βandĪ. These elements are useful during the back-tracing, but they are “secondary results” which have to be calculated fromRandfPrev. So these elements introduce unnecessary computation during forward propagation, since a window could be modified several times by merging with other windows. Hence, with the data structure proposed here no extra calculation to update these elements is required.Compared to the structure in  [15], thewhas bigger size, but it has two advantages: 1. Similar as compared to the structure proposed by MMP, we reduce the calculation of the two distances from the root to the two ends of the window; 2. The Boolean variable in the structure in  [15] will cause much bigger complexity in the propagation and back tracing since it does not contain the belonging relation of the window (edge) to which face.Notice that the generation of laser path takes one of the boundary contours of the surface as initial curve, and offsets curves with equal distance one after another on the surface. It is necessary to extend the discrete geodesic method from point source to linear source, since the first laser path on the polyhedral surface can be divided into line segments on the faces through which it pass. However the data structure of window, propagation procedure and the criterion to choose next window are analogous to the solution for point source.However, as described in  [22], for a single line segment source, this method needs to propagate a linear window and two point windows to the whole surface. The merge of two windows needs to be treated differently according to the types of source. The windows on an edge could be either a point-source type or a linear-source type. As shown in Fig. 5, the red curves present propagation of geodesic field from point source, blue lines for propagation from linear source. The necessity of merging linear and point windows can be seen in the example in the lower part of Fig. 5: the points in the area where the blue lines intersect red curves need to be determined to which source they are closer.It can be noticed that the “visible range” of a point window and that of a linear window are different: the propagation of a linear window is always inside of a rectangular area whose borders are perpendicular to the source line segment; the visible area of a point source is bounded by a fan shape. Hence in each time of propagation from a linear window, the visible area of the original linear window will be filled with new linear windows, and the rest parts of the two opposite edges in the triangle will be filled with new point windows. Afterwards these new types of windows will be merged with the existing windows on the two opposite edges. These will increase the number of window calculations exponentially. Since the merging procedures are very complicated, when the number of triangles becomes very huge, any residual error will cause the path to diverge from the correct value and even get lost in back-tracing. To avoid this a lot of special numerical treatments are needed and increase the computation time significantly.In our use cases, since the initial boundaries of laser processing area always consist of relative “flattened” and smooth polylines (otherwise heating concentration will occur), which means the initial polylines will never be like the lower part of Fig. 5. Based on this fact, an assumption can be made: all the areas, which can be “seen” from any of linear source, will have a shortest path to a linear source, not to a point source. This assumption enables us to fill the whole polyhedral surface firstly with linear windows, and then fill the rest part with point windows. Hence, merging of two different types of windows during propagation will not be needed. This assumption has been verified through tests even on very complicated surfaces with very unsmooth curvature changes, which are demonstrated in Section  8.Another reason why the merging between these two types of windows is unnecessary is that circular curves generated from point source are not desired for laser process, which will be described in Section  5 and shown in Fig. 8.The propagation of geodesic field from the source to the surface is similar to heat propagation: the initial curve is acting as a linear heat source, and the tool path generation on the surface is like the heat conduction in anisotropic material. The growth direction of each path is dependent on the local gradient of the surface.Fast Marching Method is introduced by James A. Sethian as a numerical method to solve wave propagation problems of Eikonal equation:(5.1)|∇T(x)|=F(x).This equation represents that the wave propagation’s time cost and also the direction at positionxdepend on the local gradient of the field, which is very close to our tool path propagation.T(x)in our case can be defined as the geodesic distance from the vertex to the initial curve, andF(x)denotes surface gradient on discrete manifold in our case. The procedure of the FMM is quite similar to Dijkstra algorithm in  [12–14], except that Dijkstra method simply searches the next node by calculating the direct distance between two nodes but FMM calculates local gradients to carry on a wave-front-style propagation.Hence a graph data structure of mesh should be firstly established. Considering the discrete characteristic of meshes, both edges and vertices of facet in a mesh can be used as nodes of the graph. In our solution we build a graph structure with vertices as nodes, and we modified the procedure from FMM to as below:I.Build ofT(x)field of mesh(1)SetT(x)=−1for all the vertices; andT(x)=0for all of those on the given initial curve;CalculateT(x)of all the vertices that are adjacent to the front (the front of propagation consists of vertices whoseT(x)=−1yet but also adjacent to those vertices with already calculatedT(x)⩾0), set the calculatedT(x)to these vertices, and find the vertexPwith smallest positive valueT(x);Update all vertices’T(x)that are adjacent toPaccording to the new calculated values;Jump to step (2) untilT(x)of all the vertices on the mesh are calculated.Generate laser path slices by interpolation on mesh with calculatedT(x).In Section  5.1 we explain (I) the method to updateT(x)and research (II) the tool path interpolation onT(x)field in Section  5.2.In a triangleΔP1P2Px, as shown in Fig. 6, the value ofT(Px)can be updated byT(P1)andT(P2)by:If onlyP1has been calculated withT(x), thenT(Px)can be temporarily set byT(P1)+|P1Px|;If bothT(P1)andT(P2)⩾0, then the calculation is executed as follows: We apply an affine transformationΔP1P2Px:R3→OxT(x).OxT(x)is a virtual coordinate system whoseycoordinate represents the geodesic distance to the initial curve, and the mapping does not change the lengths of three edges of the triangle. Thexcoordinate value is trivial and we assumeT(P2)⩾T(P1)without loss of generality. The mapped triangle onOxT(x)is shown below:(5.2)sinβ=T(P2)−T(P1)|P1P2|.According to the law of cosines,(5.3)cosα=|P1P2|2+|P1Px|2−|P2Px|22|P1P2|⋅|P1Px|.Finally the value ofT(Px)is:(5.4)T(Px)=|P1Px|sin(α+β)+T(P1)=|P1Px|sin(cos−1(|P1P2|2+|P1Px|2−|P2Px|22|P1P2|⋅|P1Px|)+sin−1(T(P2)−T(P1)|P1P2|))+T(P1).In the work of Kimmel and Sethian’s in  [12], theT(x)is the solution of the quadratic equation below:(5.5)(a2+b2−2abcosθ)t2+2bu(acosθ−b)t+b2(u2−a2sin2θ)=0.In whicha=|P2Px|,b=|P1Px|,u=T(P2)−T(P1), and(5.6)θ=∠P1PxP2=cos−1(|P1Px|2+|P2Px|2−|P1P2|22|P1Px|⋅|P2Px|).Since the method is Dijkstra-like so alsoO(n⋅logn), the solution ofT(x)will influence the computation time in a great degree, and obviously (5.4) is simpler than (5.5).Additionally, the process in  [12] requires an additional step to check whether the triangle is acute. A special “unfolding” step must be taken for an obtuse triangle, which constructs a virtual directional edge including unfolding triangles for each obtuse angle until a vertex is detected in the extended splitting section. Since a number of triangles must be unfolded, extra steps takeO(n)complexity, in whichnis the number of triangles in the mesh.The reason of taking this procedure is for monotonicity: the update of gradient for a vertex must be running “inside” of the triangle, to make sure that theT(x)is always updated with smallest geodesic value from the closest path. However, contrarily in our case the situation can and must be simplified as (5.4). As shown in Fig. 7, since the two orange triangles are on the boundary, there is no neighbouring triangle that can provide an “inside-triangle-update” for the red vertices. In this case (5.4) can provide a pseudo-geodesic distance from the two red vertices to the initial curve, which is not along the edge direction but along the projection direction. Otherwise “bending” of paths in the boundary area will be generated by (5.5), as shown in the lower part of Fig. 7. This is also the reason why we do not need the merging of two types of windows as described in Section  4, since circular or bending paths at the two ends near boundaries are not preferable for laser process.Each laser path consists of a series of segments on triangles. Here we can assume a path is a linear segment on a triangle face, since the dimension of triangles in metrology data can be controlled to small enough to reach desired precision. To properly calculate these segments on triangles regarding the geodesic distance to the initial path, we “offset” the first path (in the form of a polyline) on the surface to a triangle at the distance of required laser interval from this path, and find the intersection between the “offset” curve and the triangle by the method below:–Firstly the geodesic distance from the three vertices A, B and C to the curve,d1,d2,d3are respectively calculated asT(x)in Section  5;Compare the values ofd1–3to given offset valued, ifdis bigger thanmax(d1–3)or smaller thanmin(d1–3), then the curve has no “intersection” on this triangle, switch to next triangle;Ifd1<d,d2<d, andd3>d, then the projected segmentEFis across the edgeACandBC, as in the figure. The positions ofEandFare interpolated as:(5.7)E=A+d−d3d1−d3(C−A)F=B+d−d3d2−d3(C−B).Hence with a given distance valued, a series of segments will be generated, each of which is the intersection on a triangle. Since the segments of the initial polylines are already sorted, the generated offset segments are also sequentially connected.In practice there could be other intersection cases other than the situation discussed above. For example more than two interpolated points are found on the three edges of a triangle. In this case we use a vector that records an approximate direction of the previous path as an extra criterion to pick up the correct intersected segment to form the current path with biggest smoothness. Nonmonotonicity of geodesic distance on an edge, and the influence of break point from the original polyline source are discussed in the evaluation of error in Section  7.We test on different geometries that have the same amount range of faces from 1k to 10k to verify the relation between time complexity and the number of faces on the approximate method.Fig. 9shows two series of test data with regard to the number of faces on the model. It can be seen that the two curves are between the curvesk1nlognandk2n1.5, wherenis the number of faces,k1andk2are constants to adjust the scales of data. From this result it can be seen that the time complexity isn⋅lognand in the worst case is belown1.5. The test results can be seen in Section  8.The major difference of the generated geodesic values on polyhedron between the exact and approximate algorithms is that the approximate method does not generate multiple windows on an edge. However, as described in Section  5, in our case it is not required to calculate exact “global” geodesic distance to the initial geometry, but to take the last generated polyline as the basis for next generation, since the laser process requires equal distance between each two neighbouring paths. This incremental pattern of propagation minimizes the error caused by the monotonicity of geodesic field on edge, because the error will not accumulate from the very beginning to the end of propagation. Hence the calculation of the maximum error on a single edge will be precise enough for the evaluation of error. To reduce the iterations of each time’s propagation, at the beginning of computation a rough division of all the triangles into stripe areas with width ofδdcan be executed, wheredis the given interval of paths andδis a factor bigger than 1. Each time’s propagation will only take place on the triangles inside the area of one stripe.δcan be used to control the width of the stripes in order to guarantee that all the close enough triangles be included in the stripe.The deviation between the exact geodesic distance and the interpolated value from two vertices on an edge is caused by the discrete curvature on the basic polyline which should be projected to the laser path (if basic curve is a line then the deviation will be 0). The analytical calculation of the maximum value of deviationσmaxis difficult because it is dependent on the shape of last laser path and also the relative position of the current edge to the basic polyline. However some preconditions allow us to estimate the range of the maximum value: (1) The basic polyline should be relative smooth and contain no sharp corners with acute angle or zigzag; (2) The longest edge of a triangle can be controlled in certain range that is comparable to the interval of two neighbouring paths. These two preconditions guarantee the maximum deviation can be controlled by the relative dimension of the triangle to the discrete curvature radius of the basic polyline. Suppose the exact offset curve from the base curve near an edge has a local curvature radiusR, and the length of this edgel=μR. As it draws in Fig. 10, the deviation of geodesic distance from the points on the edge to the offset base curve can be calculated as follows, and thisσis also the difference between the approximate geodesic distance field and the real one with nonmonotonicity:(7.1)σ=R(1−1−l24R2)=R(1−1−μ24)≈μ2R8.The biggest deviation takes place when the length of edge reaches maximum and the radius reaches minimum. Hence, in order to control the maximum error smaller than a given toleranceδ, we estimate biggest curvature radiusRof the basic curve firstly, and then make sureμ<22δ/R. This should be done by simply dividing the edges which are longer than this threshold and insert new triangles. Additionally local smooth function applied to the generated polyline can also optimize the final laser path. By this method the influence of break points from the base curve can be minimized and the more complicated cases other than that discussed in 5.2 can be avoided.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
