@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Decoding the EGFR mutation-induced drug resistance in lung cancer treatment by local surface geometric properties

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A method for predicting the EGFR mutation-induced drug resistance is proposed.Four types of local surface changes are defined for the mutants compared with wild-type EGFR.Three types of the changes have strong correlation with the progression-free survival (PFS).The number of convex shapes also shows a correlation with the PFS.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Drug resistance,EGFR mutation,Lung cancer,Alpha shape,Solid angle,Protein surface geometric properties,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation-induced drug resistance leads to a limited efficacy of tyrosine kinase inhibitors during lung cancer treatments. In this study, we explore the correlations between the local surface geometric properties of EGFR mutants and the progression-free survival (PFS). The geometric properties include local surface changes (four types) of the EGFR mutants compared with the wild-type EGFR, and the convex degrees of these local surfaces. Our analysis results show that the Spearman׳s rank correlation coefficients between the PFS and three types of local surface properties are all greater than 0.6 with small P-values, implying a high significance. Moreover, the number of atoms with solid angles in the ranges of [0.71, 1], [0.61, 1] or [0.5, 1], indicating the convex degree of a local EGFR surface, also shows a strong correlation with the PFS. Overall, these characteristics can be efficiently applied to the prediction of drug resistance in lung cancer treatments, and easily extended to other cancer treatments.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations that lead to its overexpression can activate the anti-apoptotic pathways [1,2], eventually result in an aberrant proliferation of cells. The aberrant cell proliferation is a typical cause of human cancers, such as the non-small-cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) [3–6]. Clinically, gefitinib (IRESSATM), a kind of tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI), is widely used to interrupt EGFR downstream signals during the treatment of NSCLC patients [7,8]. EGFR mutants such as L858R (substitution of leucine with arginine at residue site 858) show stronger binding affinity with gefitinib than the wild-type (WT) EGFR [9,10]. However, other mutants such as those with an insertion in exon 20 of the tyrosine kinase domain show weak responses to gefitinib [11]. Moreover, for the mutant L858R, the efficacy of gefitinib becomes limited if a second mutation T790M (substitution of threonine with methionine at residue site 790) occurs [12]. It is important to study the characteristics of EGFR mutants in order to understand the mechanism of the mutation-induced drug resistance.Recently, computational methods have been efficiently applied to the studies of drug resistance [13–16]. Sequence-based and structure-based approaches are the two primary categories of these computational methods. With the rapid development of techniques such as X-ray crystallography and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, three-dimensional (3D) structural data of proteins become more readily available in structure-related researches [17]. Zhou et al. [11] conducted a structural exploration of EGFR proteins, and predicted anti-EGFR drug resistance based on the binding free energy and hydrogen bond analyses. Wang et al. [18] employed the computational methods in personalized prediction of EGFR mutation-induced drug resistance, using 3D structural data of EGFR proteins. In this work, we investigated the EGFR mutation-induced drug resistance in lung cancer treatment, by analyzing the surface geometric properties of WT EGFR and its mutants. Rosetta [19] was used to generate EGFR mutants and Amber [20] was applied to optimize the structures of obtained mutants. Subsequently, we employed the 3D alpha shape modeling method [21,22] to construct the surfaces of these EGFR structures, after which a solid angle analysis of the atoms at the drug-binding sites of EGFR proteins was conducted to reveal the geometric properties of EGFR surfaces. Finally, we carried out a correlation analysis [23] on these geometric properties and the pre-recorded progression-free survival (PFS) (the length of time between using TKI and the disease getting worse [10]) in the treatments. Experiment results show that our proposed surface geometric properties provide valuable information for studying and predicting drug resistance levels in lung cancer treatment.The experimental data used in this paper were obtained from the Queen Mary Hospital in Hong Kong [18]. This data set consists of clinical observations on 137 NSCLC patients, with gefinitib applied in their treatments. These patients share a total of 30 EGFR mutation types, and their statistics are shown in Fig. 1. The mutation types are notated by their corresponding changes in protein sequences relative to the WT EGFR [18]. For example, L858R, delE746_A750, dulH773 and delE709_T710insD respectively represent amino acid substitution, deletion, duplication and modification (deletion plus insertion). All the EGFR mutants were generated based on the template structure “2ITY” downloaded from the Protein Data Bank (PDB) [17]. The progression time (in the unit of month) of gefitinib in the treatment of each patient was recorded, revealing the drug resistance levels in each treatment.We employed Rosetta to generate the EGFR mutants. Rosetta is a molecular modeling software package for protein structure prediction and analysis of protein structures [24]. It is a popular software for computational modeling in computational biology and very successful for de novo protein structure prediction (protein tertiary structure predicting from the primary sequence) [25]. EGFR mutants were generated based on the crystal structure “2ITY”, with the drug molecule removed. For point mutations, the ddg_monomer protocol in Rosetta 3.4 [26] was adopted using inputs of the template structure and the protein sequence of each mutant. For deletions, insertions and duplications, the comparative modeling (CM) protocol [27] in Rosetta was selected. This procedure includes target–template alignment, model construction and model assessment. We applied ClustalW [28], a method for multiple-sequence alignment, to align the target sequence to the template. In the model construction, a fragment library should be prepared first. We employed Psipred [29] to predict secondary structures for each target sequence, and the fragment picker protocol in Rosetta was selected to pick fragments (3- or 9-residue long) for the sequence. Such 3-mers and 9-mers fragment files form a fragment library that can be used in fragment insertion during the structure prediction. Subsequently, we constructed the 3D structures of the mutants using the CM protocol, and a conservative modeling step was adopted to keep the backbone atoms consistent with those of the template in well-aligned regions. The 3D structures of the mutants were assessed by their physics-based energies, and the one with the minimum energy was selected. In this process, we used the full atom energy scoring function to identify accurate structures. The scoring function is a model generated with various scoring terms and the corresponding weights for each term [25]. The scoring terms include van der Waals, Lennard–Jones interactions, residue pair interactions, solvation, rotamer self-energy, Ramachandran torsion preferences, hydrogen bonding and unfolded state reference energy. The total score of a predicted structure is obtained by computing the weighted sum of the scoring terms. Although the predicted mutations generated with software simulation methods cannot always correspond exceptionally well with true structures, based on the observation that similar protein sequences usually lead to similar 3D protein structures, the comparative modeling is very valuable for predicting mutants and it is regarded as the most accurate prediction method currently available [27]. After the 3D structures of all the mutants are obtained, Amber 12 [20] was applied to carry out a minimization for each structure [11]. Each optimized structure was then aligned to the template to construct a mutant–drug complex, using the structure alignment tool of the UCSF Chimera [30].Using Amber 12, the mutant–drug complex was computationally solvated into an octahedron water box (TIP3P model) with a 10.0Å buffer around the complex in each direction. The ff99SB force field was adopted in these simulations. After solvating the complex, we conducted 1000 steps of minimization for the entire system to remove bad contacts and find the nearest local minima. This optimized structure was our final structure for analysis.The alpha shape, first defined by Edelsbrunner and Mücke, is a linear approximation of the original shape [31]. The basic alpha shape and the weighted alpha shape are the two primary types. The basic one is based on Delaunay triangulation while the weighted one is derived from the regular triangulation. Considering a set of points, the basic alpha shape consists of all the simplices in the Delaunay triangulation that have an empty circumscribing sphere with a squared radius equal or smaller than α[21], where ‘empty’ means that the open sphere includes no points. On the other hand, the definition of a weighted alpha shape is based on a set of weighted points [22]. For example, a weighted point pican be defined in Eq. (1), wherepi′represents the location andpi′′is the weight. Two points p1 and p2 are defined to be orthogonal if Eq. (2) is satisfied, and sub-orthogonal if Eq. (3) is satisfied. For a given α, the weighted alpha complex is formed by the simplices that meet the condition, under which there exists a weighted point with weight α orthogonal to the weighted points associated with the vertices of the simplex and sub-orthogonal to all other weighted points:(1)pi=(pi′,pi′′)(2)∣p1′p2′∣=p1′′+p2′′(3)∣p1′p2′∣>p1′′+p2′′.In this paper, weighted alpha shape modeling was applied to construct the surface of each EGFR mutant structure. We adopted the Computational Geometry Algorithms Library (CGAL) to compute the weighted alpha shape and set the squared common Van der Waals (VDW) radii as the atom weight. The alpha value and probe weight were set to be 0 and squared 1.4Å respectively, in order to guarantee that the vertices in the weighted alpha shape correspond to the solvent-accessible atoms.We used solid angles to characterize the geometric properties of the EGFR surface atoms, which were extracted using the alpha shape model. The solid angles of surface atoms can represent the surface curvature, which is used as a geometric property in this paper. Concave shapes around the binding sites are more likely to offer opportunities for drug binding than convex shapes. If the drug binds to EGFR mutants very tightly, then it will strengthen the response. So we studied the EGFR mutation-induced drug resistance by analyzing the solid angles around the binding sites. The definition of solid angles [32] is as follows: assume P, A, B and C are the vertices of a tetrahedron with an origin at P subtended by the triangle ABC, and the dihedral angle between PAC and PBC, PAB and PAC, PAB and PBC, are denoted by φab, φbc, φacrespectively then the solid angle of P can be expressed in Eq. (4). Further, the solid angle Ω of a surface atom M can be obtained by summing up all the solid angles with the origin at M in the alpha shape (Eq. (5)). We used Eq. (6) to transform these solid angle values to the range of [−1, 1]:(4)Ωi=φab+φbc+φac−π(5)Ω=∑iΩi(6)Ω′=cos(Ω/4).When the scaled solid angleΩ′falls into [−1, 0] or (0, 1], the corresponding shape centered at M is a concave or convex one respectively. Overall, a specific value ofΩ′represents the concave or convex degree of an atom.Spearman׳s rank correlation coefficient is a nonparametric measure of statistical dependence between two variables [23]. Consider two variables X and Y of size n, they are firstly converted into ranks xiandyi(i=1,…,n), after which the spearman׳s rank correlation coefficient ρ can be computed as follows:(7)ρ=∑i(xi−x¯)(yi−y¯)∑i(xi−x¯)2∑i(yi−y¯)2ρis in the range of [−1, 1], which indicates the dependence between the two variables.ρ>0means that X and Y are positively dependent, whileρ<0shows a negative dependence between them. The larger the absolute value of ρ is, the stronger the two variables are correlated. A perfect Spearman correlation of +1 or −1 can occur when each of the variables is a perfect monotone function of the other, under the condition that there are no repeated data values in the dataset. Specifically in our studies, the correlation analysis was applied to the EGFR surface geometric properties and the pre-recorded PFS, aiming to extract valuable dependence between them. Moreover, we employed P-value to test whether ρ was significantly different from zero. The P-value describes the probability that the statistical result is equal or more extreme than the actually observed one, with the assumption of the null hypothesis being true [33]. It was computed using the permutation test, and the null hypothesis was rejected if the P-value was less than 0.05.The hierarchical clustering method is widely used in pattern classification [34]. There are two approaches, agglomerative clustering and divisive clustering. The agglomerative clustering method builds a hierarchy of clusters by merging the clusters at the bottom to move up the hierarchy, while the divisive clustering approach splits the top cluster to move down the hierarchy. In this paper, the agglomerative clustering approach was employed to analyze the relationship of surface geometric properties and the PFS. We applied Euclidean distance to measure the pairwise distance between pairs of points, and the points with the shortest distance were merged into the same class. Then the distances between the new merged class and the old classes were calculated to obtain new clusters until all the points were merged into one cluster.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we developed a method to predict the EGFR mutation-induced drug resistance in lung cancer treatment, by analyzing the local surface geometric properties of EGFR mutants. Rosetta was employed to construct the 3D structures of these EGFR mutants. Then 3D alpha shape modeling and a solid-angle analysis were implemented to reveal the local surface geometric properties of these EGFR proteins. We classified the local surface changes of these mutants compared to the WT EGFR into four types, and the Spearman׳s rank correlation coefficients were applied to calculate the correlations between these local surface changes and the PFS. Our analysis results show that the number of atoms with the changes of convex shapes converting to concave, degree variation and disappearance have strong correlations with the PFS. Moreover, the number of binding-site atoms with solid angles in [0.71, 1], [0.61, 1] or [0.5, 1] show a strong correlation with the PFS as well. By using the hierarchical clustering method, we also analyzed the relationship of PFS and the number of atoms with solid angle values in [0.71, 1], [0.61, 1] and [0.5, 1]. The clustering results are consistent with those from the Spearman׳s correlation coefficients. These characteristics can be applied to the prediction of EGFR mutation-induced drug resistance in lung cancer treatment. Our study indicates that surface geometric properties of the binding site on a key protein such as EGFR play an important role in drug resistance prediction, and this method can also be extended to the investigation of other drug resistance mechanisms for other diseases.The authors declare no conflict of interests.