@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Data driven webpage color design

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The first attempt to automate webpage coloring through a data driven approach.We addressed the three fundamental design objectives of webpage coloring.We introduced novel probabilistic models capturing color contrasts and semantics.The models coordinated with the lexicographic strategy prove effective in demos.User tests verify the system-generated designs are more preferable.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data driven,Color design,Lexicographic optimization,Color semantics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a design framework for automatic webpage coloring regarding several fundamental design objectives: proper visual contrasts, multi-color compatibility and semantic associations. The objective functions are formulated with data-driven probabilistic models: the Color Contrast model concerning visual saliencies is trained on 52,000 basic components parsed from 500 popular webpages. Color Compatibility and Semantics are modeled from a dataset of manually tagged and rated color schemes from Adobe Kuler. To incorporate the multi-objectives in optimization, the framework adopts a lexicographic strategy, which determines the best choices by optimizing the objectives one by one in a user specified sequence. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the models and the flexibility of the framework in two typical web color design scenarios: fine tuning a colored page and recoloring a page with a specified palette. Independent perception experiments verify that the system-generated designs are preferable to those generated by nonprofessionals.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Color is a primitive modularity of a vision system, triggering instant aesthetic sensation  [1]. The first impression of a webpage on an audience only requires an initial 50 ms of glimpse  [2]. While many people can easily distinguish good and bad color designs, creating a pleasing color design requires much more time and effort  [3]. Webpage color design usually requires considerable experimentation and guesswork. It is highly difficult to systematically investigate the world of all color constellations. Even permutations of several colors on a webpage are usually astronomical. (Human beings can distinguish approximately 128 different hues, 130 different tints, and 23 shades, reaching a total of approximately 82,720 different colors  [4].)Is it possible that computers complete the coloring process by automatically evaluating and screening this huge amount of design alternatives? The main challenges in automatic color design are: how to determine a coloring that is aesthetically pleasing yet also contributes to the functionality of the design, and how to use color to convey specific moods to the audience.In this paper, we begin with computational encoding of the properties that make a webpage coloring agreeable. A data driven framework can determine an optimum coloring effect for the webpage with minimal user interactions and specifications.A webpage coloring must consider at least three fundamental design objectives  [5]: functionality (usability) for visual communication, i.e., legibility and proper visual saliency allocation; multi-color compatibility, i.e., harmony; and sematic associations with the specific moods.Three objective functions are subsequently formulated with probabilistic models on datasets of design examples:Color contrast. Color contrast not only makes a form distinguishable, but research suggests that proper distribution of color contrasts yields a hierarchy of visual saliencies  [6], allocating our resources of attention and reducing our cognitive loads. Color contrast is also regarded as a foundation of harmony  [7]. To determine proper edge contrasts of color patches on a webpage, a probabilistic model is trained on 52,000 visual components parsed from 500 webpages with their edge contrast properties and selected predictive features.Color harmony. Harmony is the most addressed objective of color design. The framework employs a Color Compatibility model, developed by O’Donovan et al.  [8]. The model is a regression of user preferences on a large dataset of color schemes from Adobe Kuler and Amazon Mturk samples. A color scheme is an ordered row of five colors.Color semantics. Note that contrast and harmony are general qualities that cannot capture the specific color themes. To express specific color moods, we introduce a probabilistic model, driven by the dataset of tagged color schemes from Adobe Kuler, to fine-tune a webpage according to specified keywords.Finally, to incorporate the multi-objective functions in the coloring process, the framework adopts a lexicographic strategy  [9], which applies the objective functions sequentially, not simultaneously.The main contribution of this paper is an attempt to automate webpage coloring through a data driven optimization. Fundamental objectives of webpage color design are addressed and formulated with probabilistic models, to capture desirable properties of webpage coloring underlying collected design data. We demonstrate that cooperation of the objectives could lead to acceptable converged states of results. Independent perception experiments verify that the system-generated designs are preferable to designs generated by nonprofessionals.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
