@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An ALE-based finite element model of flagellar motion driven by beating waves: A parametric study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present a two-dimensional model of flagellar motility using FEM-ALE formulation.Swimming velocity shows linear dependence on large amplitudes.Wavelength studies in channels reveal dissimilar trends for swimming velocity.Beating-wave propulsion in shear-thinning fluids is generally more efficient.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Microorganisms,Traveling waves,Finite element method,Moving mesh,Non-Newtonian fluids,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A computational model of flagellar motility is presented using the finite element method. Two-dimensional traveling waves of finite amplitude are propagated down the flagellum and the swimmer is propelled through a viscous fluid according to Newton׳s second law of motion. Incompressible Navier-Stokes equations are solved on a triangular moving mesh and arbitrary Lagrangian–Eulerian formulation is employed to accommodate the deforming boundaries. The results from the present study are validated against the data available in the literature and close agreement with previous works is found. The effects of wave parameters as well as head morphology on the swimming characteristics are studied for different swimming conditions. We have found that the swimming velocities are linear functions of finite amplitudes and that the rate of work is independent of the channel height for large amplitudes. Furthermore, we have also demonstrated that for the range of wave parameters that are often encountered in human sperm motility studies, the propulsive velocity versus the wavelength exhibits dissimilar trends for different channel heights. Various head configurations were analyzed and it is also observed that wall proximity amplifies the effects induced by different head shapes. By taking non-Newtonian fluids into account, we present new efficiency analyzes through which we have found that the model microorganism swims much more efficiently in shear-thinning fluids.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Microscale propulsion has been one of biologists׳ main areas of interest for many years, since motility of these small swimmers plays a profound role in biosystems. Those particular types of bacteria that exhibit motility can move in the direction of the concentration gradient of food molecules to provide nutrition or to avoid repellants. The biology of reproduction is significantly dependent upon the propulsion of spermatozoa, which have to pass through various environments in the female reproductive tract in order to meet and fertilize the ovum. Accordingly, it is of considerable importance to analyze the motion of such swimmers in detail so as to understand how different geometric, kinematic and physical parameters affect their progression velocity, power consumption, etc. and to be able to distinguish between dominant and also less influential factors. In this paper, this objective is going to be accomplished through parametric studies of the presented flagellar model for situations that were not addressed before.Numerical simulations of flagellar and also non-flagellar motility have been proven to be powerful tools to gain better insight into the underlying physics of such motions. Also, the emergence of microrobots and synthetic swimmers which are believed to have great potential in biomedical applications, have rendered computational tools even more important by providing invaluable data for improving and optimizing their design. The Study of microswimmers hydrodynamics was first initiated by the pioneering work of Taylor [1], who analyzed swimming of an infinite sheet subject to planar beating waves with small amplitudes, analogous to the beating flagellum of spermatozoa. As inertia is unimportant at microscales and the Reynolds number is quite small, Stokes equations were used in Taylor׳s analysis. Using the same method, Tuck [2] studied this case of swimming by taking inertia into account. Through his perturbation analysis of an infinite sheet swimming near boundaries, Katz [3] demonstrated that both the propulsive velocity and the rate of work by the sheet increase as the wall separation distances are reduced. Hancock [4] introduced the slender-body theory (SBT) by utilizing the distribution of “Stokeslets” in order to model the flow resulting from the beating of a flagellum. Gray and Hancock [5] developed a model that represents the flagellum by a series of cylinders, translation of which gives rise to resistive forces. These forces were considered to be proportional to the relative velocity; a fundamental assumption that forms the basis of what is known today as the resistive-force theory (RFT). Numerous studies concerning flagellar fluid dynamics have ever since made use of either of SBT or RFT. Subsequently, boundary-element method was successfully applied to flagellar hydrodynamic problems. Phan-Thien et al. [6] analyzed the swimming of a microorganism by the propagation of helical waves along its flagellum using boundary-element method and found that the results from this method were in excellent agreement with experimental observations and also with those of the slender-body theory. Smith et al. [7] developed a hybrid boundary-integral/slender-body algorithm for modeling flagellar cell motility to investigate the accumulation of human spermatozoa near plane boundaries. Planar and three-dimensional helical waveforms were prescribed and various near-wall behaviors of flagellated cell, such as trapping and deflection were studied.Methods involving direct solution of Navier-Stokes equations have gained more and more popularity in recent years, since they do not pose any restrictions on the geometry or physics of the problem. The immersed boundary method which was proposed by Peskin [8] to model blood flow in heart valves is a versatile direct numerical methodology to handle moving boundaries, particularly those encountered in biological flows. In this method, rather than considering the moving boundary as an actual flow boundary, it is represented by a singular source term in Navier-Stokes equations and thus the no-slip condition is imitated. Fauci and Peskin [9] modeled the locomotion of aquatic animals using immersed boundary method, treating the organism as a massless, elastic boundary immersed in a viscous fluid. In a similar analysis, Qin et al. [10] used a feedback law to calculate the interaction forces between the swimmer and the fluid, and analyzed the swimming of a computational organism in a channel. Among the direct methods, an alternative approach to flagellar propulsion is to apply finite element method to solve the governing equations, with the deformations taken into account through arbitrary Lagrangian–Eulerian formulation. Temel and Yesilyurt [11] simulated microrobots swimming in circular channels and made a comparison of the data obtained from CFD model and experimental work involving a robot of almost the same size. In another study, Acemoglu and Yesilyurt [12] investigated the effects of geometric parameters on swimming of a microorganism with a single helical flagellum in circular channels using finite element method.The techniques discussed up to this point have all taken advantage of a known sinusoidal beating wave-form based on experimental observations. However, the true nature of flagellar beating waves is an emergent property of the fluid dynamics and flagellum structural response. The action of internal molecular dynein motors, forces due to the passive structure of the flagellum and the hydrodynamic drag induced by the ambient fluid constitute a fully coupled physical system [13]. The curvature control theory was proposed by Brokaw [14] and helical waves were shown to be generated in simulations based on this theory [15]. Lindemann [16,17] developed the geometric clutch hypothesis and attributed the activation of dynein motors to the specific internal geometric structure of the flagellum. Recently, Gadêlha et al. [18] have developed a model based on passive flexible filaments in shear flow which takes the geometric nonlinearities into consideration in spermatozoon flagellum. They have concluded that nonlinear model predicts buckling behavior and complicated waveforms, and that curved swimming trajectories are possible without requiring asymmetric forces with such a model. Utilizing the active elastic model of Gadêlha et al. [18], nonlocal SBT, boundary-element and regularized stokeslets, Montenegro-Johnson et al. [19] have lately devised an approach to analyze the phenomenon of sperm scatter near geometric features which has promising applications in cell sorting through their individual motility characteristics. They have indicated that sperm scattering depends nonlinearly on the ratio of viscous and elastic forces: a simple backstep produces attractive or repulsive scattering of cells considering different values for specific parameters reflecting the effects of such a critical ratio.In the present work, flagellar motion of a model microorganism with the characteristic planar beat patterns of human sperm is explored. A two-dimensional finite element model is established and the time-varying, incompressible Navier-Stokes equations are solved on an arbitrarily moving mesh to allow for the displacements of the boundaries due to the motion of the flagellum. Simulations are then validated against the previous analytical and numerical works reported in the literature and the effects of various geometric parameters including amplitude, frequency, wavelength of the traveling waves as well as size and shape of the head and near-wall swimming behaviors of the swimmer are studied. In addition, swimming in non-Newtonian fluids is also investigated and discussed in this paper, owing to the widespread occurrences of such fluids in biological flow problems.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
