@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Using Petri nets for experimental design in a multi-organ elimination pathway

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We developed a Petri net to assist in the design of experiments.We modelled the human multi-organ genistein elimination pathway.Gut epithelium profiles and additional constraints improve the model parameterization.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Petri nets,Elimination metabolic pathway,Genistein,Experiment design,Metabolic pathway parameterization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Genistein is a soy metabolite with estrogenic activity that may result in (un)favorable effects on human health. Elucidation of the mechanisms through which food additives such as genistein exert their beneficiary effects is a major challenge for the food industry. A better understanding of the genistein elimination pathway could shed light on such mechanisms. We developed a Petri net model that represents this multi-organ elimination pathway and which assists in the design of future experiments. Using this model we show that metabolic profiles solely measured in venous blood are not sufficient to uniquely parameterize the model. Based on simulations we suggest two solutions that provide better results: parameterize the model using gut epithelium profiles or add additional biological constrains in the model.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Genistein is a soy metabolite with estrogenic activity that may result in (un)favorable effects on human health (for a review see [1]). Elucidation of the mechanisms through which food additives such as genistein exert their beneficiary effects is a major challenge for the food industry. A better understanding of the genistein elimination pathway could shed light on such mechanisms. Parts of this pathway are hosted by specific organs (including the small intestine, gut, liver, and kidney). Metabolite degradation products travel between these organs and eventually are secreted through the gut or kidney. Although many nutrikinetics studies have been conducted to explore the genistein multi-compartment elimination pathway in human and animal models, relatively few of its details are known and, consequently, the precise metabolic pathways and routes remain to be established. In this work we therefore do not consider detailed metabolic reactions involved in the elimination pathway (which are largely unknown) but focus on the routes of degradation products through the network of compartments (the involved organs and blood).Mathematical modelling helps to gain a more detailed understanding of the genistein elimination pathway but this requires a model describing this system in sufficient detail. However, Petri nets are able to use incomplete and/or imprecise information to reconstruct system׳s behaviour. Petri nets developed by Carl Adam Petri provide a generic approach for modelling of concurrent systems [2]. A Petri net is a bipartite graph with two types of nodes – places and transitions. In biological applications, places generally represent biological entities such as molecules, genes and enzymes. Places contain tokens that reflect, for example, metabolite concentrations or gene expression levels. Transitions represent relations between biological entities such as enzymatic reactions or metabolite transport. A Petri net simulation results in a time-dependent redistribution of tokens reflecting system dynamics. Simulation of the Petri net model implies that we select and ‘fire’ a specific transition resulting in tokens being moved from one place to the next. The firing rules define which transition fires and the number of tokens subsequently transferred. This, together with the topology of a Petri net model, results in a qualitative representation of the system׳s dynamics.Petri nets have become a popular tool for studying biological networks such as metabolic networks [3]. The review paper of Baldan et al. explains how metabolic pathways have been represented and modelled with Petri nets [4]. The authors also discuss various ways to use Petri nets for modelling network topology structures such as negative feed-back loops and inhibition. Modelling network topology with Petri nets has been shown to give qualitative biologically relevant insights about the dynamics of biological systems [5,6]. A quantitative analysis of biological network dynamics required further extension of Petri nets in a way similar to mathematical modelling using ordinary differential equations (e.g., [7]). Such Petri nets require knowledge of kinetic parameters. However, it has been shown that network dynamics might be determined by using only network topology [8,9]. For example, Ruths and co-workers [10] assumed that network connectivity is the most significant determinant of the signal propagation and that discarding kinetic parameters from the model still results in model outcome that agrees with experimental data in the majority of cases. A similar example involved the use of Fuzzy Logic to reconstruct the topology of a cell signalling network from gene expression data in silico [11].Petri net models can also assist in designing new wet-lab experiments to further characterize the system under investigation. In this paper we demonstrate how a Petri net model representing the human genistein multi-organ elimination network fits this purpose (Fig. 1). This model describes various routes involved in the elimination of genistein after dietary exposure to this compound. Each transition of metabolites within or between organs is associated with a fraction (F) that indirectly represents its relative flux. The network topology and fractions define a model configuration and allow the simulation of time-resolved metabolite relative concentration profiles for different organs given an amount of genistein input G(I) administered to an individual (Fig. 2A). The challenge, however, is to estimate fractions from measured profiles. In this work we use concentration profiles from LC-MS venous blood measurements obtained in a nutrikinetics study in which healthy volunteers were exposed to dietary genistein [12]. The estimation of fractions is challenging because given current domain knowledge and available data, the genistein elimination pathway is insufficiently constrained and, therefore, ambiguous in terms of model configurations (i.e., sets of fractions) being in agreement with experimental data. Therefore, we used our model as an experimental design tool to investigate which additional information (data or prior knowledge) would be required to further constrain the system to allow accurate estimations of the fractions. In particular, we investigated if additional metabolite profiles and additional constrains (e.g., fixing fractions associated with excretion transitions) would result in better parameter estimates.To answer these experimental design questions, we used simulated annealing (SA) to estimate fractions from experimental or simulated metabolite profiles.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
