@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Development of a digital framework for the computation of complex material and morphological behavior of biological and technological systems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A physical/digital framework is developed for form- and bending-active architectures.Banana leaf stalks (petioles) are researched for their robust structural capacities.Spring-based software, called springFORM, is utilized to simulate a variety of material behaviors.The extensible and calibrated framework fosters enhanced biomimetic insights.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Material behavior,Spring-based simulation,Computational design,Biomimetic research,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Research in material behavior involves the study of relationships between material composition and capacities to negotiate internal and external pressures. Tuning material composition for performance allows for the integration of multifaceted functionality and embedded responsiveness within minimal material means. The relationships of material composition and system performance can be dissected into properties of topology (in count, type and association), forces (as the simulation of contextual pressures), and materiality (material properties and constraints of fabrication). When resourcing information about these aspects of material behavior from biological or technological systems, the physical precedents, as specimens and/or models, serve as the primary, and often sole, exemplar. While this is necessary to initiate the study of material make-up as it relates to specific morphological performance, there is an inherent limit when asking how and to what degree the knowledge resourced from that instance applies when alterations from the norm are generated. This research proposes the possibility for testing variants of a morphological system using physical models as the precedent while incorporating multiple means of computational analysis for extensive exploration. The framework begins with the initial stage of deducing principles, regarding material organization and behavior, through comparative physical and computational study. Subsequently, through methods of abduction, new vocabularies of form and potentials in performance are generated primarily through computational exploration.The framework is shaped by research into the design and materialization of complex pre-stressed form- and bending-active architectures. A novel aspect of this framework is the development of a software environment called springFORM. In this environment, material behavior is simulated using basic spring-based (particle system) methods. The novel contribution of this software is in providing means for both manual and algorithmic manipulations of mesh topologies and material properties during the form-finding process. A series of architectural prototypes, which range in scale, define rules for the relationship between topological-material complexity and the sequencing of particular exploratory methods. The studies define the value of the physical precedent as it engenders further material prototypes, spring-based explorations and simulations with finite element analysis. These rules and methods are further elaborated upon through studying the particularly fascinating structural capacity of banana leaf stalks, a material system which is stiff in bending yet highly flexible in torsion. Of interest is a functional robustness which allows for the negotiation of both self-weight and wind loading for a large and fully integrated leaf structure. Methods of simulation and meta-heuristics are developed to address the continual material and topological differentiation of the banana leaf stalk. Case studies are based upon examination of specimens from the species Musa acuminata and Ensete ventricosum. Mechanical properties and geometric descriptions of isolated moments within the stalk provide the basis for computational comparison. Fundamental properties and behaviors are extracted from the plant specimens, yet a full description is not possible because of the plant’s intricate spatial structure. In this case, the computational means serve to elucidate upon the behavior of the complete system as well as provide avenues for exploring its variants. This paper describes an extensible and calibrated framework which can foster enhanced biomimetic insights by explorations which are based upon but extend well beyond initial biological and/or technological precedents.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The research described in this paper presents a computational framework through which complex biological and technological structures can be explored for their structural capacity and decoded for their ontogenetic variations and evolutionary development, laying the foundation for biomimetic design and research. Specifically, a concise methodology is centered on research in spring-based simulation and heuristic evolutionary computation, combined with other modes of design and analysis. This is exercised through a series of constructed prototypes and in unraveling the material and structural intricacies of the banana stalk (family Musaceae). Considerable research has been conducted in the spring-based simulation of form- and bending-active structural systems, culminating in the development of a highly extensible force and material-behavior modeling software, titled springFORM. To investigate specific material systems and biomimetic principles, an overall computational design framework is developed instituting varying combinations of different modes of simulation. Based primarily on topological complexity of the biological or technological system, physical studies of material behavior provide value of varying degrees towards further explorations through simulation in both spring-based methods and finite element method (FEM) based software. This has been employed to research performance innovations in multi-layered tension-only systems, termed deep surfaces, as well as combined form- and bending-active architectures, termed textile hybrids. Rigorous testing of the methods and the resulting prototypical solutions has occurred in both laboratory scale studies as well as full scale architectures.The goals of this research are outlined in the following manner:•Implement the springFORM software to generate simulations comparative to physical precedents and employ means of algorithmic and heuristic computation to explore topological variation.Determine the value of physical precedents in the exploration of design variants by comparing several constructed prototypes of varying topological complexity and structural logic.Employ means of studying physical precedents as the basis for simulation with both spring-based and finite element analysis, establishing a methodology for exploring complex biological structures, exemplified in the study of the banana species Musa acuminata.Depict the relationship between the degree of complexity in material behavior and the sequencing of the various methods of physical and computational study.Material computation, in this research, defines the means by which material make-up can serve as the primary agent for generating form, particularly in how it behaves in the confluence of internal pre-stress and external forces. In the context of efforts for both initial design study and complete mechanical description, material behavior necessitates exploration across several modes of simulation, from physical form-finding to computational analysis. Physical form-finding serves to define precedents for the behavior of a specific material construct. This is a data-driven process by which fundamental material behaviors along with relevant specifics of geometry and assembly are gathered  [8]. These studies of physical precedents can be the initiator to a stream of computational studies as well as a check against the fidelity of the computational methods being employed  [9,10]. Computationally, the behavior of significantly deformable models is accomplished primarily through two modes of time-based calculation: spring-based (also referred to as mass–spring) methods with Dynamic Relaxation, and mesh based finite element analysis (FEA) with implicit Newton–Raphson methods  [11–13]. The computational methods addressed in this research are sourced from two primary fields: the springs-based methods from Computer Graphics and FEM in its application to Structural Engineering. Comparisons are drawn between the spring-based methods and FEM based upon: (i) degree of fidelity towards simulating real material descriptions, (ii) capability for generation and active manipulation of the model topology, and (iii) expediency and stability of the method of calculation. The overall framework encapsulates both methods as active agents alongside physical material studies, in exploring structures formed inherently by material behavior. The distinctions between the methods, though, define their particular placement within the larger framework, considering the complexity of the material system at hand in count and range of material types, material characteristics, and degrees of structural interaction.The complexity of material-inherent behavior necessitates a coordinated series of multi-scalar modes of design generation, exploration and calibration. Executed effectively, such a methodology informs early design investigations as well as provides means for calculating full mechanical descriptions. Complexity is innate, a repercussion of the inextricable relations between material make-up, structural capacity and form. Yet, within each mode of design, the complexity needs to be unraveled into manageable components, determining the variable and invariable properties. To do so, each mode of design can be addressed via the distinct definitions of topology, force and materiality  [14]. Such definitions establish the character of the system, where integration generates the behavior. Distinguishing topology enables the components of the material system to be addressed without the consideration of geometry, defining the count, type and relation. In applying forces, the topology is addressed both locally and globally charging different components and relationships with various general principles of material phenomena. Materiality, within this framework, encapsulates specific material parameters and materialization processes. Exploration of material behavior takes place through interrogating the balance between variability and determinism within and across each definition of topology, force and materiality.This research concentrates on the deployment of spring-based methods for the modeling of complex material behaviors. This builds upon research in which particle systems, in this context also referred to as physics-based solvers, have been utilized to simulate complex material phenomena  [11,15–20]. Emanating from the field of Computer Graphics, methods for simulating material behavior through springs are skewed towards providing stability in calculation across a vast array of applications and efficiency in calculation towards approximated results. A particular concern with this research is the simulation of large deformations as a part of the form-finding process, as well as the behavior of elastically deformable materials and structures  [21,22]. A spring-based method can, with stability, solve for both cases, yet it does so with relative force descriptions and approximated results. Therefore, as a part of the larger computational framework, FEM is employed to calibrate the accuracy of the spring-based results. With the form- and bending-active structures developed in this research, iterative steps of small deformations are performed with FEM as part of a custom programmed routine, allowing for the residual internal pre-stresses to be maintained throughout the form-finding process  [23]. In this programmed method, given a clearly defined topological (not geometric) state, the FEM-based form-finding process operates as expeditiously and with specific mechanical results when compared to the spring-based methods.Ultimately, the practical distinction between the methods lies not with computational efficiency but rather with the degree of pre-planning necessary to initiate the computation process. The pre-planning indicates the degree of variability that remains available across the definition of topology, force and materiality during the process of form-finding. FEM-based approaches can function expeditiously, though through a number of fixed parameters, such as boundary and topology  [24]. In this research, an open-source spring-based solver is utilized, allowing for a custom interface to be developed and specific tools defined for manipulating topological force–material relationships. The software, called springFORM, intends to collapse the construction of model and behavior, allowing for simplistic studies to be actively transformed into complex behaviors  [25]. Within the commercial FEM-based software, such programmability of the interface is not possible, thus interaction with the solution is separated from construction of the model. Yet, where accurate mechanical descriptions can be input to the FEM analysis, critical material behaviors can be tuned which still influence the resultant form. This sets FEM form-finding as a contributing effort rather than an auxiliary analysis to the formulation of material behavior with both physical form-finding and spring-based analysis  [9].This research follows the development of complex pre-stressed architectural structures with the exploration of material complexities within the intricate structure of banana leaf stalks (Musaceae). The intent is to uncover key innovations in lightweight systems as robust yet elastically deformable structures, able to react to multiple loads without failing. In architecture and engineering, function and structural stability is often stratified across multiple distinct systems. In biological structures, functional redundancy is accomplished within single systems of many hierarchical levels, up to ten orders  [26]. The leaf stalk of a banana plant is a continuous fibrous structure from base to tip, seamlessly including the leaf, embedding a range of structural and physiological functions as well as performance in maintaining the livelihood of the organism. Its cross-sectional geometry, minimal material make-up and complex structural organization, as shown in Fig. 1, contribute to a distinct elastic performance able to deviate significant external loads through both stiffness in bending and flexibility in torsion. This is accomplished despite a shortage of primary and secondary lignified stabilizing tissue, the imposition of large leaves and a poorly distinctive root system. Yet, by means of mostly soft (parenchymatous) tissues these plants can resist enormous loads and achieve astounding structural capacity. In some species, the slender leaf stalks carry a substantial leaf yet manage to grow eight meters tall. The geometry of their tension-optimized petioles allows these plants to convert working bending loads into tensile loads, strongly reducing the risk of buckling  [2–4,27]. Likewise, the streamlining-effect at high wind speed results from the functional morphology of the leaf stalk and decreases the operating forces by reducing the flow resistance of the leaf  [1].The role models of this study, Musa acuminata and Ensete ventricosum, are important representatives of the two largest banana (Musaceae) genera. Both species develop the characteristic pseudo-stem that consists of convoluted petioles and provides an arboreal appearance together with the leaves, as shown in Fig. 2. In general, the leaves consist of a hollow leaf stalk with a u-shaped cross-section that narrows to the tip and from which on both sides of the midrib the huge laminae arise. Here, the hollow, u-shaped cross-section consists of two inwardly curved shells which are connected via several lamellas. Altogether, as shown in Fig. 3, two types of lamellas can be differentiated as they run longitudinally through the petiole and divide its hollow space into channels. While type1 lamellas directly link both shells, type2 lamellas connect the middle lamella (of type1) to the outer shell. Additionally, the aerenchymatous channels are regularly interrupted by transversal walls of stellate parenchyma, which additionally contribute to the mechanical stability  [1].The primary goal for examination of Musa acuminata (M) and Ensete ventricosum (E) is the elucidation of fundamental morphological differences between both examined species to improve the knowledge about the general mechanical properties of banana petioles. Therefore, four leaf stalks of each species are dissected into five centimeter intervals to survey their cross-sections tracking changes of morphological parameters along the petiole. Amongst others, recorded parameters include the height and weight of whole leaves, the ratio of length to the thickness of the shells, the number and intervals of the lamellas, plus the ratio between the width and thickness of the petiole. Aside from the height and weight of their leaves (M<E) both species vary considerably in the curvature mode of their petioles. Leaf stalks of E. ventricosum gradually bend away from the plant, whereas those of M. acuminata show a distinct curvature change. Furthermore, there are changes typical for both species in the geometry of the u-shaped cross-sections leading to larger friction areas in lower sections, to higher stability in mid sections and to higher flexibility in upper sections of the petioles. Finally, the curvature, the narrowing and the cross-sectional variations within the petiole are mainly responsible for the observed morphological changes.Additional biomechanical analyses of both species showed, in accordance with former studies  [1,2], a high bending stiffness together with a high torsional flexibility of their petioles. Tensile tests on the shells and lamellas of banana leaf stalks revealed no noteworthy differences between the two species, but indicated a better adaption on longitudinally applied loads in case of both structures. Additionally, the biomechanical properties of the middle lamella did not differ from those of other type1 lamellas. All in all, the petiole shells exhibited higher structural tensile moduli of elasticity than the lamellas, whereas the outer shells seemed to guarantee more tensile strength than the inner shells, at least for the longitudinal orientation.Ennos studied the integrated structural morphology of the petioles of species Musa textilis in an experimental setting  [1]. In the research, they examined the role of different structural properties in the load bearing capacity of the petiole structure related to the components of its structure such as cross sectional geometry, ventral curvature, longitudinal and transverse lamella. Through different experimental loading tests on the petiole specimens, bending, torsional, buckling and crushing stiffness is measured. Mathematical models are utilized to analyze the petiole structure using one dimensional analysis with simplification of geometry as prismatic beam with average cross sectional properties. Due to the intrinsic limitations of the simplified set up though, the analytical models do not present a study of stress distributions or concentrations, or the interaction of the shell and internal lamella. Moreover, these simplified models do not accommodate the use of more accurate material models and load applications. Thus, more accurate and three dimensional analysis of the structure is desirable to see the stress distributions and concentrations at the depth and detail of the complex structure of the banana plant.Exploration of technological and biological systems described in this research takes place through interrogating topology, forces and materiality via means of physical and computational study. This presents an exhaustive matrix of options between the modes of design and the various aspects of material behavior, as shown in Fig. 4[25]. Of consideration is the balance between moments of determinate properties and indeterminate emergent behaviors. This research establishes relationships between certain sequences of design modes based upon evaluation of the topological complexity of the material system.In the absence of parameters to define explicit mechanical properties, spring-based methods operate by applying nodal (particle) constraints which simulate various phenomena of material behavior. In a pure tensile state, the particles and springs serve to define geometry as well as describe all the in-plane forces. The use of zero-length springs, following Hooke’s Law of Elasticity, is often utilized to guarantee the tensile state, to simulate, for example, the form-finding of hanging chain models  [28,17]. However, the behavior of bending stiffness is more complex and demands implementation for the simulation of out-of-plane forces. In this research, several methods are investigated, all of which discretize the problem into particular arrays of springs applied to the node, referred to as ghost forces. The methods range in expediency for form-finding and ability to initiate bending stiffness through relative spring parameters rather than discrete material-specific properties.Across the range of methods tested, the criteria focuses on expediency of calculation and the ability to tune the behavior based upon precedents established through physical material testing and form-finding experiments. This is explored initially with the study of bending stiffness in a linear element, and extended to enable the simulation of bending stiffness within a surface structure.Three primary numerical methods have been established in Computer Graphics for simulating bending behavior of elements assumed to have a continuous material description and cross-section: cross-over, vector position and vector normal  [25,29]. The vector normal method has been expanded upon to simulate three degrees of freedom allowing input of a Young’s modulus value to more accurately simulate behavior of specific materials and uniform cross-sections  [30]. As a key comparison to FEM-based simulation, these methods allow for the bending stiffness to be applied to geometries of any initial position. For FEM analysis, the initial geometric state must be straight. This is an advantage for the spring-based methods where the stiffness can be actively added and removed during any stage of the model development and form-finding process. Ultimately, the vector position method is mostly used in this research as it allows for a generic bending stiffness to be utilized, where the parameters in the ghost forces can be tuned to follow a more specific material description.An important characteristic of the banana plant structure is the cross-sectional geometry of the inner and outer shells as curved profiles. Utilizing the previously stated methods to simulate bending stiffness in the cross-section of the petiole would inappropriately introduce bending-active pre-stress. This is due to the fact that all the methods consider the unstressed state to be a straight line. To accomplish stiffness for a curved profile, the vector position method is updated to include an initial angle variable, as shown in Fig. 5. This introduces a limitation to the form-finding process, where the initial curved state needs to be geometrically defined, to then have the bending stiffness method applied.The above described methods define geometries with bending stiffness of an implied uniform cross-section. This is useful for certain aspects of this research in simulating, for instance, the behavior of glass fiber reinforced polymer (GFRP) rods as a part of a form- and bending-active system. With the banana plant petiole, though, the cross-section from base to tip changes continually and significantly. This could be resolved by instituting a method at which six-degrees of freedom are imposed at each node, allowing for anisotropic cross-sections to be implied  [31]. The impetus, though, for research of the banana plant petiole is to work with the explicit topological definition of the transforming cross-section. To reflect this intent, the method is shifted from simulating stiffness for an implied cross-section but rather as a part of a continuous surface material.Without the use of out-of-plane forces, the cross-over method can be extended to define a surface with bending stiffness. This method uses structural springs for the primary warp and weft directions, shear springs for shear stresses and flexion cross-over springs to indirectly apply resistance at the nodes  [32]. While following the same topological strategy of triangulating the mesh structure with shear springs, in this research, the flexion springs are replaced with the nodal constraints calculated by the vector position method  [33].The software, springFORM, has been developed through on-going research in the computation of material behavior through the use of the spring-based methods described previously. It functions as both an algorithmic generator of complex geometries, an active modeler for topological and force-based manipulation, and a generator for specific data related to materialization in fabrication, assembly and application of pre-stress, as shown in Fig. 6[14,34]. A method is utilized whereby crude geometric frameworks are established, initially in the modeling program Rhinoceros, to define topology and indicate general boundary conditions. These frameworks support basic definitions of topology, between plane and cylinder, upon which elaborate associations of these building blocks can generate more complex topologies. A data table is produced to house the topological and associative information, serving as the input file for the springFORM software, as shown in Fig. 7(a). The software is programmed in Processing (a Java-based programming environment) and utilizes an open-source particle system developed by Simon Greenwold  [35]. The crude framework is subdivided into a spring mesh upon being loaded into the software, where the Hookean forces are applied to generate a force-equilibrium form, as shown in Fig. 7(b).The springFORM software utilizes the vector position method defining the rest lengths of a linear array of springs as a material length and applying nodal constraints at each particle. As a simple set of procedures, bending stiffness can be imposed upon any part of the spring topology during the act of modeling and form-finding. This takes clear advantage of the distinction to FEM, because the initial geometric state can be ignored with the spring-based methods. Initially simple tension-only systems can be transformed into systems generated of multiple interacting material-based behaviors, as shown in Fig. 8. Relevant properties of rest length (material length) and spring strength of the nodal ghost forces (bending stiffness) are exposed within the interface to allow for continual manipulation of the force-based relationships.A heuristic method has been introduced into the springFORM software to allow for variation of topology and material behaviors to be pursued, in the context of specific performative goals. A genetic algorithm (GA) is often utilized in combination with FEA and various meshing methods for developing accurate mesh resolution for multi-material assemblies, often with a high expense of computation time  [36]. In comparison, this research uses spring-based methods and considers topology as an explicit description of material elements, where variation in ghost forces are utilized to define material difference.An evolutionary algorithm (EA) is utilized over a GA because topological variation is being considered as the primary condition to evolve. An EA applies mutation to the phenotype to produce variation across a population  [37–39]. In comparison, the GA operates on the genotype, introducing variation through crossover of the chromosome between selected fit individuals  [40]. The management of topology, as it is a critical operator in defining behavior and form, is a key consideration in the functioning of the heuristic method. A GA structure poses significant challenges as it would necessitate a crossover method which can breed between individuals with chromosomes of different lengths  [41].The EA, in this research, deals directly with topology as the main engine for mutation through substituting cells (faces) of varying topology. A subdivision routine based upon an altered PQQ scheme has been developed within the springFORM software, as shown in Fig. 9. This routine is novel in considering topological ramifications outside the local boundary for subdivision. As the mesh is a force network, local subdivision triggers neighboring cells to be switched to a “support” type topology. This method maintains edge continuity as well as gradates the imposition of new forces (springs) back into the larger cell network. The routine can introducenlevels of subdivision, as shown in Fig. 10, where the EA is driving to equalize stresses across a cable-net like tensile structure. This example seeks to more effectively organize structure through heterogeneous topologies as compared to the regular ordering system as seen previously in the prototype shown in Fig. 6. The mutation of subdivisions functions through two primary (randomly activated) means: 1. addition of new subdivided cells, and 2. turning on and off of previous select cell subdivisions within the history of an individual. Together, the two methods allow for both additive and subtractive means for mutation. The EA has been developed as a multi-threaded engine allowing for efficient calculation of upwards of 200 or more individuals per population.The springFORM software and the overall design methodology for computation of material behavior have been honed across a series of varied-scale prototypes. These efforts in prototyping focus the research on continued advancement of material and structural complexity calibrated against the geometry and performance of physical models. Primarily, the performance focuses on structural capacities as highly differentiated lightweight structures. The deep surface studies, as multi-layer textile systems, imply intentions for differentiation in various spatial qualities. The textile hybrid prototypes intend for similar spatial performance, but also focus on capabilities in forming elastic architectures with primarily internalized stresses.These prototypes, as well, describe varied pathways for navigating the matrix between design processes and characteristics of material behavior, as described in Section  1.3. The criteria are driven primarily by the topological complexity of the system. The deep surface studies are models of high topological complexity containing many components and highly differentiated material properties between cables and textiles. This necessitates a methodology weighted towards explorations through spring-based modeling. The textile hybrid prototypes explore scenarios with a varied range of topological complexity related to the utilization of linear bending-active elements. In either case, physical form-finding is critical to establishing a basic topological and geometric strategy, while further explorations are balanced between springFORM explorations and finite element analysis. These exemplars show the range by which the physical precedents engender the pursuit of variants and variability.The deep surface exemplars, shown in Fig. 11, are based upon initial precedents developed through physical form-finding, where only individual cells are studied. This is possible where the individual cell logic is fairly rudimentary, allowing for a minimal amount of material and topological pre-planning. Both prototypes described here are based upon a simple cylindrical topology, though ultimately being formed into complex toroidal structures. When multiple cells are integrated within the structurally continuous system, as tensile forces span across all cells, it is impossible to predict all facets of the resulting geometry through physical form-finding only. Thus, for the textile-only material systems, the physical precedent describes the topological strategy, but performance and geometry of an aggregated system can only be realized within the computational springFORM environment. The decoding and implementation of the topological articulation are used as the primary gauge for measuring the fidelity and agility of the springFORM software  [34].The M1 prototype navigates all aspects of developing complexity in topology, behavior and materiality, through studies that interleave physical material explorations with spring-based form-finding and finite element analysis. In certain cases, the physical experiments produce an exhaustive model describing the entirety of the structural system. This mode of design is utilized for developing the overall structural strategy. In other cases, the physical studies produce a prototypical singular solution where arrays of multiple interconnected elements are studied computationally. Such is the method for developing a cellular structure as a region within the overall system. In combination, the collective methods serve to develop a highly intricate structure which deals with critical conditions of material specification and contextual constraints  [10,23].Specifically, the structure is built as a textile hybrid system, negotiating a very sensitive context, a stone tower from the 1500’s in western France built upon a design by Leonardo da Vinci. A textile hybrid system develops from the equilibrium of tensile form-active surfaces and bending-active beams. Materially, both structural capacities are realized with textile-based materials and material composites. Form-active tensile surfaces in this project are developed with textiles where performance is based upon knit structure and yarn capacity, and membranes where a coating is added to waterproof, protect and further structure a woven textile substrate. Bending-active behavior is enabled by composites of glass-fiber and polyester resin. Specific to this research, textiles range from woven polyamide-based sheets to PVC coated membranes and open-web meshes. The bending-active elements are pultruded GFRP rods and tubes. The hybrid nature of the system is expressed in the global structure where at moments an equilibrium is found in gridshell-like arrangements of bending-active elements while also in other areas the mutual exchange of tensile and bending-active forces stabilizes long cantilevering conditions  [9].The springFORM software exposes critical variables related to the simulation of bending stiffness to enable the proper alignment of neighboring, structurally integrated elements. Using the vector position method, the ratio of stiffness in the springs defining the linear beam elements to the degrees of constraint in the nodes are varied to express differing amounts overall stiffness and curvature, thus implying different material properties. The lengths of the linear beam elements are exposed as local and global variables. This enables the acute management of bending-active behavior and geometry at the moments when multiple elements interconnect. These two capacities for active model manipulation in springFORM allow for initially simple topological and geometric arrangements to be formed into the complex associations implied by the physical models, as shown in Fig. 12. The FE model serves to initially replicate the scaled structural studies, in topology and geometry, while ultimately defining the final geometry in form-finding the relationships between the bending-active beams and tensioned textile surfaces, as shown in Fig. 13.This installation, shown in Fig. 14, explores the potential of instituting differentiation within the textile surface to more intimately control stress distribution, form generation and surface articulation  [25]. Where the M1 studied the implications of critical boundary conditions and structurally dealt with exposure to significant external loads (wind, rain and snow), this prototype explores the ability for the structure to be freely placed within a gallery space intending to maximize its volume while touching the surrounding structure with a minimal number of points and structural exertion. To explore such intentions, the springFORM software is developed further from that in the M1 project so that all force relationships are dealt with collectively. With the topology relatively straightforward, then the entirety of the system is resolved simultaneously.Instituting force as the vehicle for not only form generation but also surface articulation, capabilities for variegating the structure of a textile materially is explored through the use of CNC weft-knitting technologies. Primarily, a highly structured hexagonal pattern knitted into the textile is designed to carry the tensile loads. Secondarily, the field structure of the knit is altered to allow for varying conditions between extensive elasticity at the edges to additional stiffening in the middle, diagrammed in Fig. 14(b). The variations are produced through controlling the regulation or tension in the yarn as the loops are knitted together. The less regulated regions at the edges allow the cylindrical textile to accomplish an approximately 12 m circumference. The middle region of the cylinder has a high degree of regulation in the knit to provide a pre-stressing of the textile. This induces the textile to self-form into its cylindrical shape with only minimal tensile stress being applied. In controlling these parameters of the textile and knitting process, the entire structure is able to be constructed of only 2 textile elements: a cylinder and a panel, as shown in Fig. 14(a).Overall, the installation exhibits the use of differentiated intensities in tension and bending to arrange the semi-toroidal geometry and describe the surface in distorting the hexagonal pattern. Critical to this resulting form are the relationships between various subtle and sudden shifts in knitting densities. The resulting material form actively exhibits integrated force-driven material behaviors in the expression, the distension, of the knitted fibers.Extending upon the previous precedents, the overall methodology is advanced to support study of the specific geometric, topological, and structural behavior of banana leaf petioles as the initiator for exhaustive biomimetic research. Such a starting point is akin to the formulation of the meta-structure for the M1 prototype, where the physical model establishes the explicit geometric and topological state. Yet, analysis solely from physical specimens has proven insufficient to dissect and determine the principles for the global structural behavior of the petiole. Geometric analysis of physical specimens can be conducted, while determining mechanical properties of the shell and internal lamella is more challenging as the isolated sections quickly lose their integrity when cut from the entirety of the plant structure. The biomechanical properties of the individual components of the petiole, the inner shell, outer shell and internal lamella, show the anisotropic behavior (Fig. 15), but do not allude to their exact role in the bending and torsional behavior. Larger sections up to 30 cm long were tested for their mechanical properties in bending and torsion, as shown in Fig. 16, providing benchmarking data for the computational simulations. It is therefore reliant upon computational methods to deduce the relationship between topology, material character and structural behavior by employing the study of variations of each property. This is accomplished through a protocol which tabulates the geometric and topological data initially based upon a series of cross-sections for a given banana specimen. As mentioned earlier, the specimens utilized as the prototypical cases are the Musa acuminata and Ensete ventricosum. Further variation is enabled in manipulating the data tables and active modification of the parameters during form-finding in the springFORM software.The protocol for measuring 5 cm sections is shown in Fig. 17. The table documents the length of the inner and outer shells, along with the count and individual lengths for the three types of lamellae: (i) spanning from inner to outer shell, (ii) middle lamella, and (iii) spanning from middle lamella to outer shell. Data for approximate widths of the elements is compiled to provide a comparative understanding for the mass and dimension of the individual lamella and shells. There are two primary cases for topology, which can be seen previously in Fig. 3(b) and (c), a regular radial array of internal lamella and the addition of secondary lamellae between the outer shell and internal middle lamella. Where the finite element model depends upon exact geometric dimension for accurate simulation, the spring-based model utilizes variation in the spring properties to represent changes in the thickness of the lamella.The geometric data extracted from the physical specimens provides dimensions for an array of struts and an understanding for the sequence in which the struts are connected. Utilizing this information, the cross-section is re-established computationally through an initial form-finding step. Activated as a series of springs, the struts re-organize into the general geometric profile as defined by the physical specimen, as shown in Fig. 18. This step is intended to simply generate the static geometry for the cross-section. The set of springs for the inner and outer shells are then redefined to have bending stiffness based upon the curved form-found state. This utilizes the modified vector position method, as stated previously, which has a memory of its initial curved state. Through this method, though, an additional variable is made available. The modified vector position method can be tuned to introduce pre-stress into the cross-section. While it is rare to have pre-stress within a plant structure, it was seen to minimally exist in some of the shell specimens that were examined.The FE model intends to closely mimic the petiolar structure, with its three main components of the inner and outer shells as the main load bearing elements, the longitudinal lamella and the transverse lamella. Due to very small thickness (20μm) and their direction, transverse lamellae do not have appreciable loadbearing capacity but seem to contribute to lateral stiffness of longitudinal lamella and increase their stiffness against buckling. In examining the transverse lamella in the specimens, the only appreciable material that is introduced is at the intersection with the longitudinal lamella. At these intersections, fibers between the inner and outer shell are introduced. To reduce the complexity of the model, the transverse lamellae are not modeled explicitly and instead the thickness of longitudinal lamella is increased. The longitudinal lamella have narrow cross sections (500μm) and do not have appreciable effect on the bending capacity of the structure but they contribute to stability of the cross section at high curvatures caused by severe bending conditions. Moreover, due to intrinsic anisotropy of petiole material related to direction of fibers both in shell and lamella, an orthotropic material model is used in the computational model.Given the initial research in calibrating the computational tools against the physical specimens, the degree of pre-planning for simulation is significant, in both spring-based and FEM simulation. In the spring-based methods, the dimension of the material is specified through a singular surface, where the parameters of structural, shear and bending stiffness springs (ghost forces) have to be tuned to repeat the properties of the given petiole substrate. In the FE model, the geometry can be more explicit as a continuous solid, yet the individual elements are differentiated via their material properties.The initial focus with the spring-based simulation is to establish relative relationships between the various components of the model, as well as consider the anisotropic behavior within each element. The shells are simulated as surfaces with bending stiffness applied to the nodes. The mesh is sorted into two axes of structural springs, as well as two sets of diagonal shear springs. Each set is uniquely variable, thus allowing for stiffness to be tuned along the longitudinal and transverse axes of the geometry. The internal lamella only need recognize tensile behavior, beyond the defined length and width of the element. While the rest length of the spring can be defined to specify the material dimension, if the spring is constrained below that rest length dimension then it exerts compression force. This is undesirable in the case of the internal lamella. To prevent the spring from exerting force in compression, the internal lamellae are constructed always of a set of springs where at least one node is completely unconstrained. The results of bending and torsional performance are shown in Fig. 19.As mentioned previously, the petiole has a very complex geometry due to the intricate internal hollowed cross section of lamella and variation of outer shell’s cross-sectional geometry along its length. For simplification, a 30 cm piece of petiole in constructed using a fixed cross section. The data for this cross section is derived from the table of geometric information of the mid-section specimen of the petiole. The 0.5 mm thickness of the internal lamella is increased up to 1 mm at the place of connection to the shell. This cross section is extruded to create the final solid geometry. The lamellas are ultimately distinguished from the outer shells so that different material properties may be applied.The banana plant is comprised of a fibrous material which shows non-homogeneous non-isotropic behavior due to the concentration and alignment of the fibers. In order to create a consistent computational model a homogeneous, orthotropic material model is used both for the shell and lamellas. A three dimensional orthotropic material model has 9 material constants, these constants are determined from physical tests carried out on banana stem specimens. An average of each constant is used to account for non-homogeneity of the material. Material constants for shell and lamella are shown in Table 1.Simulations, in Fig. 20, show that the maximum stresses in the lamella happen at the connection points to the shell and result in less than 25% of the maximum stresses in the outer shell. In order to see the effect of lamellas in bending behavior of the petiole, the internal lamellas are removed from the model and the model is reanalyzed under the same loading and boundary conditions, as shown in Fig. 20(b). It can be inferred that, although the internal lamellas do not provide considerable bending stiffness due to their cross section and skewed alignment, they play a considerable role in stability of the petiole cross section.Ennos et al. studied the role of internal lamella in preventing dorsoventral flattening through crushing tests and they showed that removal of internal lamella reduced the resistance of the section to flattening by about 25%  [1]. Our simulations show that removing internal lamella decreases system stiffness and stability in bending. Maximum deformations increased up to six times in comparison to the intact petiole samples. The bending mode also changes, as we remove the internal lamella the petiole ridges tend to move towards each other and the cross section deforms considerably in the middle part under loading.To simulate the petiole behavior under torsion, the model is clamped at one end and a torsional moment of 0.3 N m is applied at the other end. To apply the load uniformly at the end of the petiole, a virtual rigid body is defined and assigned to the nodes of the cross section and the moment is applied to the rigid body. von Mises stress distribution is depicted in Fig. 20(c). This reports maximum stresses in the shells as 10 times higher than the stresses in the lamella, showing small participation of the internal lamella in load bearing. Semicircular geometry of the cross section provides an optimal material distribution to resist torsional loadings. Due to small material stiffness of the lamellas and their alignment in the cross section, the lamellas do not provide considerable torsional stiffness to resist torsional loading. Fig. 20(c) shows von Mises stress distribution in the petiole under bending where the internal lamella have been removed.Comparing two figures the same stress distribution can be recognized but the maximum von Mises stresses showing a 50% increase. Also deformations have increased by 100% which show that although internal lamella do not provide considerable stiffness, they maintain the cross sectional geometry under loading and subsequently decrease overall deformation of the system.To orchestrate both inherent properties and variable relationships for material behavior, several modes of design are engaged between physical exploration and computational simulation. These modes are used to explore material behavior through dissecting topology, force and materiality. The technological material systems documented in Section  3 show that the sequence of methods can be predicated upon the degree of topological complexity. Within a simple topological setup, such as the meta-structure of the M1 Textile Hybrid, the physical model is a scalable simulation for the full scale structure. The physical model provides direct data for determining the mechanical properties of the system through FEA, produced of a methodology shown in Fig. 21(left). Still as a mode of design, once topology becomes a fixed and resolved condition, FEA generates the exact mechanical description while ratios of force distribution allow for continual reshaping of geometry.As the number of components, in count, type and relation, and material-based behaviors increase, the ability to develop equilibrium arrangements through physical simulation becomes more elusive, as all aspects of topology demand more pre-planning. An intense coordination is necessary for this, yet often lacking without a good degree of practice or prior intuition. Where physical form-finding is best suited for establishing basic material logics of minimal topological complexity, modeling in springFORM allows for advancing complexities in topology and force description to be pursued. This is evident in the deep surface prototypes and the meso-scale cellular structure of the M1 Textile Hybrid. The physical precedent is utilized as referential, allowing for specificity to emerge rather than be pre-set. The active modeling and manipulation allows for complexity to be introduced incrementally, following a methodology as shown in Fig. 21 (right). The CNC knitted textile hybrid installation, documented in Section  3.3, is a unique case where topological complexity is relatively low, yet a scale model provides little insight into full-scale performance. This is due to the difficulty in predicting the nature of a variegated textile. Ultimately, the development of this particular prototype follows the framework based on topological complexity.In addressing the complexity of the banana petiole, a stage of verification between springFORM studies and FEA is necessary, thus expanding upon the methodologies stated above. Topology, geometry and behavior are all multifaceted, meaning an increased effort is necessary in staging the method before being able to employ it. The physical precedent shifts from a mode of design to a resource for in-depth geometric data, material properties and structural behavior. Methods in spring-based simulation and physical form-finding are robust in their ability to efficiently realize material equilibria, yet they do so in producing approximated studies of behavior. The ramifications of such efficiency are that the data produced is not immediately calibrated to real world parameters of force and material properties. To bolster the multi-scalar methodology, finite element analysis is implemented alongside these other modes of design. More importantly, though, this venue for more concise study and analysis provides a means for judging the fidelity of the other design modes. A more ornate framework is instituted to address the specificities in topology, material construct and behavior for the banana plant, since the aspect of physical simulation establishes a benchmark rather than a means for variational exploration. A benchmarking stage between the examination of the physical plant specimens and the in kind simulation through springFORM and FEA, in Fig. 22(left), is followed by iterative explorations of varying material make-up to study ranges of structural behavior, as shown in Fig. 22 (right).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
