@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Wavelet analysis of cardiac optical mapping data

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Optical mapping (OM) technology is important to study cardiac electrophysiology.Wavelet analysis offers simultaneous localization in time and frequency domains.Wavelet analysis improved the signal quality compared to Fourier-based filtering.Spatial wavelet filtering produced more accurate conduction velocity estimates.Wavelet analysis is a promising tool for OM electrophysiological characterization.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Signal processing,Action potential,Optical mapping,Filtering methods,Cardiac electrophysiology,Conduction analysis,Bioengineering,Heart arrhythmias,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundOptical mapping technology is an important tool to study cardiac electrophysiology. Transmembrane fluorescence signals from voltage-dependent dyes need to be preprocessed before analysis to improve the signal-to-noise ratio. Fourier analysis, based on spectral properties of stationary signals, cannot directly provide information on the spectrum changes with respect to time. Fourier filtering has the disadvantage of causing degradation of abrupt waveform changes such as those in action potential signals. Wavelet analysis has the ability to offer simultaneous localization in time and frequency domains, suitable for the analysis and reconstruction of irregular, non-stationary signals like the fast action-potential upstroke, and better than conventional filters for denoising.MethodsWe applied discrete wavelet transformation for temporal processing of optical mapping signals and wavelet packet analysis approaches to process activation maps from simulated and experimental optical mapping data from canine right atrium. We compared the results obtained with the wavelet approach to a variety of other methods (Fast Fourier Transformation (FFT) with finite or infinite response filtering, and Gaussian filters).Results: Temporal wavelet analysis improved signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) better than FFT filtering for 5–10dB SNR, and caused less distortion of the action potential waveform over the full range of simulated noise (5–20dB). Spatial wavelet filtering produced more efficient denoising and/or more accurate conduction velocity estimates than Gaussian filtering. Propagation patterns were also best revealed by wavelet filtering.Conclusions: Wavelet analysis is a promising tool, facilitating accurate action potential characterization, activation map formation, and conduction velocity estimation.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Optical mapping is a very important tool to study cardiac electrophysiology ex vivo. This technique has the advantages of high spatiotemporal resolution of intracellular signals, which traditional intracellular and extracellular recording methods lack [1]. Optical action potentials (APs) have individual properties that differ from single cell measurements recorded with intracellular electrodes [2,3]. Given the benefit of high spatial resolution, optical imaging can record the propagation of the electrical wavefront over the surface of the heart to study electrical properties in normal and pathological conditions. Even though there have been great advances in imaging devices and voltage-sensitive dyes, challenges to recording high quality optical signal remain. In particular, transmembrane fluorescence signals emitted by voltage-sensitive dyes typically have low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), which can hamper analysis [1]. Processing of optical mapping data can degrade the waveforms and alter physiologically relevant properties, leading to misinterpretations of physiological significance [1].Wavelet analysis is an interesting method applied in many fields like mathematics, physics, engineering, and computer science [4–6]. The method, based on decomposing the signal into basic forms at different positions and scales, can be used for subsequent signal reconstruction with high precision. The main advantage of the wavelet approach is its ability to offer simultaneous localization in time and frequency domains, whereas the standard Fourier transformation is only specified in the frequency domain. Consequently, wavelet analysis has advantages in analyzing irregular and non-stationary waveforms. Cardiac APs generally have sharp upstrokes, for which the high frequency components are very rich over a very short period. Wavelet analysis might provide a powerful tool for the characterization of electrophysiological optical mapping data.The objective of this study was to investigate the use of wavelet analysis as a temporal and spatial processing method for cardiac optical mapping data. Here, we first compare the temporal wavelet approach to Fourier filtering methods, specifically the Finite Impulse Response (FIR) and Infinite Impulse Response (IIR) filtering methods, on simulated optical APs and real canine atrial optical data. We then follow with a comparison between 2D spatial wavelet processing of activation maps and conduction velocity estimation with Gaussian kernel approach. Our results suggest that wavelet analysis is a promising technique for the processing and analysis of cardiac optical mapping data.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
