@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Functional grouping of similar genes using eigenanalysis on minimum spanning tree based neighborhood graph

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Eigenanalysis on spanning tree neighborhood graph(E-MST) for clustering is introduced.Diameter based criteria to determine the sufficiency of neighborhood is proposed.The objective criterion reveals spectral properties of neighborhood graph.Experimental analysis shows the impressive results of E-MST.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Gene expression analysis,Minimum Spanning Tree,Spectral clustering,Similarity graph,,Microarray analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Gene expression data clustering is an important biological process in DNA microarray analysis. Although there have been many clustering algorithms for gene expression analysis, finding a suitable and effective clustering algorithm is always a challenging problem due to the heterogeneous nature of gene profiles. Minimum Spanning Tree (MST) based clustering algorithms have been successfully employed to detect clusters of varying shapes and sizes. This paper proposes a novel clustering algorithm using Eigenanalysis on Minimum Spanning Tree based neighborhood graph (E-MST). As MST of a set of points reflects the similarity of the points with their neighborhood, the proposed algorithm employs a similarity graph obtained fromk′rounds of MST (k′-MST neighborhood graph). By studying the spectral properties of the similarity matrix obtained fromk′-MST graph, the proposed algorithm achieves improved clustering results. We demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed algorithm on 12 gene expression datasets. Experimental results show that the proposed algorithm performs better than the standard clustering algorithms.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Microarray technology is a boon for biological researchers to monitor the expression of thousands of genes simultaneously. The results of microarray experiments are often organized as gene expression matrices whose rows represent genes and columns represent various environmental conditions or samples such as tissues. Set of genes with similar expression patterns are called as co-expression genes and extracting such genes from microarray experiments is an important task as it helps in identifying the group of genes involved in the same cellular processes [1,2].Clustering is an unsupervised learning technique that is used extensively in various exploratory analyses to discover natural grouping in a given set of objects. The objective of gene-based clustering is to partition the microarray genes into k distinct groups, where k is the number of clusters which may or may not be known in advance. Genes with similar expression profiles should be put into a single cluster which corresponds to a particular macroscopic phenotype, such as clinical syndromes or cancer types [1]. Many clustering algorithms have been proposed in the literature for gene expression analysis [5,9,10,14,18,26,28].Various approaches to clustering can be broadly categorized into hierarchical and partitional methods [3,4]. While hierarchical clustering generates a nested sequence of partitions in the form of dendrogram tree, partitional clustering directly divides the dataset into k clusters [1]. The traditional approaches like hierarchical and partitional methods lack in ability to detect the intrinsic clusters because of the heterogeneous nature of gene profiles [6].Recently more new techniques using graph theory have been proposed for gene expression analysis. Graph models are widely studied in various problem domains due to their ability to represent complex data. In graph-based clustering, the gene profiles are represented as a weighted undirected graphG=(V,E)called as gene network, where each nodevϵVcorresponds to a gene and the edgeset E represents the dissimilarity (distance) between the genes [8]. Gene expression data are often highly connected and clustering algorithms based on graph connectivity are becoming popular in identifying the co-expression genes with highly intersecting profiles. Refs. [9,10,14,18] witness the effectiveness of graph-based clustering algorithms for the identification of similar genes based on their connectivity.Given a connected, undirected graph, a spanning tree of the graph is an acyclic subgraph that spans all the vertices in the graph. Minimum Spanning tree (MST) is the spanning tree with minimum weight. MST is a well-known combinatorial optimization problem that is successfully applied for various tasks such as image segmentation and cluster analysis [14–18]. The key idea of MST based clustering is to identify and remove the inconsistent edges in order to obtain a set of clusters. Besides having a number of clustering algorithms using MST, an unified approach to detect and remove the inconsistent edges of MST that results in desired cluster structure is always being a challenging one.Another popular clustering method that is predominantly used in several fields of data analysis is spectral clustering. Spectral methods find a wide range of practical applications including bio-informatics [26,28]. The core of spectral clustering is the Laplacian matrix which is the difference between degree and adjacency (weight) matrices of the similarity graph. The spectrum (eigenvalues) of the Laplacian matrix is used to partition the given dataset [24].Although spectral methods are widely discussed, there has been a little attention on how the similarity graph is constructed from the given set of points. It is worthwhile to note that the results of spectral clustering depend on the choice of similarity graph used to encode the given dataset [20]. A similarity graph should depict the underlying structure of the dataset in order to achieve better clustering results. The most commonly used similarity graphs in the literature are ε-neighborhood graph, K-nearest neighbor graph and fully connected graph [19]. To the best of our knowledge, no theoretical study has been done about which similarity graph suits a particular dataset and how to choose the parameters e.g., ε, K, σ in case of ε-neighborhood graph, K-nearest neighbor graph and fully connected graph respectively.Most of the algorithms become inefficient when applied on heterogeneous datasets which are diverse in shape, size and densities. This is a common problem in microarray analysis. Moreover, microarray datasets often contain noise and outliers and thus finding a robust clustering algorithm is always a challenging problem [1]. As MST-based and spectral clustering methods have shown better clustering performance in identifying arbitrary shaped clusters, the proposed algorithm E-MST aims to integrate these two methods. Our proposed algorithm is free from any user-defined parameters.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, related work in gene data clustering is presented with particular attention given to the graph based cluster analysis. Section 3 highlights our contribution. Spectral clustering method is introduced in Section 4. The proposed algorithm is described in Section 5. The results of experimental validation are reported and discussed in Section 6, and finally our research is concluded in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
