@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Fragmentary shape recognition: A BCI study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
BCI based fragmentary shape recognition process.Innovative use of BCI in shape recognition domain.Power spectral density and cognitive load estimation.IRB approved study to assess the fragmentary shape recognition process.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Brain–Computer Interfaces (BCI),Fragmentary shape recognition,User studies,Cognitive load in shape processing,Natural interactions,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Recently, Brain–Computer Interface (BCI) has emerged as a potential modality that utilizes natural and intuitive human mechanisms of thinking process to enable interactions in CAD interfaces. Before BCI could become a mainstream mode of HCI for CAD interfaces; fundamental studies directed towards understanding how humans mentally represent and process the geometry are needed. The outlined work in this paper presents an objective user study to understand shape recognition process in the humans. Specifically, we focus on the fundamental task of fragmentary shape identification. The problem of fragmentary shape recognition can be defined as follows: given a partial and incomplete minimalistic representation of a given shape, can one recognize the actual complete shape or object? In user studies, each subject was progressively (in stages) shown more informative fragmented images of an object to be recognized. During each stage of the experiment, the brain activity of users in the form of electroencephalogram (EEG) signals was recorded with a BCI headset. The recorded signals are then processed to objectively study the fragmentary shape recognition process. The results of user studies conclusively show that the measured brain activities of subjects can serve as a very accurate proxy to estimate subjects fragmentary shape recognition process.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
For many years, the prototypical interactive system for 3D modeling has been WIMP (windows, icons, menus, pointer) interfaces. The user interaction in WIMP based 3D modeling interfaces is non-intuitive, as the 3D modeling subspace has to be mapped to thexandyaxes of input devices such as a mouse. This process is inherently and cognitively complex because one needs to switch between 3D and 2D subspaces, thereby disconnecting the input space from the modeling space. A creative alternative to WIMP based interactions is to develop interactions that mimic human–human interactions such as spoken language (speech), gestures and thought processes.Recently, Brain–Computer Interface (BCI) has emerged as a potential modality that utilizes natural and intuitive human mechanisms of the thinking process to enable interactions  [1,2]. BCI based interfaces for 3D modeling could be considered as a more user-centric approach. Before BCI could become a mainstream mode of HCI for CAD interfaces; fundamental studies directed towards understanding how humans mentally represent and process the geometry are needed. Answering the following question–How the human mind perceives and understands images and shapes?–is key to utilizing the full potential of BCI in CAD interfaces. The study outlined in this paper is a step in this direction.Specifically, we focus on a fundamental task of fragmentary shape identification. The problem of fragmentary shape recognition can be defined as follows: given a partial and incomplete minimalistic representation of a shape, can one be able to recognize the actual complete shape or object? Consider the fragmented images of a shape shown in Fig. 1. Initially, it is hard to recognize and categorize the actual shape. But as progressively more information is added to the images one is able to recognize the shape. The recognition of object happens with only fragments of the overall shape being displayed! In their daily lives, humans perform fragmented shape identification most of the times, as an example if an object is occluded by other objects or texture fields. Moreover, the images in Fig. 1 are not presented as full-colored textured image but instead as a simplified line drawing. Once sufficient information (even though fragmented) is presented, it is only with rare exceptions that an object fails to be rapidly and readily identified.This simple exercise ascertains that human cognition system needs only a minimalistic representation of a given object, rather than storing every little detail associated with it to recognize the object. The study presented in this paper is probably the first attempt to objectively examine how the humans’ brain activities and thinking process can be used to draw useful inferences about the fragmentary shape recognition problem. Some of the primary research questions addressed include: How can one objectively study the human thinking process of fragmentary shape recognition? Can the incorporation of BCI help in this regard? What essential characteristic brain activity information can be reliably obtained by processing human brain signals during fragmentary shape recognition process?To answer the research questions posed above, we have performed a set of Institutional Review Board (IRB) approved experimental studies. In each experiment, a subject was progressively (in stages) shown more informative fragmented images of an object to be recognized. During each stage of the experiment, the brain activity of users in the form of electroencephalogram (EEG) signals was recorded with a BCI headset. The recorded signals are then processed to objectively study the fragmentary shape recognition process.There are two key issues that need to be addressed for performing systematic fragmentary shape recognition experiments. First, there are possibly infinite sequences of displaying progressively more informative fragmentary images. Hence, there is a need for structured approaches to generate a sequence of images to be displayed. Second, there is a need for metrics based on processed brain signals that indicate the identification of an object. In this paper, we outline two structured methods of displaying progressively more informative fragmentary images and also discuss the metrics used for objective assessment. In addition to CAD field, we believe that this research study could be beneficial to shape processing, computer vision, and cognitive physiology communities too.In Section  2, we briefly review research related to the outlined study. Essential theoretical concepts related to our work are discussed in Section  3. Section  4 discusses experiment details and methods. Section  5 discusses main results of the experiments. Section  6 concludes our paper and outlines future research work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
