@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Searching for “order” in atrial fibrillation using electrogram morphology recurrence plots

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Recurrence plots show patterns within atrial fibrillation electrograms.Recurrence plot diagonal and vertical lines indicate determinism and stationarity.Wide range of morphology recurrence rates seen in canine atrial fibrillation model.Shuffling electrogram order simulates random timing of electrogram recurrence.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Atrial fibrillation,Electrograms,Dynamics,Mapping,Non-linear analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundBipolar electrograms recorded during atrial fibrillation (AF) can have an appearance of chaotic/random behavior. The aim of this study was to use a novel electrogram morphology recurrence (EMR) analysis to quantify the level of order in the morphology patterns in AF.MethodsRapid atrial pacing was performed in seven dogs at 600bpm for 3 weeks leading to sustained AF. Open chest high density electrical recordings were made in multiple atrial sites. EMR plots of bipolar electrograms at each site were created by cross-correlating morphologies of each detected activations with morphologies of every other activation. The following features of the EMR plots were quantified: recurrence rate (RR), determinism (DET), laminarity (LAM), average diagonal line length (L), trapping time (TT), divergence (DIV), and Shannon׳s entropy (ENTR). For each recording site, these measures were calculated for the normal sequence of morphologies and also after random shuffling of the electrogram orders.ResultsElectrograms recordings from a total of 3961 sites had average cycle lengths of 104±22ms resulting in an average of 100±19 activations detected per 10-s recording and an average RR of 0.38±0.28 (range 0.02–1.00). Shuffling the order of the activation morphologies resulted in significant decreases in DET, LAM, L, TT, and ENTR and significant increases in DIV.ConclusionsEMR plots of AF electrograms show varying rates of recurrence with patterns that suggest an underlying deterministic structure to the activation sequences. A better understanding of AF dynamics could lead to improved methods in mapping and treating AF.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Electrical activity during atrial fibrillation (AF) is characterized by complex activation patterns that are difficult to interpret. This includes variable activation times and changing atrial electrogram amplitudes and morphologies giving the appearance, at times, of highly erratic baseline behavior. To elucidate the evolution of these patterns and their clinical relevance is a challenge. One suggested mechanism for sustained AF is multiple reentrant circuits that wander in the atria [1,2]. There also has been growing evidence that some of these rhythms are driven by stable sources in the atria [3–8]. These sources can be in the form of focal activation, rotors, or reentry patterns resulting in the complex fibrillatory activity seen in the rest of the atria. There is still much that is not understood about dynamical behavior of AF and its impact on AF electrograms.The recurrence plot (RP) was invented and used by Eckmann et al. [9] as a means to visualize non-linear dynamical behavior. Eventually many investigators in diverse fields, such as physics, astronomy, biology, and economics, studied complex dynamical behavior not readily apparent from observed raw time series [10]. The plots were used to visualize a pattern representing the evolution of a sequence of points of some variable in one or a small number of dimensions and characterize its structure. The processes studied using RPs can be mathematical time series generated by computer solutions to linear and nonlinear differential equations or time series generated by real sequential processes occurring in nature.We have recently adapted the recurrence quantification analysis designed for scalar and vector time series to study electrogram morphology recurrence (EMR) during AF [11]. We previously showed that mapping using EMR could be used to identify areas of rapid and repeatable electrogram morphologies in patients with persistent AF [11]. From this technique it was also observed that even sites with changing morphologies had noticeable patterns that were not random. The aim of this study was to quantify the features of EMR plots obtained from a canine model of AF using methods proposed by Zbilut et al. [12,13] and Marwan et al. [17] that have been previously used to quantify the visual structures observed in recurrence plots of scalar and vector time series.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Using a novel method to measure recurrence of electrogram waveform morphologies, a quantifiable amount of spatiotemporal organization was detected at multiple levels of electrogram complexity. The pathophysiological significance of the different recurrence patterns found in the atria during AF needs to be explored. Morphology recurrence analysis might also be a useful technique to characterize complex behavior in other settings in medicine or nature.Drs. Gordon, Goldberger, Arora and Ng were supported by a grant from the American Heart Association (12GRNT12070241).Drs. Aistrup, Arora, and Ng were supported by NIH National Heart Lung and Blood Institute (R01 HL093490).Dr. Gordon, Goldberger, and Ng are inventors for patent application “System and Method for Determining Electrogram Morphology Recurrence Patterns and Rates During Atrial Fibrillation”; Serial No.: 61/899,453.