@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A study of surface reconstruction for 3D mannequins based on feature curves

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A feature curve based method for 3D mannequin surface reconstruction is proposed.The 3D mannequin is shaped byB-spline surfaces.A minimum energy method is used to improve the constructed mannequins’ quality.3D mannequin forms for different human factors can be morphologically generated.The feasibility of computer-aided fashion design and manufacturing is improved.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Fashion design,Reverse engineering,Surface reconstruction,Surface continuity,3D mannequin,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Fashion design is an industry closely connected to our lives. When a designer proposes a variety of design ideas, determining how to specifically present these ideas is an important consideration. Currently there are two methods used in the development of apparel products: one is plane cutting, and the other is three-dimensional cutting. In methods based on plane cutting, the basic pieces required for fashion design are generated by mannequin forms, and patterning is performed through adjusting the scale of the shaped cutting pieces. By contrast, in three-dimensional cutting, designers directly come up with the garment designs on the mannequin to obtain the shaped cuttings of the 2D pieces required for production. Therefore, no matter which method is adopted for fashion design and development, all of the mannequins used by the design profession are important media for the concretization of design ideas; more specifically, the process is not only closely related to garment wearing fitness, but also affects the final appearance. On the other hand, human factors of the target consumer are also an important basis for the selection of mannequins. These data are determined by the sizes and relative positions of each feature line of the human body on the mannequin. In addition, for the same human factor measurement, the same mannequin form is not definitive, which further adds the complexity of the mannequin design. Generally speaking, fashion brands define the standard mannequin model based on consumer-related data, and then develop various mannequins of different sizes, thus creating the unique characteristics of each individual brand through garment cut, in addition to style design. Therefore, the selection of a suitable mannequin is an important step in the process of apparel product development. Once a mannequin is selected, details of the overall design can then be quickly and specifically presented.When applying the 3D mannequin to the computer-aided fashion design, the mannequin should be designed based on different functions for different component levels. In the process of fashion design and manufacture, the mannequin not only completely represents the features and measurements for each portion of human body, but also corresponds to the need of customers with different figures. For this reason, each feature curve of the model has typical and specific significance, which allows the design of garments to be manufactured  [1]. On the other hand, when a mannequin is applied to a garment display, the role of the mannequin is to accurately realize the display of 3D garments in the real world. Therefore, there is a demand for mannequins that can describe human features and figures; moreover, the mannequin should be able to display fashion design in different postures to showcase the characteristics of the garments. The target of this study was to develop a module for the generation of a 3D mannequin which can be applied to fashion design and manufacture and then realize the concept of 3D mannequin-aided fashion design. Hence, there are two main technical problems being addressed in this study: (a) how to generate a 3D mannequin of different sizes; and, (b) how to directly generate the control mesh for fashion design on the 3D mannequin. In these issues, how to generate different apparel surfaces by shape morphing, based on the relative control mesh defined and transformed by the position of the feature curves, is considered in this study. Other than the situation mentioned above, how to generate the design components of sleeves and pant legs from a 3D mannequin without mesh cutting and sewing is the other focus of this study. Through these issues, a method for surface reconstruction of a 3D mannequin based on feature curves is proposed in this study, where the reverse engineering methods are applied to scan the concrete mannequin. Through this technique, the surface partitions, which are segmented on the surface of the mannequin and defined by feature curves, can be constructed. More specifically, the surface partitions can obtain the grid points that represent the form features from the extraction of scanned points. Next,B-spline surfaces are selected to reconstruct the form of the entire 3D mannequin, and to ensure that the computation of surface fitting is more stable, the Gauss–Newton algorithm is applied. Meanwhile, revising the continuity of the interface among theB-spline surfaces with the tangent vector adjustment method based on the minimum energy is adopted to integrate surfaces with different features into a unity. When the form of the 3D model is transformed by adjusting the input of human factors, the whole 3D model can be composed of different blocks due to the surface partition. Without making changes for the features, the method mentioned above can generate different 3D mannequins of different sizes by scaling. Therefore, other design components can be generated on the original 3D model by a means analogous to assembling a brick wall, the application of which can be tailored for the construction of sleeves or pant legs. Finally, the 3D mannequin based on the proposed methodology is applied to a developing platform for computer-aided fashion design to verify the practicality of the study.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section  2 presents the literature review and highlights the current limits and necessary improvements. Section  3 details the methodology of this study, while Section  4 implements a case study of surface reconstruction for a 3D mannequin. Section  5 offers the results and discussion, with Section  6 providing conclusions potential trends for future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
