@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A new Steiner patch based file format for Additive Manufacturing processes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new Steiner patch based Additive Manufacturing file format has been developed.Steiner format uses triangular rational Bezier representation of Steiner patches.Steiner format has high geometric fidelity and low approximation error.The Steiner patches can be easily sliced and closed form solutions can be obtained.AM parts manufactured using Steiner format has very low profile and form errors.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Additive Manufacturing (AM),Steiner patches,Standard Tessellation Language (STL) file,Additive Manufacturing File (AMF) format,Chordal errors,Geometric Dimensioning and Tolerancing (GD,&,T) errors,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Additive Manufacturing (AM) processes adopt a layering approach for building parts in continuous slices and use the Standard Tessellation Language (STL) file format as an input to generate the slices during part manufacturing. However, the current STL format uses planar triangular facets to approximate the surfaces of the parts. This approximation introduces errors in the part representation which leads to additional errors downstream in the parts produced by AM processes. Recently, another file format called Additive Manufacturing File (AMF) was introduced by ASTM which seeks to use curved triangles based on second degree Hermite curves. However, while generating the slices for manufacturing the part, the curved triangles are recursively sub-divided back to planar triangles which may lead to the same approximation error present in the STL file. This paper introduces a new file format which uses curved Steiner patches instead of planar triangles for not only approximating the part surfaces but also for generating the slices. Steiner patches are bounded Roman surfaces and can be parametrically represented by rational Bezier equations. Since Steiner surfaces are of higher order, this new Steiner file format will have a better accuracy than the traditional STL and AMF formats and will lead to lower Geometric Dimensioning and Tolerancing (GD&T) errors in parts manufactured by AM processes. Since the intersection of a plane and the Steiner patch is a closed form mathematical solution, the slicing of the Steiner format can be accomplished with very little computational complexity. The Steiner representation has been used to approximate the surfaces of two test parts and the chordal errors in the surfaces are calculated. The chordal errors in the Steiner format are compared with the STL and AMF formats of the test surfaces and the results have been presented. Further, an error based adaptive tessellation algorithm is developed for generating the Steiner representation which reduces the number of curved facets while still improving the accuracy of the Steiner format. The test parts are virtually manufactured using the adaptive Steiner, STL and AMF format representations and the GD&T errors of the manufactured parts are calculated and compared. The results demonstrate that the modified Steiner format is able to significantly reduce the chordal and profile errors as compared to the STL and AMF formats.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Additive Manufacturing (AM) processes have evolved from the Rapid Prototyping (RP) technique and manufacture parts by creating successive layers. The Stereolithography (STL) file is the standard format used by AM machines to generate the slices for manufacturing the part. The STL format uses planar triangles to approximate the part surfaces as shown in Fig. 1. This piecewise planar approximation introduces errors in the part representation, particularly in highly curved surfaces  [1–6]. This approximation in turn leads to errors in parts manufactured by AM machines using the STL file representation  [7]. The approximation can be reduced by increasing the tessellation in the STL file and using smaller triangles. However, this exponentially increases the number of triangles in the file which results in large file sizes. Selective modification of the STL file based on the error threshold of different surfaces using a Vertex Translation Algorithm (VTA) has been proposed by Navangul et al.  [8]. Although this algorithm has proved to be successful in controlling the increase in the number of facets while minimizing the approximation error, the modified file still uses planar facets. Therefore, there is a limit to the improvement in the tessellation that can be achieved using this approach. Recently, a new Additive Manufacturing File (AMF) format has been proposed by ASTM  [9]. This AMF format uses second degree Hermite curves to represent curved triangles. However, during the reading of the AMF file by the AM machines for creating the slices, the curved triangles are recursively sub-divided back into planar triangles. This division of the curved triangles into planar facets reintroduces the planar approximation error in the manufactured part which may potentially increase the Geometric Dimensioning and Tolerancing (GD&T)  [10] errors in the parts manufactured using the AMF format.Recently, a curved format for AM machines has been proposed by Santosh et al.  [11] which uses modified rectangular bi-quadratic Bezier surfaces for piecewise approximation the CAD surfaces. Although the Bezier format is able to minimize the errors significantly, the slicing of the Bezier patches for generating the contours cannot be performed analytically and therefore, numerical or optimization methods have to be used which leads to errors in the solution. This paper, therefore, presents a new curved file format for AM machines based on Steiner patches [12–15] for which slicing can be performed analytically to obtain a closed form solution. Steiner patches, named after the 19th century mathematician Jakob Steiner who first formalized them in 1844, are bounded Steiner or Roman surfaces [12,13,16] which are degree four surfaces in Cartesian space with a triple point. They were investigated by Sederberg and Anderson  [12,13] and Breen  [14] as potential candidates for approximate piecewise rendering of freeform surfaces with smooth tangent continuity. The intersection of a Steiner patch with a plane results in a quadratic curve in the parametric space  [12]. This property of the Steiner surface makes it attractive for the AM domain since numerically stable slicing algorithms can be developed for the Steiner format. The paper adopts the methods presented by Sederberg and Anderson  [12,13,17] and Breen  [14] and extends them to develop a new Steiner file format for AM machines. This new format is compared with the existing STL and AMF formats for some test surfaces and the approximation errors in all the formats are calculated. The approximation or tessellation accuracy is characterized as chordal error  [1–4] and is calculated as the normal distance between the tessellated facets and the actual CAD surface, as shown in Fig. 2. Mathematically, chordal error can be defined as:(1)εch=‖PCAD−PTess‖wherePTessis a point on the tessellated surface which can be either the STL, AMF or Steiner representation andPCADis the corresponding point on the CAD surface. The chordal errors for the different file formats are compared and the results obtained in this paper demonstrate that the average chordal error in Steiner patch representation is significantly lower than those of the STL and AMF file representations.One drawback of using a higher degree surface patch is that the file size increases significantly compared to a first degree planar surface. Therefore, an error based non-uniform tessellation algorithm has also been developed for generating an adaptive Steiner patch format in order to minimize the number of facets and the file size of the representation. This algorithm calculates the errors at different areas on the surface and adapts the number of facets for the different regions such that the areas with larger errors will have more number of facets while regions with smaller errors will have less number of facets. A comparative study of the number of facets between the uniform and adaptive Steiner file formats has also been performed for two test surfaces. The results of this analysis show that the adaptive Steiner file is able to achieve the same level of accuracy as that of uniform Steiner format while using fewer patches which would lead to reduction in the file size.A slicing algorithm has been developed for the Steiner file which is used for creating the slice contours at different heights. The slice contours are then used for virtually manufacturing AM parts with different slice thicknesses and part orientation  [18,19]. The simulated surfaces of the virtually manufactured AM parts are inspected and the Geometric Dimensioning and Tolerancing (GD&T) errors of the surface  [10] are calculated. The GD&T errors studied in this paper are cylindricity  [10] and profile errors  [10] which are the most widely used GD&T errors specified on curved surfaces and parts. The GD&T errors of the test surfaces generated from the modified Steiner representation are compared with those of the surfaces manufactured from the STL and AMF formats and the results are presented. The results illustrate that the modified Steiner format is able to significantly reduce the GD&T errors while still utilizing fewer number of facets.The rest of the paper is divided into six sections. The next section, Section  2 presents a brief overview of the research in the areas of STL file format and alternative formats for AM processes. Section  3 presents the methodology for developing the Steiner patch format from the CAD surface of a part. Section  4 compares the chordal errors in the uniform and adaptive Steiner formats to those in the STL and AMF formats while Section  5 presents a slicing algorithm and a virtual manufacturing model for the Steiner format. Section  6 calculates and presents the GD&T errors for the different test surfaces using Steiner, STL and AMF formats. Finally, Section  7 presents the conclusions and future scope of the current research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
