@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Reconstruction of B-spline curves and surfaces by adaptive group testing

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The B-spline by Adaptive Group testing Estimation (B-AGE) is proposed.B-AGE derives a B-spline curve or surface estimation only from salient 3D points.The salient points are found sequentially by means of group testing.B-AGE finds a unique solution with a minimum Akaike Information Criteria (AIC) value.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
B-spline curve and surface fitting,Akaike Information Criterion,Salient points,Iterative approximation,Group testing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Point clouds as measurements of 3D sensors have many applications in various fields such as object modeling, environment mapping and surface representation. Storage and processing of raw point clouds is time consuming and computationally expensive. In addition, their high dimensionality shall be considered, which results in the well known curse of dimensionality. Conventional methods either apply reduction or approximation to the captured point clouds in order to make the data processing tractable. B-spline curves and surfaces can effectively represent 2D data points and 3D point clouds for most applications. Since processing all available data for B-spline curve or surface fitting is not efficient, based on the Group Testing theory an algorithm is developed that finds salient points sequentially. The B-spline curve or surface models are updated by adding a new salient point to the fitting process iteratively until the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) is met. Also, it has been proved that the proposed method finds a unique solution so as what is defined in the group testing theory. From the experimental results the applicability and performance improvement of the proposed method in relation to some state-of-the-art B-spline curve and surface fitting methods, may be concluded.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Since the world is 3D in nature, effective interaction with the surrounding environment can be achieved by utilization of a 3D sensor, such as Lidar, 3D laser scanner, Microsoft Kinect or stereo camera. The sensor measurements are represented by a 3D point cloud as initial environment representation. 3D mapping  [1], approximate surface fitting  [2], object classification  [3], loop closure detection  [4] and mobile robot navigation  [5] are some applications of point clouds. In spite of having rich information content, storing and processing of 3D point clouds is time consuming and computationally expensive. In contrast to these discrete representations, B-spline surfaces are employed in geometric modeling  [6] and terrain mapping  [7]. Stable and parametric representation of 3D surfaces, local modeling capability and affine invariancy are some advantages of B-spline surfaces. The difficulty of B-spline surface fitting in real-time applications arises when a huge point cloud is captured from a 3D scanner. Since every measured 3D point is located on the scanned surface, too much information is available for either interpolation or approximation of a B-spline surface. Furthermore, a large scale data fitting may result in an ill-conditioned or singular matrix  [8]. Therefore, state-of-the-art B-spline fitting methods are considered in seeking few control points for representation of acquired point data  [9]. For instance, the B-spline curve and surface fitting method presented in  [10], progressively increases the number of control points as needed.Most of the conventional B-spline curve or surface fitting methods, either assume that the knot vector is known a-priori or generate a set of knot values and then find the final set of active knots iteratively. Various techniques are proposed for solving knot placement problem, such as adaptive methods  [11], evolutionary approaches  [12] and iterative techniques  [10] as some representatives. In addition to specification of distribution of knots and their values, the control points shall be determined to approximate a B-spline curve or surface. Minimization of a quadratic function  [13], iteration and optimization  [14] and the widely used least-square optimization  [15] are some state-of-the-art methods for approximation of control points.Lack of an appropriate and computationally efficient knot placement technique, requiring an initial estimate and finding a locally optimum solution are some problems of the conventional B-spline curve or surface fitting methods. Furthermore, few methods are considered in processing just the informative captured data for curve or surface fitting  [16,17]. In order to remedy these problems, a group testing based method is proposed for B-spline curve and surface fitting that approximates a model by processing few data points. This method can be employed without an initial estimation and finds both knot vector and control points simultaneously by finding the most informative or salient points.In the emerging field of Group Testing (GT), it has been shown that few tests are required to identify defective items among a large number of elements  [18]. Based on the GT theory, in this paper to the best knowledge of the authors, a B-spline curve and surface fitting algorithm is presented for the first time, where, an adaptive group testing technique is developed that considers a captured 3D point cloud as a set of elements with few defective (salient) ones. Based on the group testing theory, a test is designed that detects salient points for construction of either a B-spline curve or surface. In contrast to the state-of-the-art group testing techniques, the relation of group size to the complexity of tests, is also considered. At the final stage of the algorithm, a B-spline surface approximation is derived which can efficiently represent the captured point cloud. The experimental results on some point clouds proves the applicability and performance improvement of the proposed method.The rest of the paper is as follows. In Section  2, some related works are reviewed. In Section  3, a brief introduction to B-spline curves and surfaces and group testing theory is presented. The proposed method is explained in Section  4. Section  5 is devoted to the result of experiments and comparison to some popular B-spline fitting algorithm. Finally the concluding remarks are presented in Section  6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, an adaptive group testing based method is developed in order to find salient points of an organized point cloud and construct a B-spline curve or surface. This B-spline Adaptive Group testing Estimator, abbreviately called B-AGE, can be used in a wide variety of CAD/CAE applications. In contrast to most conventional B-spline fitting methods, instead of processing a huge amount of non-informative points, this method finds salient control points for curve or surface model fitting. In order to find the salient points, the input curve is convolved with B-splines of varying scales. The salient points are marked as maximum of convolution result. This is in contrast to widely used dominant points, which is related to points with high curvature. Exploiting distinctive properties of group testing, salient points are derived iteratively by performing group tests. A B-spline curve is derived by least square approximation from salient points. The B-spline model is updated until the AIC is met, which provides a trade off between accuracy and model complexity. It has been shown theoretically that the algorithm complexity of the B-AGE method is lower than some state-of-the-art group testing methods. Furthermore, the applicability of the proposed technique is shown by some experiments in both B-spline curve and surface approximation.