@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A molecular prospective provides new insights into implication of PDYN and OPRK1 genes in alcohol dependence

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
SNPs alter an individual׳s susceptibility for alcohol addiction.Transcription factors bind to PDYN and OPRK1 SNPs in an allele-specific manner.PDYN SNP rs1997794 has a high deleterious effect on transcriptional regulation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Transcription factors,Prodynorphin (PDYN),κ-opioid receptor (OPRK1),Allele-specific interactions,Alcohol addiction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) both in coding and non-coding regions govern gene functions prompting differential vulnerability to diseases, heterogeneous response to pharmaceutical regimes and environmental anomalies. These genetic variations, SNPs, may alter an individual׳s susceptibility for alcohol dependence by remodeling DNA–protein interaction patterns in prodynorphin (PDYN) and the κ-opioid receptor (OPRK1) genes. In order to elaborate the underlying molecular mechanism behind these susceptibility differences we used bioinformatics tools to retrieve differential DNA–protein interactions at PDYN and OPRK1 SNPs significantly associated with alcohol dependence. Our results show allele-specific DNA–protein interactions depicting allele-specific mechanisms implicated in differential regulation of gene expression. Several transcription factors, for instance, VDR, RXR-alpha, NFYA, CTF family, USF-1, USF2, ER, AR and predominantly SP family show an allele-specific binding affinity with PDYN gene; likewise, GATA, TBP, AP-1, USF-2, C/EBPbeta, Cart-1 and ER interact with OPRK1 SNPs on intron 2 in an allele-specific manner. In a nutshell, transition of a single nucleotide may modify differential DNA–protein interactions at OPRK1 and PDYN׳s SNPs, significantly associated with pathology that may lead to altered individual vulnerability for alcohol dependence.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) are associated with adaptations in phenotype such as predisposition to diseases, behavior towards medicines and environmental factors [1]. These SNPs can be in coding or non-coding regions of genes that may affect molecular functions of a cell in different ways (seeFig. 1).Genetic association studies have shown the link between SNPs and various diseases [2–5]. Alcohol induces its addictive effects by molecular adaptations in human brain neuro-circuitries. Similarly, its reinforcing effects are executed by activation of dopamine system in mesolimbic pathway while aversive effects are the consequences of OPRK1 receptor activation [6–8]. Dynorphins are derived by proteolytic processing of prodynorphin, which is encoded by PDYN[9]. Dynorphins bind selectively to kappa opioid receptors (KOR), encoded by OPRK1. The 22kb OPRK1 gene is located on human chromosome 8 and comprises four exons, including a recently identified exon that encodes the 5׳ untranslated regions [10,11]. Genetic polymorphisms implicated in the regulation of endogenous opioid system encoding genes may govern reinforcing effects of alcohol and play key role in alcohol consumption.In addition to the SNPs of PDYN and OPRK1 genes SNPs, several genetic polymorphisms in the μ-opioid receptor gene (OPRM1) are documented for their association with alcohol dependence and/or drug addiction. G-allele in A118G SNP (rs1799971) in encoding region of OPRM1 potentiates binding of β-endorphin with μ-opioid receptor, which in turn carries significantly higher craving for alcohol in male heavy drinkers [12]. Association of A118G (rs1799971) polymorphism with heroin and alcohol dependence is affected by altered regulation of protein kinase A (PKA) and pERK1/2 signaling pathways [13]. While, T1128C polymorphism (Leu7 to Pro7) in encoding region of neuropeptide Y increases vulnerability for alcohol dependence [14]. A functional SNP rs563649 in intron 1 region of OPRM1 is associated with substance dependence due to altered internal ribosomal entry site, mRNA levels and translational efficiency [15]. Furthermore, SNPs -554G>A and -995C>A in OPRM1 gene decrease the level of signal transducer and activator of transcription 6 (STAT6) and nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells (NF-kB) binding and the transcriptional activity [16,17]. This indicates that genetic polymorphism in both exonic and intronic sequences affect the underlying signaling mechanisms that regulate individual׳s response to diseases and environmental factors.A large European-Americans study has mapped all six genes that encode receptors and ligands for endogenous opioid system in 1860 individuals of European American descendants from 219 alcohol dependent families [4]. This study has documented that 9 SNPs in PDYN gene and 5 SNPs in OPRK1 gene are significantly associated with alcohol dependence. These findings indicate that genetic polymorphisms in receptor and its ligand encoding genes may affect molecular pathways implicated in alcohol dependence.Limited studies have been conducted to reveal underlying molecular mechanisms for the association of SNPs with different pathologies, particularly with alcohol dependence. These studies have documented that at SNPs, single nucleotide shift may lead to differential protein interactions with given SNP alleles [18,19]. These studies cover few SNPs that are significantly associated with alcohol dependence. Moreover, underlying molecular mechanisms operating on these SNPs, associations with alcohol dependence are governed by allele-specific differential protein interactions at OPRK1 and PDYN SNPs. Differential protein interactions may alter expression of these genes that may lead to altered vulnerability for alcohol dependence.In present study, we used bioinformatics tools to establish allele-specific different protein binding patterns with PDYN and OPRK1 SNPs that are significantly associated with alcohol dependence. It will enable us to predict molecular mechanisms modulating PDYN and OPRK1 genes expressions. This study will provide guidelines to conduct experiments to elaborate molecular basis of SNPs associations with alcohol dependence, where a single nucleotide change is enough to alter our vulnerability for diseases. Moreover, current study will enable us to predict a broader picture of fundamental molecular mechanisms implicated in alcohol dependence.A large European-Americans study has mapped all six genes that encode receptors and ligands for endogenous opioid system in 1860 individuals of European American descendants from 219 alcohol dependent families. They found that 9 SNPs in PDYN gene and 5 SNPs in OPRK1 gene are significantly associated with alcohol dependence. These 9 SNPs of PDYN and 5 SNPs of OPRK1 were selected from the Human genome variation database, HGVBase (http://hgvbase.cgb.ki.se) and National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) database of SNPs, dbSNP (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/SNP) for our computational analysis.To predict functionally important SNPs in 3׳ and 5׳ UTRs with their risk level we used VarioWatch (http://genepipe.ncgm.sinica.edu.tw/variowatch/watchingvar.do) [20]. VarioWatch is a functional variant and disease gene mining browser for association study, integrates the important information from various databases (dbSNP, UniProt, KEGG, Gene Ontology) and also incorporates in-depth functional analysis information on both known and novel variations. VarioWatch search was performed by using SNP ID in batch query mode selecting upstream (5׳) and downstream (3׳) region as 50,000 base pairs.To identify functional SNPs in datasets, F-SNP (http://compbio.cs.queensu.ca /F-SNP/) [21] database were used. F-SNP uses more than 16 databases and bioinformatics tools to provide functional effects of SNPs. F-SNP prioritizes SNPs in a probabilistic framework based upon their possible deleterious effects with an integrative scoring system. F-SNP predicts functional effects at splicing, transcriptional and translational levels. Query was provided with SNP ID and functional consequences were predicted with respect to each functional category like splice regulation and transcriptional regulation.Patch 1.0 is a pattern-based program for predicting transcription factor binding sites (TFBS) in DNA sequences. It uses positional weight matrices and a set of binding sites from TRANSFAC ® Public 6.0 [22]. Query sequence was designed by using the following parameters i.e. minimum length is 4; maximum number of mismatched is 2, and both mismatch penalty and lower score boundary was also set to 100.Minimum length is the cutoff value and sequence longer than or equal to 4 will appear in output. In the Patch 1.0 the binding sites are compared and the maximum number of mismatches specifies positions that may differ locally with some part of input sequence. Lower the number of (local) mismatches than defined value of maximum number of mismatches or equal indicates a match between whole site and input sequence. Mismatch position in comparison is assigned a mismatch penalty. Overall score for match in the whole site (search pattern) and input sequence mismatch penalty value has a negative influence. A bonus weight of 100 is given to each matching nucleotide. Thus, negative influence of a mismatching position i.e. mismatch penalty which equals to 100 corresponds to positive influence of a matching position. Lower score boundary is a cut-off score and by default it is 87.5. It defines output matches between a site (search pattern) and input sequence. The score which is estimated for every match has to be higher than or equal to this cut-off.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
