@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Assembly-based conceptual 3D modeling with unlabeled components using probabilistic factor graph

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present a novel 3D CAD tool for conceptual design exploration.Interactive concept exploration through assembly-based 3D modeling paradigm.Automated component suggestion algorithm based on probabilistic factor graph.Creative reuse of 3D models available on vast online repositories.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Conceptual 3D modeling,Factor graph,Assembly-based modeling,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This work presents a novel and intuitive assembly based 3D modeling interface to support conceptual design exploration activities. In the presented modeling interface, unlabeled segmented components of the objects are assembled to create new 3D models. The development of the interface is motivated by two aspects. First, the focus is on novice users since they stand to gain the most from intuitive interfaces. Second, the intent is on creative reuse of a growing number and variety of 3D models available on vast online repositories like Turbosquid and Trimble 3D warehouse. Specifically, we have devised an automated component suggestion algorithm based on a probabilistic factor graph. This algorithm helps the user to easily browse and select components from a database that are most compatible with the current state of 3D models being assembled. The component suggestion algorithm incorporates various aspects such as shape similarity, repetitions of shapes, and adjacency relationships. Our new suggestive interface overcomes several limitations of traditional CAD interfaces by helping the users to quickly create and explore new conceptual designs. We present results on the conceptual design of several products.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Computer Aided Design (CAD) is omnipresent in multiple industrial domains such as automotive and aerospace. In terms of market size, the CAD market is one of the established, largest, and growing areas in software markets with a market cap of $7 billion in 2011  [1]. CAD is used for representation, knowledge management, communication, and visualization of design information at various stages of engineering design process. CAD plays a significant role in all the stages of design process. If the past is prologue, the role that CAD tools play in the engineering design value chain will likely to grow in scope, scale, and complexity. Although, the currently available CAD tools allow significant degree of control in 3D shape creation by requiring the user to specify exact shape parameters in a structured manner, they are not well suited for early conceptual design exploration and ideation activities.For conceptual design, the current CAD systems have two major disadvantages: (1) inability to reuse existing design solutions as inspiration and (2) assumption that users know exact parameters and geometric details of the 3D model. Conceptual design exploration process is a creative and open-ended process in which designers initially do not have a clear mental picture of what their design looks like. They only have a rough idea of the design and through unexpected changes of direction during the generation of solution components they come up with the final solution concept. Another observation in conceptual design is that users usually derive inspiration from elements of existing designs and combine them with some new ideas to generate innovative concepts. Deriving inspiration from existing design accelerates the design process and enhances the creativity of the users. Therefore, CAD systems for conceptual design exploration should not only allow easy and intuitive (unexpected change in goal) exploration of possible design space but also enable one to reuse existing solutions as inspiration. Additionally, such interfaces should be simple to interact with and should not rely on the user providing geometrically accurate information.In this paper, we present an assembly based modeling interface for conceptual design exploration. A key advantage of assembly based modeling system is that users focus on component selection and assembly rather than the creation of new geometry from scratch. The modeling interface suggests the modeler with possible additional components for the current shape through an unsupervised component suggestion algorithm. The component suggestion algorithm is based on probabilistic factor graph and leads to considerable speedup in conceptual shape synthesis. We used shape similarity, size, repetition, and adjacency relation to define factors for the factor graph. These factors help to determine plausible components from a repository of models that could then be assembled to create designs. The marginal probability distribution computed from the factor graph is used to score and rank components. The ranked component list is provided to the user within the interface as sources of suggestions for faster, intuitive, and easy shape synthesis.Overall, this paper makes following contributions:1.A probabilistic factor graph based model that encapsulates the relationship between unlabeled components in a shape database.An unsupervised dynamic component suggestion algorithm that guides the user by suggesting most relevant components at a given stage of assembly.Development of a novel assembly based CAD modeling interface to guide a user to perform conceptual design assemblies.In next section, we discuss related works on component suggestion algorithms and assembly based design systems. A brief overview of the whole approach is given in Section  3. Section  4 describes processing steps on database 3D models to compute various attributes and relationships. In Section  5, the factor graph is described in detail. Experimental results are presented in Section  6. Finally, possible future applications and limitations of our approach is discussed in Section  7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
