@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Representing and extracting lung cancer study metadata: Study objective and study design

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose to improve retrieval by representing and extracting study metadata.Multiple expert readers produced a gold standard of 430 abstracts on lung cancer.Automatic classification performed better than or comparable to PubMed׳s filters.Study design classification was robust to differences in vocabulary across corpora.Top-ranked features were not domain-specific and could generalize to other domains.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Automatic summarization,Quality of evidence,Information retrieval,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper describes the information retrieval step in Casama (Contextualized Semantic Maps), a project that summarizes and contextualizes current research papers on driver mutations in non-small cell lung cancer. Casama׳s representation of lung cancer studies aims to capture elements that will assist an end-user in retrieving studies and, importantly, judging their strength. This paper focuses on two types of study metadata: study objective and study design. 430 abstracts on EGFR and ALK mutations in lung cancer were annotated manually. Casama׳s support vector machine (SVM) automatically classified the abstracts by study objective with as much as 129% higher F-scores compared to PubMed׳s built-in filters. A second SVM classified the abstracts by epidemiological study design, suggesting strength of evidence at a more granular level than in previous work. The classification results and the top features determined by the classifiers suggest that this scheme would be generalizable to other mutations in lung cancer, as well as studies on driver mutations in other cancer domains.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The Lung Cancer Mutation Consortium, the National Cancer Institute׳s effort to identify and target driver mutations in lung cancer, found that driver mutations were present in 64% of lung adenocarcinomas, and that patients who were treated with targeted therapy lived longer than those who did not receive such treatment [1]. Currently, treatments approved by the Federal Drug Administration are available for cancers with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations and anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene rearrangement. As new treatments continue to be identified, it is important for clinicians to stay up-to-date on new research developments in this field.To illustrate, a clinician may wish to answer the following questions: how likely is it that my patient has this specific mutation? What treatments are available for this mutation? Is my patient likely to respond? This project aims to assist a clinician in answering these questions as well as deeper queries concerning the strength of the claims found in published literature. For instance, were conclusions reached in a prospective clinical trial or a retrospective study? What was the study׳s sample size? Were the results published in a high-impact journal? Aggregated summaries of biomedical research can help inform a clinician׳s thinking on treatment strategies and assist in applying research findings to specific patients. Moreover, by utilizing natural language processing (NLP) techniques for automatic summarization, a model of current knowledge can be produced in a tractable fashion.The work described here is the initial step in a larger project, Casama (Contextualized Semantic Maps), which aims to summarize and contextualize current research papers on driver mutations in cancer. Casama׳s representation focuses on a specific set of metadata that is geared toward the initial information retrieval task, as well as assisting the user in judging the strength of the studies retrieved. This paper describes the representation and automatic extraction of two types of metadata: study objective and study design. These efforts are demonstrated in the domain of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Casama׳s information retrieval performance is compared to that of PubMed. Given the domain-specific approach in which the representation is organized, the generalizability of this scheme to other domains is also investigated.The major contribution of this work is a framework for improved information retrieval and summarization through a detailed representation of study context. This work also provides an annotated gold standard of study objective and study design as applied to driver mutations in lung cancer, as well as a first pass at automatic extraction of these data elements.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
