@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A new computational method for automatic dental measurement: The case of maxillary central incisor

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new automatic approach (CATM) to measure accurately human teeth is proposed.CATM evaluates dimensional features in algorithmic way from a 3D discrete model.CATM shown to be more repeatable and reproducible compared to traditional approaches.Measurements can be carried out quickly.CATM does not require an operator with special skills (dentist or orthodontist).

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
3D biomedical image analysis,Computer methods for tooth analysis,Dental dimensions,Measurement accuracy,Measurement protocols in biomedicine,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper proposes a new automatic approach to determine the accurate measure of human teeth. The aim of the proposed computer based method is to reduce inaccuracy of measurement with respect to traditional approaches. Starting from a 3D model of the teeth which is obtained from 3D scanning, the method algorithmically evaluates the most important dimensional features detectable in central incisors. For this purpose, specific rules are put forward and implemented in original software with a view to identifying repere points, from which to detect dimensional features both unambiguously and accurately. The automatic method which is proposed here is verified by means of the analysis of real teeth and is then compared with the current state-of-the-art methods for teeth measurement.In dentistry, knowledge of root morphology is of great importance for endodontic, periodontal and orthodontic reasons. Whereas the endodontic morphology has been looked at in depth in many studies, the gross anatomy of root surfaces has been somewhat neglected. This is probably for clinical and methodological reasons. Clinically the anatomical variability of the canals and the need to describe all the variations and anomalies found in a clinical examination is difficult. Methodologically no standard techniques have been clearly identified.In dental anatomy textbooks [1,2] definitions of tooth surfaces, features of each tooth and different crown and root morphologies have been reported, but no information can be found concerning the methodology used to identify them. This gives rise to a lack of standard protocols to perform a valid comparison of results obtained in different studies. Although in the literature many attempts concerning the acquisition of the 3D geometrical model of the teeth are reported by using different technologies (intraoral camera [3], CT imaging [4] and [5], laser scanning system [6], radiographs [7]), currently the investigations concerning the dimensional and morphological characterization of teeth are carried out in vitro by using the traditional sliding calliper [8]. Indeed, the 3D geometrical model does not furnish directly dimensional and morphological information, but a complex processing of 3D data are required. The complexity derives from the fact that geometrical and morphological features have to be preliminarily recognized from discrete models which contain just low level geometric information. Hermann [9] provided a method to determine the loss of ligament attachment in molars. This method includes the 1-mm dissection of the root and the measurement of the tooth circumference taken from projected color slides with a calibrated opisometer. Gher and Dunlap [10] have also used this method to take measurements of the molar root area. Storrer et al. [11] carried out a morphometric study of the maxillary lateral incisor root length using the digital calliper and described the grooves on the root surfaces. Fantozzi et al. [12] tried to standardize and update the root anatomy information by using a manual calliper and by setting reference points in order to determine the root tapering in the anterior tooth. More recently, with a view to improving the MCI morphological characterization and seeking relationship patterns so as to establish morphological groups, Lazos et al. [14] identified some new dimensional features.As shown by an investigation carried out by the present authors [15] in previous work, the measurement uncertainties obtained on biological objects by the manual calliper, could be too wide for a significant investigation of the anatomical dimensions to establish morphological groups.This paper presents a new method to measure the most important dimensional features detectable in central incisors. In the following, we refer to this method as CATM (Computer-Aided Teeth Measurement). A further aim of this study is to demonstrate the efficacy and precision of the computer based method which can give us more precise information about the dental macroanatomy and remove any possible human contribution to measurement inaccuracy. For this purpose, the potential inaccuracy of the manual calliper are examined and used as a point of comparison with the merits of the new computer based method.The measurement protocol used in this study is the same as that used by Lazos et al. [14]. Each step, reference point and dimension are shown inFig. 1:–The tooth is placed along its longitudinal axis in a red wax support. This support is molded in order to guarantee the stability and allow location of the longitudinal axis;The maximum crown contour or anatomic equator (E) is drawn on the tooth׳s crown with a graphic pencil;On its labial side, the most apical point of the cement–enamel junction (CEJ) is marked as Point 1;The most apical points of the anatomic equator are marked as Point 2 on the labial surface, and Point 3 on the lingual surface;The most basal points of the equator on the mesial and distal surfaces are marked as Points 4 and 5, respectively;Two reference points are marked in the root tooth (Points 6 and 7). For this purpose, a line surrounding the whole root is drawn 3mm from Point 1. Points 6 and 7 are on this line in the middle of labial and lingual surfaces.The following dimensional features are identified (Fig. 1):–Crown length (CL): defined as the distance between the CEJ (Point 1) to the incisal edge of the crown;Total length (TL): defined as CL plus root length to the apex (total tooth length);Cervical axial diameter or cervical convexity (CC): measured from Point 1 to Point 2;Major mesio-distal diameter (MD): from mesial Point 3 to distal Point 4;Minor mesio-distal diameter (md): parallel to MD at labial Point 2;Root mesio-distal diameter (Rmd): parallel to MD at Points 6–7 height;Crown buccolingual diameter (Cbl): from labial Point 2 to lingual Point 3;Root buccolingual diameter (Rbl): from root labial Point 6 to root lingual Point 7.The proposed method is performed in seven phases, as shown in the flow chart ofFig. 2. The first four steps, in which some interaction with the operator is necessary, are typical of any 3D geometric scanning procedure and serve to set up the geometric model to be submitted to the automatic measurement method. These procedures are coded and are consequently easily reproducible and repeatable. Once a valid geometric model is available, the last three phases perform the dimensional feature measurements in an algorithmic way, without any interaction with the operator. The 3D point acquisition can be performed with a 3D scanner. The acquisition consists of a 3D point cloud. The raw data coming from the acquisition process must be processed in order to obtain a valid and manifold geometric model. Although the point clouds acquired by a 3D scanner are the direct and dense measurement of the corresponding objects, single or even cluster outliers can nonetheless appear. Since the acquired data are of high quality in the method here proposed, the outliers are easily detected on the basis of the distance deviation in their nearest neighbors.Since a human tooth cannot be acquired with a single scan, it is necessary, to firstly perform the acquisition in two stages (Fig. 2a) and, then, to combine the different acquisitions in order to obtain a single coherent point cloud. For this purpose, the single point clouds need to be registered in each other (Fig. 2b). In this paper, the registration of the point clouds is performed by the Iterative Closest Point (ICP) algorithm, and is assumed to have been performed successfully when the mean distance between the two point clouds is lower than 0.05mm. Once the two point clouds are registered, a uniform point sampling is performed in order to make the density of the point uniform at 0.1mm. Data smoothing is subsequently carried out so as to reduce the random noise which typically affects any measuring process. In the method presented here, the data are smoothed using a Gaussian filter set so as to produce a mean displacement of the points not exceeding 0.02mm. Finally, the point cloud is tessellated by a mesh-growing method [17,18], and a closed and oriented surface is obtained, which defines the solid geometric model of the teeth. The geometric model is described in the form which is typical of the STL standard file format.With a view to implementing in an objective and repeatable way the repere point identification, the method which is being put forth preliminary determines the Local Reference System (LRS) of the MCI. A repeatable identification of the LRS requires that it should be defined through a robust protocol, which is based on some geometric or morphological evidence detectable on the tooth.When the tooth is acquired in the form of a three-dimensional geometric model, new evidence can be detected from the knowledge of the complete geometric description of the tooth, which overcomes the limitations of any traditional approach. The protocol introduced in this work identifies the LRS by evaluating the Principal Component of inertia of the tooth (PCA) [16], which is an automatic operation that can be easily performed once the geometric model is known. PCA is a common technique for finding patterns in high-dimension data. In this study it is carried out by the Principal Component Analysis of the polyhedral surface by considering the masses associated with the barycenter of the triangles of the polyhedrons which are proportional to its area.The LRS consists of three mutually orthogonal axes which come from the tooth barycenter. The longitudinal axis ζGis associated with the lower inertia moment of the geometric model; it is the direction that identifies the tooth height (Fig. 3a). In order to identify the positive direction of the axis ζG, two sections (Γ1 and Γ2) of the tooth performed with two planes (Π1and Π2) are analyzed. The sectioning planes, Π1 and Π2, are perpendicular to ζGand distant 3mm from two extremes of the tooth identified on ζG(Fig. 3b). The section which needs to be located highly is the one which is the worst approximation of a circle (Fig. 3c). In what follows this section is referred to as Γc. The mesiodistal (ξG) and the labiolingual (ψG) axes are orthogonal to ζGand they are found by analyzing the principal component of inertia of the planar section Γc. Thus, the mesiodistal axis is associated with a lower inertia moment. The reference frame of the tooth consists of three mutually orthogonal planes (mesiodistal ΠM, labiolingual ΠLand transversal ΠT) as shown in Fig. 3d. The labial side of the tooth is distinguished from the lingual one by analyzing the curvature of the sectioning curve Γ3 obtained by the intersection of the tooth with the labiolingual plane (ΠL) (Fig. 3e).The following Fig. 3f–h shows the result of identifying the LRS for a 3D scanned tooth (Fig. 2f), the labial view (on the mesiodistal plane –Fig. 3g) and the proximal view (on the labiolingual plane – Fig. 3h). The next section describes the methods to identify typical repere points which are found in the related literature to measure the MCI. The nomenclature used to identify the repere points is the same used in literature.A set of repere points can be identified on the proximal view. The proximal view of a tooth is the minimal hull curve (Γ4) which contains the projection of the points (PΠL) of the tooth surface onto the labiolingual plane (ΠL). On the curve Γ4 four repere points (P2,P3,P6,P7) can be identified.Table 1 reports the related rules. The repere pointP1 is identified on the curve Γ3. The curve Γ3 can turn out to be quite different from Γ4 due to the particular morphology of the tooth. Therefore, the identification of the repere pointP1 can be more robust when it is performed on Γ3 rather than Γ4.The eight repere points on the labial view (P4,P5,P8,P9,P10,P11,P12,P13) are identifiable on the curve Γ5 which is the labial view of the tooth. It is the minimal hull curve which contains the projection of the points (PΠM) pertaining to the tooth surface onto the mesiodistal plane (ΠM).Table 2 reports the related rules.Table 3 highlights the rules to evaluate the eight dimensional features. The first three dimensions (TL, CL and CC) are the projection of the distance between two repere points on the axis ζG. The other dimensions are defined as the distance between a pair of repere points.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
