@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Three dimensional quantitative structure–toxicity relationship modeling and prediction of acute toxicity for organic contaminants to algae

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new alignment-free method is described to characterize organic contaminants.A general-purpose 3D-QSTR predictor is developed based on a large contaminant pool.The predictor is used to virtually evaluate a random substituted benzene library.Four substituted benzenes are determined to have high acute toxicity to Scenedesmus obliquus.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Organic contaminant,Acute toxicity,Three dimensional quantitative structure–toxicity relationship,Machine learning,Alga,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Although numerous chemicals have been identified to have significant toxicological effect on aquatic organisms, there is still lack of a reliable, high-throughput approach to evaluate, screen and monitor the presence of organic contaminants in aquatic system. In the current study, we proposed a synthetic pipeline to automatically model and predict the acute toxicity of chemicals to algae. In the procedure, a new alignment-free three dimensional (3D) structure characterization method was described and, with this method, several 3D-quantitative structure–toxicity relationship (3D-QSTR) models were developed, from which two were found to exhibit strong internal fitting ability and high external predictive power. The best model was established by Gaussian process (GP), which was further employed to perform extrapolation on a random compound library consisting of 1014 virtually generated substituted benzenes. It was found that (i) substitution number can only exert slight influence on chemical׳s toxicity, but low-substituted benzenes seem to have higher toxicity than those of high-substituted entities, and (ii) benzenes substituted by nitro group and halogens exhibit high acute toxicity as compared to other substituents such as methyl and carboxyl groups. Subsequently, several promising candidates suggested by computational prediction were assayed by using a standard algal growth inhibition test. Consequently, four substituted benzenes, namely 2,3-dinitrophenol, 2-chloro-4-nitroaniline, 1,2,3-trinitrobenzene and 3-bromophenol, were determined to have high acute toxicity to Scenedesmus obliquus, with their EC50 values of 2.5±0.8, 10.5±2.1, 1.4±0.2 and 42.7±5.4μmol/L, respectively.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Algae are a polyphyletic and paraphyletic group of organisms that occur in most habitats and usually found in damp places or bodies of aquatic environments [1]. Diverse compounds have been reported to exhibit acute toxicity on algae [2]. However, it is too time-consuming and expensive to systematically conduct experimental assay on all existing and potential chemicals for their toxicity. Therefore, an important aspect of modern toxicology research is the prediction of toxicity of compounds from their molecular structure using quantitative structure–toxicity relationship (QSTR) approach [3,4]. Recently, a number of QSTR studies have been successfully performed to investigate the structural basis and molecular properties underlying compound toxicity to algae [5–9]. For example, Lu et al. developed a series of simple linear correlations between the molecular structure and acute toxicity of aromatic compounds using quantum chemical parameters and physicochemical features [10–12]; these correlation models were later extended to the joint toxicity of substituted phenols and anilines to algae [13–15]. Despite these successful cases, above works can only be regarded as preliminary QSTR studies on acute toxicity to algae owing to their small data size and simple regression method. In this respect, Lessigiarska et al. organized a large compound set to investigate fish, algae and Daphnia toxicity [16]. Recently, Gramatica and co-workers performed a case study of toxicity of (benzo)triazoles to the algae Pseudokirchneriella subcapitata and suggested that a satisfactory QSTR model can only be built from elaborate selection of structural descriptor, regression method and data set [17].In the current study, we first collected hundreds of organic contaminants and environmental pollutants and their acute toxicity to a variety of algae to define a distinct data set. Second, a new three-dimensional QSTR (3D-QSTR) methodology was developed to characterize the structural and nonbonded profile of organic molecules. Third, seven machine learning methods, including three linear and four nonlinear, were employed to correlate the generated descriptors with compound toxicity based on the collected data set. Forth, the acute toxicities of several promising candidates were evaluated in vitro using a standard algae inhibition test. In this way, we expect to obtain an optimized, general-purpose 3D-QSTR model that is able to carry out high-throughput screening of vast chemical space to determine potential toxicity for aquatic organisms.A total of 873 organic contaminants with known acute toxicities to algae were compiled from a number of literatures [10–29] and publicly available sources. These compounds include diverse industrial chemicals and environmental pollutants such as nitroaromatics, phenols, anilines, triazoles and substituted benzenes, and their toxicity was experimentally determined as 50% effective inhibition concentration (EC50) for a variety of algae species such as Scenedesmus obliquus, Chlorella pyrenoidosa and P. subcapitata in 48 or 72h. Here, the EC50 values were converted to negative logarithm form (pEC50) for subsequent analysis. The 873 chemicals as well as their acute toxicity data are tabulated in Supporting Information Table S1.In a high-profile article Golbraikh and Tropsha pointed out that internal validation appears to be the necessary but not the sufficient condition for a statistical regression model to have high predictive power, and they emphasized that the external validation is the only way to establish reliable model [30]. Therefore, we randomly split the data set into two parts with the ratio of ~3:1; the large part consisted of 655 compounds was used as internal training set to develop QSTR models, and the small part contained 218 samples and was served as external test set to blindly validate the developed models.Previously, quantum chemical descriptors (e.g. the energies of the highest and lowest occupied molecular orbital) and physicochemical descriptors (e.g. dipole moment and hydrophobicity) have been widely used to perform QSTR modeling of compound toxicity to algae [10,11]. The drawback of these 2D descriptors is that they are incapable of capturing molecular 3D structure information. Currently, the most widely applied 3D-QSAR methodology is the comparative molecular field analysis (CoMFA) [31]. However, CoMFA can only be applied to the cases where all investigated molecules share a common sketch to facilitate alignment manipulation. To solve this issue, we herein used a new 3D molecular structure characterization method that is free of the alignment manipulation step.Organic molecules are commonly composed of atoms H, C, N, P, O, S, F, Cl, Br and I; they can be categorized into five classes in terms of their chemical attribute, that is, class I: H, class II: C, class III: N and P, class IV: O and S, and class V: F, Cl, Br and I. All the 15 possible combinations among the five classes of atoms are represented inTable 1. For example, the combination of classes III with IV includes four atom pairs N–O, N–S, P–O and P–S. Subsequently, three nonbonded interaction potentials that dominate biomolecular recognition, i.e. electrostatic, steric and hydrophobic, were calculated for all atom pairs in an organic molecule, and the resulting values were assigned into the 15 combinations. In this way, the nonbonded interaction profile of an organic molecule can be characterized using at most 45 nonbonded descriptors; the first, secondary and third 15 descriptors represent, respectively, electrostatic, steric and hydrophobic potentials for the 15 combinations of five atomic classes in an organic molecule.The electrostatic, steric and hydrophobic interaction potentials between two atoms i and j in a molecule can be calculated using, respectively, Coulomb׳s lawEijE=(qiqj/dij), Lennard–Jones equationEijS=εij[(Dij/dij)12−2(Dij/dij)6]and empirical hydrophobic potentialEijH=−(Siρi+Sjρj)e−dij[32], where the qiis partial charge of atom i, dijis spatial distance between atoms i and j, εij=(εiiεjj)1/2 is the potential well of atom pair i–j[33], Dij=(ChDii+ChDjj)/2 indicates the van der Waals contact distance of atom pair i–j[34], and Siand ρiare the solvent accessible surface area and hydrophobicity of atom i[35,36].Here, chlorobenzene was used as an example to illustrate the process of generating molecular descriptors. As shown inFig. 1, the 2D molecular structure of chlorobenzene was automatically converted to 3D conformation using CORINA program [37], and the coarse-grained 3D conformation was then minimized with the MM2 force field [38] to achieve its energetic minimum. Subsequently, the electrostatic, steric and hydrophobic potentials were calculated for the chlorobenzene based on its minimized 3D structure. The chlorobenzene contains five hydrogen atoms, six carbon atoms and a chlorine atom, corresponding to classes I, II and V, respectively. The combination of classes I, II and V presents six possibilities, that is, I–I, I–II, I–V, II–II, II–V and V–V. Here, the chlorobenzene is unable to define the V–V combination since it has only one atom (chlorine atom) belonging to the class V. Therefore, five descriptors were finally generated for each nonbonded term, totally resulting in 15 non-zero nonbonded descriptors for the chlorobenzene molecule.Seven sophisticated machine learning methods, including three linear and four nonlinear methods, namely, multivariable linear regression (MLR) [39], partial least squares (PLS) regression [40], back-propagation artificial neural network (BPANN) [41], support vector machine (SVM) [42], least square-support vector machine (LSSVM) [43], random forest (RF) [44] and Gaussian process (GP) [45,46], were employed here to perform statistical modeling. Here, a coarse-grained grid-searching scheme using root-mean-square error of cross-validation as the objective function was carried out to determine the optimum combination of model parameters.Matlab toolboxes of ChemoAC_MLR, ChemoAC_PLS, NNET, SVMKM, LSSVMlab, RFTX and GPML were used to implement MLR, PLS, BPANN, SVM, LSSVM, RF and GP modeling, respectively.The statistical quality of built regression models is measured using the coefficients of determination of fitting (rf2) and 10-fold cross-validation (rc2) on training set, the coefficients of determination of prediction (rp2) on test set, and modified rp2[47–49].(1)rf2=1−∑i=1n(yi−y^ifit)2∑i=1n(yi−y¯tr)2(2)rc2=1−∑i=1n(yi−y^icv)2∑i=1n(yi−y¯tr)2(3)rp2=1−∑i=1m(yi−y^ipred)2∑i=1m(yi−y¯te)2(4)rm2=rp2×(1−rp2−r02)where n and m are the sample numbers of training and test sets, respectively; yiis the experimentally determined pEC50 value of sample i;y¯trandy¯teare the mean values of all yiin training and test sets, respectively;y^ifit,y^icv, andy^iprdare the estimated pEC50 values for sample i by fitting, cross-validation and prediction, respectively; r02 is squared correlation coefficient between the observed and predicted values of the test samples with intercept set to zero.The tested compounds, including one substituted benzene, one substituted aniline and two substituted phenols, were purchased from Shanghai Chemical Reagent Co., China (analytical reagent grade). The algal strain S. obliquus was used to perform the inhibition test that was conducted according to the OECD guidelines for the testing of chemicals. The culture was maintained in a liquid medium, prepared as described in Lu et al. [10]. In logarithmic growing period, the algae were incubated with the tested compound under a continuous light for 48h. The initial alga concentration in the culture is about 2×104 cells/ml. Algal growth was monitored using electron microscope.Data were handled according to Chao et al. [50] Briefly, the equation μ=ln(Nt/N0)/48 was used, where μ is the algal average growth rate, and N0 and Ntare the initial cell concentration and the cell concentration after being cultured for 48h, respectively. The inhibition rate was calculated as I=(μb−μt)/μb×100%, where μband μtare the algal average growth rate of the control and that under exposure of compounds, respectively. The EC50 values were determined through one variable linear regression analysis of compound concentrations and the inhibition rates as the relative toxic potency for each single chemical.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Nonbonded interactions are known to dominate various molecular behaviors such as recognition and interaction [63,64]. A new alignment-free 3D-QSTR method was proposed in this study to characterize the nonbonded interaction profile of organic molecules, which was then employed to parameterize the molecular structure properties of hundreds of organic contaminants retrieved from various literatures and publicly available source. The obtained structural descriptors were correlated with experimental acute toxicities of these contaminants to diverse algae species by using seven machine learning methods. Two nonlinear models built using SVM and GP showed both high fitting ability and strong predictive power. Subsequently, the best GP model was employed to screen a virtual compound pool that contains 1024 randomly generated substituted benzenes. As a result, ten compounds were identified as promising candidates that may cause severe acute toxicity to algae, from which four compounds were assayed to confirm their significant toxic effect on the algal species S. obliquus.There was no conflict of interest.