@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Scalp EEG brain functional connectivity networks in pediatric epilepsy

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Introducing a new data driven graph theory-based methodology for constructing brain functional connectivity networks.Proposing a decision support system for pediatric epilepsy diagnosis.Developing a framework to assess the functional connectivity networks alterations using scalp EEG time series.Evaluation of graph theory measures of brain functional connectivity in pediatric epilepsy diagnosis.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Epilepsy,Functional connectivity,Graph theory,Pediatric,Scalp EEG,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study establishes a new data-driven approach to brain functional connectivity networks using scalp EEG recordings for classifying pediatric subjects with epilepsy from pediatric controls. Graph theory is explored on the functional connectivity networks of individuals where three different sets of topological features were defined and extracted for a thorough assessment of the two groups. The rater’s opinion on the diagnosis could also be taken into consideration when deploying the general linear model (GLM) for feature selection in order to optimize classification. Results demonstrate the existence of statistically significant (p<0.05) changes in the functional connectivity of patients with epilepsy compared to those of control subjects. Furthermore, clustering results demonstrate the ability to discriminate pediatric epilepsy patients from control subjects with an initial accuracy of 87.5%, prior to initiating the feature selection process and without taking into consideration the clinical rater’s opinion. Otherwise, leave-one-out cross validation (LOOCV) showed a significant increase in the classification accuracy to 96.87% in epilepsy diagnosis.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) estimates that more than 2.3 million adults and half a million children in the United States are affected by Epilepsy [13], which is characterized by the occurrences of recurrent seizures with unknown causes. This number is projected to dramatically increase every year with 0.15 million newly diagnosed epilepsy cases [19]. Although the impact of seizures varies from person to person, physical and mental functions of the affected person could be severely altered. A systematic approach in diagnosing epilepsy could improve the planning of the treatment process. Scalp electroencephalography (EEG) has been widely perceived as an effective tool for non-invasive brain studies in patients with epilepsy. Scalp EEG has gained significant prominence for assessing brain function in patients with different neurological disorders, among them epilepsy. These include surveying the response of the brain under the influence of drug therapies [4,38,44], source localization of epileptic seizures which exploits techniques in the time/frequency domains for analysis of individual EEG electrode recordings [2,3], to name a few. Assessment of functional connectivity network (FCN) in patients suffering with various neurological disorders (e.g. Epilepsy in our study) through modalities such as EEG recording has elicited new findings in ways of underlying distinctions that delineate epileptic from control populations [4,10,21,32,36,43,44,46].The high temporal resolution of EEG renders it an indispensable tool in the primary diagnosis of epilepsy and in the visualization of characteristic temporal events like interictal spikes which are closely associated with epileptic foci [10,31]. Additionally, EEG has been utilized to distinguish focal and generalized neurophysiologic correlates of epilepsy [7]. However, visual inspection and interpretation of continuous temporal EEG recordings is tedious, time consuming and prone to human error. Furthermore, epilepsy diagnosis based on visual inspection of EEG has been shown to be very subjective to the expert opinion [32]. This has led to the general cohort of adopting various automated techniques for diagnosing epilepsy. Artificial neural network (ANN) based classifiers have received the most attention towards epilepsy diagnosis using scalp EEG recordings [11,26,48–50,60]. The general routine of ANN based techniques is to process each isolated EEG signal with the aim of extracting a set of discriminating features as input to train an ANN in the design of an optimal classifier and predictor of the diagnosis.Although conventional techniques offer a promising success rate in characterizing and classifying population groups, they suffer from various drawbacks. Epilepsy being a complex disease with multifactorial causes makes the diagnostic process much more complicated than simply relying on a training model. The need of a training phase for extracting discriminating features forces the models to be constrained in their applications to specialized cases, limiting their potential for generalization as more cases are treated. Also, performance trade-off between classifier metrics like sensitivity and specificity has to be considered for choosing the optimal model parameter.Feature based techniques tend to oversimplify the fact that human brain includes a complex web of neuronal interconnectivity and discrete anatomical regions that function together to generate brain activity [36]. This underlying brain infrastructure suggests that solutions to the diagnosis of epilepsy need to consider the whole brain functional connectivity network (FCN). Thus, FCN seeks to define a pattern of cross-correlation between discrete functionally characterized brain regions to give statistical importance to anatomical connectivity and subsequently determining inter-regional neurophysiological inferences [21,22,45]. The connectivity model utilized in the study to construct FCN is based on the strength of correlation that exists among scalp EEG time series.Connectivity assessment based on Pearson correlation coefficient is well defined for evaluating the inter connectivity among cortical brain regions in the form of time series [14,28,53]. Introducing graph theory applications to the field provided a more systematic infrastructure to compare brain networks with different conditions; however, care is required to be given in selecting the right protocol to hypothesize the existence of a connection between brain regions and in applying graph theory based strategies to reduce bias [47]. Different applications of graph theory and small world networks [13], with causality analysis combined with network analysis [45,55] and frequency coupling detection among isolated scalp EEG recordings [22]and electrocorticographic (ECoG) [34] are a few of the widely used model-based solutions for studying functional connectivity networks of brain using scalp EEG recordings. Spectral analysis of brain connectivity in frequency domain supported the importance of association among brain cortical regions in predicting epilepsy [16,17]. However, the dynamic multi-causal characteristics of epilepsy and seizure activities requires the connectivity analysis to be performed in the time domain as well [35] to evaluate the transient changes in the pattern of connectivity among brain regions.With the exponential increase in the number of connectivity studies in patients with epilepsy, different changes in the topology of the FCN constructed using different network measurements were reported, however few studies [23,58] examine the changes in FCN’s of pediatric populations. The other important reason to focus on this population was the finding in [12] which supports that regular treatment of epilepsy may or may not treat childhood epilepsy. Epilepsy diagnosis in pediatric population is critical as most focal epilepsy has their onset during childhood and adolescence. The study objective was then first placed on introducing a novel technique to construct functional connectivity networks in pediatric population. The technique was developed based on finding a geometrical relation among the time series of non-invasive scalp EEG. Graph theory based measurements of network topology were then applied in a systematic approach to develop data-driven solutions for pediatric epilepsy diagnosis. Moreover, the data-driven approach introduced here involves no training phase in its development to classify patients with epilepsy from controls.16 Children (7 pediatric control (PC) patients and 9 pediatric epilepsy (PE) patients) were recruited for this study. Scalp EEG obtained with varying sampling frequencies of 200Hz, 500Hz and 512Hz from control subjects (4 males and 3 females) and subjects with epilepsy (5 males and 4 females) were recorded using the 10–20 electrode placement system with a referential montage. The raw digital EEG data used one reference electrode located in the midline of the scalp based on the 10/20 system. The electrode recordings were then referenced to the average of all referential recordings. The resting state data was collected from routine EEG recordings from epileptic patients and controls, without the imposition of long recording sessions. The EEG recordings for the study were recorded from both patients with epilepsy and controls were performed for screening purposes and none of the patients with epilepsy were taking medication at the time of the recordings. For an unbiased comparison of files, the segments from the patients with epilepsy were extracted from sections that do not include the seizure event, which may or may not contain abnormal discharges. Recordings were performed at Miami Children’s Hospital, Miami, Florida, USA, using XLTEK Neuroworks Ver. 3.0.5 equipment. The file segments from patients with epilepsy were only interictal (i.e. without seizure activity). The lengths of EEG epochs free of artifacts were varied from 9s to 90s. The choice of 9s as the minimum segment size for this study followed the recommendation of [56] in segmenting the EEG signals in the studies focused on epileptic seizures.Table 1 summarizes the demographic characteristics of study subjects. The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board and consent forms were provided to the patients or legal representatives.Continuous recorded data were digitized using an internal 22bit analog to digital (A/D) converter and pre-processed to attenuate the effect of unwanted sources in the signal. Eye movement, muscle artifacts, eye blinks, electromyography (EMG) and electrocardiography (ECG) were labeled for artifact rejection purposes through implementation of blind source separation artifact removal [30] by Independent Component Analysis (ICA).Fig. 1 outlines the main steps involved in the design of the automated decision support system to cluster a group of subjects into two categories (controls vs. patients with epilepsy).The primary aim of the “Functional Connectivity Network Construction” block depicted in Fig. 1 was to determine the pattern of functional communication among isolated channels to establish a brain state. Functional connectivity among brain regions is another layer of defining an association between cortical areas rather than the structural connectivity. Structural connectivity is based on inspecting the existence of direct medium among brain regions found by structural imaging. Functional connectivity as defined in this study is based on the association among the EEG recordings across the brain cortical regions.A variety of measures exist for defining the association among two time-series of neurophysiological signals [39]. Metrics such as time domain cross-correlation [35], Phase lag index [17], synchronization likelihood [16] have been widely applied. Measures based on cosine similarity which is a normalized inner product are also widely accepted and applied in natural language processing and in information retrieval of text documents [29] and multi-channel biological signals [57]. It is also shown that inner product based measurements e.g. cosine similarity is computationally efficient in its applications involving high dimensional sparse data [15,20,52]. The use of more sophisticated and non-linear measures which are not based on simple cross-correlation would be definitely an option; however it is shown that almost similar efficiency was achieved with both linear and non-linear measures of mutual association among multi-channel signals when analysis of ictal and interictal biological signals is performed in epilepsy research [5,37,42].To construct the FCN, each electrode recording is assigned to a vector in discrete time domain denoted asxi→;i=1,2,…,mwhere m is the number of electrodes. These vectors thus represent the EEG signals in subject space, and their quantities at each time step are the corresponding magnitude of the signal at that time dimension. The dimension varies across subjects depending on the length of the recording. A pairwise geometrical distanceθij;i,j=1,2,…,mwas defined as in Eq. (1) to serve as a metric in order to describe the extent by which the recordings of a pair of electrodes share mutual information in the current brain functional state.(1)θij=π−cos−1(xi.xj||xi||||xj||)i,j=1,…,mThis equation is essentially a distance measure calculated as a cosine similarity measure. Distances were normalized into[0,π/2]range to give a more sensible definition of vector co-variations in a geometrical context. Distance of0radcorresponds to maximum correlation among two vectors whileπ/2radimplies that the vectors are orthogonal and thus uncorrelated.Adjacency matrices are created by concatenating all the pairwise distancesθijfor each subject in a two-dimensional array, as shown in Eq. (2).(2)ASn=[θij];i,j=1,…,mThe adjacency matrix for subjectn;n=1,2,…,Nis denoted byASn. Adjacency matrices are thus one form for introducing the next level of automation in epilepsy classification based on graph analysis of FCN using scalp EEG measurements.Pairwise relations between objects could be mathematically modeled and studied in terms of a graph. Nodes of the graph refer to the electrodes used to record EEG signals and their location in graph is determined from the coordinates in the 10–20 EEG electrode placement system. An edge is defined as the pairwise relation connecting a pair of nodes (electrodes in the context of the study). Pairwise angles which make up the adjacency matrix are termed as weights of graph edges for the study. The graph as defined here is an undirected form of FCN. A graph may not include edges among pair of nodes when there is no communication between them.Graph theoretical analyses of multi-channel EEG have been evaluated for different schemes of complex brain networks affected by epilepsy [40,41,45,46,51], emphasizing that small world network model of the brain function could be altered by epilepsy. To automatically cluster the group of subjects into epileptic or controls using the network graph(GSn;n=1,2,…,N)as defined from their adjacency matrices, a subset of topological features [8] were extracted from the network graph.Table 2 lists all the features extracted from the network graphs for each subject. Features given in Table 2 describe density-related, distance-based and spectral features. A vectorfSn→with its elements defined as the abbreviated features listed in Table 2 has been assigned to each subject in the following form:(3)fSn→=[ldadndegadnnaccabcawccrcmsmacge]n=1,…,NThe final step of the classification system based on graph features extracted from FCN as presented in Fig. 1 involves the use of the K-means clustering technique [27]. K-means clustering technique partitions the observation vectors(fSj;j=1,2,…,N)intoK=2clusters such that each observation belongs to the cluster with the closest mean. In mathematical terms, the algorithm tries to partition the N feature vectors (one vector per subject) into 2 classesCi;i=1,2so as to iteratively minimize the within class sum of squared differences, over all classes defined as in Eq. (4)(4)argminC∑i=12∑fSn∈Ci||fSn→−μi2||i=1,2;n=1,…,NwherefSn→refers to the feature vector assigned to subject Sn andμiis the centroid vector assigned to the classCi. The difference between the feature vectorfSn→and the centroid vectorμiindicates the point-to-cluster centroid distance.The proposed algorithm as described earlier in Fig. 1 has the option to incorporate rater into the decision making process by adding a Sequential Feature Selection (SFS) block before the K-means clustering process. SFS fulfills two tasks: (1) it helps reduce the dimensionality of the observation vectors and therefore alleviating the computational burden of the algorithm; and when available (2) it integrate the rater’s opinion into the decision making process.The rule of thumb is that classification accuracy increases with increasing number of features involved, but eventually a larger number of features could decrease the accuracy due to small sample size relative to the number of extracted features [24,25]. Non-parametric classifiers may be more prone to presence of correlation among features, however correlated features requires more computation resources and add complexity to the training phase of pattern discovery.Fig. 2 displays the pairwise correlation coefficients between each pair of features extracted from the graph representing FCN of each subject. Correlation coefficient is calculated and color-coded from the matrix whose rows were study subjects and columns are graph measures. Analyzing correlation coefficients suggests the high dependencies among most of the features which could lead to the curse of dimensionality issue. To overcome this situation, SFS block based on General Linear Model (GLM) [1,9,33] subject to existence of clinical priori diagnosis was added to rank the features with their importance to the classification process.The GLM-SFS process consists of first assigning a binary numeral to each subject based on the rater’s opinion. The rater opinion is considered as the results of the screening process performed based on the clinical assessments. A binary numeral of ‘1’ signifies that the subject is a patient with epilepsy whereas a ‘0’ represents a subject from the control group. AN×1logical vectorR→is thus generated for all N subjects to be used in a GLM-based Sequential Feature Selection (SFS). A solution is one that fits a GLM using all features as the model repressors to the responseR→as in Eq. (5). SFS then searches over all possible subsets of features and chooses the subset which gives the most accurate response in terms of mean square error.(5)R→=FSN×W+εIn this case,FSNis a14×Nmatrix comprising the N vectorsfSn→;n=1,…,Nderived earlier in Eq. (3), and W are the weights to be estimated so as to minimize the error ε. The number of subjects involved in the study is represented by N.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
