@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Assembly unit partitioning for hull structure in shipbuilding

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A hull assembly model based on the attributed connection oriented graph is presented.Using the fuzzy assessment rule to establish the assembly relation matrix of hull.The fuzzy cluster method to analyze partition of assembly units is given out.To establish evaluation model on assembly ability of hull.Using the fuzzy synthetic evaluation to decide the optimal partitioning scheme.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Hull assembly,Assembly unit partitioning,Assembly model,Fuzzy clustering,Fuzzy synthetic evaluation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In order to solve the problem that low automatic degree to the block assembly process design will negatively influence construction cycle time and construction quality in shipbuilding, this paper presents a newly developed determination system of assembly units for the hull structure. Firstly, the assembly information model of a hull block which includes the part information and the linkage information between parts is proposed following the structural features and assembly process of the hull structure. Secondly, the assembly relation matrix is established on the basis of the fuzzy assessment rule and then the fuzzy clustering method to analyze partition of assembly units is given out. Thirdly, through analyzing the assembly ability of hull structures, the set of evaluating indexes is founded whose weights are decided by an analytic hierarchy process (AHP). Meanwhile, the model for the assessment is provided by fuzzy synthetic evaluation (FSE) and the comprehensive assessment values of assembly partition schemes can be computed to judge the final optimization scheme. A block assembly is taken as an example to verify the proposed method, and the results show that it is an effective method for solving the partition problem of hull structures.Lλ=0.8=0.694×1.0+0.723×0.8+0.704×0.6+0.354×0.4+0.066×0.20.694+0.723+0.704+0.354+0.066=0.7279.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A ship is a huge structure which is constructed by a large number of hull structural parts through welding operation. To maximally utilize the process commonality, expand the work areas and improve the work conditions, the ship assembly abides by the principles of work-package breakdown in modern shipbuilding. The ship hull is divided into hundreds of building blocks (e.g. about 200 building blocks in the case of the 300000 ton VLCC), blocks are further segmented into of several unit blocks which can consist of two or more mid-assemblies and subassemblies. A mid-assembly is composed of a few subassemblies, and a subassembly consists of steel plates and sections. Considering the bottom-up assembly procedure, the levels of hull structure assembly to assemble steel plates and sections into the final hull should be classified into subassembly level, mid-assembly level, unit block assembly level, block assembly level and final hull assembly level. An assembly unit is a finished product at each assembly level and is used as a component part at the next level  [1–3].In assembly unit construction, since every unit is assembled by welding steel plate and sections with various sizes and shapes, determination of assembly units is very difficult, and it is still realized manually depending on the experiences and know-how of assembly engineers. So it is very important to realize the automation of assembly unit partitioning by means of concluding the experiences of skilled assembly engineers to form an effective decision method, and which can reduce cost, improve quality, and raise the productivity.To reduce the number of independent parts or components in assembly sequence planning of complex mechanical products, the subassembly identification and extraction is widely studied by many researchers  [4,5]. From the literatures, we can see that there are some basic methods for subassembly formation, such as the interactive component disassembly method, the “set-cut” method, and the relationship-map method. These methods establish the fundamentals for the automation of the assembly units partitioning, but they have some own disadvantages in actual production activities. The interactive component disassembly method is mainly concerned about formulating a necessary and sufficient set of questions to be answered by the human designer and is the relatively low degree of automation  [6]. The “cut-set” method can generate all possible subassemblies of a product in theory, but this method always suffers from ‘state explosion’ with the increasing number of parts  [7,8]. The relationship-map method employs the connection matrix on the assembly liaison graph to generate all geometrical feasible assembly units, but the method could lead to a complex matrix calculation that makes it difficult to generate an effective result  [9,10].In recent years, many scholars pay more attention to the exact assembly modeling method and mathematical subassembly patterns to implement a fully automated partition system. Wang et al.  [11] pointed that the assembly constraints including the topological, geometrical, and process constraints should be considered and merged into the assembly model for the more effective subassembly identification. Xing et al.  [12] presented an assembly modeling with adjacency matrix and three subassembly patterns, which are described by mathematical equations, respectively. And then the assembly tree can be created through selecting different subassemblies detected from the adjacency matrix and other constrains. Gao et al.  [13] used a method of gray clustering based on gray system theory to perform subassembly identification. In this method, the clustered objects are part pairs with adjacency relation in a product, and the clustering indices consist of energy consumption of disassembly, disassembly time, disassembly direction and diameter of part pair. Jeonghan et al.  [14] used the liaison graph of a product assembly to represent the assembly and subassemblies, and then they presented mixed-integer programming to model the partition of the assembly graph. Zhang et al.  [15] used the aircraft assembly tree of type hierarchy to represent the main structure of assembly, and then they presented a fuzzy-clustering algorithm to find the desired disassembly scheme on the objects which are not included in main structure.Although these scholars made great progress on generating assembly units, the proposed methods are not universal for all products and need sufficient domain-specific knowledge. As a result, the above methods are not suitable for shipbuilding because of their limits. Firstly, these methods emphasized the geometrical constraints and mechanical assembly process constraints, but the linkage characteristics between two components and design characteristics of a part within the welding structure were not considered. Secondly, the subassembly identification is NP-complete in mathematics and the computational efficiency of the algorithm mentioned above is still not satisfactory. Meanwhile, the computing result of each algorithm is unique and difficult to adjust according to change of production condition. Thirdly, the obtained assembly schemes can only match the assembly relationship in a product structure and lack the systematic analysis based on the assembly ability of products. Therefore, this paper presents the linkage graph model of a hull block which includes the part information and linkage information through considering the various assembly constraints for hull assembly. On the basis of the assembly model, a new assembly unit partition method is proposed to automatically gain decomposition schemes of the hull assembly structure based on the fuzzy clustering. All the feasible partition schemes are easily obtained through adjusting the threshold of fuzzy cut matrix. Furthermore, to effectively evaluate the generated partition schemes, we establish the assembly ability criterion and give the assembly ability evaluating method based on FSE.The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In Section  2, we establish the framework of the solution. In Section  3, we present the representation method of block assembly information. A block partition method based on the fuzzy clustering is provided in Section  4. In Section  5, we present the evaluation method of assembly unit partition scheme based on FSE. In Section  6, we present a case of a block partition to show how to model, analyze and evaluate the system. Conclusions are given in Section  7.The assembly unit partitioning in a shipyard defines the work strategy for the ship. In this process, the designer decides how to build the ship from the numerous hull parts available. Determination of appropriate assembly units makes the process of hull assembly more flexible, easier and faster. At present, this work is done manually by some skilled engineers in the production planning stage. However, because of time pressures and the limited know-how of designers, only a very few partitioning schemes can be optimized in the actual shipbuilding activities.In this research, we build a decision system for assembly unit partition based on fuzzy mathematics. The overall system framework is shown in Fig. 1. First, BOM (bill of materials) data of the block model are extracted from the shipbuilding computer-aided design (CAD) system, with which the information of parts and the relations between parts are defined in the interface program. With the assembly model defined, we present a fuzzy clustering method to determine the assembly unit. For the existence of multiple feasible assembly schemes, we use the FSE method to select an optimal assembly unit partitioning scheme. Finally, the optimal assembly unit partitioning scheme will be input to the shipbuilding CAPP system in which the assembly sequences at each assembly level and welding process planning on these units should be decided.To enable automated assembly unit partitioning, all the related product information should be organized and represented as the product assembly model within a computer. In the traditional assembly model, a product is generally described by liaison graph proposed by De Fazio and Whitney  [16]. The graph can be easily established by extracting the required information from the CAD models directly or/and indirectly, but it is designed to represent only geometric assembly information and assembly process information. Some partitions could be feasible from a geometric and process point of view for a mechanical product, but are impractical due to the special properties of part and connection within a welding structure. To support the decision and evaluation of good assembly partition plans and assembly process plans for the hull, the assembly representation used in this research integrates both geometric and non-geometrical assembly data and is represented in the form of an attributed connection oriented graph, which is termed the block assembly information model (BAIM).This paper defines the BAIM as a 2-tupleBAIM=〈N,E〉.Where:Nrepresents a set of nodes,Erepresents a set of edges. Each node is defined as a part of a block and each edge is defined as the geometric relation between two parts. The corresponding attributes meanings of the node and edge in BAIM are defined as follows:(1) The attributes information of a node includes part number, part name, part type, corresponding block number, part area, part material, part gravity, number of parts connected to it, characteristic value of part base and so on.The characteristic value of a part base is the very important non-geometrical information and it is determined by part area, part gravity and number of parts connected to the part. The characteristic value of theith part base which is definedPbican be described as:(1)Pbi=α⋅ai∑(a1,a2,…,ai,…,an)+β⋅qi∑(q1,q2,…,qi,…,qn)+δ⋅li∑(l1,l2,…,li,…,ln)whereaiis the area of theith part,qiis the mass of theith part,liis the number of parts connected to theith part,α,βandδis the relatively weight of each aspect respectively and its value is most suitable to chooseα=0.5,β=0.2andδ=0.3according to expert’s experience,nis the number of parts in a block.If a part area is larger, its mass is heavier and its connected parts are more, then its characteristic value will be greater. The inclusion of non-geometrical information helps to reduce the explosion of possible solutions.(2) The attributes information of an edge includes link number, corresponding block number, the source node number of the link, the destination node number of the link, link direction, link type, link length and so on.The link type is classified into five categories as shown in Fig. 2, which is the Face-to-Edge type, the Edge-to-Edge type, the door penetration type, the collar plate penetration type and the watertight penetration type respectively.The link direction is defined a special coordinate as shown in Fig. 3, which includes six directions such as Head, Tail, Top, Bottom, Out and In. In order to justify the direction of a link, this paper defines the direction of a directed edge correspond to the coordinate. In a link edge, if a part has the higher characteristic value than the other, then it is the source node and the other is destination node. The direction of a directed edge is from the source node to destination node  [17–19]. We can further justify the connection direction of welding posture according to its linkage direction.In modern shipbuilding activities, hull assembly unit partition is mainly realized manually depending on the experiments and know-how of assembly engineers. In the process of assembly process design, the assembly unit partition mainly focuses on the rationality of part connections without limiting the design function. To evaluate the rationality of part connection, assembly engineers often consider some assessment rules which often own fuzzy characteristics, such as difficulties of assembly adjustment, work efficiency influence of welding posture, work influence of crane turning process, etc. Therefore, this paper introduced some notions and theories in fuzzy mathematics to the assembly unit partition in shipbuilding.AssumeP={pi|i=1,2,…,N}, represents the part set of each block. It means that a block consists ofNparts andpiis theith part in a block. SinceMrelated factors determine the rationality of connection for a part, every part can be defined a set ofMelements, as expressed withpi=(pi1,pi2,…,pim). The direct product can be defined as:(2)P×P={(pi,pj)|pi∈P,pj∈P}.The fuzzy relationshipR∼is defined as the subset inP×P, its membership function is a form of binary function and can be expressed as:(3)uR(pi,pj):P×P→[0,1].In this paper the fuzzy relationshipR∼can be used to evaluate the rationality of connection during the assembly partition and the membership functionuR(pi,pj)represents the measurements of the rationality. A largeruR(pi,pj)indicates better rationality, while a smalleruR(pi,pj)expresses the worse rationality. If a value ofuR(pi,pj)is zero, then it means that there is no relationship betweenpiandpj. Therefore, the fuzzy phenomenon of assembly unit partition can be described by the fuzzy relationships and the fuzzy relation expression can also be transformed into a reasonable fuzzy relation matrix.In order to get the membership function value in establishing fuzzy relation matrix, it is necessary to consider the accumulated experiences and professional assembly knowledge of the shipbuilding engineers. In this research, we selected the subjective assessment method to determine membership grade. Also, in order to avoid any influence of personal preference, the final result value is given by an average of several experts’ overall opinions.The fuzzy matrix which is gained according to the above method accords with the definition of similarity fuzzy relationship. So, it owns the reflexivity which is expressed asuR(pi,pi)=1,∀pi∈P, and the characteristic indicates that a part owns the most tight connection with itself. It also owns the symmetry which is expressed asuR(pi,pj)=uR(pj,pi),∀pi∈P,∀pj∈Pand indicates that there is no relationship between the connection rationality and the connective directions.In order to compute the rationality of the different connection type, the rule-based expert system has been developed for determining automatically membership grade based on the information of BAIM. The following are some examples of rules.Rule 1:if (there is no connection betweenpiwithpj) then, (uR(pi,pj)=0).if (Connection Type is edge-to-edge) and (Bothpiandpjare plates), then(uR(pi,pj)=0.9).if (Connection Type is face-to-edge) and (piis a stiffener,pjis a plate) then(uR(pi,pj)=0.8).if (Connection Type is face-to-edge) and (Bothpiandpjare plates) and (Connection direction is bottom), then(uR(pi,pj)=0.7).if (Connection Type is face-to-edge) and (Bothpiandpjare plates) and (Connection direction is Vertical), then(uR(pi,pj)=0.6).if (Connection Type is Through) and (piis a stiffener,pjis a plate), then(uR(pi,pj)=0.5).if (Connection Type is face-to-edge) and (Bothpiandpjare plates) and (Connection direction is top), then(uR(pi,pj)=0.4)if (there is the connection betweenpiwithpi), then(uR(pi,pi)=1).Only a set accords with the fuzzy equivalent relation, it can be realized its subset partition according to the fuzzy mathematics. However, a fuzzy relation matrix which is gained through above method can only meet the request of reflexivity and symmetry without transitivity. Therefore, this matrix is a similarity relation but not an equivalent relation and it must be transformed into the fuzzy equivalence matrix through the transitive closure method  [20,21].The transitive closure is used to compute fuzzy equivalence matrix from a given fuzzy similarity matrix. Given a fuzzy similarity matrixR, its transitive closureb(R)is computed by matrix multiplication of max–min composition. According to the necessary and sufficient condition that a matrix is the fuzzy equivalent matrix,b(R)is calculated as:R→R2→R4→⋯toR2k=Rk∘Rk, at this time,Rkis a fuzzy equivalent matrix.AfterRKhas been determined, a general equivalent relationRλwhich is calledλ-level cut matrix is concluded by the given threshold valueλ∈[0,1]. Since theRKis a fuzzy equivalent relation,Rλshould be an equivalent relation. The granularity of set divisions can be easily controlled through adjusting the valueλ. Asλ=0,Rλpartitionsmfuzzy data sequences into one cluster. On the contrary,Rλcommonly partitionsmfuzzy data sequences intomclusters whenλ=1. If0≤λ1≤λ2≤1, each part divided formRλ2should be a subset ofRλ1. So the division method onRλ2is a process to further partitioning the set ofRλ1, which makes assembly unit partition of hull quite flexible and offers a great convenience for hull designers to put forward the best scheme  [22,23]. In assembly unit partition, the value ofλcannot be arbitrarily determined and should be selected based on the results of the trial on different value.In the above method, the granularity of assembly unit sets can be controlled by adjusting the values ofλ. Thus, the result of division is not unique. From the construction point of view, shipbuilding enterprises should establish some evaluation rules of assembly ability to find an optimal partition scheme according to the characteristics of their own products, production conditions and shipbuilding process level. In order to evaluate effectively the assembly unit partitioning schemes, some judgment principles are presented as follows:(1) Welding process ruleWelding is the main assembly process in whole block erection. Therefore, some key process rules must be considered when we decide the division scheme of a block. Firstly, the connection interface between two subassemblies should be suitable to the welding operation in order to decrease welding time and operation difficulty. Secondly, each subassembly should have the rational structure and is rigid enough to hoist and transport. Thirdly, up-welding operation should be decreased as much as possible because it will waste the assembly time and enhance the welding difficulty.(2) Welding resources utilization ruleIn the shipbuilding shops that handle the heavy and bulky blocks or subassemblies, it is necessary to use crane which is expensive material-handling equipment. Because the space equipped with such facilities is typically limited and bottlenecked, the subassemblies should be restricted with its dimension and weight.Welding operation is continued assembly procedure and usually uses high-effect and precise welding equipments which usually are bottleneck resources. Therefore, division schemes of a block should fit to use the most suitable equipment of efficiency improvement among several idle ones to reasonably allocate the resources and improve the utilization rate.Each block or subassembly assigned to assembly occupies the space of the workshop while it is being built. Hence the total area occupied by the subassemblies assigned to assemble should not exceed the area of idle working area at any day in the planning horizon.(3) Workload equilibrium ruleSince lean ship production requires a continuous and uniform process flow, build strategies must be established and followed which reflect the proper work breakdown, especially block breakdown. In this regard, the block division should be consistent with the following two considerations to balance and coordinate the workload of different operation lines. The first is maximum use of group technology (GT) advantages. Subassemblies need to have similarities in geometry, size and welding type, while subassemblies will be assigned to a family grouping after division of a block. The second is the control of production rhythm which is facilitative to keep a continuous and uniform work flow within manufacturing levels.(4) Related process influence ruleThe main operation for block assembly is the welding operation. In addition, there are outfitting and painting processes in a whole block production procedure. To extend the work area and decrease the outfitting operations in the dock, we should ensure that the outfitting parts are installed in a relatively early stage of block assembly and given more assembly room at the block division. Also, the damage on painting face during the block assembly should be diminished to the minimum.Based on the above analysis, we established the multi-layer fuzzy decision model which is depicted in Fig. 4.The model includes four object layers which are candidate layer, criterion layer, factor layer and objective layer from the bottom up. The candidate layer consists of division schemes about a block breakdown. The criterion layer and factor layer consists of assessment facts following the hierarchy criteria derived from the above judgment principles. The objective layer will gain the optimization result through calculating the acceptance grades of division schemes based on the evaluation method described below  [24–27].The main concern in assembly unit decision is that decision problems contain multiple criteria, which are uncertain and often conflicting. So it is difficult for a decision-maker to provide exact judgment based on the method of qualitative analysis. To deal with such a fuzzy multiple criteria decision-making problem, this paper uses the FSE approach for selecting the most appropriate block partition scheme. The sensitivity of the FSE is quite high compared to other index evaluation techniques and it is particularly useful in multivariable circumstances  [28,29].The procedures of FSE approach are as follows:(1) Establishment of factor setUBased on the judgment principles of block division, a rational division scheme is measured from four main aspects, including welding process(U1), welding resources utilization(U2), workload equilibrium(U3)and related process influence(U4). Then the second factor setU=[U1,U2,U3,U4]is built from the bottom up in Fig. 4. Also,Uirepresents an assessment category which synthesizes several individual factors and can be further depicted asUi=(ui1,ui2,…,uiPi|,i=1,2,…,K). After this, the first factor setU=[u1,u2,…,ui…,uN]is composed of all theuiPi, whereN=∑i=1KPi.(2) The construction of evaluation criteria setV=[v1,v2,…,vj,…,vM]WhereMis the number of evaluation criteria categories,vjis the threshold of thejth criteria category. In this study, the outputs of assessment result are classified into five levels: level 1 (very unsuitable), level 2 (unsuitable), level 3 (general), level 4 (suitable), and level 5 (very suitable). Therefore, we chooseV=[v1,v2,v3,v4,v5],M=5, and its quantitative level isV′=[0.2,0.4,0.6,0.8,1.0]. From level 1 to level 5, the importance ranges from light to heavy.(3) The establishment of membership functionsThe evaluation matrixR=(rij)M×Nis mapped from factor set to evaluation set. In the fuzzy environment,rijis the degree to which alternativevjsatisfies the factorui. It is presented by the fuzzy membership function of grade alternativevjwith respect to the factorui. The shape of membership function has a direct impact on evaluation results. Because all the factors in the model are the qualitative index and are too difficult to quantitatively compute, the evaluation sets are structured by means of subjective assessment of the technician and manager.(4) The determination of the weight setThe determination of the relative importance of each factor is one of the classical problems in multi-factor analysis. In this study, the AHP is applied, which is widely used in the determination of the relative importance of decision-making factors. The AHP is based on following steps  [30–32]:Step 1: Establish a pair-wise comparison decision matrix.The AHP makes use of a paired-comparison matrixA=(aij)n×n, in whichm=numberof criteria; and the entryaij=ratioof relative importance of factorito factorjbased on a standardized comparison scale of nine levels shown in Table 1.Step 2: Computation of index weightFirstly, the geometric mean value of each row in matrixAshould be computed followed by the Eq. (4).(4)δi¯=∏j=1naijn,i=1,2,…,n.And then the vector of geometric mean value isδ¯=(δ1¯,δ2¯,…,δn¯)T.Secondly, normalization of above results should be computed followed by the Eq. (5).(5)wi=δi¯∑i=1nδi¯,i=1,2,…,n.And then the aggregate of relatively weight of each factor isW=(w1,w2,…,wn)T.Finally, the maximal eigenvalue should be computed by the Eq. (6) to test consistency.(6)λmax=∑i=1n(AW)inwi.Where:(AW)iis theith component in vector(AW).Step 3: Test consistencyAHP must meet the requirement that matrixAis consistent. Therefore the parameter consistency index (CI) should be computed as follows:(7)CI=λmax−nn−1.Generally, the consistence test is passed whenCI≤0.1and the weight vector is then determined.(5) The calculation of the relative importance setFrom bottom to up in the Fig. 4, we can assess thePifactors in eachUito get the assessment matrixRi. Then, the first level fuzzy assessmentYican be computed by matrix multiplication as follows:(8)Yi=(yi1,yi2,…,yiK)=WiRi(i=1,2,…,K).The second level fuzzy comprehensive assessment is based on the assessment results of all theUi, so theYiis the assessment matrix of the second level. The assessment results can then be obtained:(9)B=W⊕R=W⊕[Y1Y2⋯YK]=W⊕[W1⊕R1W2⊕R2⋯WK⊕RK]=(b1,b2,…,bn).(6) The determination of the final evaluation resultWhen the relative importance setB=(b1,b2,…,bn)is given, the result of block partition assessment is determined by Eq. (10):(10)L=∑i=1kvibin/∑i=1kbin.Herenis parameter and its value is “1” or “2”.viis the value of evaluation criteria set.Fig. 5is a hopper unit block of a bulk carrier and it is composed of 28 parts. To compress the size of example matrix, the same link in BAIM can be simplified using the synthetic expression method. For example, FZ-1 stands for the synthesis of FR1, FR2, FR3 and FR4 for they are the same part type and own the same linkage type and linkage parts. Similarly, FZ-2 stands for the synthesis of FR5, FR6, FR7 and FR8, FZ-3 stands for the synthesis of FR9, FR10, FR11 and FR12, FZ-4 stands for the synthesis of FR13, FR14, FR15 and FR16, and FZ-5 stands for the synthesis of FR17, FR18, FR19 and FR20. As a result, the BAIM of Fig. 5 is shown in Fig. 6and the application is based on the phases provided in the previous section and is explained as follows.Based on the BAIM, the rule-based expert system can automatically decide the rationality measurements of the part connections. And then the fuzzy relationR∼can be figured out and expressed as Fig. 7. Because theR∼is a fuzzy similarity matrix, the transitive closure is used to compute its corresponding fuzzy equivalence matrix. As a result, the fuzzy clustering method can be used to analyze the assembly unit divisions by the fuzzy equivalence matrix. Letλ=0.5,0.7,0.8,0.9then four different dynamic divisions are obtained and their corresponding clustering tree is shown in Fig. 8.In the Fig. 8,Rλ=0.5represents the set in which all the parts in example block are combined to form one subassembly, shown as {FZ-1, DP1, DP2, FZ-2, DP3, DP4, TB1, FZ-3, TB2, FZ-4, TB3, FZ-5, TB4}:Rλ=0.7represents the set in which the example block is divided into two subassemblies, shown as {FZ-1, DP1, DP2} and {FZ-2, DP3, DP4, TB1, FZ-3, TB2, FZ-4, TB3, FZ-5, TB4};Rλ=0.8represents the set in which the example block is divided into six subassemblies, shown as {FZ-1, DP1, DP2}, {FZ-2, DP3, DP4}, {TB1, FZ-3}, {TB2, FZ-4}, {FB3, FZ-5} and {TB4};Rλ=0.9represents the set in which the example block is divided into eleven subassemblies, shown as {FZ-1}, {DP1, DP2}, {FZ-2}, {DP3, DP4}, {TB1}, {FZ-3}, {TB2}, {FZ-4}, {FB3}, {FZ-5} and {TB4}.Before establishing the judgment matrix, the actual shipbuilding conditions of a shipyard were studied and the opinion of the shipbuilding process experts was considered seriously. And then, judgment matrixAcof criterion layer is given out after pairwise comparison of the elements of this layer and weight values of each factor and its related parameter values are figured out (see Table 2) according to the method presented in Section  5.2.The consistency ratio of the pairwise comparison matrix is calculated as0<0.10. Thus, the weights are consistent and they would be used in the fuzzy comprehensive evaluation.The rest weighting vectors of factor layer’s elements may be deduced by analogy:WU1=(0.4,0.4,0.2),WU2=(0.5,0.5),WU3=(0.2,0.2,0.4,0.2),WU4=(0.33,0.33,0.33).When the data of the assessment factor are given, we can get the result of the division scheme evaluation for each scheme by following the procedure described above (see Section  5.2). Taking the scheme ofλ=0.8for example, the evaluation criteria setV′={1.0,0.8,0.6,0.4,0.2}, and membership of factor set at 5 levels is established with experts (see Table 3).When evaluation sets and weight sets are given, we can get the first level fuzzy assessmentYi, such asY1={0.72,0.84,0.72,0.32,0.0},Y2={1.0,0.8,0.4,0.2,0.0},Y3={0.32,0.68,0.96,0.56,0.16},Y4={0.73,0.66,0.73,0.33,0.07}. Similarly, the second level fuzzy assessment can be figured outB={0.694,0.723,0.704,0.354,0.066}. At last, according to Eq. (10), the assessment result is calculated by the equation given in Box I.Similarity we can get assessment results of others division schemes, such asLλ=0.7=0.6123,Lλ=0.9=0.5568,Lλ=0.5=0.2129. It is obvious that the division scheme ofλ=0.8is calculated to be the best one in three alternatives.The assembly liaison graph model has been widely used for assembly unit partition because it can apparently describe the connection relationship between parts. However, with seldom assembly constraints, the search space of subassembly identification is increasing exponentially in proportion to the number of parts. So, it is very difficult to gain the optimal partition solution if we select traditional graph search algorithms. In this research, the assembly rationality of a connection in the hull assembly liaison graph is regarded as a kind of fuzzy attribute of parts assembly relationship. Thus, the fuzzy clustering can be employed to generate the feasible partitioning schemes for shipbuilding when the fuzzy attributes are quantified with the fuzzy theory and the BAIM is translated into a fuzzy matrix. It is obvious that the assembly unit partitioning method can overcome the difficulties of “state explosion”.From the experiments, it can be seen that every partition scheme satisfies the requirements of hull assembly rationality and abides by shipbuilding strategy. That is, every partition scheme is feasible according to hull assembly process. Furthermore, if we look from the bottom up in Fig. 8, each level of the cluster tree can be considered as the further division of its bottom-level and it represents the disassembly procedure on the block. If we look from the top down, the cluster tree represents the construction procedure of the whole block which includes part assembly, subassembly, mid-assembly, unit assembly and final assembly. As a result, the clustering tree can distinctly demonstrate the product structure of a hull block.The outcomes of subassembly identification are diverse for the same hull block owing to the use of different value ofλ. The generated partition schemes should be evaluated through further considering the assembly ability on the block. However, the different production conditions and application backgrounds have different standards or criteria to evaluate the partitioning schemes. The ranking order on alternative schemes is sensitive to the weights under the uniform evaluation model. To confirm the optimal scheme achieved under a certain production condition, the human judgment method can be used to adjust weights and then sensitivity analysis was performed in which various weighting schemes were employed and the entire FSE procedure was repeated.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we presented a framework for efficient assembly unit partition in shipbuilding assembly planning. Firstly, we defined a block assembly information model based on the attributed connection oriented graph. It was shown that using the method the complex assembly relationship can be formulated graphically and major process constraints in hull structures can be expressed accurately. Secondly, in order to make the assembly unit partition automatically, we proposed a fuzzy cluster algorithm based on the assembly model and some fuzzy assessment rules. Comparing with the other subassembly extraction methods, the algorithm can easily obtain all the feasible partition schemes through adjusting the threshold of fuzzy cut matrix. Finally, the rational partition scheme of assembly unit is selected through the FSE and AHP. Thus, the final result not only matches with the assembly relations in a product structure tree, but abides by the real production condition. Through the experiments, we find that the proposed method is feasible and applicable for the shipbuilding applications.However, the work presented in this paper is just a preliminary effort in the hull assembly design. A large amount of work to make the proposed approach and system practical use is necessary. Future efforts will be required to further the research on the integration of the assembly unit partition method with the shipbuilding CAD/CAPP system. In the meantime, the rules to determine membership grade should be further extended according to the analysis of complex assembly architecture and the automatic acquisition of weights using algorithms instead of the direct input from designers is also required.