@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Suggestions for a web based universal exchange and inference language for medicine. Continuity of patient care with PCAST disaggregation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We show that the Q-UEL language can be extended to continuity of patient care.We believe that this follows the requirements of the 2010 PCAST report.Q-UEL tags have been constructed from patient records in CDA and VistA.Data elements in these tags can be disaggregated as PCAST requested.The patient data can be reaggregated rapidly by authorized persons.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Universal exchange language,PCAST report,Continuity of care,Interoperability,Electronic health record,Disaggregation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We describe here the applications of our recently proposed Q-UEL language to continuity of patient care between physicians, specialists and institutions as mediated via the Internet, giving examples derived from HL7 CDA and VistA of particular interest to workflow. Particular attention is given to the Universal Exchange Language for healthcare as requested by the US President׳s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology (PCAST) released in December 2010, especially in regard to disaggregation of the patient record on the Internet. To illustrate many features and options, one of our most elaborate configurations combining them, for disaggregation and reaggregation, is described. The Q-UEL tags used do not physically join, but query each other from a random mix via the application. Despite the computationally demanding complexity of the configuration with two joining tags for each data tag and four independently evolving keys, plus a valuable but rate limiting isomorphism test, packets of essential clinical data for patient could be recovered and displayed every 2s for a “club” of 30,000–50,000 patients in the mix. All computation here is on a standard laptop, but for practical use of the Internet to display downloaded data, the above is adequate, so focus is primarily on increasing club size. In practice, it is not necessary that a club comprise an entire nation. Assuming that one does not use purely random assignments of patients to arbitrary clubs, there could for example be a club comprising all schoolchildren in Scotland, or a club comprising all military veterans in Illinois. In such cases, one is typically dealing with clubs each of the order of a mere million patients. Using such club sizes efficiently, and in principle even a club the size of a whole country, appears to be possible.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Since records are stored and transmitted in the disaggregated state, reaggregation efficiency is important for all COC functionalities of Q-UEL, at least in the current setup. The elaborate method described above with benchmarks as in Table 1 allowed a club of 50,000 patients to be queried to obtain a basic patient summary of some 100 data elements (clinical factors), bundled into an average of 5 per attribute (“one shred” of record), in 1min. User controllable simplifications of the method raise the club size to 1–2 million patients. However, reasonable assertions in Table 2 imply that the same record could be obtained in the same time, by plausible modifications, for a club the approximate size of the US. Note that these estimates are still for an elaborate triple shred bra-ketbra-ket, rather than a double shred bra-ket or single shred braket, model, and performed on a standard laptop not interacting with a server. But however achieved, all these assertions depend, of course, on scalability. The current rate (serially querying) is scalable up to at least 3–4 million emulated patient tags (Table 1), and earlier similar configurations reached 7–9 million on 2009 generation Thinkpads though requiring extensive additional machine memory (RAM). Somewhat similar (computational order) querying, associating, graph theoretic, and processing of 6.7 million chemical structure patent records had similar performance on 2006 generation ThinkPads [65]. It is not hard to think of plausible improvements, but the tempting one of using very high performance supercomputers as servers to reaggregate and transmit encrypted results to portals would lose the “entropy protection” in transmission. This brings to mind that even PCAST-style disaggregation is not perfectly secure if tags transmitting to a reaggregating portal are somehow monitored, but that in turn suggests using the last feature of method D (Table 2). Here, an “isomorphism family” is transmitted as a kind of club, reaggregating at the portal the document of interest from that club.Because disaggregation has been made highly automatic, demonstrations are rather unimpressive. In effect, one takes a document, places it in a black box, closes the lid, opens the lid and takes out the document, albeit with a key or keys. To this may be added that any document can be shredded by splitting it into arbitrary elements, including images and scans of documents, spreadsheets, PowerPoint files, and so on. Since one need not look in the black box, it may be questioned as to why one disaggregates data elements by metadata (attributes in AML). The problem of interconverting between standards vanishes, at least as far as protection by disaggregation is concerned. The reason why it is good to “shred by metadata” is for disposing pieces of medical data to authorized stakeholders on a need-to-know basis, and for data mining the private encrypted data by authorized persons. These reflect interpretations of PCAST requirements. At this point, the question might well be raised as to what, if any, of all the above is what PCAST actually wanted. We believe that Q-UEL is compliant with what PCAST did want but it is indeed a matter of interpretation. Our interpretations do not seem far removed from those of other observers on various blogging sites, but there has been little in depth formal discussion outside of Q-UEL itself. Even the Yosemite Manifesto [19] was rather vague, and although very general “roadmaps” for implementing its proposal have appeared, the status of any subsequent progress regarding them is rather unclear to us at the time of writing [66]. Indeed, the work done and to be done is because PCAST did not define a UEL in detail, essentially saying that “there are ways of doing this” [12].It is believed that neither the authors nor the organizations to which they are affiliated will directly benefit financially directly from this publication. All aspects relating to the Q-UEL language as they are reported in this journal are unpatented and for the following purpose. Q-UEL is a research project. To the extent that it is a proposal for a universal exchange language for healthcare, Q-UEL can only be such if it, or something like it, attracts interest, can be readily or similarly reproduced to same overall effect, and be widely adopted. The authors may indirectly benefit financially in terms of consultancy and Cloud, Web, or specialist customization services for related applications as result of demonstration of their expertise and direct involvement in the field.