@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multiclassifier system with hybrid learning applied to the control of bioprosthetic hand

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Application of multiclassifier system for bioprosthetic hand control is proposed.Three multiclassifier systems using feedback information are developed.Three multiclassifier systems are compared in the static mode.Three multiclassifier systems are compared in the dynamic mode.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Bioprosthetic hand,Biosignals,Multiclassifier system,Hybrid learning,Random Reference Classifier (RRC),Feedback,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper the problem of recognition of the intended hand movements for the control of bio-prosthetic hand is addressed. The proposed method is based on recognition of electromiographic (EMG) and mechanomiographic (MMG) biosignals using a multiclassifier system (MCS) working in a two-level structure with a dynamic ensemble selection (DES) scheme and original concepts of competence function. Additionally, feedback information coming from bioprosthesis sensors on the correct/incorrect classification is applied to the adjustment of the combining mechanism during MCS operation through adaptive tuning competences of base classifiers depending on their decisions. Three MCS systems operating in decision tree structure and with different tuning algorithms are developed. In the MCS1 system, competence is uniformly allocated to each class belonging to the group indicated by the feedback signal. In the MCS2 system, the modification of competence depends on the node of decision tree at which a correct/incorrect classification is made. In the MCS3 system, the randomized model of classifier and the concept of cross-competence are used in the tuning procedure.Experimental investigations on the real data and computer-simulated procedure of generating feedback signals are performed. In these investigations classification accuracy of the MCS systems developed is compared and furthermore, the MCS systems are evaluated with respect to the effectiveness of the procedure of tuning competence. The results obtained indicate that modification of competence of base classifiers during the working phase essentially improves performance of the MCS system and that this improvement depends on the MCS system and tuning method used.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The importance of hands in a human life cannot be overestimated. It plays a role not only of a skillful manipulator which allows grasping and manipulating a variety of objects, but also of the sensor in order to determine the type of object being touched or held and when there is no light also detect the object position. A loss of even a single hand significantly reduces the human activity. A possible solution is to equip the armless patient with the prosthetic hand.At present, the construction of a multi-joint anthropomorphic mechanical structure that can copy even very complicated movements of the human hand poses no problem. Also the motion control of such a structure to accomplish defined finger postures is well known. The basic problem lies however in controlling the movement of prosthetic hands so as to enable their users to grasp and manipulate objects dexterously. This control, at the decision level, boils down essentially to recognize the intention of hand motion (the class of deliberate grasp or manipulation) on the basis of biosignals coming from the patient׳s body [1,2].Existing active prostheses of hand are generally controlled in the myoelectric way – they react to electrical signals that accompany the muscle activity (called electromyography signals – EMG signals). The control is feasible since after the amputation of the hand, there remain a significant number of the muscles in the arm stump that normally controlled the finger action. The tensing of these muscles still depends on the patient׳s will and may express her/his intentions of her/his prosthesis [3,4].Nevertheless, a reliable recognition of intended movement using only the EMG signal analysis is a serious problem. A recognition error increases along with the cardinality of movement repertoire (i.e. with prosthesis dexterity). A natural solution to overcome this error and increase the efficiency of the recognition stage may be achieved through the following actions:1.by introducing the concept of simultaneous analysis of different types of biosignals which are the carrier of information about the performed hand movement [5–7];choosing the proper signal parameterization method (accepted feature extraction method) and applying (if available) the best method to reduce the dimensionality of the feature vector (reduction/selection) [8,9];through improving the recognition method – the authors proposed to use the multiclassifier system with base classifiers dedicated to particular registered biosignals and with dynamic ensemble selection scheme [10];supporting the process of biosignal recognition by taking into account the feedback signal derived from the prosthesis sensors for the correction of combining algorithm of MCS [11,12].The efficiency of the realized control process depends on the quality of signal representation (i.e., feature vectors) subjected to recognition, i.e. quality of biosignal acquisition and analysis process, but also on the assumed number of recognized motion classes (hand gestures) and the required level of recognition reliability (wherein these values are inversely proportional to each other – the higher level of recognition reliability required the lower allowable number of recognized classes – and vice versa) [2,13].To improve the reliability and precision of control (i.e., reduce uncertainty of motion classes recognition while maintaining or even increasing the cardinality of the repertoire of motion commands), the process of classification should be supported by additional information derived from the process of prosthesis interaction with a grasped object, supplied through prosthesis sensor system. In most cases, such information relates to posture (arrangement of the fingers) and the pressure forces of the fingers on the object [14].The bioprosthesis control system developed in this study includes the above-mentioned ideas. It uses both EMG and MMG signals (according to Proposition 1) which have been subjected to a reduction procedure using the autoregressive model and the PCA method. Combination of both methods in the task of biosignal parametrization (reducing the dimensionality of the source biosignals) was already experimentally tested by the authors demonstrating high efficiency with respect to the classification accuracy [15].The multiclassifier systems (MCS) are very strongly developed, mostly because of the fact that committee, also known as ensemble, can outperform its members [16]. Currently, MC systems which are using Dynamic Ensemble Selection (DES) schemes are becoming increasingly popular [17,18]. These methods first dynamically select a subset of competent classifiers from the ensemble and then combine the selected classifiers by majority voting. In this way, a DES-based MC system takes advantage of both selection and fusion approaches.The paper is a sequel to authors׳ earlier publications [10–12,19–21] dealing with different aspects of application of multiclassifier systems to the control of bioprosthetic hand whose short characteristics are as follows. The concept of using MCS system to control the bioprosthetic hand on the basis of unimodal biosignal (EMG) was originally introduced in [19]. The application of MCS system in two-level structure using multimodal biosignals was proposed in [20], but this was a preliminary concept not supported by experimental studies. The MCS system based on competence measure with probabilistic model and homogeneous ensemble was experimentally investigated and results are presented in [21]. In [10] we focussed on experimental comparative analysis of MCS systems with heterogeneous and homogeneous ensembles applied to control the bioprosthetic hand. The idea of using feedback information coming from bioprosthesis was originally introduced in [11]. The authors distinguished four ways of such a biofeedback scheme, however without specified form of algorithms: to automatically adjust the grip, to assist the classification process, for adaptive tuning the classification algorithm and for feeling the grip. The first constructive algorithm for tuning of combining procedure in the MCS system was proposed and experimentally tested in [12]. The method developed is based on the two-stage MCS system and the DES scheme which modified competence of base classifiers.The term “hybrid learning” refers to the trained combining MCS system and denotes a mixed learning procedure comprising two steps. On the first step base classifiers and combining procedure are trained in the offline (static) mode and after this step the MCS system is ready to be used. On the second step which is executed during the testing phase (control of bioprosthetic hand) in online (dynamic) mode the combining procedure is subject to modification using the additional validation objects (coming from the bioprosthesis sensors) in order to improve the accuracy of the MCS system.Since in the proposed MCS systems’ learning procedures, both the first and second step, are performed in a different way, experimental investigations are conducted in which classification accuracy of the MCS developed is compared and the MCS systems are evaluated with respect to the effectiveness of the modification of combining algorithm.This paper is divided into 5 sections and organized as follows. Section 2 provides an insight into techniques and problems of biosignal acquisition and methods of extraction of features from the registered biosignals. Section 3 presents three MC systems with DES strategy and algorithms for adaptive tuning classifier competence via feedback information coming from the prosthesis sensors. The experiments conducted and the results with discussion are presented in Section 4. Section 5 contains conclusions.Prosthesis control involves two levels:•decision level,motor level.The role of motor control is to accomplish defined finger postures according to the commands of decision level, while the decision control boils down essentially to recognize the intention of hand motion based on biosignal recognition.According to authors׳ proposition the bioprosthesis decision control is performed by recognizing the user׳s intent of prosthesis movement on the basis of classification of EMG and MMG signals from his/her arm stump. Natural hand movements are accompanied by electrical and mechanical signals produced by the working muscles. Myoelectric phenomenon consists of variation of electrical potentials of contracting muscle fibres in relation to the surrounding tissue. This potential variation propagates through the body and can be registered on its skin as an EMG signal. Since in the working muscle the distinct fibre groups are successively activated and relaxed, the created myopotentials have an alternate character, and while propagating in the tissue, they are subject to spatial filtration. The EMG signal measured at a given point is the superposition of the potentials produced by all active fibres, and depends on spatial configuration of the fibres [13].Muscle activity is also accompanied by mechanical vibrations of the fibre groups, which (like myopotentials) propagate through the surrounding tissue to the body surface. These vibrations are called MMG signals [22]. They have low frequency (up to 200Hz) and small amplitude and can be registered as a “muscle sound” on the surface of the skin by microphones [23,24]. This sound carries essential information about individual muscle group excitation. The combination of these two modalities (EMG and MMG signals) provides a synergy effect. The distinct types of movements call for various activities of muscles, so the various spatial configuration of active fibres. Hence, the distinct finger movements correspond to the distinct classes of EMG and MMG signals [20].As stated above, the biosignal-based control takes advantage of the fact that the vast majority of finger driving muscles are located in the forearm, which means that after a hand amputation they are left in the stump. The activity of these muscles still depends on the patient׳s will, so biosignals accompanying this activity can be used to control prosthesis motion. The general concept of bioprosthetic hand control is as follows: the signals generated by the active muscles (usually EMG signals) of stump of the limb equipped with prosthesis are measured, and after analysis and classification converted into decisions controlling the prosthesis fingers motion [25–28,3,4].This requires the development of three stages:1.acquisition of signals;reduction of dimensionality of their representation;classification of signals.The acquisition must take into account the nature of the measured signals and their measurement conditions. A quality of the obtaining information depends essentially on the ratio of the measured signal power to the interfering signal power, defined as SNR (Signal to Noise Ratio). For the non-invasive methods of measurements carried out on the surface of the patient׳s body, it is difficult to obtain a satisfactory SNR [26]. The noise amplitude usually exceeds the amplitude of the measured signal many times. For the EMG signals the amplitude of voltages induced on the patient body as a result of the influence of external electric fields may exceed more than 1000 times the value of useful signals. This induces the need for careful design of measurement channels for different modalities, including the sophisticated circuits and high-quality components. Usually a differential measurement system was applied. The system encompasses two signal electrodes placed above the examined muscle and a reference electrode placed as far as possible above electrically neutral tissue (above a bone or a joint). Signals obtained from signal electrodes are subtracted from each other and amplified. The common components, including surrounding noise, are thus excluded and the useful signal is amplified. For the MMG signals the basic problem when designing the sensor registering the muscle vibration is to isolate the microphone or the accelerometer from the external sound sources along with the best acquisition of the sound propagating in the patient׳s tissue. This induces the need for special casing collecting the sound. This requires a special casing damping a sound from the environment, with chamber focussing sounds from the forearm tissue.After the acquisition stage, the recorded signals have the form of strings of discrete samples. Their size is the product of measurement time and sampling frequency. For a typical motion, this gives a record of size between 2 and 5 thousand of samples (time of the order of 2–5s, and the sampling of the order of 1kHz). This “primary representation” of the signals hinders the effective classification and requires the reduction of dimensionality. This reduction leads to a representation in the form of a signal feature vector.The most natural approach for feature extraction from the original signal (expressed in the time domain) is its transformation in the frequency domain through the decomposition of signal on the signal components at different frequencies and energy values, using the Fourier Transform (FT) [3]. The Fourier transform converts a function from a given space in such a way that exposes its periodic, frequency properties (the so-called spectrum of function). The transformation is lossless, and function can be reconstructed from its Fourier transform. FT averages energies at frequencies in the analysed period of time, which well locates frequency for stationary signals. Because of the nonstationary nature of the biosignals, the authors used the short time Fourier transform – STFT, which transforms the signal in the connected time and frequency domain. STFT can be understood as a series of Fourier transform performed on the framed signal, wherein the position of the window in time is shifted in such a series monotonically.Another method that allows the analysis of the signal in time and frequency is the Wavelet Transform. Representation is constructed from the “wavelet coefficient” – signal scalar products with standardized functions generated as a shift and stretching of wavelet.Authors׳ earlier experimental research showed [19,21,4,15] that the effective method with respect to the recognition error and the calculation costs in the biosignal analysis are the sequence of two techniques: autoregressive (AR) model and principal component analysis (PCA). The AR model belongs to a group of linear prediction methods that attempt to predict a value ynof a time series of data{yn}based on the previous values(yn−1,yn−2,…). Several estimators of AR coefficients are well known in the field of signal processing. We choose the Burg algorithm because of its many remarkable advantages (it does not apply window data, minimizes forward and backward prediction errors, gives high resolution for short data records, always produces a stable model) [29]. The Burg algorithm estimates the AR coefficients by fitting an auto-regressive linear prediction filter model of a given order to the signal.New issue of bioprosthesis control is to include “feeling of grip” – i.e. the feedback about the posture of prosthesis fingers and their contact with the object being gripped [13,30]. The focal point of this issue is choosing the type of sensors and their location on the artificial hand. Both types of indicated problems will be addressed in the design of the measuring stand and the method of conducting experiments.Considering, in the motion control process, the information concerning the prosthesis interaction with a grasped object, provided by the prosthesis sensors, we can distinguish four different ways of using the information related to the posture of the fingers and their pressure on the grasped object [11]:1.To automatically adjust the grip (the fingers when gripping) to the shape and size of the object – due to information about pressure force of individual segments of fingers on the object (during the closing of grip and touching the object as well as grasping and maintaining the grip). As a result, for the same control decision the prosthesis fingers can be set at different positions depending on the shape and size of an object to be gripped.To assist the classification process (in grasping phase) by decreasing the repertoire of recognized grips (information from the prosthesis defines the subset of grips, then the classifier once again recognized biosignals but only for this subclass).For adaptive tuning of the classification algorithms (when MC system is used) – this is done by adjusting the competence functions of base classifiers involved in the recognition, according to the following rules: the value of classifier competence for recognized movement is increased (decreased) if the analysed movement is classified correctly (wrongly).For feeling feedback from prosthesis to patient (e.g. the patient can feel via special vibration, the movement of prosthesis fingers and their pressure on the grasped object) – that mobilizes patient׳s note and increases the control commands forming accuracy.Current researches in this area relate essentially to point 1 (to adapt automatically the prosthesis action to the shape and size of the gripped object – and as a result, for the same control decision the prosthesis fingers can be set at different positions depending on the shape and size of the object to be gripped) and point 4 (to support a feeling feedback from prosthesis to patient – what mobilizes his/her attention and increases the control commands forming accuracy [30,31].The sensory feedback from the contact of prosthesis with the object could also introduce a new quality to the decision control model (points 2 and 3 of the above classification). The values of the touch/force of the object to the particular points of the prosthesis hand, together with the angular positions of the hand-wrist and finger joints characterize a size/shape and elasticity of the gripped object specifying the type of implemented grip [31,32].In this study the third way is used. In next section the MC systems developed with algorithms of tuning combining mechanism are presented in detail.In this subsection an introduction to the design of multiclassifier systems is presented. In particular, in subsection we yield an insight into two concepts which are specific and common for original algorithms presented in next subsections. The first concept is a two-level structure of MCS system which is a natural consequence of two biosignals (EMG and MMG) used in classification procedure. The other one is the modification of combining algorithm during the testing phase in online mode which in proposed algorithms denotes the tuning of competence function of base classifiers involved in the classification process.In the multiclassifier (MC) system we assume that a set of trained classifiersΨ={ψ1,ψ2,…,ψL}called base classifiers is given. A classifier ψlis a functionψl:X→Mfrom a feature space to a set of class labelsM={1,2,…,M}. Classification is made according to the maximum rule(1)ψl(x)=i⇔dli(x)=maxj∈Mdlj(x),where[dl1(x),dl2(x),…,dlM(x)]is a vector of class supports (classifying function) produced by ψl. Without loss of generality we assume thatdlj(x)≥0and∑jdlj(x)=1.The ensemble Ψ is used for classification through a combination function which, for example, can select a single classifier or a subset of classifiers from the ensemble, it can be independent or dependent on the feature vector x (in the latter case the function is said to be dynamic), and it can be non-trainable or trainable [16].In this paper, we propose MC systems which use a dynamic ensemble selection scheme and trainable combining methods based on a competence measurec(ψl|x)of each base classifier (l=1,2,…,L) evaluating the competence of classifier ψlat a pointx∈X. For the training methods of combining the base classifiers it is assumed that a validation set(2)V={(x1,j1),(x2,j2),…,(xN,jN)};xk∈X,jk∈Mcontaining pairs of feature vectors and their corresponding class labels is available. In the MC systems developed in this study, combining algorithm is implemented at the classification function (support) level which allows determination of the supports provided by the MC system to different classes, as a function of supports and competences of base classifiers, namely:(3)dj(x)=F({dlj(x)}l=1,2,…,L,{c(ψl|x)}l=1,2,…,L,x);j∈M,x∈X.In the following sections presenting different MC systems formula (3) has a concrete form.Since recognition of the patient׳s intent is made on the basis of analysis of two different biosignals (EMG and MMG), the multiclassifier system – according to the proposed concept of the recognition method – consists of two submulticlassifiers ψEMGand ψMMG, each of them dedicated to particular types of data. It leads to the two-level structure of multiclassifier system presented in Fig. 1.At the first level combining methods (3) are realized for both submulticlassifiers and supportsdj(EMG)(x)anddj(MMG)(x)are provided for each classj∈M. At the second level these supports are combined by the weighted sum:(4)dj(MC)(x)=c(EMG)(x)dj(EMG)(x)+c(MMG)(x)dj(MMG)(x)where weight coefficients c depend on the combining method applied in the subsystems ψEMGand ψMMG.Finally, the MC systemψMC(x)classifies x using the maximum rule:(5)ψMC(x)=argmaxj∈Mdj(MC)(x).The feedback signal from the bioprosthesis sensors monitoring contact of prosthesis with the grasped object can be the source of information about a class of hand movement and correct/incorrect classification of the MC system. Although this signal contains the data defining finger postures during the grasp [33], it does not yield unambiguous information dealing with the type of hand action (pattern class). Nevertheless, we can assume that the feedback information coming in the course of recognition of testing objectx¯or confirms the correctness of grasping movement classification or – if misclassification is made – determines the subset of classesM(x¯)∈M, into which the correct grip belongs [12]. This assumption is the basis of an additional learning sequential procedure through the tuning of combining method of base classifiers.In order to use the feedback information about correct/incorrect classification in an efficient manner, hierarchical structure of MCS described by two-stage decision tree logic is proposed in this study. The example of decision tree structure connected with further experimental research is presented in Fig. 2(see also Section 4.1). The root-node represents the set of all classesM, interior nodes denote disjoint subsets of classesMk(k=1,2,…,K)and terminal nodes represent pattern classes. The two-level decision tree structure is univocally determined by the information coming from the prosthesis sensors, which means that subsets of classesMkcorrespond to groups of classesM(x¯)into which executed grasp described by the feature vectorx¯can belong. In order to classify an object into a class, one has to traverse a path of the tree starting at the root-node and at the encountered node one ought to take a decision about the further path in the tree until a terminal node is reached. Its label indicates to which class the unknown object is assigned [34]. MCS in the two stage decision tree structure denotes that classifiers applied in the interior nodes of a decision tree are multiple classifier systems.The proposed tuning algorithms differ from each other for MC systems presented in the next sections. In all MC systems which are working in two-stage decision tree logic, testing objects with feedback information on the correct/incorrect classification are successively added to the validation set and used for dynamic (iterative) tuning competence function of base classifiers depending on their decisions. In the MC System 1 competence is uniformly allocated to each class belonging to the group indicated by the feedback signal. In MC system 2, the modification of competence depends on the node of decision tree at which a correct/incorrect classification is made. In MC System 3, the Randomized Reference Classifier (see Section 3.2.1) and concept of cross-competence are used in the tuning procedure.In MC system 1 (MCS1), the construction of competence measure of base classifier being the basis of combining method (3), consists of the two following steps. In the first step, a competence setClfor each classifierψl(l=1,2,…L)in the ensemble is constructed:(6)Cl={(x1,C(ψl|x1)),(x2,C(ψl|x2)),…,(xN,C(ψl|xN))};xk∈V.This set contains so-called source competences at validation points [35]. In the second step, the competence set (6) is used to construct the competence functionc(ψl|x)through extending (generalizing) the source competencesC(ψl|xk)to the entire feature spaceX. The next subsection describes the construction of competence measure in detail.In order to determine competence set (6) a hypothetical classifier called a randomized reference classifier (RRC) is constructed. The RRC can be considered as equivalent to the classifier ψland its probability of correct classificationPc(RRC)(xk)at the validation pointxk∈Vcan be used as the source competenceC(ψl|xk)of that classifier at xk. The RRC, originally introduced in [18], is a stochastic classifier defined using a probability distribution over the set of class labelsM. The RRC uses the maximum rule (5) and a vector of class supports[δl1(x),δl2(x),…,δlM(x)], for the classification of the feature vector x, where the jth support is a realization of a random variableΔlj(x). The probability distributions of the random variables are chosen in such a way that the following conditions are satisfied:(7)Δlj(x)∈[0,1];(8)E[Δlj(x)]=dlj(x),j=1,2,…,M;(9)∑j=1,2,…,MΔlj(x)=1,where E is the expected value operator. From the above definition it follows that the RRC can be considered as equivalent to the classifier ψlfor the feature vector x since it produces, on average, the same vector of class supports as the modelled classifier.Since the RRC performs classification in a stochastic manner, it is possible to calculate the probability of classifying an object x to the ith class:(10)Pl(RRC)(i|x)=Pr[∀k=1,…,M,k≠iΔli(x)>Δlk(x)].In particular, if the object x belongs to the ith class, from (10) we simply get the conditional probability of correct classificationPcl(RRC)(x).The key element in the modelling presented above is the choice of probability distributions for the random variablesΔlj(x),j∈Mso that the conditions (7)–(9) are satisfied. In this paper beta probability distributions [36](11)P(RRC)(i|x)=∫01b(u,αli(x),βli(x))[∏j=1J≠iMB(u,αlj(x),βlj(x))du,whereB()̇is a beta cumulative distribution function. The justification of the choice of the beta distribution can be found in [18] and furthermore, the MATLAB code for calculating probabilities (11) was developed and it is freely available for download.Applying the RRC to a validation point xkand putting in (11)i=jk, we get the probability of correct classification of RRC at a pointxk∈V, namely(12)Pcl(RRC)(xk)=Pl(RRC)(jk|xk),xk∈V.Since the RRC can be considered equivalent to the modelled base classifierψl∈Ψ, it is justified to use the probability (12) as the source competence of the classifier ψlat the validation pointxk∈V, i.e.(13)C(ψl|xk)=Pcl(RRC)(xk).The source competences (13) are next extended to the entire feature spaceXusing the following normalized Gaussian potential function model [37]:(14)c(ψl|x)=∑xk∈VC(ψl|xk)exp(−dist(x,xk)2)∑xk∈Vexp(−dist(x,xk)2),wheredist(x,y)is the Euclidean distance between the objects x and y.In the combining method of base classifiers (3), a dynamic ensemble selection strategy is applied. It means that for a given testing objectx∈Xfirst the set of base classifiers with the competences greater than the probability of random classification is selected:(15)Ψ(x)={ψl1(x),ψl2(x),…,ψlT(x)},c(ψlt|x)>1Mand next supports for classes are calculated as a weighted sum of classifiers from the set (15):(16)dj(x)=∑ψlt∈Ψ(x)c(ψlt|x)djlt(x);j∈M.This method is applied to both MC subsystems ψEMGand ψMMGand supportsdj(EMG)(x)anddj(MMG)(x)produced according to (16), which are finally combined by the weighted sum (4), where(17)c(EMG)(x)=1|Ψ(EMG)(x)|∑ψl∈Ψ(EMG)(x)c(ψl|x)and(18)c(MMG)(x)=1|Ψ(MMG)(x)|∑ψl∈Ψ(MMG)(x)c(ψl|x).Ψ(EMG)(x)andΨ(MMG)(x)denote sets of base classifiers (15) for subsystems ψEMGand ψMMG, respectively.The suggested algorithm for tuning competence of a base classifier ψlis presented in Table 1.In Multiclassifier System 2, the classification of both subsystems ψEMGand ψMMGis determined in a two-stage procedure based on the decision tree scheme.The method proposed in MCS2 uses – as previously – DES strategy with competence measure of base classifiers constructed – also, as previously – in a two-step procedure. The source competences of base classifier ψlat a validation pointxk∈Vare defined as [35](19)C(ψl|xk)=2·dl,jk(xk)log(2)/log(M)−−1∈[−1,1].Information contained in the competence setCl, i.e. values of competence for validation points xk, is generalized to the whole feature spaceXkaccording to (14).Finally, DES based multiple classifier systems for interior nodes of decision tree and for subsystems dedicated to EMG and MMG signals were constructed using proposed models of the base classifiers competences and combining methods presented in Section 3.2.2.The algorithm for tuning competence of base classifiers which is a consequence of two-stage decision tree model of classification procedure is presented in Tables 2 and 3for the case of correct and incorrect classification of a test point, respectively.Multiclassifier System 3 is based on the RRC classifier and the local confusion matrix. Whereas the above-mentioned multiclassifier systems are designed in order to exclude inaccurate classifiers from the ensemble, MCS3 is aimed at dealing with the unreliable classifiers in a different way. MCS3 is able to harness information from the inaccurate classifier by incorporating classifier-depend competence (cii(ψl|x),i∈M) and cross-competence (cji(ψl|x),i≠j;i,j∈M) measures. The following subsections provide a detailed description of proposed measures.In the proposed method, the inference process is performed on the basis of a probabilistic model. The model is built under assumption that classification outcomeψl(x)=i,i∈M, true class numberj∈Mand attribute vectorx∈Xare realizations of random variablesIl(x),J,X, respectively. Random classification outcomeψl(x)=imeans that base classifier ψlis considered to be a stochastic classifier which classifies object x according to known distributionP(ψl(x)=i)=Pl(i|x)∈[0,1]. According to the Bayes classification model, we also assume that prior class probabilities(20)P(J=j)=P(j),j∈Mand class-conditional probability distribution of features:(21)P(x/j)=Pj(x).x∈Xare known. Under the adopted model, the support ofjthclass can be defined as its a posteriori probability of the class j when feature vector x is given:(22)Pl(j|x)=∑i=1MPl(i,j|x)=∑i=1MPl(i|x)Pl(j|i,x),wherePl(j|i,x)denotes probability that an object x belongs to the class j given thatψl(x)=i.Unfortunately, the proposed model relies on an impractical assumption that classification committee consists of base classifiers which assign class labels in a stochastic manner. In real-world classifier systems it is undesirable to obtain random classification result so the usage of stochastic classifiers is avoided. In order to overcome this issue, the analysis of the probabilistic properties of base classifier ψlhas been replaced by probabilistic analysis of its randomized equivalent. The randomized equivalent of base classifier is built using the RRC model. Hence the probabilityPl(i|x)can be estimated using corresponding probability obtained by the RRC model(23)P(ψl(RRC)(x)=i)=Pl(RRC)(i|x)≈Pl(i|x).The value of the probabilityPl(j|i,x)is approximated using local confusion matrix for classifier ψlin the neighbourhoodN(x)of point x:(24)cji(ψl|x)≈Pl(j|i,x).The competence measure is proportional to the probability of a correct classificationPl(j|j,x). Consequently, the cross-competence measure is proportional to the probability of misclassificationPl(j|i,x),j≠i. The high value of this measure indicates that, in the neighbourhood of x, classifier ψltends misclassify objects from class j as class i. This information can be used to correct output of the inaccurate classifier.Finally, class support for classifier ψlat point x is calculated as an approximated value of a posteriori probability (22), namely:(25)dlj(x)=∑i=1Mmji(ψl)(x)Pl(RRC)(i|x).A confusion matrix or an error matrix provides us with complete information on classification accuracy of classifier ψ for separate classes [38]. As shown in Table 4, the rows of the confusion matrix correspond to the true class, and consequently the columns correspond to the classes predicted by classifier ψl. When model of the classifier and values of the probabilities (20) and (21) are known, each entry (i,j∈M) of the confusion matrix can be calculated as follows:(26)εj,i(ψl)=P(i,j)=P(j)∫XP(x|j)Ri(ψl)(x)dx,where(27)Ri(ψl)(x)={1ifψl(x)=i,0otherwiseindicates the decision regionDi(ψl)={x∈X:ψl(x)=i}of deterministic classifier ψl. However, in the proposed approach deterministic base classifiers have been substituted by equivalent randomized models. In this case, the decision region can be easily expressed as a fuzzy set whose membership function is defined as follows:(28)Ri(ψl)(x)=Pl(RRC)(i/x).The key point in the process of approximation of probabilityP(j|i,x)(24) is to provide a definition of neighbourhood of point x. In this study, the Gaussian membership function is adopted(29)μN(x)(xk)=exp(−αδ(xk,x)2),whereα∈R+andδ(xk,x)are the Euclidean distance between xkand x. The experimental evaluation showed that the best results were obtained when α is set to 1.Finally, given (28) and (29), the entries of the local confusion matrix for classifier ψland pointxm∈Xcan be obtained using the following formula:(30)εj,i(ψl)(xm)=P(j)∫XP(x|j)μN(xm)(x)Pl(RRC)(i|x)dx.In most of real world classification problems, probability distributions (20) and (21) remain unknown, while validation set (2) is available. In such a case, the theoretical entries of the confusion matrix (30) must be approximated. For this purpose, let first define the following fuzzy subsets of validation set:(31)Vj={(μj(xk),xk):xk∈V}which denotes the subset of validation objects belonging to the classj∈M, and(32)Di(ψl)={(μD(xk)=Pl(RRC)(i|xk),xk):xk∈V}which is a decision set (i∈M) of randomized classifier ψlin the validation setV.The sets (31) and (32) can be used to approximate local confusion matrix entries (30), namely:(33)ε^j,i(ψl)(xm)=|Vj∩Di(ψl)∩N(xm)|∑j=1M|Vj|,where|A|is the cardinality of a fuzzy set A [39].Finally, the approximation ofP(j|i,x)is calculated as follows:(34)cji(ψl|x)=ε^j,i(ψl)(x)∑j=1Mε^j,i(ψl)(x).The validation set is updated according to the algorithm presented in Table 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The problem addressed in the paper was solved with satisfactory quality, however there is still room for improvement. Main tasks – investigation of feedback information usability and search for the best competence adaptive tuning model gave important results. The feedback system has proven its legitimacy. Experimental investigations showed that there is dependence between the level of improvement for each of the tuning methods and its performance in the static mode. This paper proved that utilization of prosthesis feedback information is useful to tune adaptive competence, which used in specially designed Multiclassifier systems could lead to improvement in recognition quality. Bioprosthesis systems built on that paradigm will constantly improve their operation during everyday use. However, only two out of the three proposed systems indicated statistically significant improvement so there is room for further research which will address other systems.