@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Tool orientation optimization for

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Average strip width estimation method and sample points selection method for3+2-axis sculptured surface machining.The quasi-feasible sector (QFS) in a projection plane for determining the domain that contains the optimal tool orientation.Novel tool orientation optimization method based on a bunch of projection planes.Numerical examples for tool orientation optimization in3+2-axis machining of a sculptured surface.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
3,+,2,-axis CNC machining,Sculptured surface,Tool orientation optimization,Average strip width,Projection plane,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presented an optimization method to select a tool orientation for machining a sculptured surface by the3+2-axis machining strategy. The optimization method could select the tool orientation for the maximum average strip width in3+2-axis machining. The method could also be used to determine the workpiece setup for general 3-axis machining. The average strip width estimation method was presented as well. Quasi-feasible sectors containing the optimal tool orientation could be found according to the projection planes and the normal vectors of sample points. And the method can find the optimal tool orientation based on projection planes. A freeform surface was parted into 9 sub-surfaces firstly, and then the presented method was applied on those sub-surfaces to determine the optimal tool orientations. The tool paths were generated with the optimized tool orientations and used to mill the sub-surfaces without interference. The method presented could also be applied on the trimmed surface, the surface with a boss, and the blade on a blisk. The machining results indicate that our method can improve machining efficiency through reducing the number of tool paths for3+2-axis sculptured surface machining.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Sculptured surface, also called freeform surface, has been widely used in aerospace and mold industries.3+2-axis machining uses the three linear motion axes during cutting and fixes the two rotary axes in a particular gesture. It could be treated as a special 5-axis machining strategy. This strategy has high rigidity and low motion error during machining. Generally, fillet-end cutters could be used with this strategy to mill the sculptured surface.A lot of researches on 5-axis machining have been performed to improve the quality and the efficiency of sculptured surface machining  [1–13]. Compared with the researches on tool orientation optimization for 5-axis machining, the publications  [14–21] on3+2-axis sculptured surface machining strategy are not enough. Especially, few researches take the tool orientation optimization into consideration for3+2-axis machining.Generally, the cost of using a 5-axis machine tool is much higher than that of using a3+2-axis machine tool. And the3+2-axis machining could improve the rigidity during machining and increase efficiency comparing with the traditional 3-axis machining. The purpose of our research is to apply the3+2-axis machining strategy to mill the sculptured surface with high efficiency and low cost. Previous researches always focus on surface partitioning. But the detail for choosing the setup gesture for each sub-surface has not been studied enough. This paper will present an optimization method to find a suitable tool orientation for machining a sub-surface with a given torus cutter.The principle for choosing tool orientation is improving the machining efficiency. Generally, the machining strip width and the feed rate have deep influence on machining efficiency. Redonnet et al.  [10] and Lee  [13] have illustrated that the productivity could be improved through expanding the effective cutter radius or sweep curve for end milling of freeform surface. It suggests the strip width could influence the machining efficiency. At the same time, the feed rate is always constrained by material, tool life and machining surface roughness. In this paper, it is assumed that the feed rate is constrained at a certain value. Then the purpose of this paper is to study the strategy to improve machining efficiency through enlarging the strip width. Therefore, the principle for tool orientation optimization would be finding the tool orientation corresponding to the maximum machining strip width.The method presented could be used in finding an optimal tool orientation for a sub-surface with3+2-axis machining strategy, which is a complement for traditional3+2-axis machining. It could be used in fixed axis machining and index axis machining. It could also be used to decide the workpiece setup for general 3-axis machining.This paper presents a strategy to optimize the tool orientation for3+2-axis machining. The method chooses a tool orientation that is used to generate tool paths for machining the entire surface with a wider strip width. This paper gives a method that estimates the average strip width for a sculptured surface by a series of sample points, and it defines the quasi-feasible sector (QFS) for tool orientation optimization. A given surface should be distributed into plenty of grid points firstly, and then sample points would be selected from those points. Projection planes will be defined, and then the QFS domain for each plane will be found. The optimal tool orientation for those planes will be searched in those QFS regions. We find the best tool orientation from each projection plane. Then those tool orientations will be compared to find the optimal tool orientation. This method is a global optimization method, and the optimal tool orientation could be used to generate tool paths by the iso-parametric method. This method can improve the machining efficiency for3+2-axis machining.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Firstly, the overview of 5-axis machining and3+2-axis machining is introduced in Section  2. Then in Section  3, the method for estimating the average machining strip width of a surface is presented. Section  4 proposes the method to find the quasi-feasible sector (QFS) in which the optimal tool orientation will be searched. The tool orientation optimization method based on multiple projection planes is presented in Section  5. Some practical examples are given in Section  6, and then followed by the conclusions and discussion in Section  7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
