@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Assessing the performance characteristics and clinical forces in simulated shape memory bone staple surgical procedure: The significance of SMA material model

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A powder metallurgically processed NiTi material was calibrated for the bone staple.Pre/post-surgical performance is studied for a body-temperature-activated SMA staple.Generated staple forces tended to increase under sustained thermal loading.The simulation results correlated well with the experimental measurements.The thermal activation scheme of the SMA staple was proved to be clinically viable.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
NiTi,Bone-staple,Simulation,SMA material model,Clamping force,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This work is focused on the detailed computer simulation of the key stages involved in a shape memory alloy (SMA) osteosynthesis bone stapling procedure. To this end, a recently developed three-dimensional constitutive SMA material model was characterized from test data of three simple uniaxial-isothermal-tension experiments for powder metallurgically processed nickel-rich NiTi (PM/NiTi-P) material. The calibrated model was subsequently used under the complex, thermomechanical loading conditions involved in the surgical procedure using the body-temperature-activated PM/NiTi-P bone staple. Our aim here is to assess the immediate and post-surgical performance characteristics of the stapling operation using the material model. From this study: (1) it was found that adequate compressive forces were developed by the PM/NiTi-P bone staple, with the tendency of this force to even increase under sustained thermal loading due to the intrinsic “inverse relaxation phenomena” in the SMA material, (2) the simulation results correlated well with those from experimental measurements, (3) the body-temperature-activated PM/NiTi-P staple was proved to be clinically viable, providing a stable clamping force needed for speedy coaptation of the fractured bones, and (4) these realistic assessments crucially depend on the use of suitable and comprehensive SMA material models.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Depending on the pattern and severity of a bone fracture, different (internal/external) fixation techniques are considered for the treatment of damaged bones. This operation typically involves realignment of the fractured ends into an appropriate orientation and proximity, conducive enough to re-establish and maintain the integrity of the fractured bone pieces [1]. Adequate compression forces are then applied on the fractured segments to initiate coaptation of the fractured pieces. The procedure is expected to be minimally invasive (without causing further damages to other surrounding vital organs, especially those supplying blood to the osteotomy site). Since the rate of healing is significantly affected by the applied compression (by increasing both the size and densities of the fractured bone [2,3]), it is obviously advantageous for this applied clamping force, barring any discomfort and surgical trauma [4] to be maintained during the whole healing period.With this intent, bone staples of different geometrical configurations (i.e., cross sectional areas, tip contours and back/base shapes, thicknesses) and material (traditional or advanced) make-up are currently accepted for carrying out bone fixation operation. For instance, there are varieties of Shape Memory Alloy (SMA) bone staples (ranging from “simple” to more “sophisticated” shapes) in the market for utilization. Different studies [5–10] have highlighted some of advantages achieved from using SMAs for design of medical devices over their traditional material counterparts. Moreover, newer (also known as “next generation”) bone staples (making use of barbs, serration along the staple legs, etc.) are considered to provide a more secured compressive forces (i.e., less pull-out of the staple) along the length of the fractured pieces. A typical fracture in the third metatarsal foot bone and a U-type foot staple inserted at a fractured site are shown inFig. 1a and b, respectively.Due to the high degree of sensitivity attached to medical operations, it seems appropriate for such surgical procedures (involving the use of devices like bone staples), to be simulated using the right computational tool(s) before their “practical” utilization in a patient. In particular, after judicious selection of a specific size and type of staple, a systematic numerical simulation could furnish surgeons with the pertinent information needed at each critical step in the “yet-to-be-performed” surgical operation [9]. Accurate prediction of the anticipated compressive stress/force and its variation with time will help to estimate the viable activation conditions needed for the effective application of a selected SMA bone staple device, viz. its short and long term (post-surgery) performance capability.Such investigative study will require a set of essential ingredients like: (i) an application-driven “comprehensive” SMA material model, that is sufficiently wide in scope to capture the non-linear response characteristics of the SMA material, and is also easy to calibrate from data of simple tests; (ii) the ability of such model to handle contact-interaction effects between the SMA metallic staple and the host bone tissue, and (iii) treat complex thermomechanical loading conditions involving large displacements and rotations as well as multi-axial states of stresses.As described in the flow chart ofFig. 2, our approach here is to carry out an engineering simulation using a nonlinear finite element procedure which incorporates an SMA constitutive framework model [11] to ascertain the crucial role played by a powder metallurgically processed nickel-rich NiTi (PM/NiTi-P) SMA material on the functional performance of an SMA bone staple. Among the other schemes of activating the SMA staple [12], the staple used for our current demonstration is designed to self-generate the compression force needed for the fixation once it gets heated to the body temperature.Our targeted goals here are to: (1) predict the anticipated compressive clamping force practically needed for the actual “physical” bone fixation operation, as well as (2) investigate the post-operative (short and long term) stability performance of the SMA staple device during its utilization. This involved (1) obtaining all the material parameters of the nonlinear model from the “simple” isothermal, uniaxial, tensile tests, and (2) applying the calibrated model to the real condition in the stapling surgery to evaluate crucial information regarding the response under complex transient (short-term response) as well as sustained (long-term response) multi-axial loading conditions. This will be further aided by the experimental validation provided by comparing the present predictions of our simulation to the test results reported by Krone et al. [13].Different micromechanical and phenomenological SMA models have been developed to expound on the underlining mechanisms responsible for the unique characteristics observed in SMAs (see Lagoudas et al. [14] for examples of such models). The SMA material model selected for our current study is formulated using multiple inelastic mechanisms to capture the nonlinear, hysteretic, cyclic evolution responses of ordinary and high temperature SMA materials [11,15]. The model, in its scheme of implementation is made “general”, targeting applications involving medical- and engineering- SMA-based devices which are predominantly subjected to different degrees of displacements and rotations during their operation. It is designed to allow easy implementation into large scale finite element software, like as ABAQUS®standard [16]. A brief outline of this formulation is given below.To simplify the writing of the fundamental equations underlining the general model, the language of small deformations was used. In view of its practical application, especially for investigations involving biological materials, where geometric distortion/deformation behaviors are predominantly large [17], all tensorial quantities in our generalized model are simply formulated in the rotated configuration to account for such impending effects. For instance, for the Cauchy stress tensor, one hasRmiσmnRnj, withRijbeing the rigid-rotation tensor obtained from the polar decomposition of the deformation gradient,Fij, into the pure rotation(orthogonal tensor) part,Rim, and a pure (right tensor) stretching part,Umj; i.e.,Fij=RimUmj[18].Here, all required responses are captured using two groups of state variables. These are: (1) the controllable state variables which include the inputted temperature (scaler) and second-order tensor components of the stress,σij, and/or total strain,εij, and (2) second-order tensor internal state variables made up of sets of internal stress-like and their conjugate strain-like quantities,αij(b)andγij(b), respectively, where the superscript counter-index ‘b’ denotes the number of the inelastic mechanism, with b=1–6, here.The total strain (as shown in Eq. (1)) developed during the material’s deformation process is a combination of the elastic (reversible) strain,εije, and the viscoplastic (irreversible) strain,εijI, with theεijItensor accounting for the direct transformation of Austentite→Martensite, the detwinning of Martensite variants, and the reorientation of Martensite variants.(1)εij=εije+εijIAs the SMA material structure experiences stresses, strains, and/or transformations, the viscoelastoplastic mechanisms, b=1–6 (used in the equations below) are employed to regulate the energy stored, and/or dissipated, through the Gibbs complementary energy function,Φ, and the dissipation potential,Ω, respectively. In particular, the subscripts “R” and “IR” are used to denote the reversible and irreversible components of the scalar energy function,Φ, respectively.(2)Φ=ΦR(σij)+ΦIR(σij,αij(b))(3)ΦR(σij)=12σijEijkl−1σkl(4)ΦIR(σij,αij(b))=σijεijI+∑b=1NH¯(b)(5)Ω((σij−αij),αij(b))=∫κ2Fn2μdF(6)αij=∑b=16αij(b)The partitioning of the energy storage and the energy dissipation in the development of the above equations (and their subsequent evolution functions) allow the capturing of all nonlinear hysteresis loops of the stress–strain–temperature responses in both the superelastic and the pseudoplastic regimes [11]. The mechanisms, b=1–3 are devoted to regulate the energy stored, and those for b=4–6 correspondingly regulate the energy dissipated.Note thatEijkl−1(in Eq. (3) above) is the compliance of the fourth-order viscoelastic material stiffness moduli,Eijkl, defined as(7)Eijkl=νE(1+ν)(1−2ν)δijδkl+E2(1+ν)(δikδjl+δilδjk)where E is the elastic modulus,νthe Poisson’s ratio, andδijthe Kronecker delta.The scalar functionH¯(b)used in the prior Eq. (4) is the nonlinear “power-type” viscoplastic function for the individual internal mechanism (b). Its specific form is different for each of the energy-storing mechanisms (b=1–3) and the energy-dissipating mechanisms (b≥4). To this end, the specific functionsH¯(b)written below are conveniently taken to be functions of either the internal stress,αij(b), or its associated/conjugate internal strain,γij(b), using the scalar functionsG(b)org(b), respectively:(8)H¯(b)={κ(b)2∫1h¯(g(b))dG(b),forb=1,2,3κ(b)2∫1h(G(b))dG(b),forb≥4(9)h¯(g(b))={κ(b)H(b)(g(b))(β(b)−1)κ(b)+H(b)(g(b))β(b)forb=1,2H(b)[1+(g(b)κ(b)/H(b))β(b)]forb=3(10)h(G(b))=H(b)[1−(G(b))β(b)h^(L)]forb≥4where(11)G(b)(αij(b))=12κ(b)2(αij(b)Mijklαkl(b))withMijkl=12(δikδjl+δilδjk)−13δijδkl(12)g(b)(γij(b))=γij(b)γij(b)In addition, theh^(L)(in Eq. (10)) is the Heaviside function with argument being the loading index. Here,L=αij(b)Γij, whereΓij=∂F/∂(σij−αij)andH(b),β(b), andκ(b)are material parameters for the individual hardening mechanisms, b=1–6.Moreover,κ(which is the threshold for inelastic flow) and n andμ(i.e., the rate dependent factors) utilized in Eq. (5) constitute the inelastic flow material constants. These rate parameters allow the assessment of short and long term range deformation characteristics of the SMA material under variable loading rates. In Eq. (10) above, F, which is the inelastic flow surface in which the scalar function F, depends on the tensorial argument(σij−αij), is defined below as:(13)F(σij−αij)=1κ2[12(σij−αij)Mijkl(σkl−αkl)]The rate equations stated below (in Eqs. (14)–(16)) with the first-order time-differential equation represented with over-dot(−•)symbol) are responsible for the evolutionary characteristics of the material. Here,(14)ε̇ij−ε̇ijI=ddt(∂ΦR∂σij)=Eijkl−1σ̇kl(15)α̇kl(b)=[∂2ΦIR∂αij(b)∂αkl(b)]−1γ̇ij(b)(16)ε̇ijI=∂Ω∂σijandγ̇ij(b)=−∂Ω∂αij(b)It is important to note that the above equations are stated only to give the general overview of the model and have been reduced for the specific application described in this paper. Consequently, the stated equations do not account for the terms originally incorporated into the model to capture the intrinsic asymmetry in tension–compression–shear response (ATC) that might be exhibited by the material. The reason for this omission is the unavailability of experimental data for the compression and shear loading cases during this study. For in-depth exposition to such mathematical equations and guidelines to the model’s utilization, readers are referred to our cited Refs. [11,15].In summary, considering the above simplifications in the SMA model, there is a total of 23 material parameters that are needed to calibrate the present model for the PM/NiTi-P. This task will be completed in Section 3 using the experimental test data of the PM/NiTi-P material.Two different engineering materials are considered here for the SMA staple-bone interaction surgical simulation procedure. In particular, the bone (considered stiffer than the staple counterpart) was assumed to be a linear, isotropic elastic material whiles the SMA staple device was modeled using the powder metallurgically processed nickel-rich NiTi (PM/NiTi-P) material. The PM/NiTi material contains pre-alloyed NiTi powder (54.6wt% Ni and 45.4wt% Ti), with two polymer additives; i.e. amide wax and a polyethylene wax (68vol%, 19vol%, 13vol%, respectively) [13,19]. From the differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), the phase-transformation characteristic temperatures for PM/NiTi-P alloy were Mf=−43°C, Ms=−23°C, As=−13°C, and Af=29°C.Since only small levels of stresses and strains are expected to develop in the bone, it was described using the linear elastic material model in Abaqus [16] with Young’s modulus, E=164,000MPa and Poisson’s ratio, ν=0.3. Our focus here will therefore be on calibrating the PM/NiTi-P material as described in the sequel.Material parameterization of the constitutive model for the PM/NiTi-P was based on the results of three “simple” uniaxial–isothermal–tension experiments. The specific temperatures selected for these tests i.e., −48°C (pseudoplastic state), 13°C (transition state), and 37°C (pseudoelastic state), covered the material’s transformation temperature range. Considering the 23 material parameters alluded to above, “empirical” handbook values of the Young’s modulus of elasticity, ‘E’ and the Poisson’s ratio, ‘v’, were taken from SMA literature to describe the elastic portions of the deformation responses, hence leaving us to evaluate only 21 remaining parameters to describe the inelasticity part of the model.Amongst these 21 remaining parameters, the values for the two rate-related parameters, i.e., exponent, ‘n’=5, and modulus, ‘μ’ =105MPas were selected based on our assumption of “weak rate-dependency” of the SMA material response (see Section 3.2 for further explanation regarding this viewpoint). The key reference thresholds; ‘κ’ in the transformation function, and ‘κ(b)’ for mechanisms b=1–6 and their respective hardening rate parameters ‘H(b)’ and ‘β(b)’ were determined from the isothermal test at 37°C. For the calibration of the isothermal test at the two other temperatures; i.e., 13°C and −48°C, only the 3 parametersκ(b)for b=1, 2 and 4 were assumed to vary with temperature in a piecewise-linear fashion. In particular, hereκ(b)for b=1 and 2, were taken to have identical values. In summary, the calibration was completed using 20 fixed material parameters; i.e., E, υ, n, μ,H(b)andβ(b)for b=1–6,κ, andκ(b)for b=3, 5, 6, (seeTable 1a), together with 3 temperature-dependent parametersκ(b)for b=1, 2 and 4 varying linearly between the tabulated temperature values in Table 1b. On the basis of this calibrated model, a comparison is made inFig. 3 between the model results and the corresponding test data, where a good agreement between the two is noted.The responses of SMA under sustained loading conditions involving material creep, and relaxation, have been observed experimentally for various equiatomic NiTi SMAs at temperatures higher than the Austenite finish, Afand as well as at temperatures below the Martensite finish, Mf[20,21]. In particular experimental evidence reported by Helm [20] clearly shows periods of stress relaxation under constant strain at both higher temperatures above Af(as shown in Fig. 4a), and lower temperatures below Mf(as shown in Fig. 4b) for the NiTi SMA alloy. At present, there appears to be lack of elaborate experimental tests pointing out the definite intrinsic factors causing such rate dependent responses in SMA materials. The generation and absorption of latent heat at such times of holding during the loading and unloading stages of the test conducted at temperatures higher than Afare suggested to be a cause of these phenomena [22]. On the other hand, the other experimental tests involving the same NiTi SMA material at the temperatures lower than Mf(where only stress-induced detwinning/reorientation of the martensite occurs; i.e., there is no likelihood of latent heat generation), show evidence of genuine rate-dependent effects (due to material viscosity) in the form of creep and relaxation (seeFig. 4c).From our standpoint, since the temperature is always treated as a controlled variable in our simulations and the mechanical and/or thermal loadings are applied with moderate or slow rates, all factors which could account for high rate effects in the response of the material are unlikely. Therefore, we have opted to incorporate a degree of rate dependency (referred to here as “weak-rate-dependency”, justifying the selected values of ‘n’ and ‘μ’), particularly to imply that the model is still capable of exhibiting the important creep and relaxation phenomena alluded to above.Under certain conditions, such time-dependent material behavior can become very relevant, especially in applications involving sustained loading, like our current bone stapling procedure. This section is therefore devoted to the prediction of the time-dependent response of the present PM/NiTi-P material, which will provide a useful insight into the long term global performance of the SMA bone staple device (as will be discussed in Section 4).The model responses of the calibrated PM/NiTi-P material is first studied in uniaxial, strain-controlled (with a strain rate=1E−4/s), isothermal, tension tests with hold times at both temperatures higher than Afand temperatures lower than Mf. These tests include multiple periods (of 3-h duration each) during which the strains are held constant along the loading and unloading branches of the test. The corresponding calibrated model results are depicted in Fig. 4d (with strain holding at 1%, 2%, and 3%), and Fig. 4e (with strain holding at 0.5%, 1.5%, 2.5%, and 3.5%), respectively. The calibrated model responses during the loading branches in the tests performed at T=37°C (>Af) and at T=−48°C (<Mf) exhibit the “conventional” phenomena of stress relaxation; i.e., where the magnitudes of the tensile stresses decrease during the periods of constant strain. This is in conformity with the experimental evidence indicated in Fig. 4a and b alluded to above.However, there is a significant difference in the character of the stress changes occurring during the strain-hold periods along the unloading branch of the test at high temperature (T=37°C). More specifically, an inverse-relaxation phenomenon occurs, resulting in an increase in the magnitude of the tensile stress during the hold period. This also is in good agreement with the experimental result counterpart shown in Fig. 4a.Finally, the model simulation for stress-controlled (with stress rate=0.125MPa/s), tensile test conducted at low temperature, T=−48°C, with multiple periods of stress-holds (at stress values of 100, 150, 200, and 225MPa) shows the conventional creep phenomena resulting in an increase in the tensile strain magnitude during stress-hold periods. As can be seen be seen in Fig. 4f, the model calibrated response is qualitatively similar to the experimental results shown in Fig. 4c.Although not shown here, further study on the case of Fig. 4d, was conducted to reach the final equilibrium hysteresis loop, using much longer strain holding periods (i.e., more than the 3h). It is worth stating that, in these latter cases, the corresponding changes in stresses after 3h hold periods were essentially negligible, thus indicating that the material has essentially attained the final steady-state/equilibrium stage. More specifically, the height of the equilibrium hysteresis loop (in stress unit), can be very accurately estimated as the difference in magnitude of stresses occurring at the end points of the strain-hold periods at loading and the corresponding unloading states in Fig. 4d (with respect to a given strain-hold value, i.e., 1%, 2% and 3% here).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
