@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Extraction of generative processes from B-Rep shapes and application to idealization transformations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Generative processes are derived from extrusion primitives identified in the object.Maximal primitives are identified and removed from the object to simplify its shape.The object is simplified up to single extrusions to produce a construction graph.The extracted graph is a non trivial representation of the object with additive process.Extrusion primitives and interfaces are used to generate an idealized model for FEA.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
B-Rep model,Construction graph,Generative shape process,Idealization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A construction tree is a set of shape generation processes commonly produced with CAD modelers during a design process of B-Rep objects. However, a construction tree does not bring all the desired properties in many configurations: dimension modifications, idealization processes, etc. Generating a non trivial set of generative processes, possibly forming a construction graph, can significantly improve the adequacy of some of these generative processes to meet user’s application needs. This paper proposes to extract generative processes from a given B-rep shape as a high-level shape description. To evaluate the usefulness of this description, finite element analyses (FEA) and particularly idealizations are the applications selected to evaluate the adequacy of additive generative processes. Non trivial construction trees containing generic extrusion and revolution primitives behave like well established CSG trees. Advantageously, the proposed approach is primitive-based, which ensures that any generative process of the construction graph does preserve the realizability of the corresponding volume. In the context of FEA, connections between idealized primitives of a construction graph can be efficiently performed using their interfaces. Consequently, generative processes of a construction graph become a high-level object structure that can be tailored to idealizations of primitives and robust connections between them.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Shape decomposition is a frequent approach to analyze and structure objects. During product development processes, process planning defining how to sequence machining operations  [1,2], FEA evaluating the structural behavior of components  [3–5], are task examples that require shape decomposition. The initial generation of the component shape during the design phase can be regarded as the task where the component structure is generated with feature-based B-Rep modelers or hybrid CAD modelers, which also provide Boolean operators. Classically, the object structure is described using a binary tree containing the elementary features or primitives generating the object. This tree structure contains information very specific to each CAD software and, most of the time, is lost when transferring objects across CAD systems and across phases of product development processes. Indeed, the construction tree obtained is very efficient at producing a parameterized representation of the object allowing a user to easily modify some dimensions as well as the shape of the object.However, the construction tree produced during the design phase may not be well suited for the shape decompositions taking place at other stages of product development processes, e.g. process planning and finite element analyses. As an example, Fig. 1illustrates this configuration with a rather complex component where the entire user’s modeling process contains 34 steps, some of them containing multiple contours producing simultaneously several features. Two views defined as top and bottom in Fig. 1(a) show the major details of the component shape. Fig. 1(b) depicts some of the 34 steps involving either extrusion or revolution operations incorporating material addition or removal as complementary effect when shaping the object. As it appears in Fig. 1, the generative process can be rather complex and, even if it is available, there is no straightforward use or transformation of this process that could be exploited to idealize this object even though its shape contains stiffeners and thin areas that can be modeled with plate or shell elements rather than volume ones. With respect to the idealization objective, it appears mandatory to produce another generative process that could incorporate features or primitives whose shapes are close enough to that of stiffeners and thin wall areas.Similarly, the current generative process is not well suited if the depth of some stiffener,St, needs to be modified (see Fig. 1(a)) because this dimension is obtained through several material removal and addition operations (see steps 18, 20, 23 in Fig. 1(b)).Using generative processes to model an object shape independently of any CAD modeler is a means to obtain a description that is intrinsic to each object  [6]. They stand for a set of modeling actions that can be used to generate different construction histories of this object. All the previous observations show the interest of associating generative processes to not only a history but to several ones to be able to meet various user’s needs. To this end, we propose to extract a construction graph from B-Rep CAD models so that the corresponding generative processes are useful for FEA and, particularly, idealization processes. This graph is extracted using a primitive removal operator that simplifies progressively the object’s shape. Somehow, the principle is to go ‘backward over time’.The paper is structured with Section  2 that reviews prior contributions. Section  3 sets the context and the hypotheses of the proposed approach. Then, Section  4 describes identification and removal operators of primitives. Section  5 sets up the extraction of the generative process graph used in Section  6 to perform idealizations.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
