@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Numerical study of stenotic side branch hemodynamics in true bifurcation lesions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Numerical models were generated to investigate stenotic side branch hemodynamics.We studied the effect of stenosis severity and location on WSS and blood perfusion.Low blood perfusion was found in type (1,0,1), corresponding to branch steal.Critically low WSS developed along the outer wall in the SB of lesion type (1,0,1).This is counterintuitive to the Medina classification where (1,1,1) is most severe.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Coronary bifurcation,Medina classification,Pulsatile flow,Left main coronary artery,Atherosclerosis,Coronary artery disease,Wall shear stress,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Coronary bifurcation lesions are complex. Whether a critical condition exists in the stenotic side branch (SB) of bifurcation lesions, according to the Medina classification, is unassessed. Computational models of coronary bifurcations were developed with different stenosis severities and locations, in order to study the flow distribution and wall shear stress (WSS) in the SB. It was found that bifurcation lesion type (1,0,1) had a flow ratio of 0.25, much less than the corresponding normal ratio of 0.47, and the 0.46 and 0.39 ratios computed for lesion types (0,1,1) and (1,1,1), respectively. Bifurcation type (1,0,1) was associated with a 47% reduction from normal coronary flow, resulting in coronary branch steal. Blood flow to the SB decreased as the stenosis severity increased and approached the carina, in the proximal, distal, and side branches. Similarly, WSS values decreased with increasing stenosis severity. Bifurcation type (1,0,1) had the lowest WSS values in the SB, and were below the 0.5Pa threshold for atherosclerotic growth. In conclusion, the results suggest that lesion type (1,0,1) is at the greatest risk of coronary branch steal, leading to potential ischemia, as well as further atherosclerotic growth. This is counterintuitive to the Medina classification, where bifurcation type (1,1,1) is usually considered the most severe.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of death in developed countries. Abnormal thickening of the vessel wall, referred to as atherosclerosis, is a progressive disease that can lead to significant luminal narrowing, resulting in a reduction of blood flow and inducing ischemia. Pathological examination of diseased vessels has indicated that arteries that bifurcate are more likely to develop atherosclerotic lesions [1,2]. Coronary bifurcation lesions are defined as the vascular narrowing of one or more of the three branches of the bifurcation, namely the main branch proximal (MBP), the main branch distal (MBD), and the side branch (SB). Coronary artery bifurcations are prone to the development of atherosclerotic plaque, due to hemodynamic factors such as unsteady and disturbed flow [3].Currently, there are at least seven classifications that categorize bifurcation lesions [4–10]. The Medina classification [6] is a simple and straightforward system of classification that has been adopted as the preferred system to classify bifurcation lesions in the clinical setting. A critical luminal narrowing of 50% or greater in any of the three vessels is assigned the binary value 1. Otherwise, the vessel receives a value of 0. In this context, it becomes apparent that the Medina classification is purely an anatomical classification scheme (Fig. 1) [11]. The primary advantage of the Medina classification over other classification schemes is that it is easy to remember.The term SB is reserved for vessels considered less important than the main branch, typically the daughter vessel with the smallest diameter. In numerous cases, however, such as in the bifurcation of the left main coronary artery (LMCA), the SB, specifically the left circumflex artery (LCX), is as important as the main branch [4]. In particular, occlusion of the SB has been recognized as a contributing factor for the etiology of myocardial infarction (MI) occurrence, post-intervention [12–14]. A recent clinical study conducted by Hahn et al. [14] found that the presence of a moderate SB stenosis (greater than 50% diameter reduction) prior to percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) was an independent predictor of SB occlusion post-PCI, after main vessel stenting.Gould et al. [15] introduced the novel concept of coronary branch steal, where blood flow is directed away from the stenotic daughter vessel during hyperemia, due to the interaction of stenoses proximal and distal to the bifurcation carina with the non-stenotic branch. As a result, flow through the stenotic distal branch is decreased to below resting control values. In cases of non-occluding partial stenoses where collateral flow may not be fully developed, the potential for steal-induced ischemia significantly increases. This is very important from a clinical perspective. It becomes evident that a further understanding of the critical nature of the SB in bifurcation lesions is required, in order to improve overall patient outcome.There is little information available about the impact of stenosis severity and location on coronary flow distribution in bifurcations, in the context of coronary branch steal. The aim of this work is to investigate coronary branch steal in the critical side branch of coronary bifurcation lesions, according to the Medina classification [6]. Emphasis is placed on analyzing multi-lesion configurations with a SB stenosis, in order to investigate which lesion type, if any, presents significant coronary branch steal. To further investigate the critical SB, the impact of stenosis severity and location on WSS in the SB is analyzed. While significant work has been done analyzing WSS in coronary arteries and its impact on plaque progression, there are fewer studies conducted to evaluate WSS in bifurcation lesions [16–22]. To date, only the works of Binu et al. [21] have analyzed WSS in diseased bifurcations according to the Medina classification, but have not studied WSS in the SB of true bifurcation lesions. Therefore, using computational fluid dynamics, coronary bifurcation models are studied with various stenosis severities and lesion locations, in order to investigate the flow and WSS distributions in the critical SB.The geometric models of the coronary bifurcation presented in this work simulated the bifurcation of the LMCA into the left anterior descending artery (LAD) and the LCX. For computational purposes, the geometry of the coronary arteries was simplified to a cylindrical conduit, with diameters corresponding to clinical arteriography data. The dimensions of the idealized coronary arteries were 4.2mm for the MBP, 3.2mm for the MBD, and 3mm for the SB [23]. The diameters of the simulated coronary arteries had a fractal ratio of 0.67, thus satisfying Finet׳s law of coronary bifurcations [24]. The bifurcation angle between the centreline of the MBD and SB was 75°, corresponding to typical anatomical values [25].To ensure fully developed flow at the inlet and downstream of the lesions, the branch lengths were extended, and determined based on the respective diameters of the mother and daughter vessels. A MBP length corresponding to 15DMBP was utilized, and the daughter vessels had branch lengths of 12DMBD and 11DSB for the MBD and SB, respectively, measured from the center of the bifurcation to its end. It is known that the hydrodynamic entrance length, L, for achieving 98% fully developed flow is approximated by the following equation: L=0.05ReD [26,27], where Re is the Reynolds number and D is the vessel diameter. For the LMCA, this would correspond to an entrance length of approximately 32.8mm (using a Reynolds number of 156, calculated from a maximum flow rate of 1.7mL s-1) The extended branch domain used for computational analysis provided sufficient length for a parabolic-like profile to be established, and thus, the assumption of fully developed flow was reasonable.The stenosis geometry was modeled using the geometry of experimental work completed by Ahmed and Giddens [28], with Gaussian symmetric surface morphology. The total lesion length was restricted to 6mm, lending to a more focal stenosis. To investigate the variance of flow and WSS, vessels with mild to moderate stenoses were used for the first set of analyses. Lesions of different diameter stenoses, 22.5%, 30%, and 50%, were utilized to construct models associated with the Medina classification. The same percent diameter stenosis was imposed in the MBP, MBD, and SB, for each model. Stenoses were positioned at the bifurcation carina. Nine geometric models were created for this computational study. Examples of the computational configurations can be seen inFig. 2(a).The second set of simulations investigated the effect of lesion location on flow distribution and WSS. Diameter stenoses of 50% were imposed on the vessels, according to the Medina classification. Stenoses were placed at the bifurcation carina, as well as 0.003m and 0.006m away from the carina, for a total of nine geometric models. Examples of the implemented configurations are shown in Fig. 2(b).Only true bifurcation lesions were considered for analysis, defined as the occlusion of two or more vessels, where one of the vessels is the SB.Hemodynamic analyses were conducted using COMSOL 3.5 (Burlington, MA, USA), a multi-physics simulation software used for engineering applications. The governing equations of blood flow in the computational domain were solved using the finite element method. For both sets of analyses, blood was taken to be Newtonian (a commonly used assumption [18,29,30]), and the flow was modeled using the incompressible and transient Navier–Stokes equations(1)∇⋅u→=0ρ(∂u→∂t+u→⋅∇u→)=−∇p+μ(∇2u→)Where ρ denotes the fluid density (kgm-3),u→the velocity vector (ms−1), p the pressure (Pa), and µ the viscosity of the fluid (Pas). The Newtonian properties of blood were µ=0.0035Pas, and ρ=1060kgm−3[31]. The assumption of Newtonian flow in this study can be considered valid, as the vessels׳ diameters were greater than the 100µm threshold considered for microcirculation. As a result, the shear rate was higher than 100s-1, the critical value below which non-Newtonian behavior dominates [32]. Furthermore, studies conducted by Johnston et al. concluded that a Newtonian model was a good approximation for blood flow and sufficient for use in numerical studies, rather than implementing a non-Newtonian fluid model [33].To solve the governing equations, boundary conditions representative of the physiological conditions were required. Blood flow was considered to be unsteady, with a fully-developed laminar profile, resulting in a parabolic velocity distribution at the inlet [22]. The use of an extended branch domain allowed for a parabolic inlet velocity profile to be implemented. A time-dependent velocity profile for a healthy LMCA was obtained from literature, as shown inFig. 3[34]. The waveform velocity has a period of T=0.8s, where 0<t (s)<0.25 is systolic flow and 0.25<t (s)<0.8 corresponds to diastole [35]. The arterial flow at peak diastole in the MBP was 102.2mLmin−1.It has been clinically observed that blood flow, in the presence of coronary disease, is modified due to downstream vascular resistance adaptation. In order to reflect the resulting reduction of flow, the inlet flow was reduced, according to stenosis severity as it is clinically observed. Fractional flow reserve (FFR) is used to assess the physiology of coronary lesions and its response to vasodilatory agents, and is defined as the ratio of myocardial flow in the presence of a stenosis to the myocardial flow without a stenosis. A FFR value of less than 0.75 indicates functionally significant lesions [36]. Utilizing the FFR definition, one can characterize the resulting flow variation in the presence of an arterial lesion from the normal flow during the cardiac cycle. According to a clinical study conducted at Tokyo Women׳s Medical University [37], the following FFR values are within the physiological range of diseased arteries with varying stenosis severity: 0.95 for a 22.5% diameter stenosis, 0.85 for a 30% stenosis, and 0.78 for a 50% stenosis. Therefore, the reduced inlet velocity was estimated, as followed:(2)Vin,22.5%stenosis=0.95VnormalVin,30%stenosis=0.85VnormalVin,50%stenosis=0.78VnormalFor the vessel outlets, a commonly used outflow boundary condition was employed; specifically, a zero gauge pressure was applied at the MBD and SB [16,38]. Since the lesions located in the MBP, MBD, and SB are far from the outlet, flow in a nearly fully developed state can be re-established.The computational domain was meshed using COMSOL 3.5, and mesh sensitivity analysis was carried out for three different mesh densities. Fluid domains were discretized into coarse, medium and fine meshes, with 64,581, 95,595 and 163,442 tetrahedral elements, respectively. Unsteady simulations were performed and velocity field variations were assessed. Simulation results showed only a peak difference of 6% between the medium and fine mesh densities, compared to a 9.5% difference between the coarse and medium mesh. Considering the nominal difference in the velocity fields between medium and fine mesh densities, and the resulting discrepancy of computing time, a medium mesh density of approximately 95,000 elements was used for analysis.The flow ratio, defined as the ratio of the maximum flow of the SB to the MBP during the cardiac cycle, was calculated using the following equation:(3)Flowratio=Qmax,SBQmax,MBPwhere Qmax,SBis the maximum flow rate of the side branch, and Qmax,MBPis the maximum flow rate of the main branch proximal.WSS (Pa) was calculated as the product of viscosity, µ, and the shear rate, γ˙ (s−1). The shear rate, in three dimensions, is defined according to following equation:(4)γ̇=2((∂u→∂x)2+(∂v→∂y)2+(∂w→∂z)2)+(∂u→∂y+∂v→∂x)2+(∂u→∂z+∂w→∂x)2+(∂v→∂z+∂w→∂y)2where,u→v→andw→are the computed velocity components [39].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
