@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Experimental validation of 3D printed patient-specific implants using digital image correlation and finite element analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We design patient-specific bone replacement shapes using topology optimization.We perform mechanical testing on a 3D printed bone replacement by applying masticatory forces.We validate the strains of the tests with digital image correlation and finite element analysis.We show that the topology optimized implants provide adequate load-transfer mechanism.This technique has the potential to alleviate the uncertainty for bone replacement designs.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Craniofacial implants,Topology optimization,Segmental bone defect,Digital image correlation,Masticatory simulation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
With the dawn of 3D printing technology, patient-specific implant designs are set to have a paradigm shift. A topology optimization method in designing patient-specific craniofacial implants has been developed to ensure adequate load transfer mechanism and restore the form and function of the mid-face. Patient-specific finite element models are used to design these implants and to validate whether they are viable for physiological loading such as mastication. Validation of these topology optimized finite element models using mechanical testing is a critical step. Instead of inserting the implants into a cadaver or patient, we embed the implants into the computer-aided skull model of a patient and, fuse them together to 3D print the complete skull model with the implant. Masticatory forces are applied in the molar region to simulate chewing and measure the stress–strain trajectory. Until recently, strain gages have been used to measure strains for validation. Digital Image Correlation (DIC) method is a relatively new technique for full-field strain measurement which provides a continuous deformation field data. The main objective of this study is to validate the finite element model of patient-specific craniofacial implants against the strain data from the DIC obtained during the mastication simulation and show that the optimized shapes provide adequate load-transfer mechanism. Patient-specific models are obtained from CT scans. The principal maximum and minimum strains are compared. The computational and experimental approach to designing patient-specific implants proved to be a viable technique for mid-face craniofacial reconstruction.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Craniofacial segmental defects that are caused due to blast injury or tumor ablation require reconstructive procedures involving large bone replacement implants. Such defects remain a challenging problem for reconstructive surgeons as it is difficult to create a complicated 3D structure that satisfies significant functional and aesthetic roles of the midface. Proper reconstruction and replacement are needed not only to obliterate the defect, but also to address the issues of swallowing, orbital function, vision, mastication, speech and restoration of facial contour and self-image [1]. These defects are patient-specific and the implants should depend on the loads and the dimensions of the missing bone defect. Large segmental bone defects of the midface typically require bone grafts for a successful outcome and, advances in microvascular free flaps have greatly increased reconstructive options. Virtual surgical planning, stereolithography modeling, and prefabricated osteotomy bone cutting templates have made surgical planning of osteotomies easier [2–4]. However, for most of these cases, no structural analysis or design principles are used which often results in unfavorable circumstances such as fracture or high stress concentrations. Advances in 3D printing technology have opened a new dawn in patient-specific implant design. Recently, a bioresorbable airway splint has been successfully created and implanted in an infant using a 3D printer [5]. This work demonstrated innovative creation of implants for patient-specific anatomical condition using a multi-disciplinary approach involving high-resolution imaging, computer aided design and biomaterial based 3D printing. For a large segmental defect, finding the correct and optimized shape of the bone replacement still remains a question. Reconstruction is typically done heuristically without adequate surgical preplanning and structural analysis. To address this problem, a technique named topology optimization has been introduced into designing bone replacement in our previous work [6,7]. Topology optimization is a method of finding a structure with optimal load paths to transfer a number of loads to defined supports. This method is widely used in designing components for the automobile industry and lately in designing aircraft components. For example, it has been successfully applied to design the main wing box rib of Airbus A380 [8].Surgical outcome can be enhanced by taking an interdisciplinary approach. Custom tissue fabrication can be considered an option to replace the region of defect ideally [9]. A potential strategy to achieve this objective for craniofacial reconstruction is to apply bone formation technique to patient specific solutions obtained from computer aided design (CAD) with computational methods [7]. The solution is optimized for functional restoration when combined with soft tissue repair and appropriate prosthetics even though the design may deviate from the original human bone geometry. The objective function of topology optimization algorithm is to minimize compliance within the structure. Although only mechanical loadings were considered, it was found that topology optimization gives a shape similar to human natural skeleton without a defect when applied to cross-section on a vertical plane through first molar [7]. Understanding how functional physiological loads (e.g., required for biting) are transferred to the bone-implant interface enables better design of implant supported prosthesis as well [10,11].Traditional strain measurement technique in experiments uses strain gauges. Although they are known to be reliable and robust [12], strain gauges only give discrete data by averaging the real strains between the tips of strain gauge. The result of this technique tends to be affected by environment and requires preparation of the surface and wiring [13]. In general, local strain measurements are essential because complexity in geometries and inhomogeneity result in substantial variation over the structure. Recently, a technique named Digital Image Correlation (DIC) has been developed that captures full field strain data with a good resolution on the surface of the model from images. This relatively new method can be applied to complex geometries. Theories and detailed information of the method can be found in Refs. [14,15]. This DIC technique is used extensively in experiments to characterize the specimen’s behavior. Using this method, full field strain of splinted and non-splinted implant prostheses has been captured [16]. Also, various kinds of computational models for composite hemipelvis [12] and, proximal femur [12,17] have been validated with DIC.The principal aim of this paper is twofold. (i) To experimentally validate that the finite element model correctly captures the stress strain contour of the skull model subjected to masticatory forces and (ii) to validate that the designed implant appropriately transfer the masticatory forces by keeping the maximum stress below ultimate stress. In order to do this, a bone replacement shape for a patient with massive facial injury with large bone loss in midface is designed using the topology optimization method. The solution is then embedded in the skull with computer-aided engineering software to obtain a skull model. Then, the skull model with the embedded implant is fabricated by a 3D printer. Mastication activity is simulated in the experiment and also modeled by finite element analysis (FEA). This work is expected not only to evaluate the solution of topology optimization but also to appraise the idea of using topology optimization to design macroscopic bone replacement shapes for midface defects. The full field strain data from mechanical testing via DIC is compared with that from FE (Finite element) model under same boundary and loading conditions to validate the FE model. FE model of skull is further analyzed to investigate the practicality of the skull in terms of load transfer mechanism and structural integrity.A skull model of massive facial injury with large bone loss in the midface is extracted from the CT scan using software Amira (FEI Visualization Science Group, MA, USA) as shown inFig. 1. The defect is in the center of midface and is asymmetrically extended bilaterally. Using measurement tools, the appropriate design domain is extracted. Within the design domain, supports are provided on the lateral surfaces for contact and fixation between the implant and uninjured portion of facial skeleton. A set of upward forces representing the forces of mastication are applied on bottom surface in the dental profile and, another set of downward forces are provided in the center of the top surface to simulate the trauma forces that may be transferred from the upper region of skeleton. Appropriate holes are embedded to mimic eye, nasal cavities and space for hard palate. The illustration of design domain and respective boundary conditions are shown in Fig. 1.Topology optimization suggests the best material distribution within a design domain by seeking where to put the material (solid) and where not to (void). The topology can be defined by the density at different locations within the domain. The density is usually considered a design variable and can assume 0 or 1 with 0 representing the void and 1 representing the solid. The topology optimization method used in this work iteratively optimizes the elemental densities in the design domain to minimize the compliance (maximize the stiffness) of the final structure while satisfying the volume fraction constraint. This objective function and constraints can be mathematically expressed as follows,(1)minimizeρC(ρ,ud)=fTudsubjectto:K(ρ)ud=fV(ρ)=∫ΩρdV≤Vswhere C is the compliance, ρ is the density vector, f is the global load vector and udis the global displacement vector. K is the global stiffness matrix, Ω is the design domain, and Vsis the volume fraction constraint. Employing the Solid Isotropic Material with Penalization (SIMP) method [18,19], the problem is relaxed for density to have any value between 0 and 1 with small lower bound of ρmin=0.001 to avoid singularities during calculating for equilibrium. Also, a parametric equation of Young’s modulus for local stiffness is defined. Thus, following is added in the problem.(2)0<ρmin<ρ<1E(x)=ρ(x)pE0where p is the penalization factor andE0is the Young’s modulus of the material in the solid phase.In this work, we used the multi-resolution topology optimization (MTOP) method [20]. In MTOP, different discretizations are employed for analysis, design and optimization. The details of this method can be found in [7,20] and for basic theory and introduction of the topology optimization the readers are referred to [21]. Two level of discretization are used in MTOP, B8 elements for displacement (analysis) and 125 density elements inside a B8 element for density (visualization) and design variable (optimization). Based on conditions shown in Fig. 1, a total of 28×20×12=6720 B8/n125 elements are used in the topology optimization algorithm. The design parameter Vs(volume constraint) is chosen as 12%. The penalization factor (p) is selected as 3 to satisfy the Hashin–Shtrikman bounds [19]. The load ratio between the top and the bottom forces depends on the relative importance given to them for different patient-specific conditions. The load ratio between top and bottom forces is chosen to be 10 and the number of iteration is limited to 50 with a condition to terminate the process if density change in domain between iterations is less than 0.001. The result is shown inFig. 2(a). Also, if the user wants to emphasize the equal importance between the top and the bottom forces, load ratio of the top and bottom forces can be changed to 1. In this case, a different solution is obtained which is depicted in Fig. 2(b). Both the respective topology optimization solutions in Fig. 2. are represented with iso-surfaces with density of 0.25.In order to embed the topology optimized bone replacement into the skull, the mandible is separated by cutting the image data near upper condyles in mandible via image segmentation. The bone replacement implant is then scaled and positioned. A denture is included during the embedding process. Once all the components are properly positioned, their stereolithography are combined in a Boolean fashion. Note that the embedded model is re-meshed to alleviate the discrepancies in mesh size between components. The procedure is visually shown inFig. 3.A realistic mastication activity is selected to be simulated by applying appropriate force over molar region on one side of optimized solution embedded skull model (seeFig. 4(a)) while the skull model is held stationary. The stereolithography of skull model is sent to Dimension SST 1200es (Stratasys Ltd., MN, USA), a 3D printer, to fabricate three skull models for the repetitive mechanical testing. This 3D printer uses Fused Deposition Modeling (FDM) technique with ABSplus TM-P430. The elastic modulus of this thermoplastic (2320MPa, 330000psi) is obtained from the manufacturer. Custom fixture, which is inspired by medical halo device [22], is designed in SolidWorks (SolidWorks Corp., MA, USA) and fabricated. The fixture is attached onto the XY table of the Instron 1321 (Instron, MA, USA) servo-hydraulic load frame. XY table is adjusted so that load is applied over the expected molar region in the skull model. Aluminum cylindrical load applicator (see Fig. 4(b)) is used. This load applicator is hinged in the middle so that the top portion is flexible to ensure better contact with the skull model. The cross sectional area of the load applicator is comparable to the area of two molar teeth in the skull model. The final configuration is shown in Fig. 4(b).The mechanical behavior of skull model is analyzed by measuring full-field strain using the 3D digital image correlation technique in the region where most deformation is expected as depicted in Fig. 4(a). Successive images are taken at the constant speed of 2 frames per second with a pair of GRAS-20S4M-C (Point Grey Research, BC, Canada) cameras (resolution: 1624×1224pixel) equipped with 35mm Schneider (Scheneider Optics, NY, USA) lenses. The final configuration of the cameras in the experiment is shown inFig. 5. The external surface of the skull model is sparingly painted with black and white spray paint to give a speckle pattern. The deformation of the model surface is calculated by the Vic-3D software (Correlated solutions, Inc., SC, USA) by monitoring the changes in this speckle pattern in the digital image sequence.A calibration panel that has a set of points with known spacing is used to calibrate the data acquisition system. The calibration panel is oriented differently in each calibration images from both cameras so that they can be used to define 3D Cartesian coordinate system in Vic-3D. The contour of the skull model is captured by stereo triangulation in the defined 3D Cartesian coordinate system. The MTS FlexTest (MTS, MN, USA) controller is set to apply a linear ramp load on the skull model with a maximum magnitude of 120lbs (≅534N) starting from 5lbs (≅22.2N) of preload through cylindrical load applicator. Load histories of the three mechanical tests are shown in Fig. 5.In order to successfully replicate the mechanical testing, the material property of the printing material (ABSplus) is required. The tensile property of ABSplus which can be obtained from the manufacturer (Stratasys Ltd., MN, USA), could not be directly applied because compressive stress dominates in the study. Hence, we performed our own mechanical testing to obtain the compressive material properties of ABSplus material used in the 3D printing. Additional cylindrical specimens with 12mm diameter and 24mm height are 3D printed to characterize its property under compression. Printing layer with respect to load of this specimen is controlled such that it is consistent with the skull model. Similar setup with that of the mechanical testing of skull model is employed. A ramp load that generates strain rate of 8.333E−4 is chosen (50% strain in 600s) (seeFig. 6). 3D digital image correlation technique is used to capture the mechanical behavior of the specimen during loading. In the sequence of the images, a virtual extensometer is positioned in specimen’s longitudinal direction to extract engineering strain. Stress and strain relationship is extracted by correlating extracted engineering strain with the loading profile. The testing is repeated three times with the three specimens. The resulting three true and engineering stress strain plots are shown in Fig. 6. The average elastic modulus of the ABSplus from the three samples is computed to be 2.074GPa.The stereolithography of the skull model is meshed using 3D volumetric elements. The mesh consists of 155195 linear tetrahedral (C3D4) elements and 41492 nodes in the skull model. Commercial FEA software Abaqus (Dassault Systèmes, Vèlizy-Villacoublay, France) is used for the simulation of the experiment.Elastic modulus of 2.074GPa and material yield strength using 0.2% offset method of 53MPa from the compressive specimen testing are used with manufacturer provided Poisson’s ratio of 0.35. Plastic behavior is also taken into account in the FE model by introducing plastic strain values. The boundary conditions to match the mechanical testing of skull model are employed. They include four areas in upper cranium and two areas in the bottom most portion of skull model. Their movement and rotation under the load is prohibited by fixing the nodes in these areas. A load of 267N which is the half of the maximum load in the mechanical testing is applied on 23 nodes in the region of first and second molar teeth as concentrated forces (magnitude of 11.61N each in vertical direction). (SeeFig. 7(b)).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
