@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Shape recognition of CAD models via iterative slippage analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present a new shape recognition method by iterative slippage analysis.The exact normal is found to be one of the key points for slippage analysis.The appropriate region is found to be the other key points for slippage analysis.A knowledge guided region growing method is used to get the appropriate region.An iterative normal modification method is used to obtain the exact normal.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Shape recognition,Slippage analysis,Basic primitives,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A new slippage analysis method for recognizing basic primitive surfaces of CAD models is presented in this paper. Obtaining the exact normal and searching the appropriate local region of each point are found to be the key steps for determining the local slippage motion type. First, the tensor voting-based boundary point recognition method is integrated to preprocess the original points. Then, the local slippage analysis method is used to initialize the point type. Furthermore, the appropriate region of each point is acquired by the region growing method. Meanwhile, the middle level information (the basic primitive surface types and the representative parameters) is found, guiding the modification of the normal of each point and the iterative detection of the surface types. Finally, the middle level information-based smooth method is introduced to refine the boundary of each basic primitive surface. The empirical results show that the proposed algorithm is efficient and robust for recognizing primitive shapes from CAD models of mechanical parts.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With the rapid development of 3D digital data acquisition devices, we can obtain all the point cloud of 3D models easily and rebuild the triangular meshes with high accuracy. This is recently called reverse engineering, which provides a new way to create massive complex 3D models. However, due to the loss of middle level and high level model information (symmetry, parallelism, perpendicularity, etc.), such meshes are too raw to be directly used in the subsequent processes, such as CAD model reconstruction, and convergent-type CAE. With the virtual explosion in the amount of raw data available for designer, the critical problem shifts to obtain the middle level and high level information through this data and adopt it to improve the efficiency for redesigning a new product [1]. The key processes to detect the middle level and high level model information from existing 3D point clouds are mesh segmentation and shape recognition [2–6].Recently, a lot of researches have been done on shape segmentation and recognition. Most previous approaches are based on the local model information like curvature or boundary detection. However, even with the segmented surface patches, it is also difficult to get the middle level model information, let alone the high level model information. Realizing that a lot of mechanical parts consist of basic primitives, such as plane, sphere, cylinder, cone, extrusion, revolution, helix, nowadays, many researchers have attempted to segment the CAD models into basic primitives [7–13]. The existing primitive shape fitting approaches likely confront the following problems: (1) hardly can recognize all the basic primitives, such as plane, sphere, cylinder, cone, extrusion, revolution, and helix; (2) hardly can obtain the middle level information of the basic primitives, such as the center and radius of a sphere, the normal and position of a plane, etc; (3) sensitivity to numerical noise inherently embedded within the obtained 3D point clouds. Therefore, we propose a new slippage analysis method to robust recognize shape primitives of mechanical parts. We discover that the key processes for slippage shape segmentation are the exact normal and the appropriate region selection of each point. The existences of noise in point cloud obtained by 3D digital data acquisition devices and sharp edges in mechanical objects make it difficult to find the exact normal of each point. Thus, we introduce the tensor voting method to classify the point type into a plane, a sharp edge and a corner. Meanwhile, the detected point type improves the efficiency of the surface type segmenting and recognizing. Furthermore, we use the knowledge-based region growing method to get the exact region for each primitive patch, and then adopt the extended RANSAC method to obtain the middle level information, which iteratively guides the normal modification and the shape recognition.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
