@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Computerized methodology for micro-CT and histological data inflation using an IVUS based translation map

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A framework for inflating micro-CT/histological images is proposed.The micro-CT/histological images are transformed and validated based on IVUS.A realistic matching between IVUS and micro-CT/histological images is achieved.The overlapping plaque areas are significantly after inflation.The reliability of validation procedure is enhanced in IVUS plaque detection.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Micro-CT,Histology,Intravascular ultrasound,Plaque characterization,Image registration,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A framework for the inflation of micro-CT and histology data using intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) images, is presented. The proposed methodology consists of three steps. In the first step the micro-CT/histological images are manually co-registered with IVUS by experts using fiducial points as landmarks. In the second step the lumen of both the micro-CT/histological images and IVUS images are automatically segmented. Finally, in the third step the micro-CT/histological images are inflated by applying a transformation method on each image. The transformation method is based on the IVUS and micro-CT/histological contour difference. In order to validate the proposed image inflation methodology, plaque areas in the inflated micro-CT and histological images are compared with the ones in the IVUS images. The proposed methodology for inflating micro-CT/histological images increases the sensitivity of plaque area matching between the inflated and the IVUS images (7% and 22% in histological and micro-CT images, respectively).

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Acute thrombus formations results to life threatening consequences such us stroke or myocardial infarction. The mechanisms of coronary artery disease (CAD) initiation and progression [1] have been studied for many years [2]. It is well known that plaques at high risk for rupture and thrombus formation are not necessarily those that cause severe stenosis [3,4]. In order to investigate plaque features of vulnerability and changes in their composition an accurate visualization of the vessel wall is needed. Several invasive and non-invasive imaging modalities [5,6] are nowadays available which are major determinant of the clinical outcome [7], and provide the appropriate interventions. Imaging methods, allow assessment of luminal pathology, quantification of plaque burden and characterization of the type of the plaque.Intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) [8] is currently the most widely used invasive imaging modality which provides high resolution cross-sectional images of the coronary arteries. In IVUS images an expert observer can permit detailed evaluation of the lumen, media-adventitia border and evaluate the plaque composition with a moderate accuracy [9]. To increase the accuracy of IVUS in characterizing the atherosclerotic plaque, several methodologies have been proposed in the literature allowing automated processing of the IVUS frames [10–14]. However, these methods were based on experts annotations and none of them was further validated using histological cross sections, which is considered as the current gold standard in plaque characterization. Therefore, the Virtual histology intravascular ultrasound (VH-IVUS) [15] plaque characterization method was developed and validated based on histology [16]. The VH-IVUS has become the method of choice in IVUS plaque characterization and is widely used in the clinical and research arena nowadays [17,18].Although histology is considered as the gold standard for atherosclerotic plaque characterization an accurate registration between the histology and IVUS images is needed [19]. Therefore, experts detect anatomical landmarks such as side branches, surrounding tissue layout, etc, in both IVUS and histological images. Once the artery histological segments are matched with the corresponding IVUS segments, the histological images are produced. However, histological image extraction is a time consuming procedure having several limitations. The harvested segments are mounted in a paraffin tray, then the pathologist cut the segments in cross sections and stains them with haematoxylin to produce Masson׳s trichrome images (histological images). Then the histological images are matched with the IVUS images and experts annotate the various plaque types in the stained histological images. Anatomically, the lumen of the produced histological images is narrowed eccentrically or concentrically. Tissue fixation at unphysiological intraluminal pressure as well as dehydration from paraffin embedding leads to artery wall shrinkage and coarctation, which is evident as gross deformations in cross-sectional histological images [20]. Therefore, the entire artery wall of the produced histological images cannot be matched with the artery wall in IVUS images and only a small area plaque can be matched and used for validation. This procedure was followed to validate the Vitual Histology (VH-IVUS) plaque characterization method [16]. However, the lack of histological data, the time-consuming and lab intensive procedure of histological image extraction procedure [21], makes the validation of IVUS methods extremely difficult.Micro-CT is a powerful imaging technique providing high resolution images of small specimens. The feasibility of micro-CT for the analysis of the coronary artery wall has already been evaluated [22]. It provides high quality images able to visualize the 3D shape and size of the plaque precisely, even though it cannot be used in large animals in-vivo. Due to its excellent spatial resolution, micro-CT has been shown to be able to detect small early lesions at submillimetric scale and to be well correlated with histology [22]. Although, a detailed plaque characterization is an advantage of histology considered as the current gold standard for visualizing plaque components, micro-CT could be also used as gold standard in plaque characterization due to its excellent resolution. However, the images acquired from both micro-CT and histology are deformed, due to the lack of blood pressure. Hence, both techniques require expert׳s intervention in order to be used for plaque characterization.Traditionally, medical image-registration can been classified to rigid (images simply need to be rotated and translated to achieve correspondence) or non-rigid (correspondence between two images cannot be achieved without some stretching or deformation of the images) [23]. Experts can perform rigid image registration between IVUS and deformed images; deformed images can only be rotated to achieve correspondence without any morphological transformation. The images that are co-registered cannot have a point-by-point correspondence between the reference and target images as the micro-CT/histological images are deformed. Therefore an automated image registration method cannot be applied in order to transform the co-registered images into one coordinate system. To overcome this limitation in deformed images derived from both histology and micro-CT a non-rigid registration method, based on artery inflation is needed.In this work, we propose an inflation methodology for non-rigid registration of micro-CT/histological and IVUS images. The methodology is based on the assumption that lumen is deformed and compressed due to the lack of blood pressure; however the translation of center of gravity is negligible. The methodology consists of three main steps: (a) IVUS/deformed image contour co-registration, (b) Deformed image and IVUS lumen detection, and (c) Image Inflation. The proposed methodology was used to inflate histological and micro-CT images and was validated by comparing the plaque areas in the pre and post inflated images with the plaque areas in the IVUS images. The method increases the plaque area matching between the inflated and the IVUS images improving the reliability for a correct plaque labeling process as well as it enhances the accuracy of the produced training dataset from the histological images.The methodology for the artery inflation includes the following steps:A.IVUS/deformed image contourco-registration. Medical experts manually select paired frames of deformed images and IVUS images along the imaged vessels.Deformed image and IVUS lumen detection. The lumen borders of both deformed images (S1) and IVUS images (S2) are automatically detected.Image Inflation.A distance map is created from the areas insideS1andS2and is used to create a transformation matrixT. The inflated imageI(i,j)is produced by 2D interpolation of the non-inflated image using the transformation matrixT.The above steps are presented inFig. 1. The methodology for vessel inflation estimates the deformation of the inner wall and applies an inverse transformation to create an image as close as possible to the uncompressed vessel.As medical experts can only perform rigid image registration [23] between IVUS and deformed images, they selected manually paired frames of deformed images and IVUS on corresponding segments of the artery along the entire vessel. Fiducial points such as side branches and calcified plaques are used as landmarks. By measuring the distance between branches the same artery segments are detected on both deformed images and IVUS. An example of deformed images and IVUS registration is shown inFig. 2 where five different landmarks were identified on both IVUS and micro-CT cross sections, by the experts.The landmarks identified in the two image sources (micro-CT/histological images and IVUS) are used for frame alignment, and border registration. The slice index of two landmark points is used for frame alignment, and the location of the landmark in the image is used to rotate the IVUS borders accordingly in order to be aligned with the corresponding micro-CT/histological frames.The second step of the methodology is the detection of both the deformed image lumen borders and the IVUS lumen borders in the co-registered images. The lumen borderS1of the deformed imageID(i,j)is semi-automatically detected:1.The user approximates manually the center of the lumen (Ci,Cj) of theIDimage.ImageIDis segmented using an intensity based thresholdT[24] (T=400, sensitivity analysis was performed in the range of 100–1000).The binary objects of the segmented image are labeled. As lumen area is considered the binary object that includes the center of the lumen (Ci,Cj).The procedure followed for detecting the lumen border on the deformed images is shown schematically inFig. 3.To detect the lumen borderS2in IVUS, we have used the method proposed by Plissiti et al. [25], which employs deformable models [26]. The approach entails an initial contour of the lumen border to be provided at the first frame of the IVUS series.In order to inflate the image a transformation of each pixel on vertical and horizontal directions must be estimated. An assumption of our methodology is that the wall is not compressed therefore the translation of pixels corresponding to vessel wall is equal to the translation of the nearest lumen point. Therefore, for the estimation of the image transformation a mapping of contourS1(pre-inflated micro-CT/histology lumen) toS2(IVUS lumen) is required.An active contour(e(t)=[i(t),j(t)],t∈[0,1])is a method for delineating an object outline curve and has the ability to deform according to specific constrains. We minimize the energy functionEactive, in order to obtain the final contour as:(1)Eactive=∫01(Einternal(e(t))+Eexternal(e(t)))dt,where:Einternal=k(s)|∂e(t)/∂t|2+λ(s)|∂2e(t)2/∂t2|2andk(s),λ(s)are the regulation parameters. As an external energyEexternal, we use the Gradient Vector Flow method [27].In order to calculate the image transformation map the active contour approach, described above, is followed [26]. Initially the following distance imageD(i,j)is created(2)D(i,j)={DS1(i,j)+DS2(i,j)i,jincludedinS2DS2(i,j)otherwise,whereDS1(i,j)andDS2(i,j)is the signed distance ofi,jfromS1andS2, respectively.The active contour [26] method is applied to the distance imageD(i,j), starting fromS1, iterating until convergence. Using the distance imageD(i,j)the active contour is forced to approximate theS2, letS1′, as depicted inFig. 4a. Therefore the active contour points of the initial model, approximatingS1, and the corresponding points on the active contour result (after convergence), approximatingS2, provide a mapping function fromS1toS2as shown in Fig. 4b.The contour mapping fromS1toS2is used in order to create the transformation matrixT(i,j)in vertical (TX(i,j)) and horizontal directions (TY(i,j)):(3)Tx(i,j)={i+PXS1(i,j)i,jexteriortoS1iotherwise,(4)Ty(i,j)={j+PYS1(i,j)i,jexteriortoS1jotherwise,wherePXS1(i,j),PYS1(i,j)are the translations on vertical and horizontal directions of the point onS1(translation to the corresponding point onS1׳) closest to(i,j), respectively. A schematic presentation of the translations on vertical and horizontal directions is shown inFig. 5.The inflated imageI(i,j)is produced by the 2D interpolation of the non-inflated image using the Cartesian translation maps forTX(i,j)andTY(i,j)(Fig. 6).Following 4 months of high-fat, cholesterol (4%) supplemented diet, 3 pigs underwent left coronary angiography and IVUS examinations and then sacrificed by KCl i.v. bolus injection under anesthesia. The entire heart was harvested and the coronary arteries were processed for micro-CT acquisition and histopathological examination. Animal instrumentation and experimental protocols were approved by the Animal Care Committee 5 of the Italian Ministry of Health (Protocol number: 06/2009-B-2009/01/26). The approval was according to the Italian Law (DL-116, Jan. 27, 1992) and the National Institute of Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals.The dimensions of each IVUS frame were384×384pixels and the system used was the Volcano Therapeutics, Rancho Cordova, CA. The catheter was the Eagle Eye Gold, Volcano Therapeutics with 2.9-F and 20-MHz diameter and frequency, respectively.The animals which were selected for histomorphometric validation of micro-CT coronary measurements, featured mild (preatherosclerotic changes), moderate (<50% of segments with atheromas) and severe (> 50% of segments displaying atheromas) intima changes of the left coronary artery (LCA). After micro-CT scan, en bloc embedded LCA specimens were rewarmed, removed from the Falcon test tube, cross cut in segments of 5mm length and sectioned (Microm HM 300, Bio-optica). Ten to twelve cross sections from each artery were obtained and stained with haematoxylin and eosin (H&E) and Masson׳s trichrome stains. All sections were examined under a light microscope (Olympus BX43) at 4× to 20× original magnification and digitized by a video system (Olympus D70 camera) interfaced to Olympus Cell Sens Dimension software for image acquisition and morphometric analysis H&E and Masson׳s stained sections, under 2× microscope magnification, were digitized at 1600×1600 pixel resolution and compared to corresponding micro-CT and IVUS slices. Artery wall cross-sectional thickness and area, as well as maximal intimal thickness and cross- sectional area of each section were calculated.An in-house developed micro-CT scanner installed at IFC-CNR, Pisa, was used [28]. All the tomographic acquisitions were made with 720 projections over 360 degrees, for a total scan time of 54min and a total exposure of 2268mAs. For each sample, we have obtained images of 512×512 dimensions.The proposed image inflation methodology was validated using expert׳s annotations. A medical expert selected manually paired frames of micro-CT/IVUS images and histological/IVUS images. From the 3 arteries 22 micro-CT/IVUS and histological/IVUS pairs were selected. Plaque was visible in 16 micro-CT/IVUS segments and in 18 histological/IVUS segments. The same expert annotated the plaque in these 16 and 18 micro-CT/IVUS and histological/IVUS segments, respectively. The images were inflated using the proposed inflation methodology and plaque areas were calculated in the pre and post inflated images and were compared with the plaque areas of the IVUS images. In order to find the best match for comparing the plaque area between the pre-inflated images with IVUS images the centers of gravity in the two areas were detected The center of gravityC(Cx,Cy)of each area fornpixels of the area perimeter is defined as:(5)Ci=16A∑q=1n−1(iq+iq+1)(iqjq+1−iq+1jq),(6)Cj=16A∑q=1n−1(jq+jq+1)(iqjq+1−iq+1jq)whereAis the plaque area.To validate the proposed methodology we computed the Pearson׳s correlation coefficients between the plaque areas measured in the pre and post inflated images and the plaque areas measured in the IVUS images, we have performed Bland-Altman analysis and we have computed the positive predictive value:(7)PPV=TPTP+FP,As true positive values (TP) we define the common area between the two measurements, as false positive (FP) values we define the plaque area of the micro-CT or histological image minus the common area and as false negative (FN) the IVUS plaque area minus the common area. Finally, the ratio of overlapping/non-overlapping areas and the Jaccard/Sørensen–Dice similarity coefficients were computed. The ratio of overlapping/non-overlapping areas were defined as:(8)Rover=TPTP+FN,(9)Rnon−over=FN+FPTP+FN,and the Jaccard/Sørensen–Dice similarity coefficients were defined as:(10)J=TPFP+FN,(11)SD=2×TP2×TP+FP+FN.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Both micro-CT and histology produce images corresponding to deformed vessels. This deformation is due to the lack of blood pressure. Currently, by using the proposed image inflation methodology we can overcome this limitation and produce realistic micro-CT/histological images. The proposed methodology could be used for validating several plaque detection methods with histological/micro-CT images. Since the plaque areas are overestimated in histological/micro-CT images due to standard histological tissue processing a more realistic inflation method should be developed in the future, able to decrease these areas during the inflation procedure. However this approach should also involve other parameters (i.e. biological) than only geometrical parameters during the inflation procedure.None declared.