@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Interactive tooth partition of dental mesh base on tooth-target harmonic field

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A harmonic field (HF) is introduced to partition individual teeth from dental mesh.A modified weighting scheme of HF is used for mesh partition purpose.Constraints of HF are assigned based on prior knowledge of human teeth.A boundary refining strategy is introduced to handle complicated dental mesh.Smart user interfaces are proposed to improve flexibility and reduce interaction.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Tooth,Dental models,Mesh partition,User interfaces,Harmonic field,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The accurate tooth partition of dental mesh is a crucial step in computer-aided orthodontics. However, tooth boundary identification is not a trivial task for tooth partition, since different shapes and their arrangements vary substantially among common clinical cases. Though curvature field is traditionally used for identifying boundaries, it is normally not reliable enough. Other methods may improve the accuracy, but require intensive user interaction. Motivated by state-of-the-art general interactive mesh segmentation methods, this paper proposes a novel tooth-target partition framework that employs harmonic fields to partition teeth accurately and effectively. In addition, a refining strategy is introduced to successfully segment teeth from the complicated dental model with indistinctive tooth boundaries on its lingual side surface, addressing an issue that had not been solved properly before. To utilise high-level information provided by the user, smart and intuitive user interfaces are also proposed with minimum interaction. In fact, most published interactive methods specifically designed for tooth partition are lacking efficient user interfaces. Extensive experiments and quantitative analyses show that our tooth partition method outperforms the state-of-the-art approaches in terms of accuracy, robustness and efficiency.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Three dimensional (3D) tooth models are now widely used in dental-related fields, ranging from oral medicine and forensic medicine to anthropology and archaeology. There are two major ways of reconstructing tooth models. The first one is segmenting teeth from medical images, like dental cone beam computed tomography (CT) images [1]. The second one is partitioning teeth from a noisy 3D dental model, which is generated from scanning the results of patient-specific dental impressions [2]. In fact, segmented teeth on dental models correspond to crowns of the teeth. Full tooth models can be further generated by integrating the segmented teeth with roots reconstructed from CT images [3] or statistical models [4]. Since the CT imaging modality is radiologically invasive and of relatively low resolution [4], the usage of 3D dental models for tooth partitioning is much more popular.As basic operations of dental models, tooth partition (or segmentation /cutting/decomposition) is a key ingredient in virtual dental applications. For example, it is a fundamental process in dental surgical plans, while the success of surgeries depends not only on the technical aspects of the operation, but, to a larger extent, also on the formulation of precise plans [5]. In other words, precise plans are crucial to the success of surgeries, as well as to the partition procedure. The segmented individual teeth also are essential for virtual orthodontics treatments [6], information retrieval [7,8], and can be used in dentists’ training, communication between the dentist and the patient, etc.In this research, we aim to find a novel method to partition each tooth from 3D digital maxillary or mandibular mesh models. We also have chosen to involve intuitive user interaction, since fully automatic segmentation is typically impossible, specifically, defining a semantic subpart for shapes remains a challenging task [9]. The major challenges exist in the following two aspects:The first and primary challenge when partitioning a mesh model is to accurately locate cutting boundaries. In other words, we have to find a proper partition criterion. Most widely cited criterion is the minima rule, which states that human perception usually divides a surface into parts along the concave discontinuity of the tangent plane [10,11]. Based on the principle, surface curvature field is traditionally used to identify the boundaries. However, unlike ideal synthetic models, clinical dental models may have different problems, like tooth crowding and other dental abnormalities, which make the curvature-based method unreliable in terms of accuracy and efficiency. So, choosing an appropriate segmenting strategy to accurately find cutting boundaries is the first and foremost challenge we are facing.The second challenge lies in the user interface designation. On one hand, user interaction can provide useful high-level information in order to aid in the detection and extraction of target objects. On the other hand, a method that requires too many manual operations is unreasonable. For example, placing a great deal of control points on models will lead to experiences that are tedious and time-consuming. This is because the time it takes can quickly add up to hours and the user may need special training. Moreover, it is important to guarantee real-time feedback during the interaction. Hence, designing smart user interfaces with minimum user interaction and real-time feedback is another crucial key for our research.Fully considering the challenges described above, we introduce a novel interactive tooth partition framework based on harmonic fields (HFs). The main contributions of our method include the following:•Other than curvature field, a HF with a modified weighting scheme is introduced for dental model segmentation in terms of accuracy and efficiency. This is the first time that HF theory is used in tooth partitioning.A strategy of assigning constraints for HF is proposed based on prior knowledge on human teeth.A boundary-refining method is presented to successfully solve the problem of segmenting teeth from complicated maxillary models with indistinctive tooth boundaries on the lingual side surface. The problem had not previously been solved properly.As an interactive method, smart interfaces are developed to partition teeth intuitively with minimal user interaction. In contrast, user interface designations are barely introduced in most published interactive methods.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we propose an innovative approach to interactively partition individual teeth from digital maxillary or mandibular models. Though widely used in most published tooth partitioning methods, curvature field is unreliable for segmenting teeth in terms of accuracy, and we support this argument through the experimental results of two curvature-based segmentation methods designed specifically for tooth partitioning.In addition to surface curvature, a tooth-target harmonic field with improved weighting schemes and constraints guided by prior knowledge is employed to identify the tooth boundaries in our approach. Additionally, a boundary-refining strategy is introduced to successfully solve the problem of a complicated model with indistinctive tooth boundaries on its lingual side surface.As a novel interactive method, smart and intuitive user interfaces are also proposed to improve the flexibility and reduce user interaction. Effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed method is approved by (1) comparisons between state-of-the-art methods and ours, (2) mean errors and (3) time consumption evaluations.Since our proposed framework is based on HF, the input models should be manifold. Right now, one tooth is corresponding to one HF in our method. It would be more interesting to extend the current framework for multiple teeth partitioning under a uniform HF, and further reduce the interaction. Given that the time consumption of the HF based method will increase, along with augment of the mesh scale, segmenting teeth from high precision dental models with low time cost might be another interesting future direction to explore.None declared.