@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Low-complexity detection of atrial fibrillation in continuous long-term monitoring

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This study describes an atrial fibrillation detector for implementation in a battery-powered device.The detector is suitable for detection of brief atrial fibrillation episodes.The detector performs better on the MIT–BIH Atrial Fibrillation database than do existing detectors.The detector can be implemented with just a few arithmetical operations.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Atrial fibrillation,RR-based detection,Low-complexity detection,Continuous ambulatory monitoring,Brief episodes,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study describes an atrial fibrillation (AF) detector whose structure is well-adapted both for detection of subclinical AF episodes and for implementation in a battery-powered device for use in continuous long-term monitoring applications. A key aspect for achieving these two properties is the use of an 8-beat sliding window, which thus is much shorter than the 128-beat window used in most existing AF detectors. The building blocks of the proposed detector include ectopic beat filtering, bigeminal suppression, characterization of RR interval irregularity, and signal fusion. With one design parameter, the performance can be tuned to put more emphasis on avoiding false alarms due to non-AF arrhythmias or more emphasis on detecting brief AF episodes. Despite its very simple structure, the results show that the detector performs better on the MIT–BIH Atrial Fibrillation database than do existing detectors, with high sensitivity and specificity (97.1% and 98.3%, respectively). The detector can be implemented with just a few arithmetical operations and does not require a large memory buffer thanks to the short window.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In recent years, atrial fibrillation (AF) monitoring has been performed in connection with cryptogenic ischemic stroke [1], interventional ablation procedures [2], and pharmacological treatment [3], providing information for evaluating the efficacy of different treatment strategies. Ultimately, continuous long-term monitoring, lasting from several weeks to months, should be performed so that all episodes of paroxysmal AF are detected, including the very brief ones, and, therefore, it is essential that detection techniques are developed subject to the constraint that the implementation can be made extremely energy efficient.It has been shown that the success rate of catheter ablation is highly overestimated when determined from 24-h Holter recordings [2]. This issue can be addressed by considerably extending the monitoring period so that the likelihood of detecting AF episodes increases. However, existing techniques for continuous long-term monitoring reduce the patient׳s quality of life and often lead to premature termination of the data acquisition [4]. While patient comfort can be improved by shrinking the size of the monitoring device, using a smaller battery, large battery capacity is nonetheless needed in this type of monitoring since battery replacement or recharging should be avoided.Many different approaches to AF detection have been proposed in recent years: the majority of the detectors take the RR interval series as the starting point [5–8], whereas a few detectors also involve information on P wave and f wave morphology [9–11]. However, the latter type of detector is associated with dramatically higher computational demands than are the RR-based detectors, making them unsuitable for implementation in a low power device. Somewhat surprisingly, it has been demonstrated that increased complexity through inclusion of morphologic analysis does not necessarily translate to performance better than that achieved by an RR-based AF detector [9,10].Crucial issues to be solved in RR-based AF detection are (1) improved detection rate of brief (“occult”) episodes of paroxysmal AF (<30s) and (2) reduction of the false alarm rate due to ectopic beats and other irregular types of rhythm. While almost all AF detectors require at least a 30-s episode for correct detection, recent studies have suggested that episodes as short as 5s are of interest to detect since they are associated with increased risk of stroke [12,1,13]. Therefore, reliable detection of brief episodes is essential so that an accurate evaluation of AF burden can be produced when studying thromboembolic risk.In this paper, we propose a novel RR-based AF detector with a low complexity structure that can be implemented with few arithmetical operations. The detector involves blocks for preprocessing, bigeminal suppression, characterization of RR irregularity, signal fusion, and threshold detection; both off- and online versions of the detector are presented (Section 2). Using annotated ECG databases as well as simulated signals, both described in Section 3, detector performance is investigated in Section 4 as a function of different design parameters as well as a function of AF episode length. The resulting performance is compared to that achieved by other AF detectors in the literature.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The present study shows that the proposed AF detector, despite its extreme simplicity, offers better performance than do the detectors described in the literature. An important feature of the detector is its use of a short window, only 8 beats, facilitating the detection of brief, subclinical AF episodes. The detector is particularly well-suited for implementation in a battery-powered device, e.g., an external or implantable event recorder, thanks to the very few arithmetical operations required for each RR interval.None declared.