@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A tool path generation method for freeform surface machining by introducing the tensor property of machining strip width

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A regional based tool path generation method is proposed and tested.A tensor is derived to evaluate machining strip width using ball end mill.A surface division method is presented based on machining strip width tensor field.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Freeform surface machining,Ball end mill,Tool path,Machining strip width,Tensor,Surface subdivision,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Due to the complexity of geometry, the feed direction with maximal machining strip width usually varies among different regions over a freeform surface or a shell of surfaces. However, in most traditional tool path generation methods, the surface is treated as one machining region thus only local optimisation might be achieved. This paper presents a new region-based tool path generation method. To achieve the full effect of the optimal feed direction, a surface is divided into several sub-surface regions before tool path computation. Different from the scalar field representation of the machining strip width, a rank-two tensor field is derived to evaluate the machining strip width using ball end mill. The continuous tensor field is able to represent the machining strip widths in all feed directions at each cutter contact point, except at the boundaries between sub-regions. Critical points where the tensor field is discontinuous are defined and classified. By applying critical points in the freeform surface as the start for constructing inside boundaries, the surface could be accurately divided to such that each region contain continuous distribution of feed directions with maximal machining strip width. As a result, tool paths are generated in each sub-surface separately to achieve better machining efficiency. The proposed method was tested using two freeform surfaces and the comparison to several leading existing tool path generation methods is also provided.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Freeform surfaces are widely used in design of complex parts in the field of automotive and aeronautics to meet the aesthetic and functional requirements. The machining of freeform surfaces is time-consuming with significant manual interactions by using the current CAM systems. Thus how to generate the tool path automatically and optimally has become one of the most popular aspects in the current research of freeform surface machining  [1].Quality and efficiency are two criteria to evaluate the tool path. First, requirements in surface tolerance should be satisfied and no interference or gouging is permitted. Then the machining time should be reduced as much as possible. Great efforts have been made in machining strip width optimisation in tool path computation to increase the machining efficiency  [2–4]. In most of these methods, the whole surface is considered as one machining region. Tool paths of the surface are computed by shifting an initial tool path which may be one of the surface boundaries or a curve within the surface generated under some rules. However, for complex surfaces machining, the feed directions with maximal machining strip width usually present varies among different regions. If the surface is still treated as one region in this condition, only local optimal machining results could be achieved. In this paper, machining strip width is evaluated using a rank-two tensor and the surface may be divided into several sub-surface regions. Each region contains continuous distribution of feed directions with maximal machining strip width. Then tool paths in each sub-surface could be generated separately to achieve optimal tool paths.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper presents a new regional based tool path generation method for freeform surface machining. The complex freeform surfaces may need to be divided into several sub-surface regions for machining separately to avoid local optimisation. Instead of representing the machining strip width as a scalar in traditional tool path generation methods, a rank-two tensor is developed to evaluate the machining strip width with ball end mill. Based on this tensor, machining strip widths in all feed directions at each cutter contact point could be evaluated continuously. The machining strip width tensor could be used both in tool path generation and surface subdivision. In tool path generation, it is helpful to find out an optimal initial tool path curve. For surface subdivision, a machining strip width tensor field is established. Critical points in the tensor field are called degenerated points which are further classified into three types. Only trisector degenerate points are selected as the start to construct inside boundaries for dividing the surface. In each sub-surface, feed directions for maximal machining strip width of the cutter contact points follow the similar or same pattern. Then tool paths in each sub-surface are generated separately. This method is tested in finishing two freeform surfaces and the comparisons with the iso-parametric method, iso-scallop method and the machining potential field based method are provided. It shows the proposed method could achieve a better result both in total tool paths length and machining time. The future work will focus the derivation of the tensor for machining strip width evaluation with other types of cutters like flat end mill and fillet end mill. We are also interested in integrating the machining strip width optimisation to feed speed optimisation.