@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Segmentation of anterior cruciate ligament in knee MR images using graph cuts with patient-specific shape constraints and label refinement

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose an anterior cruciate ligament segmentation method in knee MRI.Patient-specific shape constraints for graph cuts are proposed to avoid leakage.Label refinement with superpixels is proposed to recover inhomogeneous region.Superpixel refinement significantly improves the accuracy of tibia-attached ACL.Experiments show that the proposed method improves the Boykov model by 15% in DSC.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Knee MRI,ACL segmentation,Graph cuts,Shape constraints,Superpixelization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We propose a graph-cut-based segmentation method for the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) in knee MRI with a novel shape prior and label refinement. As the initial seeds for graph cuts, candidates for the ACL and the background are extracted from knee MRI roughly by means of adaptive thresholding with Gaussian mixture model fitting. The extracted ACL candidate is segmented iteratively by graph cuts with patient-specific shape constraints. Two shape constraints termed fence and neighbor costs are suggested such that the graph cuts prevent any leakage into adjacent regions with similar intensity. The segmented ACL label is refined by means of superpixel classification. Superpixel classification makes the segmented label propagate into missing inhomogeneous regions inside the ACL. In the experiments, the proposed method segmented the ACL with Dice similarity coefficient of 66.47±7.97%, average surface distance of 2.247±0.869, and root mean squared error of 3.538±1.633, which increased the accuracy by 14.8%, 40.3%, and 37.6% from the Boykov model, respectively.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) is a ligament located in human knee joint, which plays an important role in maintaining knee joint stability [1]. For diagnosis of ACL injury and its surgical guidance, the segmentation of the ACL in knee magnetic resonance (MR) images has received an increasing amount of attention. Numerous works have described the manual segmentation of the ACL as assisted by orthopedic experts for clinical purposes [2–4]. However, because manual segmentation is time-consuming and suffered by intra- and inter-observer variability, an automatic ACL segmentation technique is necessary. In knee MRI, an automatic segmentation of ACL is made challenging by several imaging characteristics of the ACL, including 1) adjacent soft tissues, e.g., the posterior cruciate ligament (PCL) and articular cartilage, which share similar intensity distribution with the ACL; and 2) intensity inhomogeneous regions inside the ACL, especially the region attached to the tibia. As shown inFig. 1, during the ACL segmentation process, these adjacent soft tissues with similar intensity distribution cause the leakage of the segmented ACL label into these soft tissues, while the inhomogeneity inside the ACL results in loss of the inhomogeneous region from the segmented ACL label when an intensity-based segmentation technique is applied.Due to these difficulties, only few works have been published with regard to the segmentation of the ACL. Ho et al. [5] suggested an ACL segmentation method based on morphological operations and the Chan–Vese active contours model [6]. Given that the Chan–Vese model is intensity-based, both leakage and loss of the inhomogeneous region inside the ACL can occur in the segmented ACL label such that experiments on this method demonstrate low performance; the specific results showed an overall Dice similarity coefficient (DSC) of 38.1±9.1% for four knee MRI sets. Lee et al. [7] suggested an ACL segmentation method based on adaptive thresholding and graph cuts [8]. Because graph cuts, which are originally based on intensity, are also associated with leakage problems, patient-specific shape constraints for graph cuts have been proposed to avoid leakage. As a result, most of the leakage was reduced with the help of shape constraints; however, the missing inhomogeneous region inside the ACL was not fully restored.In this paper, we propose a graph-cut-based segmentation method for the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) in knee MRI with a novel shape prior and label refinement. To avoid leakage of the segmented ACL label into regions with similar intensity, two cost terms for graph cuts, referred to as fence and neighbor shape constraints, are proposed. These shape constraints depict the shape of the ACL from the graph cut seed and not from a previously segmented dataset such that they reflect patient-specific information onto the graph cuts. To restore inhomogeneous regions inside the ACL which are not fully segmented via graph cuts, refinement by classifying over-segmented superpixels adjacent to the ACL label with location and intensity priors is proposed. As a result, the proposed method enables the segmented ACL label to avoid leakage into regions of similar intensity and to recover missing inhomogeneous regions inside the ACL.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present the proposed method in detail. In Section 3, experimental results and their analyses are presented, while Section 4 discusses the contribution and effect of the proposed method. In Section 5, we conclude with a brief summary of the work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we proposed the graph cut-based segmentation method for the ACL in knee MRI with patient-specific shape constraints and superpixel-classification-based label refinement. In the graph cuts, to avoid the label leakage into regions with similar intensity, two additional shape constraints were formulated to reflect the planar and spatial shape information of the ACL from the extracted seeds to the graph cuts. To restore the missing inhomogeneous regions of the ACL, refinement of the segmented labels was performed by classifying superpixels adjacent to ACL labels with location and intensity priors. In the experiments, the proposed method segmented the ACL with an average DSC of 66.47±7.97%, which increased the accuracy by 15%, 15%, and 9% from the Boykov model, the TBSC, and the PSSC graph cuts, respectively; the average ASD was 2.247±0.869, which decreased the error by 40%, 36%, and 16% from the Boykov model, TBSC, and PSSC graph cuts, respectively.We declare that we have no conflict of interest.