@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Investigations on the role of CH…O interactions and its impact on stability and specificity of penicillin binding proteins

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Importance of CH…O bonds in the structural stability of PBPs are analyzed.Significant number of interacting residues shows higher conservation score.Interestingly residues with higher conservation score have more stabilizing regions.Our study provides detailed structural information about PBPs.Results obtained from this study will be useful in designing effective antibiotics.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Gram positive bacteria,Gram negative bacteria,Antibiotic,Resistance,Stabilizing interactions,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Penicillin binding proteins are recognized as important antibacterial targets because of their crucial role in the cell wall synthesis of bacteria. Alteration in the binding site of penicillin binding proteins is one of the major problems for beta lactam antibiotics to exert its effect. In the present study the influence of CH…O interactions in the conformational stability of penicillin binding proteins were analyzed in both Gram positive and Gram negative bacteria. CH…O interactions constitute about 20 to 25% of total hydrogen bonds and act as an important driving force in ligand selectivity. From our analysis we observed a total of 13,398 CH…O interactions in Gram positive bacteria and 10,855 CH…O interactions in Gram negative bacteria. It was interesting to observe that CH…O interactions were higher in Gram positive bacteria than in Gram negative bacteria, which augurs well for the discrepancy in cell wall of the bacteria. CH…O interactions are classified into four types depending on the interaction of acceptor residues with the back bone or side chain of CH groups. From our results we observed that major contribution to penicillin binding proteins was observed from side chain atoms of donor residues and back bone atoms of acceptor residues [SM CH…O] in both Gram positive and Gram negative bacteria. Conformational preference of Gram positive bacteria indicated that amino acids lacking side chain and the cyclized amino acids preferred to be in turn regions, whereas aromatic amino acids dominated in Gram negative bacteria. Our analysis gives detailed information about the principles involved in the conformational stability of penicillin binding proteins and the results will be useful for researchers exploring penicillin binding proteins.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Beta lactam group of antibiotics are commonly used to treat bacterial infections. β-Lactam antibiotics acts by targeting the penicillin binding proteins (PBPs) that play a crucial role in cross linking of cell wall synthesis [1,2]. β-Lactam antibiotics mimics the structure of d-alalnyl-d-alanine dipeptide and cross links into the growing peptidoglycan layer, thereby disrupting the cell wall synthesis. PBPs are primarily classified into two major types depending on the molecular weight, (i) high molecular mass [HMM] PBPs (ii) low molecular mass [LMM] PBPs. HMM PBPs are responsible for the polymerization of peptidoglycan which is essential for cell wall synthesis. HMM PBPs are further classified into class A and class B PBPs based on the activity and sequence homology. LMM PBPs act as a signaling peptide in the polymerization reaction of peptidoglycan layer [3]. Indiscriminate use of β-lactam antibiotics leads to the development of antibiotic resistant strains. Three major mechanisms of resistance acquired by bacteria against β-lactam antibiotics include the enzymatic degradation of antibiotics, removal of antibiotics by efflux pumps and the modification of binding site of PBPs. Alteration in the binding site of PBPs is one of the important mechanisms of resistance adopted by bacteria against the β-lactam antibiotics. Alteration in the binding site of PBPs leads to either the decrease in or loss of affinity for β-lactam antibiotics [4]. This intrinsic mechanism of resistance is responsible for the emergence of methicillin-resistance Staphylococcus aureus strains, which is a persistent therapeutic problem worldwide. Previous studies have reported that mutation in the active site (conserved motifs) of PBPs decreases the binding affinity with β-lactam antibiotics [5]. Apart from the regular hydrogen bonds that stabilize the protein structure, there are several weak hydrogen bonds which provide significant amount of the energy to stabilize the protein structures [6]. CH…O hydrogen bonds are recognized as principal hydrogen bonds because of their higher occurrence [7]. CH…O hydrogen bonds are weak hydrogen bonds which are formed when an electronegative carbon atom (donor) and an oxygen atom (the acceptor) share a hydrogen atom. Similar to regular hydrogen bonds, they also include dipole, monopole and van der Waals interactions [8]. Energy of CH…O interactions is found to be approximately −2kcal/mol to −3kcal/mol [9]. Since the importance of CH…O interactions are emphasized by several researchers [10–18], analyzing the CH…O interactions provide valuable information pertaining to its role in the structural stability of PBPs. Even though extensive studies have been made on the structure of PBPs, there is no information on the role of non canonical interactions in the conformational stability of PBPs. Hence, in the present study we have examined the energetic contribution of CH…O interactions to the structural stability of PBPs in both Gram positive and Gram negative bacteria.A non redundant set of PBPs for both Gram positive and Gram negative bacteria were retrieved from Protein Data Bank (PDB) [19] based on the sequence similarity and the resolution. The criteria used for non-redundancy are as follows [20];i)Resolution of the structures should be less than 2.5ÅIf the structure has more than one chain, then chain A is taken for analysisSimilarity between the sequence should be less than 25%Structures were optimized by adding hydrogen atoms using the program REDUCE with default settings.The structures which were filtered using the above said criteria are listed below,Gram positive bacteria, 2BG1, 2JCH, 2JE5, 2XD1, 2XD5, 2Y2G, 2ZC4, 3ZFZGram negative bacteria, 1HD8, 1NJ4, 1PWC, 3A3J, 3OC2, 3U3E, 3UDI, 4KQRWe employed the Hydrogen Bond Analysis Tool (HBAT) [21] to analyze the energetic contribution of CH…O interactions to the conformational stability of PBPs. The following parameter was used to identify the CH…O interactions between the donor and acceptor residues.d(H…O)≤3.0Åandθ(C−H…O)≥90where d measured the distance between acceptor and donor residues, θ was the bond angle between C and H atoms and the centre of O atom. CH…O interactions were categorized into four groups based on the type of interactions with the donor and the acceptor residues. Pictorial representations of the parameters are shown inFig. 1[21].i)Interaction between the main chain of donor residues with the main chain of acceptor residues (MM CH…O interactions)Interaction between main chain of donor residues with the side chain of acceptor residues (MS CH…O interactions)Interaction between side chain of donor residues and the main chain of acceptor residues (SM CH…O interactions) andthe interaction between side chain of donor residues and the side chain of acceptor residues (SS CH…O interactions).Further in order to understand the percentage energetic contribution of CH…O interaction to free energy, we used FoldX energy function [22–24] to calculate the free energy of all the PBPs analyzed. FoldX function includes all the terms that have been found to be important for protein stability. The free energy of the PBPs was calculated using the following equation:ΔG=Wvdw⁎ΔGvdw+WsolvH⁎ΔGsolvH+WsolvP⁎ΔGsolvP+ΔGwb+ΔGhbond+ΔGel+ΔGKon+Wmc⁎T⁎ΔSmc+Wsc⁎T⁎ΔSsc[22]where ∆Gvdw was the sum of the van der Waals contribution of all atoms. ∆GsolvH and ∆GsolvP were the differences in solvation energy for apolar and polar groups. ∆Ghbond was the free energy difference between the formation of an intra-molecular hydrogen bond formation. ∆Gwb was the extra stabilizing free energy provided by a water molecule by making more than one hydrogen bond to the protein. ∆Gel was the electrostatic contribution of charged groups, including helix dipole. ∆GSmc was the entropy of fixing the backbone in the folded state, which was dependent on intrinsic tendency of a particular amino acid to adopt certain dihedral angles. ∆GSc was the entropic change which involves side chain conformation. ∆GKon reflects electrostatic interactions. ∆Str was the loss of translational and rotational energy involves in the formation of the complex.Preference of CH…O interacting residues in the formation of secondary structure of proteins was analyzed by utilizing the information available in PDB using DSSP server [25]. DSSP is a database of secondary structure assignments for all protein entries in the PDB. DSSP server predicts conformational preference of residues by analyzing hydrogen bonding pattern, which is geometrically defined as the distance between the backbone carbonyl oxygen (O) and the amino nitrogen (N). An n-turn is defined based on the H-bonds between residues i and i+n (where n is 2, 3 or 4), it includes any residue (i) that is isolated (i.e., no paired). Helices are defined as patterns of adjacent n-turns and strands are defined as patterns of adjacent bridges. A bridge involves a pair of H-bonds and can be either parallel or anti parallel [26]. Based on the tendency of interacting residues, the results were categorized into helix preferrers (H), turn preferrers (T) and strand preferrers (S) [27].The extent to which the atoms on the protein surface interact with the surrounding aqueous environment is referred to as accessible surface area. Accessible surface area of protein directly correlates with the hydrophobic free energy that plays a crucial role in the stability of structure. Earlier report states that each square Angstrom of accessible surface area removed from contact with aqueous environment gives a free energy of 25cal/mol [28]. Therefore, elucidating the contact between the interacting residues and the aqueous environment provides important implications in understanding the conformation of protein structure. In the present study, we employed the use of ASAview tool [29] to analyze the solvent accessibility pattern of CH…O interacting residues in PBPs. Depending on the nature of interacting residues, it was classified into buried, partially buried and exposed residues [30]. Exposed state endowed to the residue having the cut off value of >15; partially buried value is endowed to the residue having the cut off value of 10–15 and finally buried residue is endowed to the residue with a cut off value of <10 [31].Preferential contacts between the interacting residues were analyzed and the residues were accordingly grouped into short range contacts, medium range contacts and long range contacts. The distances between the residues involved in CH…O interactions were computed by calculating the distance between the α-carbon of the first residue and the corresponding residues in protein. Composition of the amino acids correlated with this residue was calculated within a sphere of 8Å, the range which was adequate for local and non-local interactions. The contribution from <±4 with respect to Cα atom was represented as short-range contact, ±4 to ±10 as medium-range contacts, and >±10 were treated as long range contacts [31].Stabilization centers are residues which play a critical role in the stability of protein structures. In the present study we utilized SCide server to identify the stabilization residues in PBPs [32]. Residues are considered to be in the stabilizing regions if they are involved in long range contact and if it is possible to select one to one residues from both flanking tetrapeptides of the two residues such that three residues from each segment make at least seven contacts out of the possible nine.Functionally important residues were found to be conserved throughout the structure of proteins. We employed ConSurf server for computing the conservation grade of CH…O interacting residues. The server involved the generation of multiple sequence alignment followed by the construction of phylogenetic tree. ConSurf score was generated based on phylogenetic tree analysis. The conservation score was calculated using the following expression:Pk=∑m−1N(Aijm(k)Mij)whereAijmis the amino acid substitutions; N is the number of sequence in the alignment and Mijis the replacement values.Finally, the conservation score of the interacting residues were assigned based on the grading scale from 1 to 9 indicating highly variable to highly conserved regions [33].The statistical difference was measured by independent t-test and Fisher’s exact test for the whole data set using the software package SPSS [34] with respect to hydrogen bond donor/acceptor, short/long range contacts, exposed/buried surface area of the interacting residues and secondary structure residues. p-Values of <0.05 were considered as significant.Importance of CH…O interacting residues in the binding site of PBPs was analyzed using the program LIGPLOT [35].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
