@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Semantic interoperability of knowledge in feature-based CAD models

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Design intent should be captured and the semantics should be processed by intelligent systems.We investigate the use of Semantic Web technologies for the exchange of “intelligent” CAD models.We define axioms and mapping rules to achieve semantic integration between CAD ontologies.We extend semantic integration with a similarity measurement to detect similar design features.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Feature-based design,Semantic web,Ontology,Reasoning,Similarity measure,SWRL,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A major issue in product development is the exchange and sharing of product knowledge among many actors. This knowledge includes many concepts such as design history, component structure, features, parameters, constraints, and more.Regarding CAD models, most of the current CAD systems provide feature-based design for the construction of solid models and to carry, semantically, product information throughout its life cycle. Unfortunately, existing solutions and standards, such as STEP, for exchanging product information, are limited to the process of geometrical data, where semantics assigned to product model are completely lost during the translation process. Moreover, STEP does not provide a sound basis to reason with knowledge.The work described in this paper is part of our approach based on the development of OWL ontologies to preserve semantics associated with product data. In this work, we will focus on the semantic integration of these ontologies by defining axioms and rules. The integration process relies basically on reasoning capabilities provided by description logics in order to recognize automatically additional mappings among ontologies entities. Furthermore, the mapping process is enhanced with a semantic similarity measure to detect similar design features. Similarity measure integrates all aspects of OWL DL language. Thus, similarity functions are defined for each type of entity to involve all the features that make its definition. However, this will enable data analysis, as well as manage and discover implicit relationships among product data based on semantic modeling and reasoning.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The increasing number of product development tools entails effective collaboration among different partners. Exchanging CAD (Computer Aided Design) data is essential because CAD models represent the core result of product development, namely the product shape. Actually, most of the current CAD systems provide feature-based design for the construction of solid models. Firstly, geometric modelers were regarded as the appropriate representation of product information, but later the feature approach has been proposed to enhance the capabilities of solid modelers  [1]. Thus, efficient data exchange implies the possibility to integrate all relevant engineering data into a compound product model in a reusable form.However, existing solutions for exchanging product information are limited to the process of geometrical data, where semantics assigned to product model are completely lost during the translation process. Current standards, such as STEP (STandard for the Exchange of Product model data)  [2] have attempted to solve this problem, but they are not based on formal semantics that will enable rigorous semantics  [3]. Moreover, STEP does not provide a sound basis to reason with knowledge.Our research investigates the use of Semantic Web technologies, such as ontologies and semantic web rule languages for the exchange of “intelligent” CAD models among different systems, while maintaining the original relations among entities of the model. Ontologies have been proposed as an important and natural means of representing real world knowledge for the development of database designs. Furthermore, Ontology offers an additional benefit for exchanging CAD models by way of its reasoning ability. Hence, we have proposed a method of sharing CAD models based on the construction of a “Common Design Features Ontology”, called CDFO, used as an Interlingua for the exchange of product data  [4]. Implicit facts and constraints are explicitly represented using OWL (Web Ontology Language) and SWRL (Semantic Web Rule Language). These technologies will facilitate collaborative engineering and improve product data management.In this paper, we present our semantic integration method between developed ontologies represented with OWL DL language. This method is based on inference mechanisms provided by reasoners (e.g. Pellet) in order to minimize human interaction thus enhancing semantic interoperability. Rules are also defined to create more complex relations between entities of different ontologies. A similarity-based method for feature ontologies is then defined to match entities having no equivalent correspondences. This method is based on the development of similarity functions that consider all OWL DL constructs used in entities descriptions.The rest of our paper is composed as follows: In Section  2, we present an overview of related work for CAD models interoperability including our proposed methodology for sharing CAD models. This methodology requires the development of a common ontology called CDFO and applications ontologies specific to CAD systems and standards. Integration methodology of different ontologies is described in Section  3, and examples are provided in its different subsections. Our methodology is extended with a similarity-based method described in Section  4. This similarity method requires the development of a similarity global function and local functions described in Sections  5 and 6 respectively. Conclusions are drawn at the end of this paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
