@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Shape optimization for human-centric products with standardized components

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A mixed-integer shape optimization framework.The ability of design transfer with standardized components.An approach using standardized components in the customization of freeform objects.Design automation of customized products for fitting human bodies.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Human-centric,Product design,Shape optimization,Mixed-integer,Standardized components,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, we present an optimization framework for automating the shape customization of human-centric products, which can be mounted on or embedded in human body (such as exoskeletal devices and implants). This kind of products needs to be customized to fit the body shapes of users. At present, the design customization for freeform objects is often taken in an interactive manner that is inefficient. We investigate a method to automate the procedure of customization. Major difficulty in solving this problem is caused by the not freely changed shape of components. They should be selected from a series of standardized shapes. Different from the existing approaches that allow fabricating all components by customized production, we develop a new method to generate customized products by using as-many-as-possible standardized components. Our work is based on a mixed-integer shape optimization framework.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Human-centric products start to be widely used in many medical and sport applications, and the shape of these products must be adaptive to the shape of human bodies. Three-dimensional (3D) shape of human bodies can be obtained by 3D scanners. After establishing the correspondences among different human bodies [1,2], the product originally designed for a specific body can be warped to a shape to fit another body [3]. In this way, the product can be reused and customized for another person. It is good enough for transferring the design of some products such as clothes, shoes, and furniture as all components in these products can be fabricated in a low cost. However, it does not apply to electronic or mechanical products. Some of their components, e.g., nuts, chipsets, or joints, cannot be freely varied. Instead, these components are usually fabricated in a standard way—i.e., each of them has a series of variations that are manufactured by mass production. These components are called standardized components, and the series of variations is called element library in the rest of this paper. Note that, as fabricated by mass production, shape variations of these components are in a stepwise manner. For example, the wheels of bicycles as standardized components can only be either 24 or 26 inch but can never be 24.3 inch.The classification of components into standardized series is mainly based on the procedure of manufacturing, which is beyond the scope of this paper. At present, the customization of products with standardized components is often conducted by designers in an interactive manner. The shape optimization step becomes the bottleneck of designing human-centric products. The major challenge comes from the lack of an effective shape optimization method that allows a component to be varied in a stepwise manner. The problem becomes more challenging when the shape variation is driven by human bodies and the product’s shape is required to well fit the human body’s shape. In this paper, we investigate techniques to automate the step of customization.A Mixed-Integer As-Rigid-As-Possible (MI-ARAP) shape optimization framework is developed in this paper. The shape optimization is formulated as an as-rigid-as-possible deformation problem that is computed on volumetric meshes. During the optimization, some components are restricted to be one of the pre-defined shapes in the element library, which is actually a variational formulation with integer variables. It means that the component is not allowed to deform continuously from one shape to another shape. To keep the spatial relationship between a product and human bodies, we may use continuous deformation methods [4,3] to warp the shape of a product designed for one human body into a shape fit another human body. This shape obtained by continuous deformation is called the initial shape, which is the input of our optimization. After obtaining the initial shape by warping a product from one human body to another one, the standardized components are warped into a non-standard shape (e.g., see the middle of Fig. 1). These distorted components will be replaced by the most suitable shapes in the element libraries. Unfortunately, if all the standardized components are simply replaced at the same time, the nearby components could become incompatible. An iterative rounding algorithm is investigated in this paper to solve this problem. An example to illustrate the function of our approach is shown in Fig. 1. As-many-as-possible standardized components are used during the shape optimization, so that an economical solution is developed to realize the customization. This is because the cost of fabricating standardized components by mass production is much lower than the cost of customized production for non-standard shapes.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
