@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An automatic tool to facilitate the statistical group analysis of DTI

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We design an easy-to-use tool for DTI analysis using a user-centred methodology.Our tool leads to a 96% reduction in analysis time compared to traditional pipeline.Our tool minimises the user errors and automates the DTI statistical group analysis.Results in the study of depression in the elderly demonstrate its accuracy.The tool is currently being used by clinicians in a University Hospital.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Image analysis,DTI,FSL,Group statistics,Usability evaluation,User-centred design,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundUsers may have difficulty calculating DTI group statistics since they need to master several complex tools that require high user intervention. A tool called DTIStatistics for the automatic and easy calculation of DTI group statistics was developed to reduce analysis times and possible errors.MethodsThe proposed software was designed by using a user-centred methodology in which we performed an iterative usability evaluation with an expert committee. Once the experts׳ requirements were fulfilled, we performed a validation of the final version of DTIStatistics with target users, comparing the execution time of this tool and the standard pipeline normally used.ResultsTarget users needed significantly less time to complete the tasks with DTIStatistics, reducing the analysis time from 1383.78 to 57.2s. They were able to complete all the tasks and barely made errors. Moreover, target users were not able to display the analysis results with the standard pipeline, but when using our tool they only needed 34s. Target users found DTIStatistics easy to learn, use and interact with, and they concluded that they could effectively complete the tasks with it. Additionally, we present example results in the study of depression to demonstrate the validity of DTIStatistics for clinical research.ConclusionsDTIStatistics facilitates and significantly automates the calculation of DTI group statistics by reducing the analysis times, which implies lower costs. DTIStatistics is highly applicable in clinical research, as demonstrated by the fact that it is currently being used at the University Hospital, University of Navarra (Spain).

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Neuroimaging has been increasingly applied to patients with brain disorders in order to investigate in vivo abnormalities in the brain [1–4]. The analysis and visualization of medical image data extracted from neuroimaging is crucial for prevention and diagnosis. Recent neuroimaging techniques such as Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) have arisen in order to characterize the structure of the brain. Fractional Anisotropy (FA), a measurement extracted from DTI, describes the fibre structure (Fig. 1) and is used to analyse disease abnormalities in the white matter and compare FA between subjects in clinical research.In clinical studies, after preprocessing the images, a statistical analysis between groups is usually performed to analyse the differences between subjects׳ brains due to the abnormalities caused by disease or aging. There are several techniques that can be used to carry out the analysis [5,6], including region of interest (ROI) analysis, tract analysis and voxelwise analysis.Earlier studies have mainly used the ROI method [7–9]. BrainSuite [10], Brain Voyager QX [11] and FreeSurfer [12] include this technique. However, the fact that in this method the regions are drawn by hand makes it difficult to define ROIs between subjects in a reliable and accurate way [13]. Additionally, this method can miss significant information in non-selected regions.More sophisticated methods use tractography, which is the tracking of the brain fibres, in order to compare FA values across subjects. In this approach, called tract analysis, white matter fibres are traced using ROIs. The UNC-Utah NA-MIC DTI framework [14] is an example of a tract-based tool based on Goodlett׳s quantitative tractography method [15]. The accuracy of the methods depends on the registration of each subject to the standard space. In addition, only the information that is extracted from the tracts is analysed.Voxelwise analysis (VBA) methods attempt to solve the various limitations of the other methods by analysing the whole brain, which means that it is not necessary to specify any regions by hand. Moreover, automated registration is carried out to match all the images. Due to these improvements, several recent studies have used voxelwise analysis. Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM) [16] and Tract-based Spatial Statistics [17], the latter being part of FSL Software [18,19], are two examples of voxelwise analysis software. Both methods differ in the spatial normalization of FA images and in the parameters applied in the smoothing. TBSS was developed to alleviate the alignment and smoothing problems of SPM. Despite some weaknesses in revealing tract specific features, TBSS has become the most popular tool for analysing DTI images.Recently, several pipelines have been attempting to facilitate the processing of DTI datasets. Some of them provide an environment in which to design workflows within and between packages, and users need to construct pipelines that contain the steps and dependencies (MIPAV [20], JIST [21], Nipype [22] and LONI [23]). These types of powerful tools are designed for expert users. However, most of the time the target users are novices in programming and they may have difficulty processing DTI datasets and calculating group statistics. The recently published PANDA [24] does not require that the pipeline be defined, and it aims to overcome the handicap of complexity by adding a GUI. However, a usability study with end users is missing to objectively evaluate the tool׳s real ease of use. Usability testing is essential for determining whether a solution works with target users [25–28]. Moreover, the authors of PANDA do not detail their design methodology. Following a design methodology, such as the user-centred methodology, will provide a full understanding of the problems in existing tools and facilitate the development of a tool that fulfils the needs of the users.Despite the appearance of pipelines, TBSS, or FSL in general, is the preferred tool amongst clinicians for statistical group analysis [29–32]. However, FSL requires advanced knowledge of DTI analysis, and due to its numerous features users are required to master the software. Therefore, they often get confused, as each step must be done manually. In addition, DTI statistical group analysis normally takes hours and sometimes more than one tool is needed for a complete analysis, further increasing the complexity of clinical research studies. For all these reasons, it is very important to automate the process in order to reduce user intervention and consequently minimise the number of errors, analysis time and costs.In this paper, we present a novel medical tool, which we call DTIStatistics, for automatic statistical analysis based on FSL, MRICron [33] and R [34]. The main objective of DTIStatistics is to enable easy preprocessing and the calculation of group statistics from DTI datasets. Our proposal has a friendly graphical user interface and its automated pipeline minimises the need for user intervention. This tool was designed using a user-centred methodology [35]. Following this methodology, we performed an iterative usability evaluation with expert users in Human–Computer Interaction, Bioengineering and Medicine in order to create a suitable tool. Once the software met the experts׳ requirements, we validated the final version of the tool with our target users. To that end, we recruited Biomedical Engineering students to validate the tool, and the validation confirmed that our tool facilitates the preprocessing and statistical group analysis of DTI datasets. In order to demonstrate the validity of DTIStatistics in clinical research, we present example results obtained with our tool in the study of late-onset major depressive disorder in the elderly.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
