@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Biological-data-based finite-element stress analysis of mandibular bone with implant-supported overdenture

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We clarify the stress distribution in peri-implant mandibular bone of a subject with an implant-supported overdenture.FEA models of mandible with two and four implants were constructed by CT images and in vivo loading data in the subject.Stress reduction was observed by increasing the number of implants.Stress concentrated at thin cortical bone around the implants.Stress concentrated around the implant aligned with a large deviation from load direction.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Implant,Finite element method,Overdenture,Stress,Biological data,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundThis study aimed to evaluate the stress distribution in a mandibular bone with an implant-supported overdenture by a biological-data-based finite element analysis (FEA) utilizing personal CT images and in vivo loading data, and to evaluate the influence of the number and alignment of implants and bone conditions on the stress in peri-implant bone.MethodsFEA models of a mandible were constructed for two types of overdentures: 4 implants supported overdenture (4-OD) and 2 implants supported overdenture (2-OD). The geometry of these models was constructed from CT images of a subject, who wore an implant-supported overdenture. The magnitude and direction of the loads on the implants for two types of overdentures during the maximal voluntary clenching were measured with 3D force transducers. FEA using these loads was carried out to observe stress distributions in peri-implant bone.ResultsHigher stress was observed in cortical bone around the implant neck. Stress in peri-implant bone for 4-OD was reduced in comparison with those for the 2-OD. For the 4-OD, notwithstanding such reduction of the stress, the stress concentrated at the cortical bone around the implant aligned with large deviation from load direction.ConclusionsIn this study, biological data from a certain subject was successfully duplicated to the FEA models. The results demonstrate the mechanical prominence of using more implants. Even in 4 implants model, high stress was found around an implant with a large inclination and with thin cortical bone. This suffices to demonstrate the capability and usefulness of the biological-data-based FEA.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
An implant-supported overdenture (OD) is applied increasingly in recent years, supported by excellent clinical outcomes [1–3]. It offers significant improvements for subjects who are lacking stability and retention of their denture. In long-term results of implant-supported overdentures, despite achieving satisfactory survival rate, the prosthetic complications such as screw loosening and fracturing of the prosthetic component were often observed and significantly affected by biomechanical conditions [4]. Additionally, possible association between biomechanical conditions and peri-implant bone loss was reported [5]. Mechanical stress in peri-implant bone, induced by occlusal loads transmitted to these implants, is known to affect bone homeostasis [6].In human study, the duration of load was found to significantly affect bone loss and implant failure [7]. In animal study, excessive and dynamic loads induced marginal bone loss [8,9]. Thus, it is important to investigate this mechanical stress, which plays a prominent role in long-term prognosis of implant treatment and mechanobiological reaction of the tissue. In particular, the effect of mechanical stress might be more detrimental in unfavorable patient’s conditions, such as low bone quality, limited bone quantity, adverse functional habits, and compromised medical health [10]. Finite element analysis (FEA) has come to be utilized to investigate stress on the implant components and peri-implant bone. As confirmed by several FEA study, mechanical stress in peri-implant bone is strongly affected by implant number, diameter, length, thread profile, material properties of implant components, quality and quantity of surrounding bone [11–15]. It is also well known that the performance of FEA is dependent on various factors of the model, such as geometry, load conditions, material properties, and boundary conditions [16]. Recent development of digital imaging techniques made it possible to obtain subject-specific biological data of bone geometry and property for FEA modeling [17–19].In previous studies, we developed a methodology to measure 3-D forces exerted on implants in vivo[20–22]. We also conducted a pilot study to construct a biological-data-based FEA model of a mandible with implants, utilizing CT images and in vivo load data of a subject with an implant-supported overdenture, in whom 3-D force on each implants had been measured. The measured load on the implant was unpredictable and the bone morphology and quality are peculiar to individual patients. Therefore, patient’s specific “biological-data-based FEA” could be worthy to improve understanding of biomechanical conditions relating to the implant treatment. The purpose of this study was to investigate the mechanical stress distribution in a mandibular bone of the subject with an implant-supported overdenture by a biological-data-based FEA and to evaluate the influence of the number of implants on the stress in peri-implant bone.The present FEA was based on biological data collected from a 62-year-old female subject, who wore an overdenture (OD) supported by four dental implants 3.75mm in diameter, 13mm in length (MkIII RP, Nobel Biocare, Kloten, Switzerland). The implants were installed between the mental foramens of mandible (Fig. 1a and b), which were labeled with 1 to 4, with Imp1 being the right distal implant and Imp4 the left distal one. The subject had no systemic disease and no abnormalities and disorders in her stomatognathic system. CT images of the subject, taken before the implants installation, were used to constructing FEA models geometry. Bone quality and bone quantity were classified in B-3 type described by Lekholm and Zarb [23]. It was characteristic of the subject that the left distal implant was supported by thin cortical bone. All of four implants were installed nearly vertical to her occlusal plane, according to the common guideline of implant insertion.The magnitude and direction of forces exerted on implants during maximal voluntary clenching (MVC) were recorded with 3-D load-measuring devices, consisting of piezoelectric force transducers (Type Z18400, Kistler Instrument, Winterthur, Switzerland) (Fig. 1c). The lower part of this device was connected to the abutment with a titanium screw, and its upper part was connected with a bar attachment (Fig. 1d). These transducers can record triaxial forces simultaneously and independently with high linearity, low hysteresis and good temperature stability for each measuring axis as described in detail in the literature [24]. Measured loads were analyzed according to the three dimensional coordinates defined as vertical (z), antero-posterior (y) and mediolateral (x) axes based on the mandibular plane and sagittal plane. Measurements were conducted for two types of overdentures: 4 implants supported overdenture (4-OD) and 2 implants (locating medially) supported overdenture (2-OD) (Fig. 1e and f). The overdenture had 3 clip attachments that were connected with bar splinting 4 implants during function for 4-OD, only a clip at the center was connected with a bar splinting 2 implants for 2-OD (Fig. 1g). In 2-OD case, the distal implants (Imp1 and Imp4) were not contacted to the inner surface of denture during function. Clenching task was repeated five times for each condition. To avoid the influence of fatigue, duration of each clenching was 2s with the interval of 2min. Check bites were taken with silicone impression material (FLEXICON, GC Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) to make sure that the occlusal contact pattern was identical in both cases of 4-OD and 2-OD.This study was approved by the research ethics committee of Tohoku University Graduate School of Dentistry.4-OD and 2-OD FEA models were constructed with an ensemble of computer-aided-engineering software (Fig. 2).(1)The CT data was converted to the JPEG images for shape extraction. Model geometry of the mandible was constructed from the images of the subject with dedicated software (Mechanical Finder, Research Center Of Computational Mechanics Inc, Tokyo, Japan). The region of mandible comprising cortical bone layer around a cancellous bone core was obtained by setting a threshold for the image data.The geometry of the implants (3.75mm in diameter/13mm in length) and the bar attachment were constructed with CAD software (Solidworks, Solidworks Corp, Concord, MA, USA).The position and angulation of each implant were determined with reference to X-ray cephalometric images of the subject (Fig. 3 andTable 1) and each implant was implemented into the model with FEA software (Patran, MSC Software, Santa Ana, CA, USA).The interface between the implants and the surrounding bone was completely fixed to simulate the state of osseointegration. The part of mandibular ramus was completely constrained by enforcing zero-displacement conditions for all nodes (Fig. 2). All materials were assumed to be linear elastic isotropic behavior and material volumes were considered as homogeneous (Table 2) [25,26]. The model consisted of 126,134 ten-node tetrahedral elements and 196,198 nodes for 4-OD model and 135,420 elements and 180,830 nodes for 2-OD model.The loads were applied on the upper plane of individual implants where the load measuring devices were mounted. Magnitude and direction of loads applied on the individual implants were the mean values of the loads on the respective implants, measured in the subject during her maximal voluntary clenching (MVC) (the arrows in Fig. 2b and d andTable 3).The linear static stress analysis of those two models was conducted by FEA solver program, MSC Marc (MSC Software, LA, CA, USA) with TX7/i9610 supercomputer (Cyberscience Center, Tohoku University, Japan). The von Mises stress, the minimum principal stress, and the maximum principal stress were used to observe stress distribution. In the present study, we introduced the stresses contour maps for qualitative evaluation of the stress distributions comparatively between 2-OD and 4-OD. On the other hand, we introduced the two scalar-valued evaluation factors, σRand VRfor quantitative evaluation of the stress values defined as follows [21]:σR: Average von Mises stress in 5mm3 stress concentration area around peri-implant bone (MPa). Before identifying the σR, von Mises stress of each element around each implant was calculated, and the elements were realigned in higher stress sequence up to 50mm3 in sum of the element volume for the implant. Then σRwas calculated as the average of the stress in these elements.VR: Volume of von Mises stress concentration area (mm3) (criteria: more than 3MPa for the von Mises stress).These two scalar-valued evaluation factors were computed for the von Mises stress in a columnar-shaped domain of the bone surrounding each implant.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
