@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Surface design based on direct curvature editing

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Surface design based on direct curvature editing is introduced.A point-based curvature control is extended to a curve-based control.A log-aesthetic curve is embedded into existing design surfaces.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Curvature control,B-spline curve and surfaces,Log-aesthetic curves,Cross curvature,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a novel method for modifying the shapes of existing uniform bi-cubic B-spline surfaces by interactively editing the curvatures along isoparametric curves. The method allows us to edit the curvatures of the two intersecting isoparametric curves at each knot with specified positions, unit tangents, and unit normals. The user adjusts the radii of circles, representing the radii of curvature in theuandvisoparametric directions directly via a GUI without having to work with control points and knots. Such shape specifications are converted into iterative repositionings of the control points on the basis of geometrical rules. Using these point-based curvature-editing techniques, we successfully embedded log-aesthetic curves into existing surfaces along their isoparametric curves. Moreover, we were able to distribute the cross curvature with log-aesthetic variation along the isoparametric curves. We applied our technique to the design of automobile hood surfaces to demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithms.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the field of structural mechanics, it is well known that a higher stress concentration occurs in regions with a smaller radius of curvature  [1]. The presence of such regions causes an object to experience a considerable increase in maximum stress. Therefore, engineers must design the geometry to minimize stress concentration by avoiding high curvatures. Curvature control also plays important roles in fluid dynamics. The surface curvature distribution of airfoils and blades near the leading edge is essential for optimum aerodynamic, thermoeconomic, and overall performance of turbomachinery-based power plants  [2].In aesthetic surface design, a new design can be accelerated by the reuse of existing designs if the B-spline forms are available from previous designs, in whole or part  [3]. The designer can interactively make local modifications to the existing B-spline surfaces defined by knots and control points. However, modifying the surfaces to a desired shape via direct manipulation of knots and control points is difficult. Accordingly, researchers have developed tools that allow the user to change shapes of surfaces in an intuitive way and convert them into modifications in control points locations and knot vectors  [4]. Séquin  [5] envisioned a CAD system, in which a designer specifies boundary conditions and constraints for a car hood surface panel, and then picks a suitable cost functional, from which the system generates a desired surface via optimization.In this paper, we introduce a novel method for modifying the shape of existing uniform bi-cubic B-spline surfaces by interactively editing the curvatures or fitting to prescribed curvature values along isoparametric curves. The point-based curvature control method allows us to edit the curvatures of two isoparametric curves at each knot with specified positions, unit tangents, and unit normals. Users adjust the radii of circles representing the radii of curvature of theuandvisoparametric curves via a graphical user interface (GUI), without having to work with control points and knots. Such shape specifications are converted into iterative repositionings of the control points on the basis of geometrical rules. We further extend this point-based curvature control technique to curve-based curvature control, where we successfully embedded log-aesthetic curves  [6,7] into existing surfaces.The contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows:•we introduce a novel method for editing curvatures of two isoparametric curves at the knots of uniform bi-cubic B-spline surfaces;we prove that changing the curvature of one isoparametric curve at a knot does not affect the curvature of the other intersecting isoparametric curve at the same knot as long as the position at the knot does not change;we extend point-based curvature control to curve-based control, which allows us to embed a log-aesthetic curve into the surface together with cross curvature (see Section  4.2 for definition) control.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section  2, we review the literature on direct surface curvature editing, log-aesthetic curves, and iterative geometric interpolation algorithms. In Sections  3 and 4, we examine point-based and curved-based curvature control, respectively. In Section  5, we apply our technique to the design of automobile hood surfaces to demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithms. In Section  6, we conclude the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
