@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Motion-based method for estimating time required to attach self-adhesive insulators

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper presents motion-based time estimation scheme for attaching insulators.The scheme has been developed by analyzing the motions of attaching 350 insulators.It estimates times by identifying the features of insulators and MODAPTS rules.Estimates vary from the actual value by an average of 9.5%.It is realistic compared to MTM (13%–18%) and AEM (15%).

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Adhesive insulators,Time estimation,Attachment time,Motion analysis,Modular arrangement of predetermined time standards (MODAPTS),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the home appliances industry, ongoing competition has resulted in the need for more effective cost reduction and control. As a part of this effort, at the design stage, design teams have developed various time-estimation methods that can be used for setting target costs, and have conducted ongoing analysis of the resulting production processes  [1]. In particular, the outsourcing of production of components has attracted increased attention as a means of meeting targets. This has resulted in intense collaboration between small- and medium-sized manufacturers.Most product costs are determined at the design stage [2]. In addition, the assembly cost can be a major element in the overall cost of a product. Therefore, a quick and reliable method of estimating the assembly time is essential. After determining the dimensions and features of components on a drawing, it is necessary to determine the time needed to assemble them without actually making and assembling a physical prototype.Currently, there are two main types of time-estimation techniques: product-based and process-based. Among the product-based time-estimation techniques, the original design for assembly (DFA) method and its variations for manual assembly have been widely adopted [3]. Among the process-based time-estimation techniques, the modular arrangement of predetermined time standards (MODAPTS), a type of time and motion study, is applied to determine the actual time needed to complete assembly  [4]. In both methods, the goal is to design assembly lines that make assembly as easy as possible so that products can be rolled off in high volumes.Home appliances such as refrigerators, air conditioners, and washing machines all go through a manufacturing process known as “final assembly” whereby components are put together by hand to prepare the product for delivery. New components may incur different assembly operations, which can cause the time required for assembly on the line to differ. Among these, self-adhesive insulators, which are used to suppress vibration and block moisture, are designed with different forms and methods of attachment according to the requirements of the customers. For example, the front module of an air conditioner incorporates 39 insulators among its 93 parts, that is, the insulators account for 41% of the total. The cap module of a refrigerator contains 10 insulators among its 16 parts, such that the insulators account for 62% of the total.The conventional DFA method has been widely used as a time-estimation method in the design phase. The DFA estimates the total handling and insertion time based on tables that relate the assembly time to design factors that influence the gripping, orientation, and insertion of parts  [5]. Although the DFA is able to calculate accurate assembly times for general parts, the time estimates for handling adhesive insulators range from 5 to 7 s depending on their sizes, while those for insertion vary between 5.5 and 6.5 s depending on the holding down required and their ease of alignment [6]. These estimates are far from realistic, however, because the insulators used in industry are much more varied in their sizes and shapes.The MODAPTS system is used to analyze the way work is performed by quantifying the amount of time required to perform an assembly operation [7]. It is accurate enough to be used for setting labor rates in industry. However, the method is not easy for design engineers to apply because it incurs tedious manual processing requiring hours of effort.In the home appliances industry, the attachment time is that time needed to attach a self-adhesive insulator. It must be estimated from a drawing in terms of product assembly time. The current time-estimation method is based on times that are directly proportional to the area of the baseline insulator. No consideration is given to the actual shape and size of the insulator. As such, the method is very easy but inaccurate. For a given size, for example, a time estimate can be determined by identifying the size of an insulator as given by the following equation: attachingtime(s)=1.2+0.0000888×A, whereA=areaof insulator (length×width). This method is easy to use because it needs only the size of the insulator, but the average difference between an estimate made with this method and the actual data can be as much as 30% because it does not consider the shape of the insulator.In this paper, as an alternative, we propose an easy and accurate time estimation model based on the time relationship between the motions involved in attaching an insulator and the size and shape of that insulator. For this purpose, we recorded videos of the attaching of 350 different-shaped insulators of the types used in refrigerators, air conditioners, and washing machines, and then analyzed the motions used to attach them in an actual physical factory layout using MODAPTS.This study aims to contribute to a practical means of estimating the time required for attaching self-adhesive insulators at the design stage. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section  2 describes the review of the related literature. Section  3 presents MODAPTS in detail. Section  4 presents the proposed time-estimation method and its validation. Section  5 summarizes the results obtained for an actual industrial case. Section  6 discusses the case results and some issues arising from the development of the proposed method. Finally, Section  7 summarizes the advantages and limitations identified by these studies.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
