@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Estimating the parameters of multi-state models with time-dependent covariates through likelihood decomposition

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Currently, various successive treatments are offered to people with ESRD.The demand increase requires modelling these treatments for provisional purposes.Modeling should allow for several treatments as for time-dependent covariates.We present and test an approach that allows for an unlimited number of treatments.This approach may be extended to allow for various other management constraints.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
End-stage renal disease,Transition rates,Markov models,Multi-state models,Time-dependent covariates,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundMulti-state models become complex when the number of states is large, when back and forth transitions between states are allowed, and when time-dependent covariates are inevitable. However, these conditions are sometimes necessary in the context of medical issues. For instance, they were needed for modelling the future treatments of patients with end-stage renal disease according to age and to various treatments.MethodsThe available modelling tools do not allow an easy handling of all issues; we designed thus a specific multi-state model that takes into account the complexity of the research question. Parameter estimation relied on decomposition of the likelihood and separate maximisations of the resulting likelihoods. This was possible because there were no interactions between patient treatment courses and because all exact times of transition from any state to another were known. Poisson likelihoods were calculated using the time spent at risk in each state and the observed transitions between each state and all others. The likelihoods were calculated on short time intervals during which age was considered as constant.ResultsThe method was not limited by the number of parameters to estimate; it could be applied to a multi-state model with 10 renal replacement therapies. Supposing the parameters of the model constant over each of seven time intervals, this method was able to estimate one hundred age-dependent transitions.ConclusionsThe method is easy to adapt to any disease with numerous states or grades as long as the disease does not imply interactions between patient courses.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Multi-state models have already been widely used in medicine. These models are of great interest in studying chronic diseases with several grades and/or treatments [1]. When the number of states is large, when back and forth transitions between states are allowed, and when time-dependent covariates (such as age) have to be taken into account, the resulting model can become quite complex. We faced all these difficulties when we designed a model to describe the successive treatments offered to patients with end-stage renal disease (ESRD).ESRD is a life-threatening condition but, in the sixties, renal replacement therapies (RRTs) radically changed patients׳ prognoses and led to longer survivals, especially in renal transplant patients. Currently, ESRD patients may experience several switches between various RRTs [2,3], and, in several countries, registries have been established to collect data on these switches [4–7]. These switches can be described using the rates of transition between different RRTs.Various solutions have been proposed to solve the specific problems of multi-state models in medical research [1,8,9]. These solutions are extensions of survival data analyses applied to settings with multiple transitions and competing risks [10–16]. In fact, several authors succeeded in using these solutions to analyse ESRD datasets, but their models used small numbers of transitions (only the main RRTs were studied), and they considered only age as a categorical variable (i.e., the estimates of the parameters were made for age classes) [17–19].In France, 10 different RRT modalities are used and all of them should be considered to model the successive treatments a patient may undergo; this requires the estimation of a high number of transition rates. Moreover, the transitions to renal transplantation or death depend on the patients׳ age which should be integrated into the model.The data recorded in the French ESRD registry [4] have two features that helped us overcome these difficulties. First, the patients׳ treatment courses are independent (that is, the switch of a patient from one treatment to another does not depend on the treatments the other patients are undergoing). Second, the exact times of all transitions from any treatment to another are known. These two features make it possible to decompose a multi-state model into sub-models whose likelihoods can be separately maximised [8,10].In this paper, we explain the way we solved a complex problem with a simple implementation of likelihood decomposition. This decomposition greatly facilitates the theoretical analysis and the numerical solution. Afterwards, considering short time intervals during which the time-dependent covariates are supposed constant led to the estimation of these covariate effects on the transition rates.Several studies on ESRD patients are longitudinal studies with possible state changes [17,18,20]: the RRT may change over time during the disease. The three main RRTs are haemodialysis (HD), peritoneal dialysis (PD), and renal transplantation (TX). These RRTs may be subdivided further according to the technique, the type of facility, the type of assistance, and the type of renal graft.The French Renal Epidemiology and Information Network (REIN) registry [4] collects data on patients with ESRD who might undergo one to ten different RRTs. REIN registry contains data on patients registered since ESRD onset (incident patients) and data on patients registered late after ESRD onset (but whose date of ESRD onset is available: prevalent patients). At registration, the mean time since ESRD onset in prevalent patients was 6.1 years (SD: 6.2 years). Overall, the dataset studied here includes 67,258 patients, 206,401 person-years of follow-up, and 56,084 transitions (between 10 RRTs+state “death”).Table 1 presents the main characteristics of REIN registry population. The complexity of ESRD data is due to the high number of possible transitions (100 possibilities including back and forth transitions) and to the dataset structure that includes left-truncated, interval-censored, and right-censored observations. One advantage of REIN registry is that, as soon as a patient is registered, all changes in RRT are recorded with the exact time of transition from any state to another.From ESRD onset to death, the patients may undergo several of 10 different RRTs. A multi-state model may then be used to describe the transitions between RRTs and between each RRT and death. This leads to a model with 20 different states: 10 for the RRTs and 10 to indicate the RRT at patient death. No impossible transition between RRTs was considered, including back and forth transitions. Being in a given treatment, a patient may be switched to any other treatment whatever the treatments he/she had previously undergone. Here, for simplicity, the figures and equations present a model with one state for peritoneal dialysis instead of four, one state for haemodialysis instead of four, one state for transplantation instead of two, and three states for death instead of 10 (Fig. 1).The time of interest was the time since ESRD onset in each patient because the transition rates from one state to another depends on the time elapsed since ESRD onset.Formally, this multi-state model may be written in terms of rates of transition between states. The process of patients moving between states was assumed to be Markovian: i.e., any change for a given patient depends only on the current state, not on the time spent in the current state. A proportional hazard model was chosen to take into account various covariates. Thus, the rate of transition from a given state i to another state j at time t (the delay since ESRD onset) for all patients whose characteristics are Z(t) at time t may be written [14]:λij(t,Z(t))=λij,0(t)*exp(βijTZ(t))whereλij,0(t)represents the baseline transition rate between states i and j at time t andβijthe vector of regression parameters that represents the effect of characteristicsZ(t)on the transition rate. A log-linear model for the effects of the covariates on the rates was considered.The classical inference method with Markov models on individual data was already described by Kay [8]. The likelihood is calculated from the matrix of transition probabilities obtained from the above-described transition rates. This method allows for the complexity induced by truncation and censoring through writing a specific contribution to the likelihood of those patients concerned by truncation and/or censoring. The method allows also having non-homogenous Markov models by defining time intervals over which the transition rates are supposed constant. The maximisation of the likelihood could have been obtained with msm package of R software [21,22], a package developed with panel observations [23]. Here, the data are less complex and do not justify the use of the sophisticated msm. Moreover, with this package, when using a time-dependent covariate, this covariate is considered constant between two observations. When studying ESRD data, the observations correspond to the times at which the patients change from one state to another. For some patients, the time spent in a given state can be quite long (the case of transplanted patients); thus, the hypothesis of constant age between two observations is too strong. This means that the data have to be split along the age scale using, for example, the Lexis class of Epi package [24,25] before using msm package.In REIN registry, despite the presence of truncation and censoring (described above), as soon as a patient is registered – that is, he/she becomes at risk of switching from one state to another – every transition and its exact time is known. In this case, mstate package of R [26] can be used and the preparation of the data can be done using the Lexis class of Epi package [25] that was especially designed for mstate package. The preparation of the data and the specification of the model using this package can be quite cumbersome when the number of transitions is high and when different covariates are considered. Indeed, for every transition studied and every level of a covariate, a column has to be added to the data. For ESRD data, modelling the ten RRT states requires one hundred transitions. If every transition depends on several covariates, the number of columns to add becomes quite high and handling the R object becomes very difficult. To simplify the formulation of the model and the manipulation of the dataset, we developed in SAS and R software a tool based on the decomposition of the likelihood.When the exact times of transition are known and the transition rates considered constant over the studied time interval (λij(t,Z(t))=λij), the formula of the likelihood becomes quite simple [10]; it reduces to:∏i≠j∏jλijNij*exp(−λij*Yi)whereYiis the total time spent in state i by all individuals during the studied time interval andNijthe number of transitions from a state i to another state j. In this expression, the competing risks are taken into account by calculating the time spent at risk in each transient state.From this formula, the number of transitionsNijcan be modelled as a Poisson process [8,10,27] whose expectationμijmay be written:μij=Yi*λijThus, it is possible to decompose the likelihood of the complete multi-state model into separate independent likelihoods, one for each transition.As every transition from each state depends on the total time spent in this state, we chose, for simplification, to split the total likelihood according to the transient states. This allows the different transition rates from a given state to share common parameters.Fig. 2 shows the decomposition of the model displayed in Fig. 1 into three sub-models, each focusing on a given transient state.To allow the introduction of time-dependent covariates into the model, each individual course since ESRD onset was split into one-month periods, the time-dependent covariate being supposed constant over each period. Then, within each period, the time spent at risk in each transient state and the number of observed transitions between states were calculated.Now, to better describe the introduction of time-dependent covariates, let us consider, for example, the sub-model relative to state TX (state 3). During a given month k, for a patient whose characteristicsZ(t)=Zkare supposed constant during this short period, Y3kis the time spent at risk of transition out of state TX and N31k, N32k, and N36k, the respective observed transitions from state TX to states PD, HD, and death. Each N3jk(j in {1,2,6}) may be modelled as a realisation of a Poisson process whose expectationμ3jk(Zk)may be written:μ3jk(Zk)=Y3k*λ3j(Zk)For example, when we suppose an effect of age on each transition rate; Zkis equal to agekwhich is supposed constant over the time interval k of one month. The baseline intensity rate and the effect of age are also considered constant over each month period. The transition rate from state TX to state j can be written:λ3j(agek)=λ3j,0*exp(β3j*agek)forjin{1,2,6}A Poisson likelihood was written to estimate the baseline intensity rates (λ31,0, λ32,0, λ36,0) and the effects of age (β31,β32, β36).This decomposition of the likelihood with introduction of time-dependent covariates is described here for three transient states but it can be easily applied to several transient states; the whole model is then decomposed into as many sub-models as there are transient states.Tools are available in SAS and R software to split the data (Lexis expansion) according to the time since ESRD onset and age [25,28]. For the application on ESRD data, this likelihood was maximised using the Newton–Raphson option of PROC NLP of SAS 9.2 software. The confidence intervals were calculated with Wald method. Maximisation was also developed in R software using Newton-type algorithm through function nlm. The R code consists of three main functions: the first allows preparing the data for the calculation of separated likelihoods, the second estimates the parameters through maximisation of the likelihood, and the third predicts the number of patients in the different states according to the estimated parameters. All these functions, as well as an example of their use on simulated data, are available on request from the authors.Within the ESRD context, the clinicians are interested in the marginal distributions [29] of the patients over the different states; i.e., the number of patients that will be present in each state according to the time since ESRD onset. The graphical assessment consists in comparing the observed probabilities of being in each state with the predicted probabilities. A monthly count of the patients in each state was used to generate an observed proportion of patients in each state. First, the survival function was estimated using this count and an actuarial method, then the probability of being in each state during each month was obtained by multiplying the survival function by the proportion of patients present in this state among live patients. This observed repartition of the patients was finally compared with the one predicted from solving the system of differential equations stemming from the multi-state model [30]. Indeed, because the whole transition process was supposed Markovian, the multi-state model may be written using a system of differential equations [30]. This approach is used for prediction then the cumulative observed and predicted probabilities of being in each state [26] were plotted in function of the time elapsed since ESRD onset. This graph allows checking the predicted marginal distributions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
