@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Automatic iterative segmentation of multiple sclerosis lesions using Student's t mixture models and probabilistic anatomical atlases in FLAIR images

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Automatic MS lesion segmentation in FLAIR images using Student's t mixture models.Segmentation performed in an iterative manner allowing successive lesion refinement.Very good spatial and volumetric agreement with raters.Results comparable and, in some cases, better than the current state-of-the-art.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Image segmentation,Multiple sclerosis,Mixture models,Student's t distribution,Probabilistic anatomical atlases,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a demyelinating autoimmune disease that attacks the central nervous system (CNS) and affects more than 2 million people worldwide. The segmentation of MS lesions in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a very important task to assess how a patient is responding to treatment and how the disease is progressing. Computational approaches have been proposed over the years to segment MS lesions and reduce the amount of time spent on manual delineation and inter- and intra-rater variability and bias. However, fully-automatic segmentation of MS lesions still remains an open problem. In this work, we propose an iterative approach using Student's t mixture models and probabilistic anatomical atlases to automatically segment MS lesions in Fluid Attenuated Inversion Recovery (FLAIR) images. Our technique resembles a refinement approach by iteratively segmenting brain tissues into smaller classes until MS lesions are grouped as the most hyperintense one. To validate our technique we used 21 clinical images from the 2015 Longitudinal Multiple Sclerosis Lesion Segmentation Challenge dataset. Evaluation using Dice Similarity Coefficient (DSC), True Positive Ratio (TPR), False Positive Ratio (FPR), Volume Difference (VD) and Pearson's r coefficient shows that our technique has a good spatial and volumetric agreement with raters' manual delineations. Also, a comparison between our proposal and the state-of-the-art shows that our technique is comparable and, in some cases, better than some approaches, thus being a viable alternative for automatic MS lesion segmentation in MRI.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a demyelinating autoimmune disease that attacks the central nervous system (CNS) and affects more than 2 million people worldwide [1]. It is mainly characterized by the presence of white matter (WM) lesions [2], which are visible on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans and appear hyper-intense on T2-weighted and Fluid Attenuated Inversion Recovery (FLAIR) images. Segmentation of MS lesions is usually done by a radiologist, who has to visually assess and manually delineate them when measuring total lesion volume. Since MRI brain scans are usually volumetric, the manual delineation procedure is done in a slice-by-slice manner, which is time consuming and suffers from large intra- and inter-rater variability and bias [3].Clinical trials have shown that lesion volumes are meaningful outcomes for assessing disease burden in multiple sclerosis (MS) [4], and thus accurately measuring such volumes is of considerable interest in clinical practice [5]. In this scenario, an automated technique to segment MS lesions and measure their volumes would reduce the time needed from the rater and decrease the observer dependency as well. However, automatic segmentation of MS lesions is challenging, since a number of variables such as partial volume effect (PVE), bias field, acquisition parameters and different scanner magnetic field strengths may directly influence the segmentation outcome. There have been many proposals over the years regarding automatic MS lesion segmentation, but no single one appears to be widely used at the present time. The proposed techniques range from a myriad of approaches such as dictionary learning [6], logistic regression [7,8], patch-based [9], random decision forest [10] and mixture models [11,12].In this paper, we propose a new fully-automatic technique for MS lesions' segmentation in MR FLAIR images using an iterative approach based on Student's t mixture models and probabilistic anatomical atlases. Our technique resembles a refinement approach by iteratively segmenting brain tissue classes into subclasses until MS lesions are grouped as the most hyperintense one. Since our segmentation technique is intensity-based, we use probabilistic anatomical atlases to constrain the iterative process to the WM region, thus avoiding misclassification of voxels that have similar intensities to lesion voxels but are outside the WM tissue class.To validate our technique we used 21 images from the 2015 Longitudinal Multiple Sclerosis Lesion Segmentation Challenge (also known as 2015 ISBI Longitudinal Challenge) and assessed its performance using the Dice Similarity Coefficient (DSC), True Positive Ratio (TPR), False Positive Ratio (FPR), Volume Difference (VD) and Pearson's r coefficient on our results and rater manual delineations. It is important to note that each case in the dataset had 2 lesion delineations, each one done by a different rater, and we compared our results to both of them. Also, in some cases the manual delineations did not have a good agreement rate between themselves, which confirms the inter-variability and bias between observers.We also compared our findings with proposals that took part in the 2015 ISBI Longitudinal Challenge. Since they used the same database as we did, a direct comparison was possible. We briefly describe the works that presented quantitative results in the following.In [13], an automatic hierarchical framework for the segmentation of healthy tissues and lesions in brain MRI was proposed. The authors used a Markov Random Field segmentation framework that leveraged spatial prior probabilities for 9 healthy tissues through multi-atlas fusion and then used a random forest classifier to provide region level lesion refinement.In [14], lesions were segmented using a fast patch matching approach, which was extended to multimodal data. To do so, the authors registered all available modalities to a common space and stacked them to form a 4D volume of multimodal intensities. Patches were defined and used to segment MS lesions.An approach using random forest and local context intensity features was proposed in [15] to segment MS lesions. The authors extracted features from the images such as voxel intensity values (before and after image smoothing) and local histogram features and trained a random forest with supervised learning to segment MS lesions.In [16], the authors proposed a 3D convolutional neural network (CNN) using a voxel-wise classifier with multi-channel 3D patches of MRI volumes as input. For each ground truth, a CNN was trained and the final segmentation was obtained by combining the probability outputs of these CNNs.Finally, in [17] the authors used an estimation of spatially global within-the-subject intensity distribution and a spatially local intensity distribution derived from a healthy reference population to segment MS lesions. Using this approach, the authors aimed to distinguish locations in the brain with abnormal intensity levels when compared to the expected value at the same location in a healthy population.All the works previously described are intensity-based methods and tried to use spatial information or patches to improve the segmentation results. The DSC, TPR and FPR values for these works are summarized in Table 10. These three metrics were the ones used by all authors, allowing a direct comparison of our approach to theirs. Along with DSC, TPR and FPR, we also used VD and Pearson's r coefficient metrics when comparing our proposal results to the raters' ground truths.This paper is divided in the following manner. In Section 2 we explain the methodology of our work, including details about the dataset, metrics used to evaluate our model, preprocessing, our segmentation technique and post-processing stages. Results and discussions are presented in Section 3, where we compare results from our technique to each rater delineation and other proposals and also analyze how well the manual delineations for each image agree with each other. Finally, Section 4 concludes our paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper presented an automatic iterative approach to segment MS lesions in FLAIR images. Our technique uses probabilistic anatomical atlases to constrain the segmentation process to the WM region (thus reducing the number of false positives and voxels to cluster) and segment the image using Student's t mixture models. Our method is performed in a refinement manner by iteratively segmenting brain tissues into smaller classes until MS lesions are grouped as the most hyperintense one.We compared the results from our automatic technique to 2 raters' manual delineations and to other works that used the same dataset using the DSC, TPR, FPR and VD metrics. Results indicated that our technique successfully segments MS lesions in FLAIR images and provides consistent results on images with a different lesion volume.A difficulty faced during the development of our proposed technique regarded the high inter-variability between the raters. This fact created difficulties in providing a solid foundation that could help us work on the adjustment of the parameters of our algorithm.One limitation of our technique lies in the image registration stage. Since the alignment between fixed and moving images is not perfect, lesions located in areas that are not well aligned are likely to be pruned in the image segmentation constraint stage. On the other hand, this constraint also reduces the number of false positives by eliminating voxels that have intensity profiles close to those of MS lesions but are outside the WM region.Another drawback of our technique is that lesion voxels that are on the “low end” of the MS lesion intensity profile are likely to be left out of the MS cluster. This happens because our proposal follows the assumption that MS lesions are the most hyperintense class in FLAIR images. If the lesions have a significant intensity variability, the less intense ones are prone not to be included in the cluster.In future works, we aim to extend the approach presented in this paper to other MRI weights such as T2 and also to develop a model to automatically select the best number of clusters and iterations for our algorithm and circumvent the “low end” intensity problem. We also intend to apply our segmentation proposal to different field strengths and data acquired on different scanners to assess its performance in different scenarios.None declared.