@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
MetaMesh: A hierarchical computational model for design and fabrication of biomimetic armored surfaces

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
MetaMesh is a hierarchical computational construct to generate articulated armored surfaces.The ancient armored fish Polypterus senegalus provides source of bio-inspiration.Local, regional and global levels of organization embed functional differentiation.Articulation of scale units is preserved by neighborhood morphing techniques.The model is adaptable to a wide array of complex hosting surfaces.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Biomimetics,Bio-inspired design,Computational design,Hierarchical computation,Functional differentiation,Natural exoskeletons,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Structural materials in nature achieve diverse functions such as toughness, flexibility and strength, through spatial variation in material properties and morphometry across organizational hierarchies with precise interfacial control  [1,2]. Biologically inspired engineering, or the translation of design schema in nature, being chemical, physical, genetic, or geometric, to synthetic systems requires complex models that both capture the intricacies of biological models and adapt their multi-scale design principles to new operative constraints. The process of mapping functional requirements between design solutions presents several theoretical and technical challenges to ensure continuity and coherence of all components. With the advent of high resolution materials characterization methods, powerful computational simulation capabilities, and increasingly precise digital fabrication technologies, it is now becoming possible to develop novel multifunctional structures with intricate, interactive, and hierarchical design strategies inspired by biological models.The study of biological armor systems is an emerging field  [3–7] with recent initial development of structural (load-bearing) bioinspired armor materials, most often nacre-mimetic  [8]. However, the design and manufacture of a bioinspired exoskeleton including salient local–regional–global hierarchical features have yet to be realized. In this paper, we present a computational design methodology that combines scientific analytical methods and computational form finding tools to generate a flexible protective surface based on an armored fish exoskeleton. Our biological model is the exoskeleton of the ancient fish, Polypterus senegalus. Its armor (Fig. 1(a)) is composed of articulated, mineralized scales that act as a protective medium from predatory threats while also allowing biomechanical flexibility in axial bending and torsion  [3,9–13]. The functional framework of the fish scale jacket (Fig. 1(b)) uses spatial variation of unit morphometry (size and shape) and their arrangement into semi-helical rings to balance the two seemingly contradictory functions of full coverage and mobility. Our prior research has begun to explore the geometric design rules underpinning the functional framework  [14–16]. One of our previous models constructed a parametric definition of single scale geometries and an associative model to generate an array of homogeneous scales using computer-aided design (CAD) software for multi-material 3D printing of a flexible, flat surface  [14]. Another model morphed scale-based geometries along a sequence to determine dimensional parameters that can be varied while maintaining connectivity within a single direction  [15].Our goal is to create a generative computational design framework for functionally graded structures with tunable local performance. These local performances can adapt to any given hosting mesh surface by emulating the design principles observed in the flexible fish exoskeleton. We distill the geometric design rules underlying the P. senegalus exoskeleton across multiple length scales (local, regional, and global). We then present the MetaMesh model that translates these design rules hierarchically to a synthetic system using an efficient framework linking experimental analytical methods (X-ray micro-computed tomography and morphometric analysis) with advanced computational geometry techniques (custom data structures for polygon mesh processing and component adaptation). MetaMesh operates in three levels of resolution: (i) locally—to construct unit geometries based on shape parameters of scales in the P. senegalus exoskeleton, (ii) regionally—to encode articulated connection guides that adapt units with their neighbors according to directional schema in the mesh, and (iii) globally—to generatively extend the unit assembly over arbitrarily curved surfaces through global mesh optimization using a functional coefficient gradient. Unlike component-based parametric techniques that focus on the packed placement of self-similar units over surfaces  [17], MetaMesh incorporates complex connectivity and overlap of the units to enable articulation with neighbors. In addition, through functional variation in unit shape, it allows control over regional connectivity and interlocking between units. We demonstrate the MetaMesh model’s potential with its application to a human body mesh surface and further discuss the model’s advantages and limitations. This computational adaptation of an articulated, segmented, flexible surface serves as a proof-of-concept model for enhanced biomimetic structures in various fields such as transportation (e.g. ground, air, water, or space), architecture (e.g. building skins or canopies), sports and military (e.g. personal protection), and consumer products (e.g. packaging)  [12,14].Eleven scales were excised from a deceased P. senegalus specimen (every 10th scale across a row on the left side of the body) and scanned via X-ray micro-computed tomography (μCT; Viva CT40, Scanco Medical AG, Switzerland) operated at 45 kV and 177 μA. The microtomographic data was reconstructed using bilinear and inter-plane interpolation algorithms into polygonal meshes using an interactive medical imaging software (MIMICS®  14.1, Materialise, Belgium) to generate digital 3D objects of the scales in stereolithography (STL) format. Further processing was executed in Rhino3D (RHINOCEROS®, Robert McNeel and Associates, USA) to remove noise and internal porosity.Geometric analysis measured variation in scale shape and served as a basis for the computational model. The coordinates of twenty landmarks defining the outline of the scale including all geometrical features were extracted from the 3D STL objects using a custom Visual Basic code programmed in the Rhino3D environment. These landmark coordinates were subjected to translation, rotation, and scaling relative to the centroid. Magnitudes of relative geometric parameters were calculated based on the coordinates. The volume of the scale was measured from the STL file in Rhino3D.The computational framework defining the MetaMesh data structure (local scale geometric definition, regional directionality patterns, and global functional gradient application) was implemented in C# on top of the design platform in Rhino3D. The mesh optimization process was implemented in Java (Eclipse IDE, © 2013 The Eclipse Foundation) and deployed within a customized applet.The closed-surface multi-material prototypes were designed using parametric CAD software (SOLIDWORKS®, Dassault Systèmes SolidWorks Corp., France) as described by Reichert et al. for a flat surface  [14]. The components of the prototype were exported as separate STL files per material component and fabricated using multi-material 3D printing (using digital materials from OBJET Connex500™) with 30 μm resolution in the digital mode. Rigid components were printed with VeroWhite (Objet FullCure®  830) and compliant components were printed with TangoPlus (Objet FullCure®  930).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
