@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Blood glucose level reconstruction as a function of transcapillary glucose transport

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We test the widely used Steil–Rebrin model for blood glucose level reconstruction.We propose an alternative for the Steil–Rebrin model.The proposed model covers effects that the Steil–Rebrin model does not cover.We compare both models using frequent sampling of glucose levels.The proposed model outperforms the Steil–Rebrin model.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Blood,Interstitial,Glucose,Level,Calculation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Let us consider a human diabetic patient who receives regular insulin doses. From time to time, the patient undergoes a detailed monitoring of his/her glucose levels using a continuous glucose monitoring system (CGMS). Over the course of a few days, the CGMS provides a detailed track of the interstitial fluid glucose levels measured in the patient׳s subcutaneous tissue. A physician reviews the interstitial fluid glucose levels measured. A difference between the blood and interstitial fluid glucose levels is considered to be unimportant because the blood glucose levels are not measured continuously. Approximately five blood glucose-level samples are taken per day, while the interstitial fluid glucose levels are usually measured every 5min.As another example, let us consider a critically ill human patient with stress-induced hyperglycemia. Instead of having the patient tolerate the hyperglycemia, intensive insulin infusion therapy could be administered to the patient with the aim of reducing mortality [1,2]. To control the insulin dosage, the patient׳s glucose levels must be monitored. Once again, it is the CGMS that measures the patient׳s interstitial fluid glucose levels.Glucose is primarily distributed throughout the body by blood vessels. The maintenance of normal blood glucose levels is accomplished by a network of hormones, neural signals and substrate effects that regulate endogenous glucose production and glucose utilization by tissues other than the brain [3]. From the blood, glucose is transported through the blood capillary membrane into the interstitial fluid. The interstitial fluid, which is found in the intercellular spaces between tissue cells, supplies the cells with nutrients such as glucose. In the interstitial fluid, the glucose is either utilized or leaves the interstitial fluid to eventually return to the blood. The lymphatic system represents an accessory route through which the fluid can flow from the interstitial spaces into the blood [4].Interstitial fluid glucose levels then vary, reflecting changes in blood glucose levels. However, the change in interstitial fluid glucose levels exhibits both a delay and a magnitude difference. Different compartments may have different glucose levels; this difference is because capillaries in different compartments have different permeabilities [4]. Subsequently, the cells of different tissues have different glucose utilization rates depending on the tissue׳s metabolic needs and the levels of available glucose. Thus, as blood glucose levels change, subcutaneous tissue glucose levels cannot be assumed to be equivalent to those in different compartments. Describing the relationship between plasma glucose and interstitial fluid glucose dynamics is an important but challenging open problem.The two-compartment model developed by Steil and Rebrin [5–7], assumes that interstitial fluid glucose levels are a convolution of blood glucose levels and the impulse response of the system with only one unknown parameter. However, a one-parameter model cannot fully describe a complex system.Another approach used experiments involving glucose tracers. Researchers [8] measured the concentrations of three different glucose tracers in both plasma and the interstitium. Similarly, other studies [9–11] have used an approach based on fluorodeoxyglucose and positron emission tomography. Such studies are intended to elucidate a particular aspect of plasma-interstitium dynamics and are not well suited for everyday use by patients. One has to consider that a diabetic patient will need to wear a CGMS taking five blood samples a day in practice. In addition, a radioactive component (the tracer) is required to perform a positron emission tomography scan, and this is a risk factor for pregnant and breastfeeding women.Another approach treats measured glucose levels as noisy time series and applies a Kalman filter [12,13]. It estimates future glucose measurements using a systems dynamics model and present glucose measurements. To estimate the model׳s parameters, one can change the parameters until the estimated glucose levels match the measured glucose levels to a satisfactory degree of accuracy. In this paper, we present an alternative to the Steil–Rebrin model of systems dynamics.Very frequent blood glucose level sampling is the only way to understand if the newly proposed method is able to correctly reconstruct blood glucose dynamics. While other studies [12–14] measure blood glucose levels every 15min, we measured blood glucose levels every 5min. The work presented herein was tested on hereditary hypertriglyceridemic rats because this allowed for a frequency of blood glucose level measuring and a longer experiment period than would be acceptable with humans.First, the experimenter tried to achieve a steady blood glucose level, preferably at 6mmol/l, using a manually corrected glucose infusion and a constant insulin infusion. After 15min of the steady state, a bolus of glucose was administered to initiate a rapid rise of blood glucose levels. The experimenter then continued to maintain the steady state at the new blood glucose levels for 60min. Next, the experimenter administered a short-action insulin bolus to create a rapid fall of blood glucose levels and continued measuring glucose levels for only the next 80min.During the experiment, glucose levels were measured simultaneously every 5min in arterial blood (±0.2mmol/l tolerance), subcutaneous tissue, skeletal muscle tissue and visceral fat (15% tolerance for the three latter compartments). For example, when a rat was given a bolus of glucose, the successive glucose levels could be increased by more than 15%. This was not due to an improper calibration of the measuring device but to an inability to further increase glucose level sampling frequencies—see Ref. [15].This study extends our previous work as we derive an improved model of plasma-interstitium glucose dynamics. Therefore, we reused our previously conducted set of experiments to compare the previous model with the presently proposed model on the same data sets. See Ref. [16] for full details of the experimental setup.Using the Steil–Rebrin model, we reviewed the differences between blood glucose levels and CGMS-measured interstitial fluid glucose levels [17,18]. According to Ref. [18], C1(t) and C2(t) represent the plasma, i.e., the blood and interstitial fluid glucose levels, respectively, V1 and V2 represent the plasma and the interstitial fluid volumes, respectively, and kijdenotes the transfer rate from compartment j to compartment i. Ref. [18] gives Eq. (1).(1)dC2(t)dt=−1τC2(t)+gτC1(t),whereg=τ×k21×V1V2τ=1k02+k12Ref. [18] assumes the existence of a steady state with no change in interstitial fluid glucose levels. Thus, Eq. (1) transforms into the boundary condition (2).(2)0=−1τC2(t)+gτC1(t)Ref. [18] assumes the following regarding the parameter g: If the blood and interstitial fluid glucose levels are equal, the expected value of g is 1 with respect to Eq. (2). τ is treated as an unknown parameter and is estimated from the data. However, it has been shown that a recalibration of the measured interstitial fluid glucose levels is needed to get the calculated g close to 1. Ref. [18] concludes with a need for developing more sophisticated recalibration procedures with time-varying modulation.There are three effects on interstitial fluid glucose levels that cannot be covered with a single change in glucose levels: the exchange of glucose between the blood and interstitial fluid across the capillary membrane, the glucose utilization by cells and the accessory route of the lymphatic system by which the glucose returns to the blood after a delay. In laboratory experiments with frequent glucose level sampling, such patterns of glucose levels were observed, which are in conflict with Eq. (1). The interstitial fluid glucose levels were steady for at least 15min while the blood glucose levels changed. For example, see the original measured glucose levels inFig. 1. This suggests that either the interstitial fluid glucose levels were sub-sampled or the Steil–Rebrin model is overly simplified. With respect to the previous section and Refs. [15,19], we consider the Steil–Rebrin model to be overly simplified. In this study, we present a new model that is not in conflict with the aforementioned glucose level patterns.One study [20] suggests the use of more than one function to model a system׳s response to glucose levels. Similarly, in study [16], we viewed interstitial fluid glucose levels as a sum of the glucose flux from the blood into the interstitium and the flux from the interstitium into cells. This is another reason for considering the Steil–Rebrin model to be overly simplified.In Fig. 1, squares denote the measured blood glucose levels. The curve next to these squares denotes the smoothed blood glucose levels. The circles denote the measured interstitial fluid glucose levels. The curve next to these circles denotes the smoothed interstitial fluid glucose levels. The measured glucose levels were smoothed using an approximation method [21].To derive a better model of plasma-interstitium glucose dynamics, let us start with our previous work on interstitial-fluid glucose level prediction [22,23]. Eq. (3) describes our previous prediction model [22]. It relates present blood and interstitial fluid glucose levels to future interstitial fluid glucose levels [22]. The b(t) and i(t) symbols denote the blood and interstitial fluid glucose levels, respectively, at time t.(3)p×b(t)+cg×b(t)×(b(t)−i(t))+c=i(t+Δt)The ∆t, p, cg and c symbols have been previously described [16,22]. ∆t denotes the prediction interval. When compared to Fick׳s Law of diffusion [24], b(t)–i(t) is the concentration difference across a membrane, and cg is the surface area multiplied by the membrane permeability and divided by the thickness of the membrane. Accounting for diffusion across the membrane, p expresses a glucose gain from the blood due to intercellular clefts between endothelial cells. The symbol c represents an arbitrary glucose level that covers the difference between the flux from the blood into the interstitium and the flux from the interstitium into cells, thus covering insulin-dependent actions.As blood glucose levels change, interstitial fluid glucose levels change as well. This is a system response that is used to determine the system variables—i.e., the model׳s parameters. A satisfactory number of measured glucose levels produce an overdetermined system in Eq. (3). In that case, the Linear Least Squares method gives the model׳s parameters – p, cg and c – for a given ∆t. It is possible to calculate parameters that remain constant throughout the duration of the experiment [23].The model already gives acceptable results if the prediction error is considered to be the absolute average difference between the predicted and measured interstitial fluid glucose levels. However, prior to reconstructing blood glucose levels, it was necessary to reduce the maximum absolute difference between the predicted and measured interstitial fluid glucose levels. This is where the novel part of this study begins.With the previous prediction model [16,22,23], there could be a slight time-lag of approximately 2.5min associated with a rapid blood glucose level change (e.g., when changing from 5.5mmol/l to 11.5mmol/l in 5min due to an intravenously given bolus of glucose). This lag causes an undesired maximum difference. Although the prediction provides a useful idea of the next course of interstitial fluid glucose levels, from a mathematical point of view the maximum difference must be reduced.Let us consider a rapid change in blood glucose levels followed by a respective change in interstitial fluid glucose levels. Because the glucose transport rate from the blood into the interstitial fluid follows the concentration gradient between these two compartments, the change in interstitial fluid glucose levels must be a product of the varying glucose transport rate. To reduce the maximum difference, let us consider the rate at which the concentration gradient converges to zero—see the reasoning for Eq. (2).Let us consider that the present interstitial fluid glucose levels and their changes determine the rate with which the interstitial glucose levels reach new levels. As a result, the prediction interval ∆t in Eq. (3) depends on the current concentration gradient between the blood and interstitial fluid. If we consider that changes in blood glucose levels affect interstitial fluid glucose levels, then the fixed ∆t has to be replaced using Eq. (4), thus producing Eq. (5). Eq. (4) reflects the fact that glucose propagates from the blood into the interstitial fluid with a delay, i.e., ∆t. Yet, Eq. (4) states that this delay is proportional to the current interstitial fluid glucose levels and their changes, which are affected by blood glucose level changes.(4)φ(t)=t+Δt+k×i(t)×i(t)−i(t−h)h(5)p×b(t)+cg×b(t)×(b(t)−i(t))+c=i(φ(t))For the h-long interval, Eq. (4) expresses the effect of a concentration-gradient change rate as it affects interstitial fluid glucose levels. The k-parameter is a coefficient of this effect. If the concentration gradient equals zero for a past h-long interval, Eq. (4) equals the original t+∆t.Considering an a priori identification of the parameters, let us start with Eq. (3). It is a well-established fact that blood glucose propagates into the interstitial fluid with a delay —∆t. The p, cg and c parameters are always identifiable if they are solved with the Least Linear Squares method because the method reduces the squares of the differences. In the worst case, the Least Linear Squares method produces p close to 1 and cg with c close to 0. In this case, the method behaves as a physician reviewing CGMS-measured interstitial fluid glucose levels, assuming that they follow blood glucose levels with a delay. When solving Eq. (5), the k parameter could be considered to be equal to zero, thus leading to the same conclusion.Because Eq. (4) is not calculated with blood glucose levels, Eq. (5) can be used to reconstruct blood glucose levels using only the CGMS-measured interstitial fluid glucose levels once the parameters are determined. To determine the parameters, the measured blood and interstitial fluid glucose levels are first smoothed. We have previously described the approximation method used to smooth blood and interstitial fluid glucose levels [21]. The method reduces the effect of outliers in the measured glucose levels because they can be affected by large deviations, especially with the CGMS [26–28]. Therefore, we do not remove outliers from the measured data sets.To estimate p, cg, c, k, h and ∆t in Eq. (5), an overdetermined system of Eq. (5) is built using the smoothed glucose levels. Eq. (5) presents a non-linear model. Let us determine the p, cg and c parameters with the Least Linear Squares method for the given ∆t, k and h parameters. Then we define the lower bound, upper bound and stepping for each ∆t, k and h parameter. The h, k and ∆t parameters are stepped within their boundaries to generate a number of ∆t, k and h triplets for which we calculate the p, cg and c parameters. The best triplet produces the least reconstruction error. The reconstruction error is the average absolute difference between the calculated blood glucose levels and the smoothed measured blood glucose levels.With the parameters p, cg, c, h, k and ∆t calculated, let us define the following substitutions (6).(6)α=cgβ=p−cg×i(t)γ=c−i(φ(t))D=β2−4×α×γUsing these substitutions, let us transform Eq. (5) into a quadratic polynomial (7).(7)α×b(t)2+β×b(t)+γ=0Then, the reconstructed blood glucose level is one of the two roots of this polynomial. Eq. (8) calculates the blood glucose level at time t.(8)b(t)=−β+s×D2×α,wheres=[−1.0;1.0]∧α≠0∧D≥0The newly introduced s-parameter selects the root. It is either −1.0 or 1.0. To determine the s-parameter, let us calculate both roots at each time point of the blood glucose level measurement. For each value of the s-parameter, let us calculate the average absolute difference between the measured and calculated blood glucose levels. The root producing the smallest difference is the desired root. So far, the s-parameter has always been 1.0.As an alternative to Eq. (8), Eq. (7) can be used if the conditions for solving Eq. (8) are not met. In such a case, let us iterate through all of the possible blood glucose levels with the desired numerical stepping. Then, the desired blood glucose level satisfies condition (9).(9)b(t)=ϑ,where|α×b(t)2+β×b(t)|=minϑ=MinLevelMaxLevel|α×ϑ2+β×ϑ|If the conditions for solving Eq. (8) are not met, Eq. (9) can still identify a glucose level for which there is an acceptable difference between the calculated and expected glucose levels. If the difference is too large, the respective set of parameters is discarded and we search for a set of parameters that produces the lowest reconstruction error.With an approach such as that in Eq. (1), deconvolution is used to reconstruct blood glucose levels from the CGMS-measured glucose levels and the impulse response of the system. This is an inverse problem which suffers from ill-conditioning. Our approach is different. We find the parameters for calculating interstitial fluid glucose levels from blood glucose levels. Then, Eq. (8) calculates the blood glucose level by calculating the root of a quadratic polynomial—Eq. (5), where the interstitial fluid glucose level is the product of the blood glucose level and not vice versa as it is with deconvolution.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
While we outperformed the Steil–Rebrin model, the Steil–Rebrin model has been tested on a considerably larger dataset over the years. Therefore, we cannot claim that the proposed model will result in improvements with human patients in practice—this has to be yet proven.