@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Assessment of pulse arrival time for arterial stiffness monitoring on body composition scales

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A concept of scales application for arterial health monitoring is presented.Pulse arrival time is estimated from impedance plethysmogram and electrocardiogram.The proposed method agrees well with arterial tonometry.The system is able to track small changes in pulse arrival time.The system has a potential to be used in clinical and ambulatory settings.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Unobtrusive long-term health monitoring,Personal health technologies,Multi-sensing device,Impedance plethysmogram,Slope sum function,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study presents a system that aims to estimate changes in arterial health status in an unobtrusive way. It might be especially useful in long-term self-monitoring of cardiovascular performance for successful treatment and empowerment of patients. This system applies the electrocardiographic and impedance plethysmographic signals acquired using modified body composition scales for the calculation of pulse arrival time, which is directly related to arterial stiffness. The proposed device was tested in a cohort of 14 subjects. The modified scales were compared to the commercial PulsePen tonometer and the results showed significant relationship between these different devices (rs=0.93,p<0.01). The system also showed the ability to track small pulse arrival time variations induced by paced respiration. These findings suggest that scales evaluating parameters of cardiovascular function have potential to become a convenient device for self-monitoring of arterial stiffness.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Stiffness of large arteries have a considerable impact on cardiovascular (CV) function. This mechanical property is responsible for maintaining continuous blood flow and retaining the shape of vessels under the high pressures. Therefore, changes in arterial stiffness can contribute to the development of CV diseases, and target organ, such as heart, kidney and brain, damage [1–4].It has been shown that an abnormal aortic stiffness is independently associated with an increased number of CV events, as well as to all-cause mortality [5,6]. This especially applies to elderly population [7–9], patients with end-stage renal disease [10,11], impaired glucose tolerance [12] and hypertension [3,4,13]. In addition, an increased aortic stiffness is found to be associated with microvascular brain lesions [14]. Although most of studies have been dedicated to the investigation of aortic arterial stiffness, the impaired elastic properties of lower-limb arteries are also related to significant health issues, e.g., peripheral artery disease [15] and diabetic peripheral neuropathy [16].Accordingly, periodic assessment of arterial stiffness has been suggested to be a part of long-term monitoring of target patients [2,4,5,7–10,12,13]. Nevertheless, the technical concerns, notably, operator dependence and measurement standardization, restrict the inclusion of arterial stiffness characterizing parameters in clinical practice [17] and home-based monitoring. Therefore, a more convenient way for periodic estimation of arterial stiffness is highly desirable.According to the Moens–Korteweg equation, stiffness of the arteries is inversely and non-linearly related to the time interval, required for the pulse wave to travel a fixed distance. A common approach is to assess the pulse arrival time (PAT) by employing the R-wave of the electrocardiogram (ECG) as a reference point and the pulse wave, recorded on a peripheral site (finger, toe). In this case, PAT is affected not only by the stiffness of the aortic arteries itself, but by the limb arteries as well. Therefore, this information scan be valuable for evaluating general status of the arteries.Emerging advances in technology enable integration of sensors for acquiring various physiological signals in an unobtrusive way. For example, bathroom scales with handlebar and footpad electrodes have been successfully applied to acquire ECG [18–22], impedance plethysmogram (IPG) [19–22], ballistocardiogram [18,20–22] and lower-body electromyogram [20]. So far, commercial bathroom scales are capable of estimating total body composition and heart rate. Moreover, the integration of assessment of arterial stiffness would allow us to track changes in arterial status and transform bathroom scales into multi-parametric device.In this paper, we propose a system for estimation of PAT using body composition scales, modified to acquire ECG and IPG signals. The proposed system enables unobtrusive long-term monitoring of PAT changes over the time, therefore, may form a basis for periodic arterial stiffness assessment. This issue has already been addressed by our group in a preliminary study [23].This paper is organized as follows. The proposed method is described in Section 2, followed by a description of the study population and the performance measures in Section 3. The results characterizing performance are presented in Section 4 and compared to a commercial device. The paper is finished with a discussion and conclusions (Sections 5 and 6).The principle of PAT estimation using body composition scales relies on synchronously recorded ECG and IPG signals. ECG was obtained using Einthoven extremity leads, whereas IPG was recorded from the soles placed on the footpad electrodes.The morphology of IPG depends on local blood volume in the body [24]. IPG is obtained by stimulating tissue with low amplitude high frequency current. Since the amplitude of the current is constant, the voltage alternates according to the impedance changes occurring due to the changes in the blood volume. Given that the lower-body IPG signal is the sum of the local impedances of all the segments between the voltage measuring electrodes, the total impedance is affected by separate body parts differently. Hence, smaller cross sectional area and greater local impedance make the lower parts of the legs contribute more to the total impedance than the lower torso or thighs [25]. As a result, the IPG recorded on the bathroom scales mostly represents blood pulsation in the feet.Generally, PAT depends on permanent arterial stiffness, but also varies with blood pressure in a short period of time because arteries become stiffer under increased pressure. Due to physiological phenomena, blood pressure and heart rate are already modulated at 0.1Hz rate [26], yet paced breathing at the same rate additionally increases modulation. During inspiration effort the intrathoracic pressure falls and provokes the decrease in stroke volume. This causes the reduction of blood pressure and successive rise in PAT. At the same time, due to physiological effects heart rate increases to maintain cardiac output. During exhalation, the reverse is true [26]. Relationship between PAT and blood pressure is useful to evaluate the ability of the developed device to track small changes in PAT. These variations in hemodynamics are not instant but gradually ongoing, so there is a time offset between changes in blood pressure, heart rate and PAT [27].Commercially available body composition scales with footpad and handlebar electrodes (HBF-510, Omron, Kyoto, Japan) were used in this study. The sensors of the scales were supplemented by the custom-made electronics for the purpose to acquire ECG and IPG. Functional block diagram of the measurement system is shown in Fig. 1.The analog front-end ADS1294R (Texas Instruments, Dallas, TX, USA) [28] was utilized for acquiring ECG and IPG. Two electrodes integrated in handlebar and one footpad electrode were used for obtaining 3 lead ECG, whereas two footpad electrodes below the heels were employed for recording the lower-body IPG. These footpad electrodes, connected to the integrated impedance measurement circuitry, were utilized to source 0.2mArms constant harmonic current at 32kHz into the body and to measure voltage drop. Signals were acquired synchronously at 500Hz sampling rate.Recommended reference method for validation of non-invasive hemodynamic measurement devices is arterial tonometry [29]. It is usually performed on subjects in supine position, but the nature of our study requires them standing and operator leans his hand on subjects to achieve stability. If reference and proposed methods were performed synchronously, this contact would influence the results of the IPG recording mechanically and electrically. Thus, scales and tonometer are operated asynchronously in the present study.Average PAT estimated using the proposed method was compared with calculated by the PulsePen (DiaTecne s.r.l., Milan, Italy) [30]. This device is composed of a tonometer and an integrated ECG unit. Pressure waves were recorded for at least 13s simultaneously using tonometer placed on the posterior tibial artery of the right foot (see Fig. 2a).PATRwas calculated as the time delay between the R-wave and the foot of the pressure wave using the included software. For the PulsePen the foot of the pressure wave is defined by the intersection of the horizontal line tangent to the lowest point of the pressure waveform with the extension of the line resulting from the mean square deviation of all points, building up the initial rise of the waveform [30]. Typical signals recorded with the PulsePen system are shown in Fig. 2b.A block diagram of signal processing stages is presented in Fig. 3. ECG and IPG, defined as snand xn, respectively, constitute the inputs of the algorithm (n is the index of the record sample). Only one lead out of 3 was chosen depending on the quality of the ECG for each subject. The guiding rule when developing signal processing algorithm was to make it convenient for implementation on embedded system after slight modifications. Group delays of digital forward filters were taken into account and compensated.The band-pass filtering of snwas achieved by cascading recursive low-pass and high-pass filters. The pass-band from 12 to 18Hz accentuates the QRS complexes, reduces the noise and the influence of the P and T waves. The transfer function of low-pass filter, described by cut-off frequency of 20Hz and group delay of 7 samples, is given by(1)Hlp(z)=164(1−z−8)2(1−z−1)2.High-pass filter with cut-off frequency of 11.8Hz and group delay of 16 samples was implemented by subtracting low-pass from all-pass filter. The transfer functions is defined by(2)Hhp(z)=z−16−132(1−z−16)(1−z−1).The output of the filters tnwas rectified in order to obtain positive peaks regardless of polarity of QRS complexes. After rectification the signal unwas smoothed by low-pass filtering to eliminate unwanted peaks surrounding real R-waves. Recursive filter, characterized by cut-off frequency of 13.3Hz and group delay of 11 samples, was used. The transfer function is defined by(3)Hlp2(z)=1128(1−z−12)2(1−z−1)2.The detection of the R-waves was performed by comparing the output of the low-pass filter vnagainst the adaptive amplitude-dependent threshold. According to the timing of the R-wavesnRi(i is the index of the R-wave), the record was also divided into RR intervals. The length of each RR interval was determined as follows:(4)RRi=nRi−nRi−1.The signal xnwas processed with length 129 linear-phase low-pass-differentiator filter designed using least-squares error minimization method. This filter has the transition band from 9.4 to 14.4Hz, the group delay of 64 samples and the edge frequency of 12Hz. The output of the low-pass-differentiator ynis the derivative of xnwith accentuated upslopes of the waveform, suppressed high-frequency noise and removed low-frequency drift.The slope sum function was used to enhance the upslope even more and reduce the remainder of the waveform [31]. The output of this function znis defined as follows:(5)zn=∑k=n−wnhk,hk={yk,yk>00,yk≤0.where w is the length of the analysing window. w was chosen empirically approximately equal to the duration of the upslope of the IPG waveform. In this study, w equals to 54 samples or 108ms.Peaks of the waveform were detected in znwithin each RR interval.nPiis the timing of the ith peak. PAT for every ith cardiac cyclePATIwas estimated as the time difference between the time instant of the R-wave and the successive peak in the slope sum function:(6)PATIi=nPi−nRi.The output of the stages of signal processing andPATIestimation are presented in Fig. 4.Fourteen volunteer subjects (five female), from 22 to 81 years old, with body mass index (BMI) from 18.4 to 35.06kg/m2, were enrolled in the experiment (see Table 1). Informed consent was obtained from all participants.We measuredPATRfrom the heart to the posterior tibial artery for every subject standing on the floor (Fig. 2a). AveragePATRwas obtained from the first ten heart cycles detected in the recording as suggested by the ARTERY Society [29]. Then, subjects were asked to stand still on the modified scales barefoot while holding handlebar electrodes in their lowered hands and breath normally. After waiting for the signals to stabilize, ECG an IPG were recorded for 1min. In the end, subjects were instructed to synchronize their respiration with an on-screen bar graph indicator. Signals were registered for additional 1min with deep paced (0.1Hz) breathing.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper shows that the proposed scales can estimate pulse arrival time, which may be used for arterial stiffness evaluation. The present system has potential to be applied for unobtrusive long-term self-monitoring of cardiovascular patients. Furthermore, these scales could be extended to a multi-parametric device by supplementing with additional parameters thus becoming an attractive way for tracing health status of general population.None declared.