@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
SME2EM: Smart mobile end-to-end monitoring architecture for life-long diseases

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We developed a novel mobile-based architecture for monitoring life-long diseases.It provides smart features to tackle several challenges (e.g., data explosion).Our mobile monitoring architecture is formally modeled and verified at design time.Its components are implemented as Web services and supported by Cloud services.Its applicability is experimentally evaluated by monitoring epileptic diseases.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Model checking,Smart mobile monitoring,Data as a service,Visualization as a service,SOA,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstractfx1

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The last decade has witnessed a substantial increase of patients with life-long diseases all around the world. For example, neurodegenerative (i.e., brain) disorders, a famous class of life-long diseases, has become an immense burden for health-care authorities. Alzheimer [1], Parkinson׳s disease [2], and epilepsy [3–5] are the most famous types of brain diseases. In Europe alone, the expense costs of brain diseases are more than the ones of heart diseases, cancer, and diabetes all put together [6,7]. In fact, the total 2010 European bill of brain disorders was around 800 billions [8]. The National Institute of Mental Health11http://www.nimh.nih.gov/about/strategic-planning-reports/introduction.shtml.(NIMH) estimates the USA total costs associated with brain disorders to exceed 300 billion dollars every year [9].In underdeveloped countries and countries with limited budgets, patients find several difficulties to receive available treatments and supervision as the treatment is usually quite expensive. In this context, authors in [10] show that the burden of epileptic seizure in “low-income countries is more than twice of that found in high-income countries” as the relative frequency of risk factors is very high. The center for disease control and prevention22http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6145a2.htm.reports that 1.0%, approximately 2.3 million of the United States adults and 1.9% of those with family income levels less than $34,999 per year had active epilepsy. Moreover, epileptic seizures happen randomly (e.g., when epileptic patient might sleep, watch TV, or play), follow a non-uniform distribution with unknown causes [4,5] over a long period of time, and are hard to predict at the medium and long run [4]. The suitable approach to detect epileptic seizures is to have the patient continuously monitored over a long period of time, ranging from several hours to several days and even several weeks. In traditional monitoring set ups, the patient has to stay in an appropriately equipped hospital, which is connected to a large and bulky set of equipment. While such monitoring set ups are suitable for a short period of the monitoring process, they are unpractical for long monitoring periods, which are necessary for life-long diseases.To cope with the exponential increase in population suffering from life-long diseases and their associated costs, many health-care governments decided to shift into mobile health monitoring systems. In these systems, mobile phones, pocket personal computers or personal digital assistants are employed as the main coordination and processing module. This will definitely allow long-term monitoring of brain disorders and will reduce health-care government costs, since patients stay in their usual environments and at the same time receive professional health-care services. The new trend of remote and mobile monitoring services has been made possible, due to a fabulous development in mobile sensing devices and smartphones alongside wireless and cellular communication networks.For most health vital signs, there are a quite number of accurate and industry-approved light, wireless, and mobile sensors. These sensors, when connected to a mobile smartphone, can constitute an essential pillar towards the development and adoption of an effective mobile monitoring system. A wireless sensor specifically reads vital signs directly from the patient׳s body, and relays the sensed information to the mobile smartphone. The intermediate smartphone in turn relays the received information to the hospital information systems. Physicians and/or neurologists will continuously have an on-the-fly view of the patient׳s status. They can also get in touch with the patient through either the reversed channel or traditional communication mediums such as the telephone or the SMS system.In order to get this set of heterogeneous hardware and software components to collaborate together for a single objective within an integrated framework, a lot of challenging issues have to be studied and solved. On one side, body sensors coming from medical equipment manufacturers are more focused on the quality of sensors than the communication and data handling (e.g., storage and exchange) aspects. On the other side, smartphone industries are more centered on the communication aspect than the sensing and data handling aspects. On their side, storage providers are focusing only on their primary business processes than the sensing and communication process.The ultimate aim of the present work is to develop a novel smart mobile end-to-end monitoring architecture (shortly, SME2EM) to monitor and visualize life-long diseases. The endeavor of SME2EM is to bridge the gap between sensor manufacturers, smart-phone industries, public internet service providers, data storage providers, patients, physicians, and health-care stakeholders in general. The word smart precisely refers to the capacity of our architecture׳s components to be pro-active, reactive, adaptive or dynamic, which accordingly make our architecture cost-effective, efficient, and usable. As the term “general” suggests, our architecture is not based on a specific kind of sensors, manufacturer, smartphones, communication protocols or platforms. It is also worth mentioning that the objectives and aspects of SME2EM are still desiderata, as clearly shown in some of the latest works (see [11] for example). From bio-informatics perspective, our satisfied aspects strongly and positively contribute in improving patients׳ diseases monitoring and quality of life. Specifically and as well be thoroughly analysed in Section 2, our SME2EM tries to address and solve many of the limitations of related works.In terms of the feasibility aspect, several application areas can benefit from our system architecture, since its main streamlined idea is to allow anywhere and anytime monitoring of long-life diseases. The user interaction with the system is extremely important for the timeliness and accuracy of the monitoring process and for gaining the benefits of using the proposed remote monitoring system. It is worth mentioning that: (1) the usability of our mobile monitoring system depends on the user being able to setup and interact with the system; and (2) the information illustrated from analyzing and processing sensed data might be a challenging issue to anyone who is not physician and does not have a deep understanding of the medical vital signs. The user׳s expertize should not be a barrier towards the use of our solution by users with little (or no) medical background knowledge, as we will show, in Section 3, how the usability aspect has been addressed in our system from a user perspective. The following scenario illustrates how our architecture can be applied to monitor epileptic seizures.Wang, an epileptic villager from Galephu city of Kingdom of Bhutan, must undertake frequent and long trips to the capital city Thimphu for diagnoses and checkup, since there is no neurosurgeon in Wang׳s original village. If Wang has the necessary equipment, his doctor, in the capital Thimphu or even elsewhere, can have a real time view of Wang׳s brain activity while Wang is working in his farm. Whenever necessary, the physician could get in touch with Wang, or a family member, asking them to take appropriate actions, such as taking medicines or getting away from a source of excitation. In an ideal environment, Wang will wear a brain ElectroEncephaloGraphy (EEG) sensor, which is connected to a smartphone, located in Wang׳s pocket. The EEG sensor gets brain activities to the smartphone and the later relays them to the physician.Moreover, the developed smart monitoring architecture is not only supporting discrete EEG recoding, but also allowing Wang to record continuously and non-invasively the EEG signals using his smart-phone. Another feature of the developed architecture is that Wang can interact with a physician through the system requesting advices and/or adjusting medications without the need to physically travel and meet the physician. Moreover, Wang can be coached in case of emergency and requested to visit the physician or any appropriate health-care center once intervention is required.The paper is organized as follow: in Section 2, we review and evaluate in the light of the above scenario the current electronic and mobile health monitoring architectures and systems. We briefly summarize current limitations of these systems, identify challenging issues and present our fundamental contributions to address these challenges and limitations. In Section 3, we introduce the design and description of our SME2EM Smart end-to-end mobile architecture for monitoring and visualizing life-long diseases. In Section 4, we show how to formalize the developed system SME2EM in order to automatically and formally verify its correctness against desirable properties using a model checking approach at design time and then makes the design of our system error free, as much as possible. In Section 5, we describe how we fully implemented SME2EM system as a collection of Web services to be easy to deploy and integrate with other components that make SME2EM. To show the feasibility and applicability of the implemented system, we use it to monitor and visualize epileptic seizures׳ states, recorded by an EEG sensor. We also discuss how we addressed the raised challenges through the design and implementation processes. In Section 6, we analytically and experimentally compute the overhead cost of SME2EM. We also evaluate the effectiveness and scalability of the implemented SME2EM system through a set of concrete and reasonable experimental scenarios. An overall discussion of the obtained results is also presented at the end of this section. Section 7 concludes the article and identifies the direction for future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
