@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Consistent quadrangulation for shape collections via feature line co-extraction

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a framework to produce consistent quadrangulations for a shape collection.We propose an efficient method for extracting feature lines from the shape collection.We propose a practical greedy algorithm for extracting the aligned cut graphs.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Quad mesh,Shape collection,Feature line co-extraction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a method that takes a collection of 3D surface shapes, and produces a consistent and individually feature preserving quadrangulation of each shape. By exploring the correspondence among shapes within a collection, we coherently extract a set of representative feature lines as the key characteristics for the given shapes. Then we compute a smooth cross-field interpolating sparsely distributed directional constraints induced from the feature lines and apply the mixed-integer quadrangulation to generate the quad meshes. We develop a greedy algorithm to extract aligned cut graphs across the shape collection so that the meshes can be aligned in a common parametric domain. Computational results demonstrate that our approach not only produces consistent quad meshes across the entire collection with significant geometry variation but also achieves a trade-off between global structural simplicity for the collection and local geometry fidelity for each shape.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In recent years, the problem of converting an object given as triangulated surface mesh into a quadrilateral representation, referred to as quadrangulation, has received a great deal of attention. Quad meshes are highly desired in many graphics applications, such as texture mapping and shape modeling. The quality of quadrangulation depends on the application and a quadrangulation algorithm should produce high-quality meshes with controlled element alignment, orientation, sizing, aspect ratio, etc. Most of the existing methods  [1–5] can handle orientation control by using a cross-field to guide the quads. In contrast to the inherent ability of orienting elements according to local regularity, the global structure is much more difficult to handle. Many state-of-the-art quadrangulation techniques are prone to producing quad meshes with complex patch layouts unless sharp surface features or additional structural constraints are taken into consideration. Hence, more attention has been paid recently to the high-level global structure of the resulting quad meshes  [6–8].This paper investigates the problem of consistent quadrangulation for a shape collection in order to produce quad meshes that exhibit global structure and simple patch layouts for each individual shape and can be aligned together in a common parametric domain for the entire collection. The main technical challenge in realizing our goal is how to construct the consistent parametrization domain on a set of shapes with large variation. Therefore we prefer to identify the prominent characteristics of input shapes and their global relations. One front in geometry processing is high-level shape analysis, the goal of which is to drive structural and semantic information from the shape’s low-level geometric properties. In this direction, some methods attempt to extract a set of representative primitives, such as structural curves  [9] or rigid components and joints  [10], that serve as the key characteristics to facilitate a variety of applications. To address the above-mentioned domain construction challenge, our method detects a set of feature lines for each of the input shapes and performs an analysis to extract a set of representative ones as the key characteristics that exhibit global structure and semantics of input shapes to guide the quadrangulation.The setting and objective of our analysis have similarities with other recent studies (e.g.,  [11]). Given mesh sequences with point-to-point registration, Marcias et al.  [11] presented a method for designing a quad mesh for dynamic shape by local analysis of the shape throughout the animation. The main idea is to produce an initial guidance field on a reference mesh that reveals shape features that originate from animation. In our setting, the set consists of shapes with a variety of non-rigid and geometric differences. However, it is often difficult and ambiguous to establish one-to-one point correspondences across a shape collection. Our approach allows the shared sharp features among a shape collection to be inferred automatically through a set of feature lines that comply with global structure and semantics of input shapes.In this paper, we present a framework for consistent quadrangulation for 3D surface shape collections. By exploring the correspondence between shapes within a collection, we first extract a set of representative feature lines that are aware of individual shape geometry and also ensure structural consistency among the given shapes. The extracted feature lines induce a set of consistent directional constraints for the input shapes. We then apply the mixed-integer solver  [5] to compute a smooth cross-field that interpolates sparsely distributed directional constraints induced from feature lines. Finally we adopt the global parametrization technique  [5] to generate the quad meshes through the intersections of the iso-lines following the cross-field. We also develop a greedy algorithm for computing cut graphs so that the quad meshes are aligned in a common parametric domain. To simplify the alignment of cut graphs, we only deal with genus-0 shapes in this paper. Fig. 1shows the results of feature line co-extraction and quadrangulation on a collection of animals using our approach. The experimental results demonstrate that our approach can achieve high performance and produce consistent quad meshes across the entire collection.This paper makes the following contributions:•A framework to produce consistent quadrangulation results for a shape collection with respect to the individual shape geometry and structural consistency across the collection;An efficient method for co-extracting the feature lines that are served as the key characteristics to induce the directional constraints for the generation of quad layouts; andA practical greedy algorithm for extracting the aligned cut graphs that determine the final quad layouts within the collection.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
