@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Dynamic analysis of a needle insertion for soft materials: Arbitrary Lagrangian–Eulerian-based three-dimensional finite element analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We performed ALE-based finite element analysis for agar gel and copper needles.We compared simulation results with corresponding experimental results.Deflections of each needle between both sets of results were different.There was no significant difference for mismatching area error.Our results have a potential to use as pre-operative surgical planning.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Dynamic analysis,Needle insertion,Finite element analysis,Arbitrary Lagrangian–Eulerian method,MR-guided microwave coagulation therapy,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundOur goal was to develop a three-dimensional finite element model that enables dynamic analysis of needle insertion for soft materials. To demonstrate large deformation and fracture, we used the arbitrary Lagrangian–Eulerian (ALE) method for fluid analysis. We performed ALE-based finite element analysis for 3% agar gel and three types of copper needle with bevel tips.MethodsTo evaluate simulation results, we compared the needle deflection and insertion force with corresponding experimental results acquired with a uniaxial manipulator. We studied the shear stress distribution of agar gel on various time scales.ResultsFor 30°, 45°, and 60°, differences in deflections of each needle between both sets of results were 2.424, 2.981, and 3.737mm, respectively. For the insertion force, there was no significant difference for mismatching area error (p<0.05) between simulation and experimental results.ConclusionsOur results have the potential to be a stepping stone to develop pre-operative surgical planning to estimate an optimal needle insertion path for MR image-guided microwave coagulation therapy and for analyzing large deformation and fracture in biological tissues.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the fifth most common cancer and the second leading cause of cancer deaths in men [1]. Magnetic resonance (MR) image-guided microwave coagulation therapy of liver tumors is minimally invasive and has many advantages for both patients and surgeons compared to open surgery [2]. Surgeons are required to insert a needle tip precisely into a targeted location such as a tumor. However, even for expert surgeons, this is not easy because the needle deflection depends on the shape of the needle tip [3,4].Several researchers have developed ways to put tip of a needle into a target tumor precisely not only in MR image-guide microwave coagulation therapy of liver tumors but also a number of percutaneous interventions in anesthesia, biopsy, and brachytherapy. Their works can be categorized as modeling insertion force [3,5–7], tissue deformation [8,9], and needle deflection [10,11]; and developing instruments to guide and steer the needle [8,12–14]. In the modeling insertion force, Okamura et al. have proposed a model of needle insertion force for the bovine liver [3]. However, they concluded that a more complete model of forces will require a combination of empirical and analytical modeling, with one approach being finite element analysis (FEA). On the other hand, by extending FEA, Dimaio et al. have developed an interactive virtual needle insertion simulation based on measured planar tissue deformations and needle insertion forces [15]. In addition, they have also proposed the concept of needle steering and formulated a needle manipulation Jacobian based on numerical needle insertion models that include the amounts of needle deflection and soft tissue deformation [16]. Moreover, Alterovitz et al. have developed a planning system for sensorless needle insertion to reduce the needle insertion error [9].However, these results have never been clinically applied for human liver tissues [17]. One reason is complex physical phenomena such as fracture involved in large deformation in biological human tissues. Therefore, both clinicians and patients need new approaches. In this respect, time-dependent dynamic fracture analysis in FEA has a potential to solve this issue but it is especially difficult because mesh elimination techniques are required for representing it. In general, FEA with mesh elimination techniques is known as Lagrangian-based FEA for structural analysis. However, a stable calculation is difficult because the finite element mesh needs to flip the shape or release some nodes when the fracture occurs. Thus, we use an arbitrary Lagrangian–Eulerian (ALE) method for fluid analysis that is also suitable for large deformation and fracture in the continuum model [18].In this study, we develop a three-dimensional finite element model that enables dynamic analyses of needle insertion with ALE-based FEA using a soft tissue model and three types of needles with bevel tips. To evaluate simulation results, we compared the amount of deflection during needle insertion and the corresponding force along the needle axis with experimental results acquired with a uniaxial manipulator. In addition, we confirmed the shear stress distribution around the needle in simulation results.As a phantom study by assuming the use of MR image-guided microwave coagulation therapy in open-MRI [19–21], we used 3% agar gel (Agar 010-15815, Wako Pure Chemical Industries, Osaka, Japan) instead of liver tissue as an isotropic and nonlinear elastic material [8]. To acquire a nominal stress and nominal strain curve of the agar gel, we performed a uniaxial compression test and three-points bending test using a compact tabletop universal tester (EZ Test, Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan). In general, the nominal stress and nominal strain curve is generated from results of the uniaxial compression and tension tests. However, for agar gel, it is difficult to perform a tension test because of its wetness. So, as the first step, a bending elastic modulus and a bending strain were calculated by the three-points bending test following ISO 178. Then, a nominal strain combining the nominal strain of the bending test (positive) and the compression test (negative) was used as input data to calculate a nominal stress according to the strain energy function W which is a function of the relative volume, J[22]:(1)W⁎=∑i=13∑j=1nμjαj(λi⁎αj−1)+K(J−1−InJ)where the asterisk (⁎) indicates that the volumetric effects have been eliminated from the principal stretches, λj⁎. The number of terms, n, may vary from 1 to 8 inclusive, and the bulk modulus is K. The jth shear modulus and exponent areμjand αj, respectively. In this study, we used n=3 as the number of terms. Finally, we manually estimated six parameters until correct nominal stress was obtained by demonstrating displacement–force curve similar to both the compression and three-points bending tests through Lagrangian-based FEA with commercial software (ANSYS LS-DYNA Ver. 971 R6.0 single, Livermore Software Technology, CA, USA), iteratively. We prepared ten test pieces for the test (compression test: 60×20×4mm3, three-points bending test: 60×20×20mm3, cross-head speed: 2mm/s). Young׳s modulus and Poisson׳s ratio of the copper needle C1100 (Custom-made, Umihira, Kyoto, Japan) used were 117GPa and 0.33 respectively. The copper is used as one of MR compatible materials [23].To evaluate this model, we performed an experiment to measure needle deflection and reaction force with a uniaxial insertion device (Custom-made, Umihira, Kyoto, Japan) (Fig. 1) by 8000Hz sampling rates. The sizes of the needle and agar were φ1.6×150mm2 based on MR compatible 14-G puncture needle [2]) and 150×40×200mm3, respectively. The angles of the bevel needle tip were 30°, 45°, and 60°. The needle was inserted into the agar gel at constant velocity 2mm/s with a penetration depth of 100mm by assuming an application with open-MRI robot [23]. After insertion, we took photos from the lateral side with a digital camera (IXY Digital 2000IS, Canon, Ota-ku, Japan) to measure the needle deflection with image processing software (Image J, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA) (n=5).We developed ALE-based FEA models as shown inFig. 2A. The model consists of the agar fixed on the lower surface. The displacement 100mm along the z-axis was applied to the rigid part (yellow part of Fig. 2A) of the needle. The frictional coefficient 0.01 was empirically set as the contact condition between the needle and the agar. The same geometries as the experimental model were adopted for the sizes of the needle and agar, and the angles of the bevel needle tip. Also, the needles have no tubular structure because an outer needle was inserted into liver with an inner coagulation probe as one needle. We generated the needle mesh using rectangular elements as a shell, and generated the meshes of the agar with hexahedral elements as a solid (Fig. 2B, C). The number of meshes totaled 297,014 elements. The size of the smallest mesh was 0.375mm in all models. We performed standard ALE-based FEA including ANSYS LS-DYNA. Material models of the needle and the agar gel applied linear elastic material (MAT_001) and isotropic elastic–plastic material (MAT_124) applying a nominal stress and nominal strain curve estimated via the above procedure, respectively.We statistically compared between the simulation and experimental results of acquired force and displacement curve using a two-factor ANOVA (p<0.05). An average curve was generated among experimental results for each bevel angle. We calculated the mismatching area by subtracting a domain bounded by the acquired force and displacement curve of simulation results from that of experimental results.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
