@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Adaptive meshing for finite element analysis of heterogeneous materials

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An adaptive meshing scheme for versatile heterogeneous materials.A mesh adaptation algorithm based on centroidal Voronoi tessellation.A specific density function aiming to equalize the material variation over mesh elements.An adaptive sampling technique for calculating material variations.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Heterogeneous object modeling,Finite element analysis,Adaptive mesh generation,Computational efficiency,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Adaptive meshing of 2D planar regions, curved surfaces as well as 3D volumes has been extensively studied in Finite Element Analysis (FEA) in the past few decades. Despite the maturity of these adaptive meshing approaches, most of the existing schemes assume the domain or sub-domain of interest is homogeneous. In the context of FEA of heterogeneous objects, traditional adaptive mesh generation strategies become inadequate as they fail to take into account the material heterogeneities. This paper is motivated to tackle such problems and propose an adaptive mesh generation scheme for FEA of versatile heterogeneous materials. The proposed approach takes full advantages of the material heterogeneity information, and the mesh density is formulated with a specific function of the material variations. Dual triangulation of centroidal Voronoi tessellation is then constructed and necessary mesh subdivision is applied with respect to a predefined material threshold. Experiments show that the proposed approach distributes the material composition variation over mesh elements as equally as possible and thus minimizes the number of elements in terms of the given material threshold. FEA results show that the proposed method can significantly decrease the mesh complexities as well as computational resources in FEA of heterogeneous objects and compared with existing approaches, significant mesh reduction can be achieved without sacrifice in FEA qualities.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With recent technologies, design and fabrication of objects with spatially different material definitions becomes commonplace. Such objects are commonly termed as heterogeneous material objects. Heterogeneous material objects [1–4] possess superior properties in applications where multiple, often contradictive, functional requirements are simultaneously expected. By introducing material heterogeneities into the design domain, different properties and advantages of various materials can be fully exploited; traditional limitations due to material incompatibility/affinity problems can be naturally alleviated with gradual material variations. In the past few decades, a variety of applications have been reported in mechanical, electrical, thermal, optical, biomedical and other fields  [5–14].The wide applications of heterogeneous objects have aroused active research in numerical analysis of heterogeneous objects. Many Finite Element Analysis (FEA)-based approaches have been proposed for function analysis or design validities  [15–21]. These methods extended traditional FEA approaches by taking the material heterogeneity into account and allowing different materials to be defined for each node or element. Most of them either use classic mesh generation schemes which result in poor accuracies (as the mesh only guarantees the geometric accuracies but fails to characterize the material heterogeneities) or alternatively, employ meshes with ultra-high densities to assure solution accuracies, which, on the other hand, significantly degrades the computational efficiencies  [22].Adaptive finite element mesh generation is a promising solution to such problems. In the past, numerous investigations have been conducted on adaptive mesh refinement for 2D planar regions, curved surfaces as well as 3D volumes  [23,24]. Finer-resolution grids are used in regions where the surfaces exhibit large curvatures, and in planar or quasi-planar regions, sparse mesh grids are employed. However, almost all of these methods assume the components under meshing have homogeneous material compositions in the domain or sub-domain of interest. In the context of FEA of heterogeneous material objects, however, these strategies are no longer effective and directly applicable.Motivated to take advantages of traditional adaptive meshing techniques while at the same time to incorporate the material heterogeneity into FEA studies, this paper aims to investigate effective approaches to generate adaptive meshes for heterogeneous objects. The proposed approach takes full advantages of the material heterogeneity information, and the mesh density is formulated with a specific function of the material variations. Dual triangulation of centroidal Voronoi tessellation is then constructed and necessary mesh subdivision is then applied in accordance with a predefined material threshold. Experiments show that the proposed approach distributes the material composition variation over mesh elements as uniformly as possible and thus minimize the number of elements while satisfying the material threshold requirement. Numerical results show that the proposed approach can properly balance the accuracy and computational overhead of finite element analyses and significant mesh reduction can be achieved without apparent sacrifice in FEA qualities.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
