@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multi-class biological tissue classification based on a multi-classifier: Preliminary study of an automatic output power control for ultrasonic surgical units

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We applied a machine learning algorithm-based classification method.We developed a device for measuring the impedance characteristics of in vivo tissues.Novel multi-classifier could automatically detect 6 classes of tissue effectively.The multi-classifier with an electrode of 3mm invasive type showed the best performance.Introduced model could be applied in ischemia monitoring and tumor detection.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Ultrasonic surgical units,Power auto-control,Impedance,Tissue classification,Multi-classifier,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Ultrasonic surgical units (USUs) have the advantage of minimizing tissue damage during surgeries that require tissue dissection by reducing problems such as coagulation and unwanted carbonization, but the disadvantage of requiring manual adjustment of power output according to the target tissue. In order to overcome this limitation, it is necessary to determine the properties of in vivo tissues automatically. We propose a multi-classifier that can accurately classify tissues based on the unique impedance of each tissue. For this purpose, a multi-classifier was built based on single classifiers with high classification rates, and the classification accuracy of the proposed model was compared with that of single classifiers for various electrode types (Type-I: 6mm invasive; Type-II: 3mm invasive; Type-III: surface). The sensitivity and positive predictive value (PPV) of the multi-classifier by cross checks were determined. According to the 10-fold cross validation results, the classification accuracy of the proposed model was significantly higher (p<0.05 or <0.01) than that of existing single classifiers for all electrode types. In particular, the classification accuracy of the proposed model was highest when the 3mm invasive electrode (Type-II) was used (sensitivity=97.33–100.00%; PPV=96.71–100.00%). The results of this study are an important contribution to achieving automatic optimal output power adjustment of USUs according to the properties of individual tissues.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Ultrasonic surgical units (USUs) that are used in laparoscopic and thoracoscopic surgery have been developed to overcome problems such as spark, charring, and inefficient coagulation associated with electrosurgical units [1–5]. However, USUs have the limitation that the surgeons have to manually control the optimal output power according to properties of the tissue [6,7]. This subjective procedure could lead to a process of trial and error and might delay the operation time [7]. Therefore, it is necessary to develop a method to control the optimal output power of USUs automatically.To develop such a method, in vivo tissues must be automatically distinguished, preferentially. The impedance that refers to the electrical characteristics of the tissue, which are dependent on the properties of the cells that make up the tissue at the molecular level and differ from tissue to tissue, can be used to classify the type of tissue. To date, impedance characteristics of tissues have been investigated in various medical fields, including dentistry [8] and internal medicine [9], mostly to classify normal and lesion tissues in conditions such as ischemia [10–12] and tumors [13–15]. Åberg et al. analyzed impedance data of normal tissue and denatured tissue (birthmarks, melanomas, and other human skin cancers) using a binary classification algorithm to determine the presence of disease [14]. More recently, Kalvøy et al. classified heterogeneous tissues for drug administration. They applied a partial least-squares discriminate analysis (PLS-DA) algorithm to the impedance data in order to classify two tissue types: muscle and fat [16]. However, the tissues encountered during laparoscopic and thoracoscopic surgeries are more diverse, not only muscle and fat tissues but also liver or lung tissues. Moreover, because the impedance values of tissues were reported to have a non-linear distribution [16,17], a higher order polynomial should be needed to classify the class of tissues. The impedance characteristics of muscle, fat, liver, and lung tissues extracted from pigs (Fig. 1(A)) showed non-linear distribution by each other as shown in Fig. 1(B) in this study. Therefore, the methods used in previous studies, such as binary classification, linear classification, and statistical analysis, have limitations for the classification of more than three types of tissue with a non-linear distribution of impedance.In order to classify the intrinsic impedance value of multiple classes of tissue with a non-linear distribution, we applied a machine learning algorithm-based classification method that uses the inherent unique properties of the multi-dimensional input data. This approach has been applied in the fields of behavior pattern analysis [18], biometrics [19], and even in clinical areas such as prediction and diagnosis of disease [20,21]. However, previous studies have reported that there are differences in classification performance among each classifier with the same data set and limitations in the accuracy of multi-dimensional class classification with a single classifier [22]. For these reasons, recent studies have used a multi-classifier as a method of combining the results of several single classifiers; this approach has resulted in a higher classification rate than that achieved using single classifiers [20,21,23,24].The goal of this study was to introduce a multi-classifier with increased accuracy of multi-class tissue classification based on the intrinsic impedance values of each in vivo tissue, with the ultimate aim of automatic optimal output power adjustment of USUs used in surgery. For this purpose, the classification performance of previously introduced single classifiers was analyzed using the electrical properties of tissues measured with the newly developed impedance measurement device. A multi-classifier that effectively classifies the multi-class tissue was introduced by combining the best single classifiers, and its performance was compared and analyzed with that of the former single classifiers. The results of this study are expected to be an important contribution toward performing tissue cutting and coagulation with minimum in vivo tissue damage during surgery using USUs.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A novel multi-classifier composed with a combination of single classifiers was proposed in this study for an automatic classification of the 6 classes of in vivo tissues (muscle in neck and abdomen, fat in neck and abdomen, liver, and lung). The multi-classifier was designed using three single classifiers (SVM, QDA, and RF) that showed a high classification rate, whereas k-NN and DT, which showed a relatively poor classification rate, were excluded. The k-NN and DT had a limitation of classification rate reduction, as compared with other classifiers, in classifying the data with noise or mismatched distribution from the training dataset [49,50]. In this study, the target classification objects included not only muscle and fat tissues extracted from abdomen and neck regions but also liver and lung tissues. For this reason, the impedance characteristics of all tissues were constructed with very complex interactions; and therefore, the k-NN and DT probably showed a relatively poor classification rate. The relatively higher classification rate in SVM, QDA, and RF is believed to be achieved by their characteristic of proposing an optimal margin [51] and decreasing a bias that can be caused during a classification process, where it distributes the non-linear distribution into multi-dimensional class [52,53].The difference in accuracy by each single classifier was based on the impedance characteristics of each tissue, such as magnitude and phase. All types of electrode (Type-I, II, and III) used in this research showed the largest magnitudes for the fat tissues (p<0.05). This result consistent with the results of previous study [16] and it is because the fat tissue has higher resistance than other in vivo tissues [54]. The impedance characteristics of the other tissues (i.e., muscle, liver, and lung tissues) appeared to have non-linear impedance distribution values, and it was not possible to classify significant differences using the statistical or linear methods. Therefore, we have proposed the multi-classifier in this study which showed higher classification accuracy than any existing single classifier such as SVM, QDA, and RF for all electrode types (p<0.05 or 0.01). Also, in classifying the multi-class tissue, low SD values (0.70–2.60) of classification accuracy ensure high reproducibility of the model [55–57]. Therefore, this will allow the proposed model to be more robust compared to the use of single classifiers.The classification accuracy of the proposed model by electrode type showed a better result for the invasive type electrodes (Types I and II) than non-invasive type electrode (Type-III) (I vs. III: p<0.05; II vs. III: p<0.01). The higher classification rate with invasive type electrodes can be explained by the low deviation at measured impedance data, as a result of reduced influence of surroundings, resulting in a more consistent measurement. However, they also had a disadvantage of directly inserting the electrodes into tissues. Even the surface type electrode had a lower classification rate; it could minimize tissue damages by not invading the tissue. In addition, the result for the classification rate of the Type-II electrode was higher (p<0.01) with smaller deviations than achieved with the Type-I electrode, even though both were the same invasive type of electrode, should be addressed in detail through future study.According to the classification results of the proposed model for each tissue (Table 3), both the sensitivity (97.33–100.00%) and the PPV (96.71–100.00%) were the highest when using a Type-II electrode. This result implies that it is possible to achieve the best 6-tissue classification when using the proposed multi-classifier and a 3-mm invasive-type electrode. The classification rates with Type-I (91.55±2.60%) and Type-III (89.67±1.89%) electrodes were relatively lower compared with Type-II (98.67±0.70%), and the sensitivity and PPV in muscle and fat tissue tended to be low. This result indicates that the classification error mainly occurred in tissues extracted from different regions in spite of the same tissue when using the 6-mm invasive and surface-type electrodes. The high and low of classification rate by each electrode type could be clearly evaluated through cross checks of sensitivity and PPV results.In this study, the proposed multi-classifier has overcome the limitation preventing classification of various types of tissues that have impedance spectroscopy of non-linear distribution. By directly applying the multi-classifier during thoracoscopic or laparoscopic surgery, the proposed multi-classifier will provide quantitative data for automatic control of the optimal output power adjustment of USUs and can be expected to reduce the problem of a delay in operation time in the surgical environment. Additionally, the multi-classifier can be applied to detection of lesion tissues such as tumors and ischemia in diverse research fields.There were, however, several limitations to this study that affected our ability to draw conclusions, as follows. (1) The number of data samples used in this study was 900 measurements in total. The sample size is considered to be sufficient compared to that of the previous research [58]. However, since the target samples were limited to 6 classes, a classifier that covers the entire range of tissues needs to additional research, and needs to include the various types of tissues as well as a sufficient sample size. (2) The target tissues used in this study were extracted from pigs. In order to applicate our proposed multi-classifier to ultrasonic surgical devices, the heterogeneity between the human and pig tissues should be considered. Therefore, the evaluation on realistic use, compatibility, and stability of this approach should be carried out through in vivo experiments targeted on the certain variables of human tissues (e.g., young vs. old, normal vs. abnormal, male vs. female, etc.) which may have an influence in the real surgical situations. In addition, environmental conditions (e.g., temperature, humidity, heat, carbonization, etc.) that can occur in an actual surgery process need to be considered. When the changes of tissue properties caused by the external environmental changes encountered during the real surgery are compensated; it is believed that the proposed methodology can be applied to humans. For this reason, the proposed multi-classifier requires further studies to classify tissues robustly. (3) Spectroscopy should be performed in subdivided frequencies and over a wider frequency band for improved classification accuracy. The feature selection process which has an intimate effect on the classification result should be also considered. (4) Even though the proposed model shows higher accuracy compared to the single classifiers considered in this study, it makes the pipeline complex, and is difficult to determine when error happens. Therefore, in the future, reducing the complex system and computational resources of the proposed model is required while maintaining its accuracy. (5) The external conditions were different from those in previous studies; therefore, it is hard to say which method is more accurate. However, the prediction accuracy between the previously proposed single classifiers and the multi-classifier was compared using the same dataset that was extracted in the previous study.None.