@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Simulation study of electric-guided delivery of 0.4µm monodisperse and polydisperse aerosols to the ostiomeatal complex

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The performance of an intranasal delivery system targeting the ostiomeatal complex (OMC) was numerically evaluated in an image-based nose-sinus model for monodisperse and polydisperse aerosols.With the synergy of optimized point-release and electric control, an OMC delivery efficiency of 34.4% was predicted for the polydisperse charged aerosols.Sensitivity analysis showed that OMC deposition was highly sensitive to particle charge and size and less sensitive to the inhalation flow rate.Simulations showed significantly enhanced OMC dosage using the proposed delivery system than standard nasal devices.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Maxillary sinus,Rhinosinusitis,Charged particles,Electric guidance,Ostiomeatal complex OMC,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Despite the high prevalence of rhinosinusitis, current inhalation therapy shows limited efficacy due to extremely low drug delivery efficiency to the paranasal sinuses. Novel intranasal delivery systems are needed to enhance targeted delivery to the sinus with therapeutic dosages. An optimization framework for intranasal drug delivery was developed to target polydisperse charged aerosols to the ostiomeatal complex (OMC) with electric guidance. The delivery efficiency of a group of charged aerosols recently reported in the literature was numerically assessed and optimized in an anatomically accurate nose-sinus model. Key design variables included particle charge number, particle size and distribution, electrode strength, and inhalation velocity. Both monodisperse and polydisperse aerosol profiles were considered. Results showed that the OMC delivery efficiency was highly sensitive to the applied electric field and electrostatic charges carried by the particles. Through the synthesis of electric-guidance and point drug release, focused deposition with significantly enhanced dosage in the OMC can be achieved. For 0.4µm charged aerosols, an OMC delivery efficiency of 51.6% was predicted for monodisperse aerosols and 34.4% for polydisperse aerosols. This difference suggested that the aerosol profile exerted a notable effect on intranasal deliveries. Sensitivity analysis indicated that the OMC deposition fraction was highly sensitive to the charge and size of particles and was less sensitive to the inhalation velocity considered in this study. Experimental studies are needed to validate the numerically optimized designs. Further studies are warranted to investigate the targeted OMC delivery with both electric and acoustics controls, the latter of which has the potential to further deliver the drug particles into the sinus cavity.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Rhinosinusitis is one of the most common airway diseases that affects 10–15% of the population worldwide and costs $5.8 billion in health care in the U.S. per year [1]. Treatment of rhinosinusitis includes oral therapy, aerosolized inhalation therapy, surgery intervention, and saline irrigation. For allergic rhinosinusitis, a combination of oral and topical steroids and antihistamines will be typically prescribed to eliminate inflammation sources. For chronic rhinosinusitis, a functional endoscopic sinus surgery is often needed to enlarge the sinus opening and recover sinus drainage. In both cases, targeted delivery of therapeutic agents to the diseased site is highly desirable, which has the advantage of having a higher drug concentration at the target, acting directly on the site of disease, while minimizing systemic side effects [2–4]. Studies have demonstrated that the dosage at the diseased site, rather than the total dose, should be used as the predictor of clinical outcomes [5]. In addition, the initial site of drug deposition has a significant effect on its bioavailability and associated therapeutic effectiveness [6]. An efficient therapeutic intervention, before or after surgery, is crucial in reducing the risk of recurrences. Furthermore, systemic medications, such as oral corticosteroids, are not effective for many patients and tend to cause considerable adverse effects [4]. Inhalation treatments with topical medications show only modest therapeutic efficacy. There is still a high rate of functional sinus surgeries in rhinosinusitis patients.Although considerable research was conducted in exploring nasal formulations to improve drug absorption, little effort has been undertaken in upgrading delivery devices targeting the paranasal sinuses [1,4]. Because the middle meatus and sinuses are poorly ventilated during normal breathing, drug delivery to these regions is limited. Most nasally administered medications, such as nasal sprays, will be filtered by the nasal valve and prevented from reaching the middle meatus or sinuses [1]. Nebulizers with small particles and swirling flows have demonstrated significantly improved aerosol delivery beyond the nasal valve region [4]. They can also deliver certain amounts of doses to the sinus; however, the sinus delivery efficiency is very low (<1%). Moreover, there is a considerable amount of unintended deposition into the lungs, which can lead to the irritation of lung tissues. Concerns of pulmonary function deterioration have been raised related to extended inhalation of steroids and insulin [7]. One approach to avoid pulmonary deposition is the bi-directional nasal delivery technique, where drugs are released only during oral exhalation with the soft palate closing the nose off from the lower airway [8]. The setback of this approach is that more than 95% of the drugs will deposit in regions other than the target site, causing significant waste and adverse side-effects [9]. More recently, sinus delivery methods, that include humming and pulsating aerosols, are under active investigation; such techniques have demonstrated improved delivery efficiencies to the paranasal sinuses. However, even with these novel strategies, the delivery efficiency to the middle meatus and sinus is limited, i.e., less than 5%, aside from the substantial drug wastes in other regions of the respiratory tract and the associated adverse side effects [1].Among all the complexities of the nose anatomy, there are three challenges that are thought to preclude effective delivery of drugs to the maxillary sinus: the nasal valve, the slit-like opening to the middle meatus, and the narrow ostium to the sinus. The nasal valve has the minimum cross-section area in the nasal chamber and behaves as the flow-limiting sector of the nose. The vena-contracta effects associated with the nasal valve induces elevated particle deposition in the nasal valve area due to the enhanced particle inertial impaction. Previous clinical studies demonstrated that a majority of administered medications with MDIs and nasal sprays were wasted in the nasal vestibule and valve regions [1]. The second challenge is the slit-opening to the middle meatus, which is formed by two overlapping flaps of turbinate tissues (middle and inferior conchae) and prevents effective air ventilation and particle transport to the middle meatus. During natural breathing, the majority of inhaled air passes through the nasal median passage and only a small fraction of air is ventilated into the middle meatus via the slit-opening. The third challenge is the thin ostium to the sinus. Mucus and air from the maxillary sinuses drain into the nose under the middle turbinate through the ostium, which is located high on the nasal lateral wall and opens to the hiatus semilunaris of the middle meatus. The maxillary sinus ostium is a funnel-shaped passage about 3–6mm in diameter and 1–22mm in length [10]. The area under the middle turbinate is the ostiomeatal complex (OMC), as shown inFig. 1a. Mucus blockage and bacteria proliferation in the OMC are frequent causes of infection in the maxillary sinus. Furthermore, the OMC itself is the most common area for sinus-related disorders and is the primary target for aerosolized drug therapy [10].Electric control of charged particles has been suggested for targeted drug delivery to the human nose and lungs [11–13]. Enhanced particle deposition in the airways due to electrostatic charges was demonstrated in human subjects, in vitro airway replicas, and numerical modeling [14–24]. Xi et al. [20] numerically explored the potential applications of electric forces to guide charged particles to the olfactory region and predicted significantly enhanced olfactory dosages from electric field guidance. In the same manner, magnetic control of ferromagnetic particles is also promising to target particles to a designated anatomical site [25]. Numerical studies demonstrated that it was feasible to enhance the olfactory dosage to therapeutic levels with magnetophoretic controls [26,27]. Considering the secluded positions of the OMC and sinuses, targeted delivery to the sinuses presents an even more formidable challenge than to the olfactory region. Only a low percentage of inhaled airflow can be ventilated to the OMC and virtually no airflow can penetrate into the sinus. This challenge could be worse in rhinosinusitis patients who suffer from blocked ostia, obstructed nasal passages, and impaired ventilation due to mucosal swelling or nasal polyps.In a recent study, Xi et al. [28] developed an optimization framework for delivery of charged particles to the OMC. By optimizing multiple design variables, the OMC dose was increased from 45.0% with the baseline model to 72.4% with the optimized system. However, the delivery system developed in Xi et al. [28] was designed specifically for 20nm charged particles. Particle size has been shown to be a critical factor influencing the topical delivery efficiency [20,28]. For delivery systems either with or without E-guidance, smaller micrometer particles have persistently led to higher deposition fractions beyond the nasal valve, presumably because of the reduced inertia impaction loss in the front nose. In a recent study, Golshahi et al. [29] developed an aerosol induction charger and demonstrated the feasibility of generating aerosols with electrical charges one order of magnitude above the diffusion limit through a combination of induction charging and droplet evaporation. A vibrating mesh nebulizer that produced 2.5–4µm droplets was used in conjunction with aqueous solutions of albuterol sulfate and sodium chloride for aerosol generation. The droplets were subsequently charged in an induction charger with electric field strength of 1–5kV/cm and were fully dried by evaporation in airflows of 90L/min within the charging chamber. The resulting particles consisted mainly of albuterol sulfate and sodium chloride, with a mass median aerodynamic diameter (MMAD) of approximately 0.4µm. The average charge number was around 480, which is approximately 5% of the Rayleigh limit of 0.4µm particles [29]. The size distribution of the polydisperse aerosols ranged from 0.03µm to 6.60µm. Charge numbers for particles with a diameter of 0.095–0.96µm were also measured, which fell between the predicted values for dried particles (upper bound) and initial droplets (lower bound) based on the theory of Reischl et al. [30].The objective of this study is to numerically design a drug delivery system targeting the above-mentioned experimentally generated particles (MMAAD: 0.4µm) at the OMC region in the nasal middle meatus. The rationale underlying the proposed design is that the path of a charged particle can be controlled by applying an appropriate electrical force so that it can escape filtrations and reach the target site. This study has four specific aims: (1) to develop a computational model for nose-sinus drug delivery of charged particles, (2) to design and optimize the delivery system to the OMC for 0.4µm monodisperse aerosols, (3) to conduct a sensitivity analysis of design variables, and (4) to identify the optimal OMC delivery system for polydisperse charged aerosols.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
