@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Automatic characterization of thoracic aortic aneurysms from CT images

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We have developed an automatic method for measuring the diameter at any point along the length of the thoracic aorta.The proposed method uses principal component analysis for determining the maximum diameter of the aorta.The method developed clearly reduces the time spent by any semi-automatic commercial method available in the market.The proposed method obtains reproducible results of the aortic diameters, contrary to what happens with semi-automatic methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Aneurysm,Aorta,Centerline,Level set,Computed tomography,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Accurate determination of the diameter is an important step for diagnosis and follow-up of aortic abnormalities such as aneurysms, caused by dilation of the vessel lumen. In this work we focus on the development of an automatic method for measuring the calibre of the thoracic aorta. The method is based on the application of principal component analysis on normal planes extracted from the aorta to establish the main axis of each section of the vessel.Two experiments were performed in order to test the accuracy and the rotational invariance of the developed method. Accuracy was determined by using a database of 15 clinical cases, where our method and a commercial software, which was considered as the gold standard, were compared. For the rotational invariance check, phantom images in different orientations were obtained and the diameter was measured with the proposed method.For clinical cases, a good agreement was observed between our method and the gold standard. The Bland Altman plots indicated that all of the values were within the acceptable limits of agreement with a bias of 0.2mm between both methods. For phantom cases, an ANOVA test revealed that the results achieved for the data sets acquired for the different orientations were not statistically different (F=1.88, p=0.153), which demonstrates the robustness of the method for rotations.The proposed method is applicable for measuring the diameter in all tested cases, and the results achieved underscored the capability of our approach for automatic characterization of thoracic aortic aneurysms.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Aneurysms are the most common pathology affecting the thoracic aorta with an incidence of 6/100.000 persons. The risk of rupture for untreated large sized aneurysm is around 74% with a 90% mortality rate [1]. Therefore, this pathology often requires surgery and is potentially a serious life-threatening disorder. An aneurysm is a permanent localized dilatation of the diameter of an artery by at least 50% of its normal diameter [2]. Thoracic aortic aneurysm disease is usually asymptomatic. In many cases, the first symptom is a serious complication such as rupture or dissection, and can end up causing death. Aneurysms of the thoracic aorta grow slowly, this growth being faster in the descending aorta (3mm/year) than in the ascending aorta (1mm/year) [3]. Surgical intervention is indicated when the diameter of the aorta exceeds maximum of 5.5cm for the ascending aorta in most patients. For patients with additional symptoms as Marfan׳s disease, bicuspid aortic valve, or a family history of aortic dissection, this value drops to 5cm. For the descending aorta, the main criterion is a bit more relaxed (5.5–6.0cm), because the adverse effects are produced in larger sizes [4]. Hence, the precise description of the thoracic aorta is crucial for the diagnosis of this type of lesion, for planning treatment [5], and for clinical follow-up.It is assumed that the shape of the aorta is circular or elliptic [6]. The manner in which the diameter of the aorta is calculated is widely agreed by the clinical community. The details of how this diameter should be calculated are described by Rousseau et al. in a recent paper [7]. According to Rousseau, if the shape of the cross section of the lumen is elliptical or even crescent rather than circular, to get the correct size of the aorta, the mean value between the maximum and the minimum diameters has to be calculated. In this model, maximum refers to the length of the maximum diameter of the aorta and minimum to the length of the diameter that is perpendicular to such diameter maximum. As seen in this description both diameters should be perpendicular.Computed tomography (CT) is an imaging technique that enables the diagnosis of patients with thoracic pain [8] and the reconstruction of an aortic aneurysm from any projection, providing information of high relevance for diagnostic as well as instructional purposes. For patients with allergy to iodinated contrast, images of vasculature can be acquired using MRI. However, MRI has the disadvantage of acquiring images of lower quality than those obtained with CT. This is due to the lower spatial resolution as well as the worst properties of radiopaque contrast (gadolinium) employee. In addition, acquisition times are clearly superior (30s versus 30min).To obtain quantitative data from CT slices, a central lumen line must be drawn on the basis of which normal planes can be calculated at specific locations and measurements taken. The methods described in the literature for calculating the centerline are primarily based on two approaches i.e., direct methods that measure the vessel with no prior segmentation, and the more common indirect methods that require prior vessel segmentation. The direct method proposed by Wink et al. [9] requires at least two user-initialized points on the vessel segment. Indirect methods are more robust to the presence of image noise [10] and tend to calculate the centerline of the vessel using thinning from a previous segmentation [11].Once the normal planes are determined, successive estimates of the maximum diameters in each plane are conventionally calculated by undertaking a multi-directional analysis within each plane. Even though Boskmap et al. [12] undertook a multi-directional analysis in order to compute the maximum distance, directly, most authors previously made an approximation of each cross-section to a regular shape, usually circles or ellipses. This fitting is performed by either growing circles from the vessel center while integrating the image gradient along the circles until reaching a local maximum, or by directly fitting a circle or an ellipse to the already segmented cross-sections. So, Luboz et al. [13] describe an algorithm based on the growth of circles in the plane orthogonal to the centerline points. Xunlei et al. [14] developed a semi-automatic method to determine the size of vessels by adjusting circles or ellipses within each cross-section. Krissian et al. [15] have introduced an algorithm for fitting the aortic sections to an ellipse instead of a circle. The points belonging to the centerline were used as reference points for the adjustment and through an iterative method the algorithm is able to improve both the fitting of the ellipse and the position of the points that belong to the centerline. Additional smoothing of the circles or ellipses along the centerline can be applied in the reconstruction step. Thereby Shim et al. [16] described a user-initialized method whereby the ellipse is corrected to locate the vessel centerline.The aim of this study is to develop an automatic method for calculating the diameters of the thoracic aorta along the whole arterial segment of interest, including ascending aorta, aortic arch and descending aorta, using CT images of patients with administered contrast medium. The proposed method is based on determining the centerline using B-Spline interpolation of the centers of mass of each CT slice following segmentation and successive volumetric erosion. Once the position of the centerline has been determined, the normal planes are calculated at specific point and principal component analysis is used to compute the minimal and maximal diameters in each cross-section.In order to evaluate the robustness of the proposed method, two types of datasets were created i.e., phantom datasets and clinical datasets from real patients. All images were obtained using a 64-detector row multidetector CT scanner (Lightspeed VCT; GE Medical Systems, Milwaukee, Wisconsin). Injection of an intravenous radiopaque contrast medium was performed before the acquisition of the images in order to enhance lumen visibility. The resulting images were stored in DICOM file format of 512×512 pixels with a resolution of 0.7×0.7(mm/pixel). The energy used in this study was 120kVp, with a pitch factor of 0.98, and a distance between slices of 0.625mm.The purpose of the dataset is to evaluate the rotation invariance of the developed algorithm. Thus, a phantom consisting of a constant tube section simulating the thoracic aorta with various curvatures in different planes along its length was designed (Fig. 1). The same CT scanner and the same parameters were set in terms of energy, pitch and distance between slices for both the phantom and the clinical cases. CT images of the phantom from different spatial projections corresponding to each of the three X, Y, and Z-axes were obtained. A total of 18 series of CT images were acquired, 6 for each rotational axis, with a 10° variation in range of [−30, 30]. Each series consisted of 980 images of a total series of 17,640 images. Moreover, the caliber of the phantom was manually gauged. A calibrator was used to take 97 homogeneous measurements along the length of the tube. Measurements were repeated three times to reduce error measurement with a total of 291 diameter values.In order to evaluate the method in real clinical cases a database was created consisting of 6599 images of the thoracic aorta corresponding to 15 patients admitted to the Radiology Unit of the University Hospital of Santiago de Compostela (CHUS). Three patients were normal cases, 1 man and 2 women, with an average age of 62.5years; and 9 were male and 3 female patients with pathology, with an average age of 64years.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
It is important to know the size of the aorta because certain key decisions relating to the management of aortic aneurysms depend on such size. However, to answer the question “How big is the aorta” is not always easy. Among the sources of error encountered regularly in clinical practice can highlight the following: the inherent level of resolution of the imaging technologies currently available, the inclusion or not of the aortic wall itself in a measurement, the limitations of specific imaging modalities to correctly display portions of the aorta and the complex geometry of the aorta itself [25]. Moreover, if a manual method is used, this implies the dedication of a specialist by a period of time that roughly takes 15min for each clinical case, depending on experience and skills of the physician.Our approach reduces analysis time to about 8min. However, clinically, the most important issue is the time spent by the radiologist in each study. Furthermore, with a fully automatic method, the time spent by the radiologist is reduced to 0min. Therefore, the use of an automatic method involves not only to save time but also some inherent characteristics of any automatic method such as the possibility of running off-line the algorithm and the attainment of the reproducibility of the results, which in turn allows more exhaustive comparisons. On the other hand, during vessel segmentation, both the slice that separates the ascending aorta and the aortic arch, and the slice between the descending aorta and the aortic arch are determined. This allows the detection of a lesion such as an aneurysm with independence of its position, given that clinically the size of the lesion varies according to the region of the thoracic aorta in which it is located.In this work we have developed an automatic method for measuring the diameter of the aorta. However, the complex shape of the ship implies the existence of many normal planes with different orientations, on which it is necessary to measure distances. Hence, the influence of the spatial resolution on the measurement of the diameter on the normal planes has to be analyzed. To see this issue, we have designed a simple phantom with a constant diameter along its length that mimics the morphology of the aorta, and the results show no statistically significant differences between the different orientations.A key feature of our approach is the use of PCA for determining the diameter of the aorta. Some authors have proposed explicitly adjusting the sections of the aorta to some mathematically well defined shapes, such as circles or ellipses. However those kinds of methods are computationally expensive because such algorithms are based on the use of iterative methods. To minimize this cost, some authors have proposed solutions ad hoc. In that way, Fitzgibbon et al. [26] used a least-square fit, specific for ellipses that minimizes the sum of the squared distances on the points of the ellipse. Moreover, when the multi-directional analysis is performed, only two control points are used to calculate each diameter i.e., the center point of the structure and the point on its boundary, which makes it vulnerable to the presence of artifacts. In terms of the aorta, the presence of artifacts entails the presence of structures related to the visceral trunks. Thus, one cannot rule out that the calculation of the directions of the maximum diameters may be influenced by the presence of these lateral ramifications.Fig. 12shows an axial slice with visceral trunks connected to the aorta. We can notice that the determination of the diameters varies according to the type of method used i.e., the PCA (Fig. 12a) or multi-directional analysis (Fig. 12b). In the latter, the presence of the visceral trunk clearly diverted the direction of the maximum diameter and raised its value considerably as compared to the value obtained with PCA, which was slightly higher than the ideal value. As the algorithm based on PCA uses the complete set of points of the characterized object, it is more robust in calculating the value of the diameters, and reduces the effect of artifacts.One of the drawbacks of the method described in this paper is that it is first necessary to obtain a precise delineation of the center line of the vessel. Several authors have dealt with this issue. Kang et al. [27] proposed a centerline deformation method using a region-based active tube model that can provide accurate results in vessel quantification. Frangi et al. [28] described an active B-Spline model, which has also been used to achieve an accurate centerline vessel axis. In our study, the calculations of cross-sections are obtained from consecutive points of the centerline after interpolation process. The interpolation of initial estimates improved the results obtained for two main reasons. First, greater precision was achieved due to greater number of points obtained by increasing the number of cross-section calculated. Second, the fluctuations associated to the computation of the position of each point on the central line were reduced. Thus, the values computed for the angles of cross-section of the aorta wall (αxand αy) varied more persistently (Fig. 13) than the process prior to interpolation (Fig. 14), which entailed a smoother transition between consecutive positions on each cross-section.Currently, there are commercial solutions available that provide radiologists data of estimated diameter values along the length of the aorta. Most of these applications, however, are not fully automated i.e., user-defined starting points have to be indicated to guide the software in the segmentation process, maximum diameters are manually measured on the graph, and the task of excluding the diameters of the supra-aortic trunks, the visceral trunks or any artifact is also performed manually. The proposed automatic method represents an attempt for eliminating such drawbacks in the computation of vessel diameters and we have demonstrated how the degree of agreement between both methods, automatic and commercial, is large enough (Fig. 11). However, although the differences achieved between both methods lie within the limits of agreement for all the cases, it would be important to demonstrate whether the two measurement methods are interchangeable for distinguishing between normal and pathological cases. The concept of normal aorta has not been clearly established in terms of the diameter. Factors such age, sex, height determine the maximum diameter of the normal aorta, but there is a consensus that when the aorta exceeds the critical value of 50mm in diameter, some kind of disease has been developed. In our case the differences of measuring such diameter by the two methods are within the interval [−2.9, 2,5]mm, that is one order of magnitude inferior to the critical diameter. So we can conclude that both automatic and commercial methods are interchangeable, not only to determine with a high degree of agreement the diameter of the aorta, but also to establish whether this is a pathological case or not.As for the limitations of our system, even though calculating the diameter is correct with independence of the location of the aneurysm, the different regions of the aorta (ascending aorta, aortic arch and descending aorta) are approximations of the clinical boundaries established for such regions. So the location of the aneurysm in terms of clinical regions of the aorta could be slightly displaced. Moreover the calculation of vessel diameter is limited to the thoracic aorta and the diameter of the supra-aortic trunks and the visceral vessels cannot be calculated with this method.In conclusion, a new method for automatically measuring the diameter of the aorta has been developed. The method highlights the potential of the PCA for determining the diameter of the aorta. The automatic calculation of this value is important for the development of computer applications for the diagnosis and follow-up of aortic disorders. The proposed method was applied for measuring the diameter in all cases of our database and the results achieved suggest the ability of our approach as a tool for automatic characterization of thoracic aortic aneurysms.None declared.