@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Robust tooth surface reconstruction by iterative deformation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The salient feature point extraction method can preserve morphological features.Different parts are set different deformation weights which help to get nice results.Iterative constrained deformation can avoid self-intersection and distortion.Robust and satisfactory adaptability in clinical application.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Robust,Morse theory,Tooth segment,Salient feature point extraction,Iterative constrained deformation,Morphological feature retention,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Digital design technologies have been applied extensively in dental medicine, especially in the field of dental restoration. The all-ceramic crown is an important restoration type of dental CAD systems. This paper presents a robust tooth surface reconstruction algorithm for all-ceramic crown design. The algorithm involves three necessary steps: standard tooth initial positioning and division; salient feature point extraction using Morse theory; and standard tooth deformation using iterative Laplacian Surface Editing and mesh stitching. This algorithm can retain the morphological features of the tooth surface well. It is robust and suitable for almost all types of teeth, including incisor, canine, premolar, and molar. Moreover, it allows dental technicians to use their own preferred library teeth for reconstruction. The algorithm has been successfully integrated in our Dental CAD system, more than 1000 clinical cases have been tested to demonstrate the robustness and effectiveness of the proposed algorithm.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In recent years, the CAD technique used in the dental CAD/CAM system has been equipped in many dental groups and laboratories [1–5]. Compared to the traditional manual restoration, the CAD technique can significantly reduce the labor intensity of technicians, enhance the quality of restoration, and meet individual needs [6].The all-ceramic crown has become increasingly popular in recent years. Compared to the conventional porcelain-fused-to-metal (PFM) crown, the all-ceramic crown emphasizes the cosmetic result [7]. The PFM crown can hardly meet requirements for the incisor restoration, but the all-ceramic crown can achieve satisfactory results [8]. In addition, the all-ceramic crown is becoming increasingly popular because of its excellent biocompatibility. To deliver an almost ideal crown, several processes need to be done, such as scanning the plaster model, reconstructing the crown׳s surface, modifying the designed crown in a virtual or simulative stomatognathic environment, and strength analysis of the dental crown. These essential processes enable the crown to follow the masticatory function, the envelope of movement permitted by the occlusion, temporo mandibular joint and neuromuscular systems.Reconstruction of the crown׳s surface includes several cascaded operations, as shown inFig. 1. Before the design process, the preparation has marked a specific identify to help selecting the proper standard tooth in the design. Fig. 1(a) is the scanned preparation model with its neighboring and antagonist teeth; the first step is to extract the margin line of the preparation (Fig. 1(b)). The second step is to cut the preparation into two parts, the unprepared part and the prepared surface (Fig. 1(c)); the third step is to calculate the insertion path from which we can see the largest visible area of the upper part (Fig. 1(d)); the fourth step is to offset the upper part by a given distance (Fig. 1(e)) to simulate the use of a die spacer; the fifth step is to select a corresponding standard tooth which has been numbered in the standard tooth library, and to position the standard tooth (Fig. 1(f)); the sixth step is to reconstruct the outer surface of the crown (Fig. 1(g)); the seventh step is to modify the outer surface of the crown to achieve a proper occlusion (Fig. 1(h)); the eighth step is to merge the inner surface and outer surface together to finish the whole design (Fig. 1(i)). In this paper, we only focus on the process of reconstructing the crown׳s outer surface (the sixth step).In the all-ceramic crown CAD design system, recovery of the whole tooth crown is difficult using only information from the tooth preparation, as shown inFig. 2. A common method is to use the information of a standard tooth. By applying the position and scale to a standard tooth, an initial shape of a tooth crown can be obtained [9,10]. The tooth crown is then deformed to fit closely to the prepared tooth׳s margin line (Fig. 2). However, following two main problems can be encountered in the existing methods:(1)Adjustment of the occlusal surface is difficult for these methods because of the presence of numerous cusps, fossas, ridges, and sulcus. Retaining these morphological features is a challenging task.Most existing methods [11,17–21] are only suitable for molars, they have certain limitations in clinical applications.To solve the two aforementioned problems, this paper presents a robust tooth surface reconstruction algorithm. The algorithm involves three steps. First, a standard tooth is initially positioned and divided into three zones. Second, salient feature points (SFPs) are extracted from the standard tooth using Morse theory. Third, the standard tooth deforms iteratively using these SFPs and meshes are stitched. By extracting SFPs, the algorithm can retain the morphological features of the occlusal surface well. The division of the standard tooth into zones and the iterative deformation technique make the algorithm suitable for almost all repair types in clinical settings.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
