@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Hypodensity extractor: A phantom study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Standard CT low-contrast phantom was adjusted for hypodensity extraction purposes.Nonlinear approximations of signals were applied for hypodensity extraction.Objective, computational and repeatable criteria of assessment were proposed.Previously proposed and new hypodensity extractors were examined with procedures.Better visible small hypodensities and more correct shape assessment were obtained.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Hypodensity extraction,Low-contrast phantom,Ischemic stroke,Computed tomography,Image assessment,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We report on the extraction procedures of low-contrast symptomatic hypodensity optimized for a computed tomography-based diagnosis. The specific application is brain imaging with enhanced perception of hypodense areas which are direct symptoms of acute ischemia. A standard low-contrast phantom, as commonly employed in dosimetry and imaging quality evaluation, was used to derive numeric criteria for assessing the extraction effectiveness. Our proposed procedure is based on multiscale analysis of the image data expanded over the frames of wavelets, curvelets or complex wavelets, followed by nonlinear approximation of the symptom signatures. Apparent subtle density changes in the phantom were evaluated using computational metrics and subjective ratings. We discuss the advantages and disadvantages of our proposed optimized hypodensity extraction procedures.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Numerical quality criteria were defined as well as the objectified subjective test procedures to evaluate the efficiency of hypodense low-contrast changes in perception. New hypodensity extractors were proposed and verified to improve the perception of hypodense areas as crucial indicators of ischemia in acute stroke diagnoses.Radiologists and non-experts (i.e., bioengineers) were asked to express conviction of assessed the different methods for extraction distinctness. The proposed methods achieved better perception of small hypodense objects with more correct shape assessment. They also provide increased sensitivity for decreased object-to-background contrast, compared to subjective rating of unprocessed phantom CTs and those SM processed. The assessment of the capabilities of individual extractors provides objective indicators to select suitable forms of hypodensity extractors depending on the actual needs or accepted diagnostic models (i.e., simplification, sensitivity, size or shape requirements).Limitations of phantom study are due to exclusion of real brain structure mapping with possible artifacts and distortions which contribute significantly to processing and final extraction effects. Thus, our conclusions do not directly translate to the clinical utility of the extractors. However, increased perception sensitivity of more subtle hypodense image changes could lead to increased diagnostic accuracy for acute stroke cases in clinical practice, following to the CAD paradigm. In particular, perception errors could be potentially reduced. Any reliable statement of any real gain requires research in relation to clinical practice. Increasing the sensitivity of medical imaging may not always lead to a reduction in perception or interpretation errors in imaging diagnostics [32]: “technology doesn׳t solve, but only displaces, the problem of perceptual error to a new and different technology, offering the opportunity to make a whole new, and maybe longer, list of mistakes”. Improved perception may lead to new and different errors because of the changed window of image information. Indeed, clinical efficiency verification of two new forms of hypodensity extractors requires representative clinical trials to answer how it aids radiologists in the reading of images. This will be the subject of future studies.None declared.