@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Identification of mutated driver pathways in cancer using a multi-objective optimization model

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An effective algorithm for identifying driver pathways in cancer is proposed.The algorithm relies on the high heterogeneity and coverage of driver pathways.The algorithm show credible performance without relying on prior knowledge.An integrated model is designed to improve the performance in a biological context.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Driver pathways,Multi-objective optimization model,Genetic algorithm,Integrative model,Driver mutation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
New-generation high-throughput technologies, including next-generation sequencing technology, have been extensively applied to solve biological problems. As a result, large cancer genomics projects such as the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and the International Cancer Genome Consortium are producing large amount of rich and diverse data in multiple cancer types. The identification of mutated driver genes and driver pathways from these data is a significant challenge. Genome aberrations in cancer cells can be divided into two types: random ‘passenger mutation’ and functional ‘driver mutation’. In this paper, we introduced a Multi-objective Optimization model based on a Genetic Algorithm (MOGA) to solve the maximum weight submatrix problem, which can be employed to identify driver genes and driver pathways promoting cancer proliferation. The maximum weight submatrix problem defined to find mutated driver pathways is based on two specific properties, i.e., high coverage and high exclusivity. The multi-objective optimization model can adjust the trade-off between high coverage and high exclusivity. We proposed an integrative model by combining gene expression data and mutation data to improve the performance of the MOGA algorithm in a biological context.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Cancer is a complex disease that is highly driven by somatic mutations, such as single-nucleotide mutations, larger copy-number aberrations, and structural aberrations [1]. The hallmarks of cancer, including a limitless replicative potential and self-sufficiency in the growth signals of cancer, hinder its effective treatment. The researchers also found these cancer cells can invade other tissues and organs via the lymphatic system or blood circulation [2]. Thus, cancer is considered to be one of the most serious diseases to inflict human beings.Researchers should understand the molecular mechanisms of cancer prior to exploring the effective treatment of cancer. Therefore, one of the remaining challenges is to identify functional mutations, which are referred to as “driver mutations”, that confer a selective growth advantage during the development of cancer, and filter random “passenger mutations”, which are neutral to the proliferation of cancer cells [3]. With the development of sequencing technologies, especially next-generation DNA sequencing technologies, large-scale genomic projects of cancer disease, such as The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), have provided a vast number of profiles of samples for different types of cancers [4–6]. Recent studies revealed that the theories of carcinogenesis are primarily attributed to the disruption of cellular signaling and regulatory pathways. Thus, the design of an effective method for identifying the driver pathways in carcinogenesis process, which is helpful to personalized medicine programs, is important [7,8].On the gene level, several studies have been devoted to identify genes with significantly higher mutation rates across samples than the background mutation rates in a vast number of samples. Some important gene mutations in cancer progression have been reported in these studies. However, minimal overlap among genome aberrations is observed even if cancer genomes originate from the same cancer [9,10]. The majority of these methods are unable to identify the heterogeneity of gene mutations.Researchers have also realized that one driver pathway may be caused by different mutations [11,12]. Pathways rather than individual genes are considered to govern cancer progression. Therefore, it is necessary to shift the point of view from the gene level to the pathway level and it is critical to capturing the heterogeneous phenomenon in cancer [13,14]. The majority of studies have focused on analyzing known information about driver pathways and the detection of the significant pathways. The enrichment of somatic mutations is a routine method in most of studies [10,15]. The disadvantage of this method is that the background knowledge of pathways remains incomplete, and existing pathway databases have distinct limitations because they frequently contain overlap and unavailable data [16–18]. Considering these limitations, it is indispensable to develop new methods to identify driver pathways without relying on prior knowledge.A vast number of gene sets exist when exhaustively testing in the entire genome. For instance, more than 1026 sets of seven human genes exist [19]. Therefore, the detection of mutated driver pathways seems implausible due to the vast number of gene sets to enumerate. In recent years, some methods have been developed to solve this problem [20]. Researchers have discovered two constraints on the combination patterns of the mutations of cancer. First, they determined that a driver mutation is rare, that is, a single mutation in one group can sufficiently perturb one pathway. Driver mutations are mutually exclusive. This property is referred to as high-exclusivity. Second, a pathway that is important to cancer frequently applies to the majority of patients. Thus, mutations in a driver pathway should be contained by most patients, which is referred to as high-coverage. Recently, some new gene sets have been identified in several studies using these rules [21–23]. A novel scoring function that is based on these two properties, which is employed to identify the mutated driver pathway, has been defined by Vandin et al. [19]. It is a new and effective method that applies the somatic mutation data detected by next-generation DNA sequencing technologies. They defined the maximum weight submatrix problem as a problem in which the scoring function is maximized and solved this problem using a stochastic search algorithm. However, the solution of this problem is difficult due to the complex computations that are required. No effective measure is available to adjust the trade-off between coverage and exclusivity in this study.To adjust the trade-off between higher coverage and higher overlap in the identification of gene sets for solving the maximum weight submatrix problem, we proposed a novel multi-objective optimization model that is based on a genetic algorithm (MOGA) for driver pathway detection. We integrated differential expression data to improve the performance of our MOGA in a biological context. The results show that the proposed MOGA method is effective and the integrated model can detect biologically significant gene sets.The remainder of our paper is divided into three sections. In Section 2, the methods that was utilized in this study are briefly introduced. In Section 3, to assess the performance of our MOGA method, we apply MOGA to two biological data sets to compare our results with the Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) method. Section 4 briefly outlines our MOGA method in future studies.For the glioblastoma and lung datasets, all genes with non-synonymous single nucleotide mutations or small indels in at least two patients were used. For glioblastoma dataset, copy number variants (CNVs) were included. If a gene had a CNV of the same type (amplification or deletion) in at least 90% of the patients with a CNV, we add a CNV type for the gene. More details about the pipeline for building mutation matrices from somatic mutation data are prepared was discussed in Ref. [24].In recent years, researchers have employed two important characteristics to detect mutated driver pathways. They transformed this problem into the maximum weight submatrix problem by considering two constraints, i.e., ‘high coverage’, which indicates that the majority of patients have a minimum of one mutation in a driver pathway, and ‘high exclusivity’, which indicates that the mutations in one pathway should be heterogeneous [19]. The identification of driver pathways is extremely difficult because the maximum weight submatrix problem is NP-hard. Considering this point, they proposed the Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) method, which is based on these two properties, to detect effective gene sets. A binary mutation matrixAwith m rows (samples) and n columns (genes), which is based on the somatic mutation data, is constructed, whereAij=1means gene j is mutated in patientiandAij=0indicates the absence of a mutation. The fitness function is defined as(1)W(M)=|Γ(M)|−ω(M)=2|Γ(M)|−∑g∈M|Γ(g)|whereMis a submatrix of mutation matrix A with m rows and k columns,ω(M)=∑g∈M|Γ(g)|−|Γ(M)|measures the coverage overlap in a setMof genes.Γ(M)=∪g∈MΓ(g)is defined to measure the coverage of submatrixM.Γ(g)={i:Aig=1}indicates that the genegis mutated in the set of samples. In other words, given a mutation matrixAand an integer k>0, the the maximum weight submatrix problem is defined as finding anm×ksubmatrix ofAthat maximizes the scoring function. For example, we could detect gene setsBandCas driver genes mutually exclusive whenk=2andk=3, as shown inFig. 1. Gene set D may be identified using genetic algorithm (GA) and MCMC, whereas the heterogeneity of D is small because both the MCMC method and the GA did not value the trade-off between high coverage and high exclusivity. Thus, some researchers attempted to solve this problem using a modified scoring functionWα(M)=|Γ(M)|−αω(M), in which the variable parameterα(α>0) is designed to adjust the trade-off between high coverage and high exclusivity [24]. The results are insufficient because high coverage and high exclusivity are mutually exclusive with regard to biological data and no method exists to calculate the parameterα. To consider both properties, a multi-objective optimization model is designed in this study.In a practical application, many multi-optimization problems (MOPs) can be characterized by multiple objectives that sometimes conflict. Numerous multi-optimal methods have been suggested to solve the MOPs. Generally, a simple single-objective optimization problem could be formulated asminf(x),x∈S, wheref(x)is a scalar fitness function andSis the set of constraints on the parameters in the functionf(x)which is often defined asS={x∈R,h(x)=0,g(x)≥0}. For this reason, the multi-objective optimization problem is described asmin[f1(x),f2(x),...,fn(x)],x∈Sfrequently, wheren>1andSis the set of constraints on the parameters in the functionsfi(x).. The Pareto solutions, indicate the trade-off among the different objective functions, could be achieved in MOPs.The maximum weight submatrix problem is a multi-objective problem. Hence, we proposed the multi-objective optimization model to adjust the trade-off between coverage and exclusivity. In previous decades, evolutionary algorithms have shown powerful ability in solving MOPs. As Zhao et al. [26] discussed, a genetic algorithm (GA) is an effective stochastic method for solving the maximum weight submatrix problem. To obtain the optimal value of each single objective, we adopt a GA [26] in our multi-objective optimization model. First, we could obtain an optimization value offi*=minx∈Rfj(x),j=1,2...,p, which is defined to measure each single-objective and is referred to as an ideal point. The ideal point model is constructed to calculate the degree that the actual results deviates from the theoretical optimal solution [25]. The multi-objective optimization model is defined as(2)minψ[f(x)]={[(fc(x)−fcm)/(fch−fcl)]2+[(fo(x)−fom)/(foh−fol)]2}1/2where the functionfc(x)is the scalar function of the constraint of high coverage. Similarly,fo(x)measures the coverage overlap, andfcmandfomrepresent the optimal value for the two constraints of high coverage and high exclusivity. We ran a standardization step to make the function value offc(x)andfo(x)comparable,(fch−fcl)is the range of values for functionfc(x), and(foh−fol)is the range of values for functionfo(x). The maximum weight submatrix problem is translated as the minimum of the functionψ[f(x)].A new fitness functionψ[f(x)]was employed to calculate the quality of our results. Note that a local search strategy was utilized to prevent the phenomenon that is referred to as “premature”.The details of our implementation, named Multi-Objective Optimization Method (MOGA), for the maximum weight submatrix problem are described as follows:Step 1: Generate the initial population randomly. The population size p=n and the mutation rate pm=0.1 were used in this study.Step 2: Use the GA method to calculate the optimal value for the two constraints of high coverage and high exclusivity.Step 3: All the parents and offsprings are ranked by their scoring value and the next generation will be made up by the best P individuals.Step 4: Run local search if the minimum scoring value does not reduce in two consecutive iterations.Step 5: Continue in this way until stopping criterion is met (the current scoring value dose not reduce in 10 iterations).Because noise such as overlap and unavailable biological data always exists, the optimal solution calculated by the algorithm (with a minimumψ[f(x)]) may not yield the best results in a practical background. Researchers have recognized that the integration of data is a useful method for reducing noise. Numerous studies have demonstrated the power of data integration [27]. Zhao et al. [26] tried to integrate the gene expression data to identify driver pathways. However, the downside of their design is that expression data is calculated independently of the mutation data.In this study, we contracted a binary mutation matrix by considering whether each gene is mutated or normal. Different genes serve different roles in the procession of cancer. Vandin et al. [19] pointed out that additional information about the functional impact or expression status could be used to weight the mutation matrix. Some effective methods are proposed to identify the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) among groups [28,29]. We downloaded gene expression data, including data on Glioblastoma cancer patients and normal patients from TCGA. By comparing the two groups, we identified 79 DEGs from 178 genes by using the t-test method. Here 178 is a dimension of matrix A (84*178) of GBM. A p-value for each gene was obtained, and a threshold ofp≤0.001was employed to filtrate the differentially expressed genes. Representing each mutation in a pathway by one value is problematic as there may exist a one-to-many relationship between encoding genes and the fold-change value was used to weight the so called Node_value introduced in [30]. Similarly, in this paper, because of the small size of patient samples, it is not accurate to use the fold-change of each gene to weight the matrix A. Here we tried to set a parameterλto distinguish the DEGs. Generally, a 1.5-fold (or 2-fold) is often used to distinguish DEGs from those unchanged (non-significant). Whenλ>=2, we found that the optimal solution is clearly not idea. Thus the parameterλ=1.5was fixed to weight the mutation matrix in this study by testing at last. That is, the entryAijof the mutation matrix is designed as follows:(3)Aij={λDEGjmutatedinpatienti1genej(ifitisnotDEG)mutatedinpatienti0otherwise,In this paper, a permutation test method was employed to evaluate the significance as follows: the mutation matrix datasets are permutedN=1000times randomly, and the MOGA method is run on the N randomly generated matrix. We tested the significance of the results, which is defined as the degree that the results deviates from the theoretical optimal solution. The p-value is calculated as follows:(4)Pvalue=∑i=1NψMi<ψM1000whereψMis the optimal value calculated by MOGA andMiis a randomly selected submatrix of the mutation matrix.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
