@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Rhythm-based heartbeat duration normalization for atrial fibrillation detection

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We investigate rhythm-based heartbeat normalization for improved atrial fibrillation detection.Heartbeat durations are normalized based on estimated rhythm of heartbeats in a window.It allows to measure irregularity of heartbeats for both AF and non-AF rhythms in the same scale.The normalization is found helpful for improving performance and robustness of AF detection.The normalization could be crucial for developing a clinically acceptable screening device.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Atrial fibrillation,Electrocardiographic monitoring,Screening,Heartbeat rhythm,Heartbeat normalization,Entropy,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundScreening of atrial fibrillation (AF) for high-risk patients including all patients aged 65 years and older is important for prevention of risk of stroke. Different technologies such as modified blood pressure monitor, single lead ECG-based finger-probe, and smart phone using plethysmogram signal have been emerging for this purpose. All these technologies use irregularity of heartbeat duration as a feature for AF detection. We have investigated a normalization method of heartbeat duration for improved AF detection.MethodAF is an arrhythmia in which heartbeat duration generally becomes irregularly irregular. From a window of heartbeat duration, we estimate the possible rhythm of the majority of heartbeats and normalize duration of all heartbeats in the window based on the rhythm so that we can measure the irregularity of heartbeats for both AF and non-AF rhythms in the same scale. Irregularity is measured by the entropy of distribution of the normalized duration. Then we classify a window of heartbeats as AF or non-AF by thresholding the measured irregularity. The effect of this normalization is evaluated by comparing AF detection performances using duration with the normalization, without normalization, and with other existing normalizations.ResultsSensitivity and specificity of AF detection using normalized heartbeat duration were tested on two landmark databases available online and compared with results of other methods (with/without normalization) by receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves. ROC analysis showed that the normalization was able to improve the performance of AF detection and it was consistent for a wide range of sensitivity and specificity for use of different thresholds. Detection accuracy was also computed for equal rates of sensitivity and specificity for different methods. Using normalized heartbeat duration, we obtained 96.38% accuracy which is more than 4% improvement compared to AF detection without normalization.ConclusionsThe proposed normalization method was found useful for improving performance and robustness of AF detection. Incorporation of this method in a screening device could be crucial to reduce the risk of AF-related stroke. In general, the incorporation of the rhythm-based normalization in an AF detection method seems important for developing a robust AF screening device.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Atrial fibrillation (AF) is the most common cardiac arrhythmia which is associated with high risk of stroke, dementia, and death. AF is affecting approximately 1% of people around the world [1,2]. The prevalence of AF increases with the increase of the age of patients. More than 5% of patients aged 65 years or older are found to have AF [3,4]. It is now recommended by practice guidelines for screening of AF in the primary care of high-risk patients including all patients aged 65 years and more [5,6]. AF is often paroxysmal and there is a good chance that AF is undetected during such an in-office screening [7]. Furthermore, a large number of potential patients may be undiagnosed as it can be asymptomatic [8]. Hence, a more effective AF screening strategy requires a readily available and cost-effective device that can be operated frequently by a patient himself, combined with an accurate, real-time, and automatic AF detection algorithm [9]. Although the ‘gold-standard’ for AF diagnosis is the detection of it on an electrocardiogram (ECG) by a trained clinician, but automatic screening is useful for primary detection of it [7,10]. Censi et al. [11] also found that daily short-term ECG monitoring with temporally-optimized ECG recording by a screen device [12] is more effective than day-long Holter monitoring to detect AF episodes. Hence, three different technologies have been emerging for the screen purpose: i) modified blood pressure (BP) monitor, ii) single lead ECG-based device, and iii) plethysmogram signal obtained by a smart phone.Modifying a BP monitor to detect AF and using it in primary care setting could be a good opportunity for early detection of this arrhythmia. Wiesel et al. [13] and Stergiou et al. [2] proposed methods to modify a BP monitor using several heartbeats. In these methods, at first premature beats are removed by discarding heartbeats which have heartbeat duration (HBD) significantly different than average duration of measured heartbeats. Then the average and standard deviation of HBD of remaining heartbeats are calculated. A measure of heartbeat irregularity is obtained by dividing the standard deviation by the average. If the irregularity is more than a predetermined threshold then the device raises an alarm for possible AF. A recent study [6] showed that such an automatic BP monitor can achieve a reasonable accuracy (100% sensitivity and 92% specificity) for AF detection.HBD information could also be obtained from a one lead ECG recording device and several such devices are already commercially available. Such a device could capture ECG signal form fingers or wrist [7,10,14] and a HBD could be computed from consecutive R peaks using an efficient R-peak detection method [15]. In fact, HBD obtained from ECG signal has been used during the last three decades by several methods for the automatic detection and classification of AF [14,16–22]. Most of these methods use a window of HBDs to compute the irregularities of HBD for AF detection and classification.Another emerging technology for AF detection is to use plethysmogram signals obtained by a smartphone's camera to image a fingertip. The advantage of this approach is that it does not require additional hardware as the optical video monitoring of the skin with a standard digital camera provides accurate HBD time series. Jinseok et al. [9] have recently demonstrated that plethysmogram signals can be used for AF screening. A clinical validation with such an instrument showed good performance such as 100% sensitivity and 91.9% specificity [23]. Repeated measurements at home by such a device with capability of automatic transmission of data to a central database will be useful for the remote patient monitoring.Enhancement of detection accuracy and robustness is very important for such devices to be clinically more acceptable. From the discussion in previous three paragraphs, it is obvious that irregularity of heartbeat duration has become the essential feature for AF detection in all three technologies. The objective of this paper is to normalize HBD in order to obtain a better measurement of irregularly and use it for improved and robust AF detection. To the best of our knowledge, only a few works on heartbeat duration normalization could be found in the literature. Rincon et al. [16] suggested a window-based normalization of HBD, where each of the HBDs was normalized based on average of a window centered at current heartbeat and average of heartbeats centered on the previous heartbeat. In fact, our experiments (Section 3) showed that this normalization had little effect on AF detection performance. In recent times, different other features such as a window of samples around QRS-complex [24,25], absence of P-wave [3,26], auto regressive coefficients [27], were used for AF detection. Several other methods transform ECG signal into frequency domain for feature extraction [24,28]. Although these methods reported good AF detection performance but such features cannot be obtained using BP monitor or plethysmogram signal. This has motivated us to investigate a method which is equally applicable for all technologies.In this paper, we have proposed a novel heartbeat duration normalization method based on the estimation of rhythm of sequence of heartbeats. The method is applicable to all three technologies. It is well-known that AF is an arrhythmia with increased and irregular heartbeat rate [20,29,30]. In our method, each HBD in a window is normalized by an affine transformation using parameters estimated from the rhythms of heartbeats. The process of normalization is named as affine normalization and the normalized HBD is termed as HBA (HeartBeat with Affine-normalization) which is used for improved AF detection. This normalization allows us to measure the irregularity of heartbeats for both AF and non-AF rhythms in the same scale. The proposed normalization method was tested by two landmark databases available online. Experimental results showed that the normalization method was helpful to boost the AF detection accuracy. For example, using HBA we obtained 96.38% accuracy which was 92.13% without normalization of HBD. Hence, the proposed normalization method could be useful for improving AF detection accuracy in the initial screening stage and could help to reduce the risk of stroke.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we have presented the method of heartbeat normalization and classification. In Section 3, we have discussed about the databases used and presented the experimental results. Discussion about the results and conclusion is given is Section 4.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
