@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Automated retinal image quality assessment on the UK Biobank dataset for epidemiological studies

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Changes in retinal vasculature prospectively associated with disease outcomes.Large population based studies help to resolve uncertainties in these associations.QUARTZ software extracts morphometric data from large numbers of retinal images.Automated image quality assessment is required to achieve full automation.This addition into QUARTZ makes processing the entire UK Biobank dataset feasible.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Retinal image,Image quality,Vessel segmentation,Large retinal datasets,UK Biobank,Epidemiological studies,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Morphological changes in the retinal vascular network are associated with future risk of many systemic and vascular diseases. However, uncertainty over the presence and nature of some of these associations exists. Analysis of data from large population based studies will help to resolve these uncertainties. The QUARTZ (QUantitative Analysis of Retinal vessel Topology and siZe) retinal image analysis system allows automated processing of large numbers of retinal images. However, an image quality assessment module is needed to achieve full automation. In this paper, we propose such an algorithm, which uses the segmented vessel map to determine the suitability of retinal images for use in the creation of vessel morphometric data suitable for epidemiological studies. This includes an effective 3-dimensional feature set and support vector machine classification. A random subset of 800 retinal images from UK Biobank (a large prospective study of 500,000 middle aged adults; where 68,151 underwent retinal imaging) was used to examine the performance of the image quality algorithm. The algorithm achieved a sensitivity of 95.33% and a specificity of 91.13% for the detection of inadequate images. The strong performance of this image quality algorithm will make rapid automated analysis of vascular morphometry feasible on the entire UK Biobank dataset (and other large retinal datasets), with minimal operator involvement, and at low cost.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Examination of the blood vessel structure in retinal images offers an opportunity to directly and non-invasively observe the blood circulatory system. The morphological characteristics of retinal vessels (e.g. vessel calibre, tortuosity) have been prospectively associated with cardiovascular and systemic disease [1–4]. Approximately 20 million people in the UK have a long term health condition and its increasing prevalence is a major challenge for the healthcare system [5]. Cardiovascular disease alone accounts for nearly 200,000 deaths in the UK per year [6], with coronary heart disease, stroke and heart failure accounting for most of these deaths. Early detection and prevention of disease outcome is key. Accurate assessment of retinal vessel morphology may be an important biomarker of vascular health, which might predict those at high risk of disease [7].UK Biobank includes probably the world’s largest retinal image repository (nearly 136,000 retinal images) in a middle-aged population-based cohort study. The depth and breadth of health data recorded make it a powerful research resource for improving the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of a wide range of serious illnesses [8]. Considerable potential exists in using this retinal dataset to discover biomarkers for the identification of high risk patients. Retinal vessel morphology may provide such a measure, which could be used to identify those at high risk, particularly of vascular related disease. However, the extraction of quantitative measures from the vessel morphology in large datasets are needed to establish the presence (or absence) of associations, and this has been prohibitive to date given the considerable amount of manual operator involvement required. Therefore, automation is needed to process and analyse the large amount of images and extract useful, objective and quantitative information from vessel morphology [9].Our research group have developed a retinal image analysis system called QUARTZ (QUantitative Analysis of Retinal vessel Topology and siZe), which is used for the automated processing of large numbers of retinal images and obtains quantitative measures of vessel morphology to be used in epidemiological studies [10]. QUARTZ was designed to be fully automated and includes vessel segmentation, measurements from retinal vessels, arteriole/venule (a/v) classification and optic disc localisation. The software also derives information from the whole retina and not simply concentric areas centred on the optic disc or manually selected vessels. The vessel analysis screen of the QUARTZ software is illustrated inFig. 1.QUARTZ is considered fully automated in respect to its ability to run on large datasets uninterrupted. However, if quantitative results are to be of high precision, then it is vital to identify and remove images of inadequate quality. Currently, this step of image quality assessment is performed manually. This takes 15s per image, which totalled to approximately 67h of manual processing time when QUARTZ was previously used to process 16,000 images [11] from another large population based study (the European Prospective Investigation on Cancer study in Norfolk; EPIC-Norfolk) [12]. VAMPIRE [13,14], SIRIUS [15], ARIA [16] and other notable vessel analysis software, also rely on manual image quality processing. Hence, the development of automated image quality assessment would be extremely beneficial in speeding up the process.Retinal images can be poorly and unevenly illuminated, blurred and obstructed. This is caused by factors including camera exposure, focal plane error, poorly dilated/small pupils, eye lashes/blinking, lens artefacts, media opacity (e.g. cataracts, vitreous haemorrhages, asteroid hyalosis) and head/eye movement.The criteria for an image to be classed as adequate differs for retinal images used to make a conventional diagnosis (e.g. detection of diabetic retinopathy) to those which are useful for extracting vessel morphometric data suitable for epidemiological studies. For the former, there must be good clarity of the entire image to ensure any signs of possible pathology are not missed. For the latter, the criteria are that image clarity must be sufficient to allow for the accurate vessel segmentation for at least a portion of the image. Useful information can still be extracted from well segmented sections of the vasculature, even if this only represents a portion of the vascular tree. From our experience most large retinal datasets used in epidemiological studies (EPIC-Norfolk, UK Biobank) contain large amounts of images of poor quality. Poorly/unevenly illuminated images are a particular problem which is expected when images are captured without the use of pharmacological mydriasis. Therefore this approach ensures that there is little wastage by making use of many of the poor images, extracting as much information as possible from these retinal datasets.In this paper, an automated image quality assessment methodology is proposed which is designed to classify retinal images as inadequate or adequate for use in the creation of vessel morphometric data suitable for epidemiological studies. As far as we are aware, this paper presents the first automated methodology designed to tackle this important issue. The methodology is based on the assessment of the segmented vasculature, which involves the extraction of three global features (area, fragmentation and complexity) measured from the segmented vessel map and support vector machine (SVM) classification. This step completely removes the need for any manual processing, allowing QUARTZ to analyse the entire UK Biobank dataset (and other large retinal datasets) without manual intervention.To the best of our knowledge no literature exists on automated retinal image quality assessment for the purpose of epidemiological studies. However, there are several publications on automated retinal image quality assessment to determine diagnostic suitability. What constitutes an adequate image for these publications (clarity across the entire image) differs to our requirements. A brief overview of these methodologies shall be given as relevance still exists. These methodologies can be divided into two major categories: (i) classifiers based on generic image quality parameters such as illumination, sharpness and contrast and (ii) classifiers based on structural image quality parameters such as field definitions and the identification of the vascular structure. The latter category holds more relevance to the objective of this paper.Methods based on generic image quality parameters generally avoid eye structure (e.g. vessel) segmentation. Lee [17] proposed a method to evaluate illumination and contrast based on a measure of similarity between a template intensity histogram and the intensity histogram of the image to be classified. Lalonde [18] adapted this approach by defining a set of local intensity histogram templates, as well as analysing the global edge magnitude histogram. Dias [19] evaluated the generic image attributes of colour, focus, contrast and illumination with features derived from colour indexing and the Sobel operator.Usher [20] was the first paper to consider image quality evaluation based on structural parameters. Image clarity was calculated based on the area of segmented vessels over the entire image. Fleming [21] judged image clarity by specifically looking at the area of segmented vasculature within the macula. The authors also performed evaluation based on field definition, which were constraints to ensure the optic disc, macula and arcades were all correctly positioned within the image. Hunter [22] proposed a method based on measuring both the contrast and quantity of segmented vessels within the macula, and on the contrast between the fovea region and the retinal background. Giancardo [23] described a technique that extracted local measures of vessel density by measuring the segmented vessel area over different regions of the image.Paulus [24] combined generic and structural image quality parameters, independent from segmentation methods. This included the use of Haralick texture metrics to describe the generic criteria and Image Structure Clustering [25] that has the ability to cluster the image pixels into the contained anatomical structures. The cluster sizes and inter-cluster differences were used to evaluate the structural recognisability.As stated above, what constitutes an adequate image for these publications differs to our requirements. These methodologies have the objective of detecting retinal images with good clarity across the entire image, our requirements are to detect to retinal images that have sufficient clarity to allow for the accurate segmentation for at least a portion of the image. Therefore, the proposed methodology takes the logical approach of assessing only the structural attributes of the segmented vasculature.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
