@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Heterogeneous object modeling with material convolution surfaces

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A material convolution surface-based approach is presented for modeling complex heterogeneous objects.Complex one-dimensional material-distributions are modeled with material primitives and field functions.Schema for compound and irregular heterogeneities in two-and three-dimensions is formulated and outlined.We report a few examples of complex heterogeneous object modeling for the validation of proposed approach.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Heterogeneous objects,Material convolution surfaces,Convolution material primitives,Contour sub-division algorithm,Compound material-distribution,Complex heterogeneous object,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The possibility to attain diverse applications from heterogeneous objects calls for a generic and systematic modeling approach for design, analysis and rapid manufacturing of heterogeneous objects. The available heterogeneous object modeling techniques model simple material-distributions only and just a few of them are capable of modeling heterogeneous objects with complex geometries. Even these approaches have also, at time, shown some glitches while modeling complex objects with compound and irregular material variations. This paper unfolds the development of a stand-alone convolution surface-based modeling approach to model complex heterogeneous objects with multi-functional heterogeneities, entailing stratified sub-analytic boundary-representation, convolution material primitives, membership functions and material-potential functions. One-dimensional (associative and non-associative) and compound two-and three-dimensional material-distribution schemas are formulated and outlined to model simple, compound and irregular material-distributions in simple/complex geometry objects. The paper also illustrates a few examples of modeling complex heterogeneous objects by implementing the approach using specialized languages and software tools.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With the advent of heterogeneous objects (HO), diverse properties may be obtained and advantages of a number of materials can be fully exploited within a single object as per the desired functional requirements. Traditional limitations due to material incompatibility, like stress concentration, non-uniform thermal expansion, etc. can also be avoided with the fabrication of multi-functional components involving multi-fold material variations. Due to excellent performances and unique features of multi-functional objects, HO modeling has become very popular in recent years. Modeling of heterogeneous objects requires a strategy different than that adopted for homogeneous objects. It should be capable of providing varying material composition information along with part geometric information  [1,2].A number of theoretical representations, material function derivations and optimization techniques have been developed for heterogeneous object modeling. Most of the existing HO representations can be broadly classified into two categories: evaluated and unevaluated modeling. Evaluated models are inexact and represent the discrete objects of interest. Unevaluated models generally do not involve intensive spatial decompositions/subdivisions or discretizations, and theoretically, can provide sufficient fidelity in geometries and material-distributions. An approach to model multi-material objects based on R-m sets and R-m classes was proposed  [3,4], primarily for application in layered manufacturing. Boolean operators were also defined to facilitate the modeling process. Jackson et al.  [5] and Liu et al.  [6] defined a local composition control (LCC) approach to represent heterogeneous objects, where a mesh model was divided into tetrahedra and different material compositions were evaluated on the nodes of each tetrahedron, by using Bernstein polynomials. Jackson et al.  [5] proposed the finite element meshes to represent functionally graded material (FGM) in which volume of the object was decomposed into a collection of linear tetrahedra. Chiu and Tan  [7] suggested a method based on material tree structure to store different compositions of an object. The material tree was later added to a data file to construct a modified file format suitable for rapid manufacturing. Huang et al.  [8] had modeled FGM objects whose materials follow a distribution characterized by the generic Bezier curves. Qian and Dutta  [9,10] proposed a feature-based modeling scheme to represent heterogeneous objects, by defining boundary conditions of a virtual diffusion problem in a solid. The work was further extended by Liu et al.  [6], by taking parametric functions, in terms of distance(s) and functions, using Laplace equation, to smoothly blend various boundary conditions, through which designers could edit geometry and composition simultaneously. Marsan and Dutta  [11] developed tensor product solids through heterogeneous solid modeling. Zhang et al.  [12] optimized the material properties of components made of different materials. Feng et al.  [13] developed a computer aided design (CAD) modeling system for the fabrication of functional components with multi-material properties. Kou and Tan  [14] proposed a hierarchical representation scheme, for designing and optimizing objects composed of multiple regions, with continuously varying material properties. This approach used boundary-representation (B-rep) method to represent geometry and a heterogeneous feature tree to express the material-distributions. Zhou and Lu  [15] used distance as the key parameter to distribute the materials in a heterogeneous object. A level-set based variational scheme was proposed  [16], which adapted a variational model as the objective function to locate any point in the material region of a well-defined gradient or on the boundary edges and surfaces of discontinuities; the set of discontinuities was represented implicitly, using a multi-phase level-set model. Tsukanov and Shapiro  [17] presented a mesh-free approach based on the generalized Taylor series expansion of a distance field, to model and analyze a heterogeneous object, which satisfied the prescribed material conditions on a finite collection of material features and global constraints. Liu  [18] verified the approaches in commercial software packages, such as SolidWorks and Unigraphics. A commercial CAD package independent system was developed by Qian and Dutta  [10] to deal with the HO modeling.Apart from modeling; design, analysis, and fabrication of heterogeneous objects also depend upon geometric as well as material-distribution information in the object domain. The issues related to design, optimization, analysis and selection of additive manufacturing (AM) process for HO were discussed in  [19]. Jonathan and Hod  [20,21] had discussed about design and analysis of heterogeneous objects with multi-material topological optimization. A few rapid prototyping (RP) techniques have the capability to fabricate heterogeneous objects but they also require heterogeneous CAD models for part fabrication. Issues related to slice generation had been discussed for rapid manufacturing of heterogeneous objects along with the data retrieval algorithm  [22]. To the best of our understanding, most of the existing computer aided models are insufficient to provide generic and uniform representation of heterogeneous objects and there is hardly any effective HO model available that can be integrated with visualization, analysis and rapid prototyping set-ups.Most of the existing representations can model simple one-dimensional (1D) material-distributions in objects having simple geometry, which generally exhibit limited functional performances, while a few approaches claim that complex heterogeneous objects could be constructed for geometric complexities only. Complex heterogeneous objects with compound material variations, i.e., two-and three-dimensional material-distributions offer great flexibility for multi-fold applications. For example, objects subjected to multiple loading, i.e., tensile, bending and shear require multi-functional properties to counter these loads and get optimal results in all aspects. These multi-functional properties can only be achieved with two-or three-dimensional material-distributions. In nature also, objects with compound material-distributions exist, e.g., wood, human bone, rock. Multi-functional heterogeneous objects call for a systematic approach in modeling compound material variations. A few approaches demonstrate the possibility of modeling compound material-distributions, however most of these methods are rather ad hoc or case specific. Thus, modeling compound material-distributions still remains to be an open problem. Irregular material heterogeneity is another issue which seems to gain increasing importance in recent studies. However, this problem has not been so thoroughly addressed in the past and thus, deserves attention and research efforts. In its current state, modeling complex heterogeneous objects with compound and irregular heterogeneities is still a non-trivial task. Thus, development of a smooth and flexible HO model for compound and irregular material-distributions and its downward applications in design, analysis and manufacturing are a few residual issues that require more focus to realize complex multi-functional components.These challenges motivate us to seek better solutions for representing and modeling complex heterogeneous objects to offer compound and irregular material variations. Specifically, we hope to provide a uniform and generic methodology to represent complex geometry objects with compound material-distributions, so that two-dimensional (2D) or three-dimensional (3D) heterogeneities can be modeled. Employing our previous work  [23–25], gradient reference approach has been reformed and described using the concept of convolution surfaces (see Section  2). The equivalent material convolution surfaces are introduced using membership and material-potential functions. Section  3 focuses on modeling 1D associative and non-associative material-distribution in the object domain. Sections  4 and 5 ​illustrate the methodology of modeling compound material-distribution in two-and three-dimensions respectively. Section  6 discusses the system implementation of the proposed approach and presents a few examples of complex material-distribution for the validation of the work. Various problems and limitations of the proposed approach are discussed in Section  7. Finally, the paper is concluded in Section  8.The proposed approach is general and uniform if used to model heterogeneous objects and is more flexible to create a variety of heterogeneous objects in contrast to already presented methods [7,13,26,20,14,4]. For modeling any HO, this approach simply requires addressing the following aspects: heterogeneous enclosure, grading enclosure and material convolution surfaces.A number of representation schemes are available for defining the geometry of heterogeneous region in an object. Boundary-representation (B-Rep) has emerged as one of the most powerful and flexible representation schemes for geometric modeling of manifold models. With B-Rep, all objects can be represented by their boundaries. In this approach, surface, edges, vertices of solid objects are represented explicitly, and the topological information for geometrical relationship between these fundamental elements is epitomized in a data structure  [27]. Besides this, concepts such as Whitney stratification, cell complexes, semi-analytic and sub-analytic have been introduced for object representation which is equivalent to B-rep data structure of geometry alongside structure  [28,29]. Stratified objects can be constructed stepwise and manipulated through Euler operators  [30]. Gomes et al. proposed the operators for n-dimensional stratified sub-analytic objects with incomplete boundaries  [28]. Relationships between Whitney stratification, cell complexes, semi-analytic and sub-analytic are proposed in  [29,31,32]. With these advancements, boundary-representation has been extended to allow special, non-solid model types called non-manifold models. Different data structures in boundary-representation (Winged-Edge, Half-Edge, Radial-Edge, Feather, and Dual half-Edge) have been developed to represent the manifold and non-manifold objects. Complex shape volumes with incomplete boundaries can be easily represented using sub-analytic stratified boundary-representations. The above reasons motivated us to use sub-analytic stratified boundary-representations for defining heterogeneous enclosure in an object, see Fig. 1.Following the above strategy, an objectPis defined as a stratified sub-analytical sub-set ofR3that is compact and homogeneously three-dimensional, such thatP=H∪Aand sometimesP=A(Fig. 1), whereHandA​represent homogeneous and heterogeneous enclosure, respectively.A​identifies the bounded fraction of the object-volume with functional heterogeneity and is defined as a closed sub-set of points inP:A={x∈P|xinside the Object,A⊆P}and also includes boundary such asA=clo(A)whereAis a collection of disjoint sub-setsDirepresentingith material-distribution and designated asith grading interior∂Di, such that:A=⋃iDiand∀D1,D2∈Di,(D1≠D2)=>(D1∩D2=ϕ).Any material heterogeneityDican be directly modeled into heterogeneous enclosure having simple geometry. However, modeling and controlling a number of material-distributions together(D1,D2,…,Di), that too into a complex shape heterogeneous enclosure, is a tedious task. The proposed approach introduces gradient enclosure(M)to model such complex heterogeneities such thatM∩A≠ϕand sometimes,M∩A=A, (Fig. 2). The grading enclosureMioffers a virtual enclosure for modeling simple material-distribution. A fraction (or whole) of this simple distribution inMi, i.e.Dibelongs toAand may be identified as desired complex distribution inAwhich if modeled otherwise (as individual distribution independent of gradient enclosure), is hard to execute inA. Also, a number of gradient enclosures(M1,M2,…,Mi)may be virtually designed together to model desired material-distributions(D1,D2,…,Di), which when combined, results in a complex material-distribution(D1∪D2∪⋯∪Di)in the heterogeneous enclosureA. Any grading enclosureMiis defined as a collection of two sub-sets, i.e. grading interior(Di)and grading exterior(Bi), such that:Mi=(Bi∪Di),whereDi=Mi∩AandBi=Mi−(Mi∩A),such thatPoint setX⊆Mand should satisfy the condition:X={x∈(A∩M)|x∈Di}.Thus, modeling material heterogeneities in an object requires following strategy:•Heterogeneous and homogeneous enclosures are identified in the object.Grading enclosure is modeled for desired heterogeneity.Grading enclosure is mapped into heterogeneous enclosure.Functional heterogeneity in a grading enclosure is defined using the concept of convolution surfaces which are created by exact evaluation of field functions for a wide set of geometric primitives. The formulation of convolution surface depends upon geometric function, the shape of primitives and potential function as discussed by Xiaogang et al.  [33]. Similarly, the proposed approach introduces material convolution surfaces which are defined as a field function of material grading enclosure, type of convolution surface-based primitives and material potential function for HO modeling.The field functions provide the means to calculate value of material grading field at an arbitrary point ‘x’ chosen from a set of pointsXin spaceR3. Field function, i.e.,F(X)for a chosen primitive is obtained by the convolution of membership functionb(X)and material potential functionf(X)[33] and is defined as:(1)F(X)=b(X)∗f(X)=∫R3b(x)∗f(X−x)dx.Various functions and primitives associated with material convolution surfaces are discussed below.Similar to the implicit primitives  [33], basic ‘grading primitives’ or ‘convolution material primitives’ are proposed for creating convolution material surfaces identified as grading enclosures. Convolution material primitives are the basic building blocks for modeling heterogeneities in the region. The convolution material primitives are classified into four categories, i.e., Point primitive, Straight Line primitive, Spline primitive and Plane primitive, which are capable of modeling required material-distribution in the bounded region defined as grading enclosureA. Material modeling with convolution material primitives requires to complete following steps:•Appropriate convolution material primitive is selected for desired heterogeneity.The geometric description of the grading enclosure depends on the selected convolution primitive and is controlled with membership functionb(X); thus, the membership function for the selected primitive is defined.Material potential functionf(X)is defined to generate the material-distributions in the grading enclosure around the primitive.Grading enclosure, then, can be efficiently mapped into heterogeneous enclosure at the desired location.Point primitive: Point convolution material primitive offers spherical membership function(SP)for grading enclosure, as shown in Fig. 3(a). Radius of spherical enclosure defines the limits of membership function. The material potential function in this case is a function of sphere radius which controls the material distribution in the grading enclosure.Straight line primitive: Straight line convolution material primitive generates cylindrical convolution surfaces(SL), see Fig. 3(b). Length of the straight linel(s)and radius of the cylinderr(t)are the key parameters (wherea≤t≤bandc≤s≤d) for material potential function to establish the material gradient in radial direction, i.e.,SL={l(s),r(t)|t∈[a,b]ands∈[c,d]}.Spline primitive: Similar to straight-line primitive, spline primitive offers multi-curvature membership functions, i.e.,(SX)such thatSX→SLfor small length segments, see Fig. 3(c). Membership function for spline primitive can be defined using circle of radiusr(t)along a polynomialγ(s)inR3, i.e.,SX={γ(s),r(t)|t∈[a,b]ands∈[c,d]}. There are some simple cases, e.g., whenγ(s)is a straight line,SXis a surface of revolution and whenr(t)is constant andγ(s)is a circle,SXis a torus. Ifr(t)varies along a polynomialγ(s), resultant grading enclosure is special convolution surface.Plane primitive: Plane convolution material primitives generally generate 2.5D grading enclosure(SS)as illustrated in Fig. 3(d). The material composition in the object is controlled by manipulating distance between selected/created planes/surfaces, i.e.d(t). Plane convolution material primitive is defined as:Ss={d(t)|t∈[a,b]}.The material potential function or material distribution function is defined for the desired material-distribution of ‘m’ number of materials in the grading enclosure. Material potential function for the grading enclosure is defined by the scheme of material distribution between the end positions  [30,22]. Distance is used as a key parameter to define the composition of a point, thus, distance-based material potential functionf(X)is defined to vary the material composition across the grading enclosure. Volume fraction ofrth material(Vr)at a point ‘x’ can be defined as:(3)Vr=f(X)(Mer−Msr)+Msrfor0≤f(X)≤1where,MsrandMerare material composition ofrth material at the start and end positions in the defined material-distribution.A number of linear or non-linear functions can be used as material potential function, e.g., Gaussian, Cauchy, Square, Inverse, Polynomial. The material potential functions calculate the profile of material-distribution or the mode of grading field generated around/between the selected primitives in the grading enclosure. The effect of material potential function on material-distribution in the grading enclosure is shown in Fig. 4.One-dimensional (1D) material-distributions are modeled with convolution surface-based material primitives. The heterogeneous enclosureAis defined in the objectP. The grading enclosureMis defined with convolution field function at specific location in space(R3)to fulfill the desired functional requirement. Gradient enclosureMcan be modeled independently and later on shifted to desired location to achieve heterogeneous enclosureAin the objectP. A few examples are presented to demonstrate the material modeling with point, straight line, spline and plane convolution surface-based material primitives, as shown in Fig. 5.As discussed in Section  2, convolution material primitives, i.e., point, straight line, spline and plane are defined for material modeling in a HO. The material-distribution space around each primitive is bounded by a virtual enclosure known as field of influence or grading enclosure. In fact, each convolution material primitive is associated with respective grading enclosure and the resultant material-distribution adopts the standard geometry/shape of respective primitive. Thus, modeled material-distribution adopts the pre-determined and standard geometry/shape of grading enclosure and is independent of the geometry of actual heterogeneous enclosure in the object (Fig. 6(a)). However, in some cases, material-distribution is required to adopt the geometry of heterogeneous enclosure and thus, is associative with heterogeneous enclosure, as shown in Fig. 6(b).The material modeling for associative relations is a tedious problem as such material-distributions cannot be modeled with standard primitives. A contour sub-division algorithm is proposed in our previous work  [25] which is capable of modeling associative material-distributions using interpolation methods and distance-based material potential functions. Some examples of material modeling for associative relations are illustrated in Fig. 7.Two-dimensional material-distributions can also be achieved by combining two or more one-dimensional (1D) material-distributions. Contribution of each 1D material-distribution is defined by assigning weight through dominating factor. These factors control the material-distribution in 2D regions. Thus, material composition at any point in such a region depends upon the dominating factors and is defined through material compositions array. The material-distribution array[M(2,x,y)]at a point(x,y)for a combined two material-distributions is illustrated as:(4)[M(2,x,y)]=[α1D1+α2D2α1+α2]x,ywhere,D1andD2=Distribution of material-1 and material-2, respectively.α1andα2=Dominating factor associated with distributionD1andD2, respectively.In actual practice, there may be more than two distributions in the same region of a heterogeneous model. Therefore, the above equation, in general form, for a combined ‘s’ number of material-distributions, is described as:(5)[M(s,x,y)]=[∑t=1sαtDt∑t=1sαt]x,ywhere,Dt=tth Material-distribution (from ‘s’ number of material-distributions).αt=Dominating factor associated with distributionDt.The material-distribution array[M(s,x,y)]also provides volume fractions of ‘m’ number of materials used among ‘s’ number of material-distributions at a point(x,y)as illustrated in the following expression:(6)[M(s,x,y)]=[Mc(1,x,y),Mc(2,x,y),…,Mc(m,x,y)]swhere,(Mc(r,x,y))s=Material composition ofrth material at point(x,y)involving ‘s’ numbers of distributions and is defined as:(7)(Mc(r,x,y))s=(∑t=1sVrDt)x,ywhereVrDt=volume fraction ofrth material associated withDtth material-distribution.The sum of all material fractions has to be unity at each point in the region and is given as:(8)∑r=1mMc(r,x,y)=1where,Mc(r,x,y)=Material composition ofrth material at a point(x,y).An example is illustrated with the help of Fig. 8to demonstrate the implementation of Eq. (5). The material-distributionsD1,D2andD3with equal values of dominating factors, i.e.,α1=α2=α3=1/3(Fig. 8(a)–(c)) are combined to achieve the resultant distribution as shown in Fig. 8(d).Another example is illustrated in Fig. 9to explain the effect of changing the value of dominating factors on material-distribution in a given region. Two material-distributionsD1(horizontal) andD2(vertical) (Fig. 9(a) and (b) respectively) are combined for different values of dominating factors as shown in Fig. 9. The results for three different combinations of dominating factors, i.e.,(α1=0.8,α2=0.2),(α1=0.5,α2=0.5)and(α1=0.2,α2=0.8), are illustrated through Fig. 9(c)–(e), respectively.The values of dominating factors are chosen and assigned to respective material-distributions to evaluate resultant 2D material-distributions for a selected region. For such a case, these dominating factors would have constant values, which would result in simple material-distribution through constant contribution of each material-distribution in the specified heterogeneous region. On the other hand, the possibility of variation in the value of dominating factor for respective material-distribution across each point in the heterogeneous region would offer more flexibility to the designer to generate complex and irregular material-distributions. Thus, variable dominating factors result in more control over 2D material-distribution. As discussed in the previous sections, the material modeling in HO can be controlled by manipulating material-distribution functions, i.e.,f(x)as per the functional requirement. The material-distribution functions are defined with the help of linear or non-linear polynomials, and thus, offer great control over material distribution. Similarly, the values of dominating factors are controlled by 2D surface functions, i.e.,g(x,y)defined through polynomials with dimensional limitations of the selected heterogeneous region. Eq. (9) defines the value of each factor at a point for the corresponding distribution as:(9)(αs)x,y={gs(x,y)}x,ywhere,(αs)x,y=The value ofsth dominating factor, forsth material-distribution, at the location(x,y).gs(x,y)=Surface function forsth dominating factor across heterogeneous region.The concept of variable dominating factors is illustrated below. Two material-distributionsD1andD2, as shown in Fig. 10, are assigned variable dominating factorsα1andα2.The value ofα1andα2​varies across heterogeneous region as per the surface functions and is given as:(10)α1=g1(x,y)=x.e−x2−y2,For{(x,y):|x|≤2,|y|≤2}(11)α2=g2(x,y)=11+x2+y2,For{(x,y):|x|≤2,|y|≤2}.The variation of factors for these functions can be visualized using plots for the given limits (Fig. 11).The above distribution ofα1andα2is assigned to respective material-distributionsD1andD2, which are then combined to get resultant irregular material-distribution, as shown in Fig. 12.From Fig. 12, it is clear that the variation in dominating factors may provide the flexibility of generating compound and irregular material-distribution in a heterogeneous object, which may be hard to achieve by other methods. This flexibility makes the proposed approach generic and uniform in the development of complex HO. The material-distribution can be further controlled, manipulated and modified by changing the values of dominating factors at any point across the heterogeneous regions.Three-dimensional material-distributions are achieved by extending Eqs. (5)–(8) to find out material distribution array[M(s,x,y,z)], material composition(Mc(m,x,y,z))sat any pointP(x,y,z)in an object and are given as:(12)[M(s,x,y,z)]=[∑t=1sαtDt∑t=1sαt]x,y,zwhere,Dt=tth Material-distribution.αt=Dominating factor associated with distributionDt.The material distribution array[M(s,x,y,z)]provides the volume fractions of ‘m’ numbers of materials used among ‘s’ number of material-distributions and is illustrated as:(13)[M(s,x,y,z)]=[Mc(1,x,y,z),Mc(2,x,y,z),…,Mc(m,x,y,z)]swhere,(Mc(r,x,y,z))s=Material composition ofrth material at point(x,y,z)involving ‘s’ numbers of distributions and is defined as:(14)(Mc(r,x,y,z))s=(∑t=1sVrDt)x,y,zwhere,VrDt=volume fraction of rth material associated withDtth material-distribution. The sum of material fractions at every point in the region would be unity and expressed as:(15)∑r=1mMc(r,x,y,z)=1where,Mc(r,x,y,z)=Material composition ofrth material at a point(x,y,z).An example, shown in Fig. 13, describes the implementation of above equations for 3D material-distributions. The material-distributions in three directions, i.e.,D1,D2andD3are assigned equal values of dominating factors, i.e.,α1=α2=α3=1/3, see Fig. 13(a)–(c). The resultant three-dimensional material-distribution is shown with Fig. 13(d).Similar to two-dimensional compound and irregular material-distributions, compound and irregular three-dimensional material-distributions can also be achieved by varying the value of dominating factors for individual distributions. A few examples are presented in Section  6 to understand and demonstrate the developed model.Most of the researchers had proposed “add-in” extensions within commercial CAD systems for modeling heterogeneous objects  [3,9,16,12]. This addition admits only minor changes within an existing framework; however, the overall system structures cannot be changed. Despite many advantages, modeling heterogeneous objects with extension-based CAD systems also have some limitations. For example: most of these systems offer homogeneous object domains rather than meeting the requirement of multi-material heterogeneous distributions and the material information is attached to the solid model rather than being inherent and integrated with model  [7,3,4]. Besides, modeling of complex heterogeneous objects  [7,13,14,3], visualization of heterogeneous objects  [14] and compatibility with the host system seem to be the added challenges. Developing a stand-alone representation scheme can overcome these limitations. Thus, the proposed representation is developed to be a stand-alone methodology, which is independent of any solid modeling application. The proposed schema can also be used for process planning tasks for rapid manufacturing of HO as discussed in  [22]. The proposed approach has been successfully implemented and accomplished through some software tools: ACIS kernel, C++, material libraries, Open Graphics Language (OpenGL) and necessary hardware peripherals: 2.5 GHz with Intel core i5-4200M processor, 4 GB RAM and 750 GB HDD and Intel HD 4600 graphics for modeling heterogeneous objects.Complex-object modeling has the capability to fulfill the designer’s intent to model a variety of multi-functional objects. The complex heterogeneous objects can be generally classified into three types: (i) objects with complex geometries and simple 1D material-distributions; (ii) objects with compound (2D or 3D) material-distributions, but simple/regular geometries; and (iii) objects with complex geometries as well as complex and irregular material-distributions. In comparison with other representations  [7,13,28,3,12], the proposed approach is capable of modeling complex heterogeneous objects with complex geometry or/and compound and irregular material-distributions. A few examples of modeling complex heterogeneous objects are demonstrated to show the validity of the proposed approach.Fig. 14shows multi-material distribution near cuts, holes and slots in a mechanical component.Five numbers of distributions are involved to improve functionality of the component. Respective materials enclosures, i.e.,M1toM5are indicated with dotted entities are shown in Fig. 14. Material enclosuresM1,M3,M4andM5are modeled using point convolution material primitives (CMP). The material distribution around the slot(M2)is modeled using contour sub-division algorithm (CSDA). Various parameters for the above case are given in Table 1.A stepped pulley with internal material variation is illustrated in Fig. 15. The cut section of stepped pulley is shown in Fig. 15(a). The material is required to be distributed around the pulley, offset from inner and outer surface, which is achieved by segregating the distribution in two phases, i.e., radial and linear.Fig. 15(b) identifies the cylindrical shells involving radial (M1,M2,M3andM4) and linear (M5,M6andM7) material-distributions. Each shell is assigned the selected distribution. These distributions are combined to get entire distribution as shown in Fig. 15(c). Finally, 3D view of stepped pulley with required material-distribution is shown in Fig. 15(d). The parameters to model all distributions are illustrated in Table 2.An example of 3D material-distribution in a cylindrical shell is shown in Fig. 16. Material-distributions in three directions, i.e., radial, linear and angular are combined to get complex 3D distribution in cylindrical shell.Fig. 16(a) illustrates the radial material-distribution while Fig. 16(b) demonstrates the linear distribution in the cylindrical shell. Third distribution in angular direction along the axis is shown in Fig. 16(c). 3D view of heterogeneous cylinder shell is presented in Fig. 16(d). The parameters to model three-dimensional distribution are illustrated in Table 3.Crane hooks are used to lift the heavy load at constructional sites and industries. Hook failure may occur due to overloading or cumulative fatigue. Various portions of hook are subjected to continuous loading and un-loading which causes fatigue failure. The finite element analysis of crane hook shows that stress concentration rises at inner surface of the throat  [34]. Thus, a compound material-distribution is modeled using two materials: fiber-reinforced composite near inner surface and shank and high carbon steel at outer surface, see Fig. 17. Various material-distribution parameters for crane hook are defined in Table 4.Two more examples of complex heterogeneous object modeling, i.e., flywheel and surface plate are illustrated in Fig. 18. The main function of a flywheel is to smoothen out variations in the speed of a shaft caused by torque fluctuations. Flywheel being a rotating disc, centrifugal stresses act upon its distributed mass and attempt to pull it apart. Flywheel subjects to tensile stress in the spokes and hoop and radial stresses in the rim. Heterogeneous model of flywheel is illustrated in Fig. 18(a) with material variations in spokes and rim.A surface plate is a solid flat plate used as the horizontal reference plane for precision inspection, marking (layout), and tooling setup. Different cast iron grades are a few of the standard materials used for fabricating surface plates, however, glass and ceramics also appeared as alternative materials. Cast iron has been stable over time and provides a better bearing surface to assist the creation of other master standards. Glass can be suitably grounded and has the benefit that it chips rather than raising a burr, which is a problem when using cast iron. Ceramic also has its own advantages and offers high quality of flatness for surface plates used in high temperature zones. In this work, an effort is made to capture the advantages/strengths of all these materials on the surface of a single plate. A surface plate with multi-material distributions, i.e., cast iron (fine and coarse), glass and ceramics along longitudinal and transverse directions is modeled, as shown in Fig. 18(b). The materials are distributed in the object at different locations. Interfacial boundaries between the materials have been removed. With this, a single multi-material surface plate can be used for different applications as per the requirement.Although, the proposed approach is more generic and uniform to model simple and complex HO, it has certain issues and limitations to deal with. Modeling system, at times, does not return consistent material compositions for complex material-distributions (due to computational noise), when retrieved frequently. High data redundancies result in unnecessary memory overheads and computation errors which make the object model error-prone to geometric and material modeling operations. The modeling system faces conflicts between material and geometry visualization near boundaries, specially, in case of spline primitives. Current schema is validated only for modeling of HO but its utility for physical realization of real time heterogeneous objects through rapid manufacturing set-ups is still pending, due to current limitations of fabrication. Besides, there is a loss of data and error that arises with data conversions and communications for downstream applications in rapid manufacturing. The approach has the limitation to model complex HOs which are independent of time. Time dependent material modeling needs to be explored further.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This work evolves a convolution surface-based material modeling approach to model material gradations through basic geometric entities in heterogeneous objects. Some of the major contributions of this work are•a convolution surface-based material modeling approach for modeling multi-functional complex heterogeneous objects. Material convolution surface-based approach is based on sub-analytic stratified boundary-representation;introduction of convolution material primitives, membership functions and material potential functions to model a range of one-dimensional material-distributions in objects having complex geometry. The approach shows its uniqueness by successfully organizing shape depending material variations between convolution material primitives and heterogeneous enclosures, like associative/non-associative material-distributions.a novel and generic method to model compound and irregular material-distributions in two-and three-dimensions, which are formulated and outlined for modeling complex and irregular heterogeneous entities.successful implementation of the proposed approach demonstrated through a few examples of complex heterogeneous object modeling.