@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Practical use of medical terminology in curriculum mapping

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We review the existing and widely-accepted medical terminologies and coding systems.We design and implement a web-based system for medical curriculum management.A practical use of the MeSH thesaurus in a curriculum mapping application is showed.Two data-analytical reports based on the MeSH thesaurus are described in detail.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Medical informatics,Medical coding,MeSH,Medical education,Curriculum management,Visual analytics,Association analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Medical coding and classification systems are used in a variety of applications in medicine, public health, education and medical informatics, including their use in statistical analyses, data mining, and expert and decision support systems or knowledge engineering. Creation and maintenance of the coding systems, nomenclatures and standardized vocabularies involves the processes of transforming descriptions of diagnoses and procedures into a universal medical standardized scheme [1]. When talking about standardization, it is necessary to mention also ontologies, which formalize the meaning of terms used in practice, expected to play a major role in the automated integration of medical data with relevant information to support basic discovery and clinical research, drug formulation, and drug evaluation through clinical trials [2]. If we want information systems in health care to process data automatically, to sort them and produce correct statistics and if the principal data should be understood globally, it is necessary to use international coding systems and nomenclatures in the process of data acquisition [3]. From the perspective of medical informatics, the topic covering the broad use and global acceptance of medical coding standards still involves two main unresolved challenges: (i) the number of coding standards developed for medicine and health care is high, whereas their widespread adoption has been rather slow; (ii) the developed standards and vocabularies vary in their coverage, often being contradictory and competing. The basic principles of medical informatics and discussions on medical coding can be found in books and guides, such as [4] or [5]. One working group inside the European Federation for Medical Informatics (EFMI) is focusing on codes, classifications, terminologies and nomenclatures in their overview article [6]. They provide definitions and history of the International Classification of Primary Care (ICPC), and of the Read code and the Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine Clinical Terms (SNOMED CT). The review [7] analyses the use of SNOMED CT over time from 1966 until June 2006. A more recent review [8] then reports on the increasing use of SNOMED CT in literature, showing that the adoption of the nomenclature needs additional efforts toward harmonization with other standardized terminologies.Medical education is an active area of education research, the importance and value of which has been demonstrated by Harden [9,10] and later by Wartman [11] already in the late eighties and the early nineties of the previous century. Medical curriculum development, mapping and harmonization are the natural components of medical education, regardless of whether the underlying model is systems-based [12], outcome-based [13] or different (competency-based, socially accountable, distributed, etc.). Increasing variety in the form and resulting proficiency of different curriculum models has recently prompted the medical education community to introduce curriculum mapping guides [14] and interoperability standards [15]. The MedBiquitous Curriculum Inventory Standard [16], approved by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), provides the technical syntax through which a wide range of different curricula can be expressed and subsequently analysed.While there are a plethora of references, surveys and books on medical coding and classification for healthcare informatics applications, much less can be found on standardized vocabularies employed in medical education. The existing cataloguing schemas and thesauri relating, at least partly, to medical education are reviewed in [17] by the Medical Education Taxonomy Research Organization (METRO). Following the results of their research among stakeholders, METRO uses two existing thesauri: (i) the Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) thesaurus, being generic for medicine, and the British Education Thesaurus (BET), being generic for education. The thesaurus of descriptors for topics in medical education resulting from METRO׳s efforts is not available today, but their set of descriptors for assessment in medical education [18] using as much as possible from the MeSH and BET thesauri is still a living project with results available on-line. The need for identifying a suitable ontology or taxonomy for annotating the content of medical educational resources is emphasized in the systematic review [19], and especially from the perspective of sematic interoperability of information systems used in medical education and the potential of the semantic web (Web 3.0) to support medical curriculum mapping. The review provides a tabular overview of all existing standardized vocabularies, including their features, such as language, scope and the underlying structure, dividing them according to their context into biomedical, educational and administrative. Education resources shared through social media platforms such as YouTube have undergone exponential growth in recent years. Annotating education videos from YouTube and enriching them with other resources through Linked Data approach [20,21] is the main focus of research presented in [22]. SNOMED CT nomenclature is used to bridge YouTube tagging data and the metadata of enriching education resources. The resulting web-based architecture includes also the application interface (API) of BioPortal providing services from the National Center for Biomedical Ontology [23].In this research, we focus on exploiting the well-known polyhierarchical MeSH thesaurus while helping the medical curriculum designers and innovators to navigate through multidimensional and extensive datasets embedded in the curriculum mapping systems. We are building on our previous experience with various nomenclatures and standards used in the development of the education web portal platform [24] and its extensions [25] adopted by all medical faculties in the Czech Republic and Slovakia under the umbrella of the MEFANET network [26]. In terms of methods and tools for curriculum mapping and reengineering, we are using our original web-based OPTIMED platform [27] and the recently adopted visual analytics tools [28–30] with the aim to develop new insights into curricular datasets and to demonstrate that the use of standardized thesaurus can facilitate curriculum reengineering processes as well as inter-institutional curriculum comparisons. In short, this paper shows an innovative way how to easily identify all essential components of a medical curriculum by adopting the MeSH biomedical nomenclature.The remainder of this paper is as follows. In the methods section, detailed information is provided regarding: (i) existing and widely-accepted medical terminologies; (ii) our implementation of a web-based system for medical curriculum management; (iii) background and statistical methodology used to develop analytical reports over curricular datasets. In the following section, two data-analytical reports are shown, depicting the results obtained from frequency and association analyses of the particular medical curriculum while employing the MeSH thesaurus. The importance of these achievements together with their current limitations and future prospects are discussed and concluded in the final sections.The main contribution of this paper lies in the use of a standardized medical thesaurus in the analyses of a dataset extracted from a curriculum mapping system. We believe that our approach can be generalized, although we present results obtained from data stored in a particular curriculum mapping system, OPTIMED, and a specific thesaurus, MeSH. The selection of this specific thesaurus is the result of our scoping review carried out according to the principles laid out in the framework for scoping studies by Arksey and O’Malley [31] and recently extended and clarified elsewhere [32,33].In this subsection, we refer to the summary overview relating to the up-to-date use of various specialized terminologies in information sciences and education. Our close attention is primarily focused on medically oriented fields where these taxonomies promote an efficient way of organizing and understanding data. It is clear that specialized vocabularies matter, not only in the traditional library and information sciences world and but also for many different digital information stakeholders [21]. For instance, the use of the vocabulary of a particular domain is an important initial step in creating formalized knowledge representations as an essential part of the education process. These vocabularies follow the ratchet principle: it moves from basic understanding to thorough understanding, from simple to complex education [34]. When a virtual learning environment (VLE) turns to the task of consolidated education data collection (for instance content management, curriculum mapping and planning, student engagement and administration, communication and collaboration domain), these vocabularies will present considerable challenges to standardizing medical education. A prerequisite to more comprehensive categorization of the education content is the implementation of standardized terminology directly in the VLE systems. One of the primary aims is to overcome two significant barriers to effective retrieval of machine-readable and processable information: (i) the variety of names used to express the same concept, (ii) the absence of a standard format for distributing terminologies [35]. The purpose of medical vocabularies is to embody what has been known in the past about every phase of medicine [36]. These vocabularies continue to increase and grow, not only in its technological aspects, but also from the perspective of medical education quality, which is logically reflected at the global level of health care. Below, the most widespread, suitable and commonly used standardized methodologies are introduced.Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) brings together many health and biomedical vocabularies, ontologies and standards to enable interoperability between computer systems. It was developed by the National Library of Medicine and covers the entire terminology domain by integrating more than 60 families of biomedical vocabularies. The three major components of UMLS are the Metathesaurus (repository of inter-related biomedical concepts covering extensive list of terms and codes from various vocabularies), the Semantic network (high-level categorization of Metathesaurus concepts) and the Specialist Lexicon (generating the lexical variants of biomedical terms) [37–39]. For illustration,Fig. 1 shows UMLS Metathesaurus integrated sub‐domains.Although geared specifically for information retrieval, MeSH can almost be seen as a general purpose vocabulary with concepts from all segments of the biomedical domain. This classification is a rich and controlled vocabulary generated through an intense indexing process performed by examiners. Terms (namely descriptors) are assigned to documents to delineate their content at 16 different branches of specificity. The 2014 MeSH vocabulary is specifically composed by more than 27 thousand descriptors, which are organized in a tree-like structure. Descriptors may be also complemented by one or more qualifiers. These terms further contextualize the meaning of the descriptors to which they are assigned in relation to the content of the considered document. The MeSH vocabulary is often used to delineate samples of documents in a number of medical areas and, as discussed, at various levels of specificity [40–42].International Classification of Diseases (ICD) is used to classify and code mortality information worldwide. The tenth revision (ICD-10) is more complex than the previous one (ICD-9). Specifically, ICD-10 contains more codes as well as re-structured chapters and changes in rules for coding. ICD-10 as a whole is designed to be the core classification for a family of disease- and health-related classifications. Some members of the family of classifications are derived by using a fifth or even sixth character to specify more detail. In others, the categories are condensed to render the broad groups suitable for use, for instance, in primary health care or in general medical practice [43,44].SNOMED CT as a coding system for clinical problems was created by the merger, expansion and restructuring of two large-scale terminologies: SNOMED RT (Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine Reference Terminology) and CTV3 (Clinical Terms Version 3). Since it contains more than 380 thousand concepts, with a total of about 800 thousand descriptions or terms, the practical use of SNOMED will demand new types of tools to search and navigate intuitively in the term “collection”. It is probably the most comprehensive clinical healthcare terminology in the world because it systematically supports the development of comprehensive high-quality clinical content for health records and provides a standardized way of representing clinical phrases captured by the clinician, enabling automatic interpretation. SNOMED CT is a clinically validated, semantically rich, controlled vocabulary that facilitates evolutionary growth in expressivity to meet the emerging requirements [45,46].Emtree is a hierarchically structured and controlled terminology for biomedicine and related life sciences, developed by Elsevier as a biomedical and pharmacological online database. It includes a whole range of terms for drugs, diseases, medical devices and essential life sciences concepts. Emtree thesaurus contains about 48 thousand preferred terms and 200 thousand synonyms in 15 main domains of drugs and diseases, organized in a multilevel hierarchy. All terms, strictly synonymous, are organized in a concept-based structure [47–49].RadLex [50] is a standardized vocabulary of radiological terms, which includes highly detailed terms for anatomy, pathology, and radiological observations. It already contains over 8000 anatomic and pathology terms, many of which are not currently available in other controlled medical terminology systems. Generally, RadLex was designed to fill the gaps in other medical terminology systems, thereby creating a single source for medical imaging terminology. Another key distinguishing feature of RadLex is that it is designed to be continuously supplemented and updated with the incorporation of new concepts, including harmonization with other popular medical vocabularies and term sets. The goal of this method is to establish a uniform, consistent terminology to improve communication of results and to better integrate clinical practice with education and scientific literature [51].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, the global summary of specialized medical terminologies, nomenclatures, coding and classification systems was introduced. We identified the significant problem of selecting and integrating proper vocabulary for computer-processable description in compliance with particular requirements. Based on the scoping review, we adopted the MeSH biomedical dictionary, where the main objective was to classify learning activities appearing in the medical curriculum of General Medicine. Thus, we have integrated MeSH into our original web-based system for innovating and harmonizing the medical curriculum. Currently, this system provides search assistance through a rich set of lexical look-up facilities, which are based on MeSH׳s complex structure including terms with tree structured contexts. Moreover, two data-analytical reports depicting the results obtained from frequency and association analyses of the particular medical curriculum while employing the MeSH thesaurus are described. They represent the aggregated tabular and graphic outputs including interactive visualizations, which play an essential role during evaluation of the whole curriculum. The main aim is to identify information rich data relations and offer clear and transparent overview for simpler and easier understanding of the curriculum structure. We believe that our approach can be easily generalized and used by any higher education institution without any methodological or technological restrictions.None.