@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A new algorithm and problems in automatic anterior eye chamber volume determining

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We showed the problem of automatic determination of the anterior eye chamber volume.60,000 images were obtained using OCT SS-1000 CASIA and Zeiss Visante OCT.The proposed algorithm gave the anterior chamber surface measurement error at the level of 4.3%.The proposed algorithm enables to obtain reproducible results fully automatically.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Anterior eye chamber,Image processing,Measurement automation,Segmentation,Volume,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study investigates the problem of automatic determination of the anterior eye chamber volume using previously published as well as new algorithms of image analysis and processing proposed by the authors. A new method for determining the anterior eye chamber volume that provides more accurate results has been proposed. The entire algorithm was implemented in Matlab and C language. 60,000 images were obtained using OCT SS-1000 CASIA and Zeiss Visante OCT. The acquired images of the anterior segment of the eye had a resolution of 256×1024 pixels with a measuring range of 8×16mm2. The images were acquired during routine medical examination at the Clinical Department of Ophthalmology, District Railway Hospital in Katowice, Poland, and were analysed in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. The new algorithm uses edge detection, morphological operations, binarization and filtration. The proposed algorithm gave the anterior chamber surface measurement error at the level of 4.3% and the anterior chamber volume measurement error of 12%. For comparison, the surface measurement error of the tomograph software was at 6.7%. Thus the obtained results were better by 2.4%. The proposed algorithm provides reproducible results automatically at a runtime of 3s per patient using a Core i7 PC computer with 8GB of RAM.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Measurements of anterior eye segment parameters are essential in diagnosis and selection of treatment methods for a variety of ocular diseases including glaucoma, corneal pathologies and cataracts. Several imaging techniques have been used for anterior chamber depth (ACD) assessment: Scheimflug camera [1,2], scanning-slit topography [3,4], ultrasonic immersion instruments [5,6] and optical coherence tomography [7,8].Optical coherence tomography (OCT) is a high-speed, high-resolution, non-contact optical imaging technique developed for noninvasive cross-sectional imaging in biologic systems. The technique was first introduced in 1991 [9] and became commercially available in 1995. Time-Domain OCT technology has longitudinal resolution of 18μm and transverse resolution of 60μm. It provides scans at a rate of up to 2048 A-scans per second. TD-OCT uses 820nm wavelength for retinal imaging and 1310nm wavelength for anterior eye segment examination. It enables precise morphometric evaluation and has good, proven repeatability and reproducibility [10–12]. Fourier-Domain Optical Coherence technology introduced in 2002 scans at 26,000 A-scans per second and provides detailed cross-sectional images of biological structures with axial resolution of 5.0μm and transverse resolution of 15μm [13,14]. Since 2003, there has been a 3-dimentional Fourier domain, anterior eye segment OCT based on available swept-source technology (SS-OCT) [15,16]. The measurement speed of commercial SS-OCT is 30,000 A-scans per second, it has high robustness against sample motion and is capable of obtaining full 3D images of ocular tissues [16].OCT has been increasingly used to diagnose and monitor a variety of retinal and anterior chamber diseases [17,18]. It provides images of anterior segment structures, including the cornea, iris, angle and lens. Corneal thickness measurement and anterior segment morphology assessment obtained with OCT play an essential role in keratorefractive procedures [19], Goldmann applanation tonometry measurements [20,21], glaucoma surgery and corneal transplantation procedures [22,23].Methods for measuring anterior eye chamber parameters involve primarily measurements of its width and depth on one of B-scans of a tomographic image [24]. The width calculation is based on designation of the apex positions of the iridocorneal angles (Fig. 1). The length of the line connecting the apices AR1 and AR2 is the anterior chamber width. The perpendicular drawn in its centre is used for measuring the anterior chamber depth (ACD). ACD is the distance from the corneal endothelium to the lens anterior surface. In addition, a tomograph sets parameters such as central corneal thickness (CCT) and others [25]. Fig. 1(b) shows the Region Of Interest (ROI) designated by a tomograph, which is the anterior chamber surface. At present, these parameters are calculated in tomographs fully automatically [26]. It is also possible to correct them manually or, in extreme cases, characteristic points, e.g. AR1 and AR2, can be designated manually. Depending on the tomograph type, it is possible to improve calculation accuracy by increasing the number of B-scans required for 3D reconstruction of the anterior chamber. 3D reconstruction of the anterior chamber is completed with B-scans arranged in the shape of a star [27] with respect to the main axis of symmetry of the eye.The presented known methods and the parameters such as depth, width, or the anterior chamber surface [28] obtained on their basis are not free of errors. The main problems are a limited number of B-scans (usually one) and inaccurate representation of the iris contour [29]. Examples are patients who have the lens and the iris disposed above or below the lines AR1 and AR2 (drawn between the apices of the iridocorneal angle). In these cases, shown inFig. 2, there are problems with overestimation or underestimation of the volume (estimated based on the width and depth) [30]. Determination of the lens position or the correct iris contour constitutes a similar problem (Fig. 1b, Fig. 2). Adaptation of the algorithm to the large interindividual variability in patients or race, e.g. the difference between Caucasians and Asians, is also significant [31].As far as image analysis and processing are concerned, all kinds of such methods which enable to determine contours play the key role in the anterior chamber volume analysis. These are usually the inner and outer contours of the cornea, iris, sclera and lens. Typical methods are based on the well-known edge detectors such as Sobel, Prewitt and Canny filters. However, these methods cannot cope with large interindividual variability. Also shadows and uneven brightness that occur in OCT images constitute a problem. The known methods of image analysis and processing must be profiled or new methods dedicated to solving this type of problems must be proposed [27]. These methods, however, involve significant zooming of the lens or corneal contour and, as a result, they introduce a statistically significant measurement error. Zooming methods are usually based on polynomial approximation using anthropometric data of the eye. Thus, the effect of shadows in OCT images is offset to a limited extent but, at the same time, it leads to a significant generalization of the detected contour. Depending on the extent of pathology and interindividual variability, smoothing the shape of the contour causes significant errors in detecting the anterior chamber volume or its surface on one of B-scans.Therefore, there is a need to propose new, more accurate methods for image analysis and to show the impact of the measurement methods used in tomographs on the results obtained. The proposed new algorithm for image analysis and processing provides reproducible results, regardless of the race of the test subjects, the extent of pathology or type of the OCT device. It is discussed in detail in the next section.60,000 images were obtained using OCT SS-1000 CASIA and Zeiss Visante OCT. The acquired images of the anterior segment of the eye had a resolution of 256×1024 pixels with a measuring range of 8×16mm2, which gave 0.0313×0.0156mm2/pixel. The images were acquired during routine medical examination at the Clinical Department of Ophthalmology, District Railway Hospital in Katowice, Poland, and were analysed in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. The subjects were all Europeans from the Caucasian ethnic group. There were 356 subjects, including 234 patients, aged 16–88. All the images were saved anonymously. They were all analysed, each B-scan, for all groups of patients: healthy subjects and patients including those with corneal transplants and other ophthalmic diseases.To evaluate the method error, 100 images (from 50 healthy subjects and 50 patients) were separated from the group of 60,000 images for which a specialist doctor manually marked the anterior chamber contour. The acquired information was stored in a vector containing the coordinates of the rows and columns of individual points.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
