@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Spike sorting paradigm for classification of multi-channel recorded fasciculation potentials

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Distribution of ‘amplitude’ and ‘area’ can be used to discriminate waveforms recorded by HDsEMG.Interactive modification module increases the accuracy of classification and is efficient time-wise.The spike sorting output, tested by two-source method, is reproducible.In each subject, only 1–2 classes were continuingly firing, albeit numerous classes had been derived.The final result of this program will further be subject to many other research studies.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis,Fasciculation potential,Feature extraction,Principal component analysis,Unsupervised clustering,Supervised classification,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundFasciculation potentials (FPs) are important in supporting the electrodiagnosis of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS). If classified by shape, FPs can also be very informative for laboratory-based neurophysiological investigations of the motor units.MethodsThis study describes a Matlab program for classification of FPs recorded by multi-channel surface electromyogram (EMG) electrodes. The program applies Principal Component Analysis on a set of features recorded from all channels. Then, it registers unsupervised and supervised classification algorithms to sort the FP samples. Qualitative and quantitative evaluation of the results is provided for the operator to assess the outcome. The algorithm facilitates manual interactive modification of the results. Classification accuracy can be improved progressively until the user is satisfied. The program makes no assumptions regarding the occurrence times of the action potentials, in keeping with the rather sporadic and irregular nature of FP firings.ResultsTen sets of experimental data recorded from subjects with ALS using a 20-channel surface electrode array were tested. A total of 11891 FPs were detected and classified into a total of 235 prototype template waveforms. Evaluation and correction of classification outcome of such a dataset with over 6000 FPs can be achieved within 1–2 days. Facilitated interactive evaluation and modification could expedite the process of gaining accurate final results.ConclusionThe developed Matlab program is an efficient toolbox for classification of FPs.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive, degenerative disorder that affects both upper and lower motor neurons. There is currently no unique marker to diagnose ALS. The crucial factor in establishing the diagnosis of ALS is to observe the clinical progression of motor neuron loss, beginning from the region(s) of onset, and then as it spreads to muscles in other regions in the body [4]. Active denervation is reflected by abnormal spontaneous activity in the affected muscle, including fasciculation potentials (FPs), generated from single or multiple motor units (MUs). FPs are detectable by conventional clinical electromyography (EMG). While not necessarily an indicator of denervation, frequent occurrence of FPs in association with changes in motor unit potentials (reflecting MU reinnervation) has been recognized as important supportive evidence for the electrodiagnosis of ALS [4–5].Needle electrodes are used to detect spontaneous muscle activity in routine clinical EMG studies. Conventional surface electrodes are historically limited by their non-selective measurement of the electrical activity of a muscle that may be attenuated by the large electrode size. In the last decade, High Density surface EMG (HDsEMG) electrode arrays have been developed [33]. This technique has attracted much attention in laboratory-based investigations including examination of FPs, [8,17,20,21]. A HDsEMG electrode contains an array of small recording surfaces spaced closely to one another. The muscle’s electrical activity can then be simultaneously recorded by a number of channels. This multi-channel electrode array enhances temporal resolution and adds spatial information and selectivity that conventional surface electrodes lack. A thorough review of surface electrode array EMG analysis and its advantages compared with concentric needle EMG has been described by Farina et al. [10]. Zhou et al. recently demonstrated that a HDsEMG array can be more sensitive than a needle electrode in capturing FPs from the superficial muscles in ALS patients [38].Although different FPs, regardless of waveform or motor unit origin, would have the same clinical diagnostic significance, it would be helpful to further classify the FPs for laboratory-based investigations. Results of FP classification can be further analyzed to characterize the firing pattern and action potential waveforms of fasciculating MUs. Potential applications may include (but are not limited to) indirect discovery of their site of origin and distinguishing between FPs that are encountered in the normal population and those associated with pathological processes such as ALS [11,28]. These pieces of information can be obtained through classification of FPs into groups of similar waveform shapes. The task of FP classification is somewhat similar to the task of EMG decomposition, which is the process of breaking down an epoch of voluntary EMG signal to derive its constituent single MU potential firings. In the past several decades, much effort has been focused on EMG decomposition, but using traditional intramuscular needle electrodes. The concept and methods of decomposition in clinical EMG have been reviewed by Stashuk [32]. In recent years, there have been numerous studies on EMG decomposition using surface electrodes [2,3,7,12–16,22,24,26,27,29,37,39]. However, available EMG decomposition software, such as Spike2 (Cambridge Electronic Design Limited, Cambridge, England) or EMGLab [25] is not applicable to FP classification, due to different characteristics of spontaneously fired spikes compared with voluntarily firing MUs.In light of these limitations, the objective of this study is to design a spike sorting program specific to the unique features of FPs. Some routines derived originally from EMG decomposition are adopted for FP classification. However, our classification strategy does not rely on MU firing rate information because of the sporadic character of FPs. In this program, robust unsupervised and supervised classification techniques are combined with facilitated interactive decision making modules. Throughout this process, automatically classified FPs are evaluated in several steps. Erroneous assignments are corrected interactively. Consistency of waveforms in each class is visually examined. In addition to qualitative evaluation, quantitative within-class distance and between-class distances are also examined for the sake of class accuracy estimation. Moreover, performance of the classification is examined using the concept of “two-source” method by applying independently to two non-overlapping sets of channels derived from an array recording. The classification program is tested with FP data sets of ALS patients. Both advantages and limitations of the program are discussed.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
