@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An efficient human model customization method based on orthogonal-view monocular photos

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We report a new precise human model customization method using customer’s photos.We propose a comprehensive human body geometrical shape representation.We learn a novel relationship model between human body’s 2D size and 3D shape.We develop a new deformation algorithm that minimizes distortion in human modeling.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Human body modeling,Model customization,Image-based model reconstruction,Data-driven modeling,Geometric mesh deformation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Human body modeling is a central task in computer graphics. In this paper, we propose an intelligent model customization method, in which customer’s detailed geometric characteristics can be reconstructed using limited size features extracted from the customer’s orthogonal-view photos. To realize model customization, we first propose a comprehensive shape representation to describe the geometrical shape characteristics of a human body. The shape representation has a layered structure and corresponds to important feature curves that define clothing size. Next, we identify and model a novel relationship model between 2D size features and 3D shape features for each cross-section using real subject scanned data. We predict a customer’s cross-sectional 3D shape based on size features extracted from the customer’s photos, and then we reconstruct the customer’s shape representation using predicted cross-sections. We develop a new deformation algorithm that deforms a template model into a customized shape using the reconstructed 3D shape representation. A total of 30 subjects, male and female, with varied body shapes have been recruited to verify the model customization method. The customized models show high degree of resemblance of the subjects, with accurate body sizes; the accuracy of the models is comparable to scan. It shows that the method is a feasible and efficient solution for human model customization that fulfills the specific needs of the clothing industry.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Three-dimensional human body modeling is an active research topic in different disciplines. Accurate representation of humans is necessary for human factors/ergonomics research. In computer graphics, it is often necessary to accurately capture and represent a human subject in various motions for entertainment (game and movie animation) applications.In the clothing discipline, 3D human body modeling is also an integral part of computer-aided clothing design. Following the pioneering work of Prof. Magnenat-Thalmann of MIRA Lab  [1], clothing simulation and pattern computer-aided designs (CAD) have received much attention from the computer graphics and clothing technology communities  [2–7]. The research follows either a 2D-to-3D or a 3D-to-2D approach  [8]. In the 2D-to-3D approach, digital 2D garment patterns are first prepared. Later, the digital 2D patterns are virtually stitched around a 3D human model and simulated for fit evaluation in 3D space  [9]. Another approach is 3D-to-2D pattern flattening. 3D garments are first created on the basis of a dummy (i.e. a digital human model) in a virtual environment, and the garment surfaces are then flattened to obtain the 2D patterns  [4,10]. In both 2D-to-3D and 3D-to-2D clothing CAD applications, it is essential to have an accurate human body model, onto which the garments are dressed or on top of which they are designed (see Fig. 1).In traditional clothing design, standard mannequins are used, which are developed based on some standard size charts, thus the produced garments would fit customers with the ideal ‘average’ figure. Nevertheless, not all people have an ideal figure and indeed most people do not. With the help of advanced digital technology, customized clothing design is becoming more feasible than before. For customized clothing design, it is necessary to have a model that represents the individual customer’s body shape and dimensions. Moreover, customized human models are also required for fit evaluation in online shopping of clothes.Customized human models can be obtained from scan. Whole-body scanning was introduced to the clothing industry in the late 1980s; scanner systems can be light-based, laser-based, or microwave-based  [11]. Since the last decade, anthropometric sizing surveys have been carried out around the world using body scanners  [12,11]. Brands and retailers have made use of body scanning technology in mass customization and online virtual fitting applications. However, scan-based modeling has a number of drawbacks. First, body scanners are often costly and bulky, and only large retailers and brands can afford to have scanners installed at their stores. Second, customers must go to a specific spot to have their bodies scanned, thus body scanners are not accessible to most people. Third, for most scanners, people must be scanned with specific clothing or with underwear only; privacy concerns and inconvenience may hinder customers’ willingness to be scanned. Fourth, the quality of the output data is also a doubt because the scanned models always have incomplete surface information. Fifth, the measurements extracted from different scanners vary  [13]. It is because the extraction of body measurements from scanned models depends on the precise location of body landmarks. However, there is no international standard available so far for landmark identification and measurement extraction from 3D scans  [11]. These limitations per se restrict the application of scan-based technology for human model customization and virtual fitting.A variety of methods without relying on scan are available in the literature of computer graphics for creating 3D virtual humans; these techniques can be classified into creative methods and reconstructive methods. Artist-designed modeling and anatomical modeling are typical creative methods. Artist-designed modeling, also known as character modeling, starts from modeling the surface geometry of the character by subdivision surfaces, NURBS or constructive solid geometry  [14]. Next, the model is fitted with a skeleton to allow easy editing of poses and movements. Anatomical modeling is developed based on physics-based human anatomy simulation technology. By modeling the detailed musculoskeletal structure of the body with major bones, muscles, and other interior structures, the models simulate how the deformation of the underlying structures (bones, muscles, and tendons) induces deformation of the skin. Artist-designed modeling is primarily used for movies and games animation; anatomical models are mainly applied in biomechanics, human factors/ergonomics, and biomedical engineering studies. Artist-designed models are good for the astonishing animation effects whereas accuracy may have to tradeoff for speed. Anatomical models are capable of realistically simulating the dynamics and object interactions, yet such physical models are difficult to construct and computationally expensive to use  [15–17].From the 2000s, much work has been devoted to building the 3D geometry of humans automatically by reconstruction or deformation. Among which, example-based techniques that learn shape models directly from examples of scanned data drew a lot of research attention  [18–20]; a detailed review of example-based reconstructive methods will be given in Section  2.2. In general, the example-learnt parametric models provide realistic deformation in terms of global shape appearance, thus they are suitable for computer graphic applications that focus on animation speed and realism. However, these models may not provide accurate local sizes. In the clothing industry, size accuracy is the most important criterion in model customization; customized models must truthfully represent the individual customer’s body shape and provide accurate size information.In this paper, we propose a new method to cater for the needs of the clothing industry on efficient 3D human model customization. The main contributions of this paper are as follows:•A new method of digital human modeling is developed, and the accuracy of the customized models is comparable to scan.A comprehensive shape representation is proposed to describe human body’s geometrical characteristics. The shape representation corresponds to key features in clothing size definition; it has a layered structure involving multiple local cross-sectional features. The local cross-sectional features include 2D size features and 3D shape features.A novel relationship model is identified and modeled between 2D size features and 3D shape features using scanned real subject data.A new deformation algorithm ct-FFD is proposed in this paper. Different from global deformation adopted by most of the existing algorithms, ct-FFD algorithm localizes deformation to specific segments. It minimizes distortion and closely resembles the geometrical shape of the control mesh.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We first review the related work, including image-based and exampled-based human body modeling and geometric mesh deformation algorithms in Section  2. We discuss the 5-step model customization method in details in Section  3. The experimental results are demonstrated and discussed in Section  4. Finally, we conclude the paper and discuss some future work in Section  5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We have proposed a high resolution model customization method in this paper, in which customer’s detailed geometric characteristics can be reconstructed using limited size features extracted from the customer’s orthogonal-view photos. To realize model customization, we have first developed a shape representation that comprehensively describes the geometrical shape of a human body. The shape representation has a layered structure involving multiple local cross-sectional features. These local features correspond to certain features defining clothing sizes; we have defined 2D size features and 3D shape features to represent each layer of local feature. We have identified a novel relationship model between 2D size features and 3D shape features; these relationship models for individual cross-sections have been learnt from a large scale database of real subject scanned models. With known relationship models, we have predicted and reconstructed a customer’s 3D shape using size information extracted from the customer’s photos. Then, we have realized model customization by deforming a template model to the shape of the customer, based on reconstructed 3D shape representation. Experimental results have proved that (1) customized models have high-resolution detailed appearance; (2) the accuracy of customized models has achieved the level of scan; (3) the model customization process is efficient and meets the requirement for real-time application. To conclude, the method contributes the clothing industry in customizing accurate human body models efficiently.We will explore to improve the existing method in the following areas. First, we will study automatic feature extraction from images; it makes the whole model customization process to be completely automatic. Second, we will improve and fine tune the relationship models between 2D size features and 3D shape features, so that special body shape characteristics such as sloppy or squared shoulders, plump back can be better modeled. Third, we will investigate model customization for customer who is dressed in loose-fit clothing or the body silhouette is occluded in the images.