@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Topology authentication for piping isometric drawings

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The topology authentication problem of piping isometric drawings is addressed.A semi-fragile watermarking scheme for the topology authentication is proposed.The proposed scheme is robust against local similarity transformations.The proposed scheme is invariant to the stretching operation on pipes.The proposed scheme provides good tamper localization accuracy.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Topology authentication,Topology integrity,Local similarity transformations,Product and manufacturing information (PMI),Watermarking,Piping isometric drawing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Piping isometric drawings, which feature their intrinsical topological relation rather than just geometrical shape, are important industrial art works in the field of Computer-Aided Design (CAD). This paper takes a fresh look at the topology integrity authentication of piping isometric drawings, which has not been mentioned before in the literature, from the digital watermarking perspective. A blind and semi-fragile watermarking based algorithm is proposed to address the referred interesting issue. The topology authentication problem of piping isometric drawings is investigated. In addition to the stretching operation, both global and local similarity transformation operations, which are critical problems in the case of watermarking embedding and extraction, are analyzed in detail. The topological graph is extracted and constructed from the drawing firstly. Then, similarity transformation invariants are constructed as watermarks carriers for each node. After that, the topological relation among joint components is encoded into singular watermarks for each node of the graph. These generated topology sensitive watermarks are embedded into geometrical invariants of each node via quantization index modulation. Theoretical analysis and experimental results demonstrate that our approach yields a strong ability in detecting and locating unauthorized topology attacks while achieves robustness against both global and local similarity transformations especially the stretching operation. The proposed scheme can be employed to authenticate topology integrity for each of the drawings derived from the model individually in industry practices.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Piping isometric drawings, as one kind of 2D CAD drawings, are detailed orthographic drawings for plants in the petrochemical industry. Petrochemical plants usually consist of a large number of pipelines which are comprised of various components. Piping isometric drawings represent the details of 3D structure of these pipelines in the form of 2D diagrams. It is the general practice among engineering organizations to produce isometric drawings of piping systems to represent all the details in the plant design. Generally speaking, hundreds and perhaps tens of thousands of such drawings should be created for a design project. Because of their wide applications in the petrochemical industry, piping isometric drawings are of great commercial and intellectual value. However, the popularity of piping isometric drawings also raises a big concern. They can be easily edited, replicated and distributed through networks or through stored media during the design as well as the project installation and construction. What is important is that, a range of engineering reports are generated based on geometrical and topological information of the drawing. Therefore, in order to properly protect the content integrity of piping isometric drawings, it is desirable to develop an authentication mechanism that can prevent digital contents from being maliciously tampered.Piping isometric drawings consist of various components which cover three kinds of information including geometrical information, topological information and engineering information as shown in Fig. 1. Geometrical information primarily describes the entities which the drawing is composed of. Topological information provides topological relation between joint components. Engineering information refers to flow direction, design constraints, specifications, etc. Components in isometric drawings share engineering information with corresponding 3D models. Reference data held in 3D plant models can be transferred to their isometric drawings, ensuring consistency of design and control of the materials and piping specifications used by engineers on projects.Topological information, in addition to geometrical information and engineering information, should be the focus of the integrity authentication for piping isometric drawings. Unlike the traditional mechanical CAD industry, which primarily concentrates on geometric modeling, plant design mainly focuses on optimizing the plant layout  [1,2]. The objective of plant layout design is to identify the most economical spatial arrangement of process vessels and equipment and their interconnecting pipes that satisfy construction, operation, maintenance, and safety requirements. Piping isometric drawings are derived directly from 3D plant models with emphasis on the relative topological relation among various joint components. These topological information are then employed to generate a variety of reports, including bills of materials, welding and cut pipe length lists automatically. However, to the best of our knowledge, no major work concerning the problem of topology integrity authentication has been studied yet.The problem of digital content integrity authentication and tamper detection has become problematic in many areas. Fragile and semi-fragile digital watermark techniques provide possible and effective solutions for this problem and have been studied and used widely for images  [3], audio  [4], videos  [5,6], 3D meshes  [7,8], CAD drawings  [9–11] and so on. They authenticate and verify digital content through embedding secret information (also called watermarks) into the cover content. Moreover, semi-fragile watermarking techniques can survive in some possibly unintentional operations the digital content may undergo. However, none has referred the topology integrity authentication problem discussed above, though a few methods have been proposed for the geometrical information authentication for mechanical CAD drawings  [9–14].To tackle this interesting problem, we therefore present a blind and semi-fragile watermarking scheme for the topology integrity authentication and verification of piping isometric drawings. The main contributions of our work can be classified as the following:(1)The first contribution is that a blind and semi-fragile watermarking technique is introduced to tackle the topology integrity authentication problem of piping isometric drawings. It is believed that the proposed scheme provides a practical and effective solution for resolving the topology integrity authentication problem.The second contribution is the construction of a topological graph from the piping isometric drawing in which each piping component corresponds to a node and each pipe corresponds to two directed edges. The topological graph is then employed to generate watermarks, which are sensitive to topology modifications, for watermark embedding and tamper localization.The third contribution is the similarity transformation invariants construction and selection for each node. These geometrical invariants which are preserved under any similarity transformation are then employed as watermark carriers.The fourth contribution is that the proposed scheme is robust against the stretching operation, as well as both global and local similarity transformations including uniform scaling, rotation and translation. This problem is aggravated by the fact that, to make isometric drawings cleaner and more legible, it is common to revise dimensions and locations of certain individual components manually without altering their topological relation.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. We first investigate the proposed problem in detail in Section  2. Then, we review some related works in Section  3. After briefly summarizing the watermarking scheme in Section  4, we describe the topological graph construction method in Section  5. The proposed topology integrity authentication scheme based on the digital watermarking is detailed in Section  7. Section  8 then demonstrates and discusses the experimental results. The paper finishes with contributions and suggestions for future research in Section  9.In this section, we first describe the geometric structure of piping isometric drawings. Then, we discuss the topology integrity authentication problem of piping isometric drawings.The geometric structure of piping isometric drawings is described from the following two aspects: the entity-level and the object-level.In aspect of entity-level, piping isometric drawings, as well as other kind of CAD drawings, are designed by using basic graphical entities, such as LINE, POLYLINE, POLYGON and ARC, as shown in Fig. 2(a).In aspect of object-level, a piping isometric drawing generally includes an individual pipeline or a set of multiple interconnected pipelines. The pipeline consists of various components, including pipes and piping components. Piping components cover fittings, valves, flanges, gasket, etc. Two joint pipes should be connected with each other through various piping components while two joint piping components can be connected with each other directly or through a pipe. All components are represented by basic graphical entities introduced above.Nowadays, hundreds of thousands of built-in graphical symbols of components are included in intelligent isometric drawing tools for the project requirements. These intelligent tools are object-based modeling and edition applications. They always include hundreds of catalogs representing either dimensional standards or manufacturer specific components. It is worthwhile to point out that there may be some slight differences among graphical symbols of the same component in different piping isometric drawing applications. This is because that the piping design should follow relevant specifications, as issued by the national standards institutes of different countries.Entities and objects in CAD drawings hold an intrinsic attribute, named handle value, which is assigned and maintained by application systems automatically. The handle value is an abstract reference to the entity or object  [9]. It is kept unique for the life of the database. This intrinsic invariance property is fully utilized in our scheme.Fig. 2(b) shows some graphical symbols of piping isometric drawings. Note that, a pipe may have different symbols with respect to the spatial relationship between it and the rectangular axes. For example, a pipe is described by a simple line when it is parallel to a single coordinate axis. Otherwise, it is represented by its projection and the projection plane on the corresponding coordinate plane as illustrated in Fig. 2(b). Fig. 3shows an example of a pipeline of a 3D plant model and its piping isometric drawing.Topological information, compared with geometrical information and engineering information, is playing an increasingly important role in the modern intelligent piping isometric drawing applications. The two joint components should meet the specific requirements, such as pipe diameter, end type, pressure rating and flow direction. Moreover, a variety of reports, such as bills of materials, welding and cut pipe length lists are generated through the topological information automatically. This is significantly different from traditional mechanical CAD drawings which primarily focus on the geometric modeling.To give an isometric a satisfactory appearance and fit, it is common to apply similarity transformations on certain individual components to revise their dimensions or locations without altering their topological relation manually. These operations include rotation, translation and uniform scaling. Piping isometric drawings are generated from 3D piping models directly by applying orthographic projection to components with different ratios. Components with large dimensions should be scaled down, since these components occupy large space on the drawings which inevitably influence the projection of other ones. In the same way, those ones with small dimensions should be scaled up to avoid any inconvenience when reading the drawings. The regions with dense pipelines should be expanded and those regions with sparse pipelines should be compressed. More importantly, translation and scaling operations on piping components discussed above will inevitably result in stretching of pipes with different factorsf(f>0). Performing these changes will create a cleaner and more legible isometric drawing and further facilitate the annotation for various components.Therefore, the problem of topology integrity authentication should draw more and more attention for piping isometric drawings. However, for 2D CAD drawings, previous studies have primarily focused on protecting and authenticating geometrical information  [9,10,12,13]. Little attention has been devoted to the referred problem. Moreover, the prospective authentication scheme is required to survive to those topology-preserving operations discussed above. These modifications do not destroy the topological relation among joint components. Thus, the modified isometric drawing should be regarded as the same as the original one. In addition, the scheme should also yield a strong ability in detecting and locating unauthorized topology attacks on each component.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
