@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Potential of support vector regression for optimization of lens system

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Lens system design represents a crucial factor for good image quality.Optimization procedure is the main part of the lens system design methodology.Soft computing methodologies optimization application.Adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS) application.Support vector regression (SVR application).

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Lens system,Optimization,Spot diagram,SVR,Soft computing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Lens system design is an important factor in image quality. The main aspect of the lens system design methodology is the optimization procedure. Since optimization is a complex, non-linear task, soft computing optimization algorithms can be used. There are many tools that can be employed to measure optical performance, but the spot diagram is the most useful. The spot diagram gives an indication of the image of a point object. In this paper, the spot size radius is considered an optimization criterion. Intelligent soft computing scheme Support Vector Regression (SVR) is implemented. In this study, the polynomial and radial basis functions (RBF) are applied as the SVR kernel function to estimate the optimal lens system parameters. The performance of the proposed estimators is confirmed with the simulation results. The SVR results are then compared with other soft computing techniques. According to the results, a greater improvement in estimation accuracy can be achieved through the SVR with polynomial basis function compared to other soft computing methodologies. The SVR coefficient of determinationR2with the polynomial function was 0.9975 and with the radial basis function theR2was 0.964. The new optimization methods benefit from the soft computing capabilities of global optimization and multi-objective optimization rather than choosing a starting point by trial and error and combining multiple criteria into a single criterion in conventional lens design techniques.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Lens system design is a complex engineering task in analytical approaches  [1,2] due to strong interactions among parameters and many local optima. There are also several design criteria, such as Seidel aberrations, chromatic aberrations, size and cost  [3,4].Lens system design mainly comprises two steps: calculating the initial lens and further optimization. The optimization method presents better and more robust results than the initial design[5,6]. Optimization is very important to lens system design  [7]. For decades, various optimization methods have been successfully used in lens system design  [8,9]. Optimization of a lens system involves determining the surface parameters defining the shape and position of each lens surface  [10]. The mathematical model for this problem is generally complicated  [11,12].The goal of the optimization process is to find the minimum merit function in a multi-dimensional variable space  [13–16]. In each step of the optimization procedure, the search direction in terms of optimization variables has to be found  [17–19]. The cycle continues until the merit function is sufficiently small.Traditional methods of optimization can be effectively employed on continuous and differential functions. But many complex real world engineering problems involve efficiently solving problems in areas of structural optimization, design and analysis of control systems and scheduling. These disciplines are characterized by nonlinear, multi objective dynamical systems that face major obstacles of getting stuck in non-optimal solutions and premature convergence  [20].Even though a number of mathematical functions have been proposed for optimization of the lens system geometrical parameters, there are still disadvantages of the models like very demanding in terms of calculation time. Meta heuristics are a class of powerful stochastic algorithms, which have been proved over the years as efficient and fast problem solvers  [21–23]. Computational intelligence (CI) belongs to this class of Meta heuristic search techniques. CI is an emerging derivative of artificial intelligence and has recently gained attention from varied fields of science, technology and management since it is an established metaheuristic optimization technique  [24]. Artificial neural networks (ANN) can be used as alternative to analytical approach as ANN offers advantages such as no required knowledge of internal system parameters, compact solution for multi-variable problems and fact calculation. For optimization of complex systems, new techniques can be used, such as the fuzzy logic (FL)  [25], ANN  [26] and neuro-fuzzy  [27].Support vector machines (SVMs) as on type of metaheuristic soft computing technique, have gained importance regarding issues related with the environment  [28,29]. There are two fundamental classes of support vector machines: support vector classification (SVC) and support vector regression (SVR). SVM is a learning framework utilizing a high-dimensional peculiarity space  [30–33]. SVR is focused around a measurable learning hypothesis and structural risk minimization rule and has been effectively utilized for nonlinear frameworks  [34,35]. The correctness of an SVM model is to a great extent reliant on determining the model parameters. Notwithstanding, organized strategies for selecting parameters are important. Hence, model parameter alignment ought to be made.SVR with radial basis function and SVR with polynomial basis function are used to determine lens system geometric parameters. Besides, the adaptive neuro fuzzy (ANFIS) model and improved versions of ANFIS, like ANFIS-PSO (ANFIS-particle swarm optimization)  [36–38], ANFIS-GA (ANFIS-genetic algorithm)  [39,40], and ANFIS-ACO (ANFIS-ant colony optimization)  [41–43], are also investigated for comparison.The main task is to investigate and compare the soft computing methods for the estimation of the optimal geometrical parameters of a lens system. Until now there are no reports of using of SVR approach for optimization of the lens system geometrical parameters. Several soft computing techniques are used to illustrate the capabilities of each method. As a measure of optimal functionality of the lens system, spot size radius of the lens system is minimized to achieve best image quality. The soft computing networks attempt to reduce the aberration and distortion in the lens system. Finally, the optimal result will present the optimal image quality of the lens system.In this article, a doublet lens system was used for the analysis of optimization techniques. Fig. 1shows the doublet lens system as an example for the optimization procedure in this work.Designing the doublet lens system involves selecting the overall power0̸sysof the doublet with the two glass lenses to be used. The glass choice gives the Abbe numberV. For the linear dispersion of the system to become zero the system has to satisfy the following equations:(1)0̸1+0̸2=0̸sys(2)0̸1V1+0̸2V2=0where the lens power is0̸=1ffor a lens with focal lengthf. From Eqs. (1) and (2) we can get:(3)0̸10̸sys=V1V1−V2(4)0̸20̸sys=−V2V1−V2.Since0̸2=−0̸1−V2V1and the Abbe numbers are positive, the power of the second element in the doublet system would be negative when the first element is positive.To characterize lens systems, ray tracing is required. Beginning at a given point on the item and a given starting plot, a ray is the processing of the trajectory through the optical framework until it achieves the picture plane. Fig. 2shows the layout of one lens system with some of the ray paths. There are numerous parameters that a lens creator must focus on to get a lens with excellent picture framing abilities: the shape of the surfaces, the thickness between two surfaces, material of the lens components, the quantity of lens components, and so forth. Image blur and distortion at a certain wavelength can be improved by changing the curvature of surfaces and thickness between surfaces.In this paper, the aim is to examine the curvature of surfaces,ci, and thickness between two surfaces,ti, to obtain a lens with good image-forming capabilities (Fig. 2).Dpupilis the diameter of the bundle of rays with an entrance angle of zero degrees. The curvature (radius) of all surfaces and the distance from it to the image surface are modified to meet a required spot size radius of the lens system. The lens system is investigated by using spot diagrams made by performing ray tracing. 22 input rays with input angles varying from 0 to 22°are used. The grid at the aperture stop (or at the entrance pupil) traces the rays from the object that pass through all grid points. At the image plane, the collection of intersection points creates a spot diagram (Fig. 3). The post diagram sizes could serve as an image quality indicator.The optimization procedure of the lens system requires variable parameters and a merit function. In this article one wavelength is used. Lens surface radii and thicknesses are optimization variables. In the optimization process, all of the variables are altered. Optimization functions are designed to maximize the image quality of the lens system. It may be necessary to select a point of reference on the image surface for optimization—usually either the intercept coordinates of the primary-wavelength chief ray or the weighted center position over all the wavelengths (the centroid) (Fig. 4).RMS minimization of the spot (blur) size to the weighted centroid is the most common optimization function choice for lens design. The RMS spot size is an indicator of image quality based on geometrical rays. The RMS spot size is estimated by tracing a selection of rays of each defined wavelength from every defined entrance angle. To calculate the RMS spot size relative to the centroid, it is first necessary to locate the centroid’s position (Fig. 4). This is the average image position determined by tracing a number of rays:(5)xc=∑1nxn(6)yc=∑1nyn.The RMS spot size is then determined using:(7)RMS=(∑1n(x−xc)+(y−yc)n)1n.The optimization result will be a reduction in the lens design aberration.The optimization problem is an extreme value problem of the objective functionf(x)=RMSdefined in then-dimensional spaceRn. The mathematical programming form of the constrained optimization problem is:(8)minx∈Rnf(x)ai⩽xi⩽bi,i=1,2,…,nexplicit constraintsgj(x)⩽0,j=1,2,…,nimplicit constraintswherex=(x1,…,xn)are the optimization variables. In lens systems, the structure and parameters of a lens system are taken as components of the optimization variables.Using paraxial approximation, all the rays with the same entrance angle converge at a single point. However, with exact ray traces, they will strike the image plane at different points, generally in the neighborhood of approximated points, and form a so-called blur spot as illustrated in Fig. 3. The RMS blur spot size is computed from the variance of the position at the image plane of different exact rays with the same entrance angle. A reference ray traced with the paraxial approximation is used to evaluate the distortion, measuring its distance from the centroid of the exact rays at the image plane.In this article, ZEMAX in sequential mode was used to optimize the lens doublet design and to acquire experimental training data for soft computing models. The optimization feature provided by ZEMAX is quite powerful and is capable of improving lens designs given a reasonable starting point and a set of variable parameters. ZEMAX uses either an actively damped least squares or an orthogonal descent algorithm. The algorithms are capable of optimizing a merit function composed of weighted target values. Fig. 5shows a flowchart of the optimization procedure.Fig. 6illustrates the procedure of optimizing the lens doublet system based on the input ray angle as well as the optimal spot size radius. Spot size radius represents the qualitative image indicator of the lens doublet system. To improve the image quality of the lens doublet system, more qualitative image indicators can be added during the optimization procedure. The optimization method can calculate optimal lens system parameters for any input ray angle.The fundamental working principle of SVMs is to perform the data mapping in some spaces through non-linear mapping and perform the linear algorithm in the feature space. If a way of computing the inner product in a feature space is available directly as a function to the original input points, it is possible to build a non-linear learning machine, which is known as a direct computation method of a kernel function, denoted byK.The flexible nature of the SVM is attributed to the kernel functions that implicitly chart the data to a higher-dimensional feature space. A linear solution in the higher-dimensional feature space corresponds to a non-linear solution in the original, lower-dimensional input space. There are some available methods that employ non-linear kernels in their strategy for regression problems and that simultaneously apply SVMs. One kernel function is the radial basis function. The main benefit of the radial basis function is that it is computationally more efficient than the customary SVM method, since radial basis function training needs only the solution of a set of linear equations instead of the lengthy and computationally demanding quadratic programming problem that is entailed in standard SVM. Compared with other probable kernel features, the radial basis function is a more compressed, supported kernel, which makes it very suitable for restricting the computational training process and improving the generalization efficiency of the radial basis function—an attribute of great value in model design. Therefore, the radial basis function with parameterσis adopted in this study. The non-linear radial basis kernel function is defined as:(9)K(xxi)=exp(−1σ2‖x−xi‖2)wherexandxiare vectors in the input space, i.e. vectors of features computed from training or test samples.In this study the following polynomial kernel function was also used:(10)K(xy)=(xTy+c)dwherexandyare vectors of features computed from training or test samples, andcis a constant making a tradeoff for the influence of higher-order versus lower-order terms in the polynomial.As a data-driven model, the ability of the SVR to make reasonable estimations is mostly dependent on input parameter selection. Adequate consideration of the factors controlling the system studied is therefore crucial to developing a reliable network. According to the experiments, the input parameters (Aperture stop—radius, Aperture stop—thickness, Surface 2—radius, Surface 3—radius, Surface 4—thickness) are collected and defined as input for the learning techniques. For the experiments, 70% of the data was used to train samples and the subsequent 30% served to test the samples. A summary of the statistical properties of the lens doublet system is provided in Table 1.There are two intuitive lower bounds on the computational cost of any algorithm that solves the SVM problem for arbitrary kernel matricesKij.Suppose that an oracle reveals which examples are not support vectors (xi=0), and which examples are bounded support vectors (xi=C). The coefficients of theRremaining free support vectors are determined by a system ofRlinear equations representing the derivatives of the objective function. Their calculation amounts to solving such a system. This typically requires a number of operations proportional toR3.Simply verifying that a vector is a solution of the SVM problem involves computing the gradient g of the dual and checking the optimality conditions. Withnexamples andSsupport vectors, this requires a number of operations proportional to nS.Few support vectors reach the upper boundCwhen it gets large. The cost is then dominated by theR3∼S3. Otherwise the term nS is usually larger. The final number of support vectors therefore is the critical component of the computational cost of solving the dual problem.Since the asymptotic number of support vectors grows linearly with the number of examples, the computational cost of solving the SVM problem has both a quadratic and a cubic component. It grows at least liken2whenCis small andn3whenCgets large  [44].To assess the success of the SVR models and other soft computing techniques, some statistical indicators were examined as follows:(1)root-mean-square error (RMSE)(11)RMSE=∑i=1n(Pi−Oi)2n,coefficient of determination (R2)(12)R2=[∑i=1n(Oi−Oi¯)⋅(Pi−Pi¯)]2∑i=1n(Oi−Oi¯)⋅∑i=1n(Pi−Pi¯)wherePiandOiare known as the experimental and forecast values, respectively, andnis the total number of test data.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
