@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A method for improving measurement accuracy of cylinders in dimensional CT metrology

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The method can fit cylindrical surface from a projection image directly.The method can measure cylindrical surface with a higher accuracy.The method can complete measurement by use of much less measurement time.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
X-ray computed tomography,Dimensional metrology,Measurement accuracy,CT artefact,Cylindrical surface fitting,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Measurement quality of industrial cone beam X-ray computed tomography (CT) is influenced by many types of artefacts, therefore, industrial-level accuracy is difficult to attain. In order to avoid the influences of these artefacts, this paper proposes a new method for measuring cylindrical surface that is a common geometric structure in mechanical parts. The proposed method fits cylindrical surface from a sinogram image directly. Compared with a standard way for dimensional CT metrology, higher measurement accuracy and less measurement time can be achieved. Mainly, the method consists of edge points detection of a sinogram image and cylindrical surface fitting. The performance of the method is evaluated by use of both simulation data and actual data.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
X-ray CT is a powerful technique to inspect a mechanical part in a non-destructive way. In industry, this technique has been used for material analysis and non-destructive testing since 1980s  [1]. Recently, due to the ability to precisely measure inside and outside structure of a mechanical part in one single scan, its application field has been broadened to include dimensional metrology that is a young and challenging application for industrial computed tomography (ICT). So far, dimensional ICT is the only device able to complete dimensional measurement of the inner geometry and non-accessible part of a component without destroying it. Also it can perform dimensional quality control and material quality control simultaneously  [2]. However, CT is inherently influenced by many types of artefacts that may prevent reliable measurement  [3]. Those artefacts are induced by such as 3D reconstruction, beam hardening, scattering, etc.  [2,4]. ​ Since circular cone beam scanning is commonly adopted for an ICT scanning system, in this paper only circular scanning trajectory is considered. As shown in Fig. 1(a), the main components of an ICT system are an X-ray source, a rotation table, and a 2D flat panel detector. The specimen is mounted on the rotation table, which is located between the X-ray source and the detector. The source emits cone beam X-rays that penetrate the specimen and generate a 2D projection image known as a sinogram image on the detector. Typically the specimen is rotated 360° and usually more than 500 sinogram images are taken. Subsequently as shown in Fig. 1(b), on the basis of those sinogram images, a CT volumetric model is generated by use of the CT reconstruction algorithm such as the FDK algorithm  [6] which is widely used for cone beam type of CT. Once the volumetric data is obtained, 3D polygonal meshes are computed by use of polygonization algorithm such as marching cubes algorithm  [7]. Then dimensional parameters are evaluated. In this study that data processing processes are called as the standard way for dimensional CT metrology.An example of typical problems in the standard way is given in Fig. 2, which includes cone beam artefact, beam hardening, and X-ray scattering. As circular scanning geometry cannot fully satisfy Tuy’s data sufficiency condition  [8], an exact reconstruction is possible only in the plane of the source trajectory, resulting in such cone beam artefact in the volumetric data. Beam hardening is a well-known cupping artefact, which is due to low energy photons of an X-ray beam with a range of energies attenuated more rapidly than high energy photons. Scattering is caused by deflection of X-ray inside the specimen or on the detector, which decreases the SNR locally. In addition to those problems, the threshold method in the process of surface extraction is also a critical and difficult issue in dimensional CT metrology. So far, 50% global threshold method is commonly used to detect the edge of single material specimen. In addition, many local adaptive threshold methods have been developed to improve edge detection by removing some noise particles or artefacts. However, neither method can detect edge accurately. It is stated that no systematic improvements can be found between local and global threshold methods with respect to the achievable accuracy  [9]. To solve these problems, much work has been done. Amirkhanov proposed a method for CT scan positions optimization to reduce artefacts by use of Radon-space analysis and penetration length analysis  [10]. Zhu presented an efficient estimation method to reduce the intensity drop in the cone beam reconstruction on circular scanning based on Grangeat’s formula and Hu’s theory  [11]. Joseph et al. described an experimental study on the influence of beam hardening, showing that beam hardening reduces internal dimensions and increase external dimensions  [12]. Xue gave a numerical analysis of the FDK reconstruction effect on CT measurement accuracy in detail  [13]. Ye proposed a material-dependent global threshold method for edge detection and reported that the grey value of an actual edge is close to the material peak in the case of serious beam hardening  [14]. All of these studies are based on the standard way. In light of that many factors in the standard way influence CT measurement quality, we propose a new way (see Fig. 1(b)) for measuring cylindrical surface from a sinogram image directly, which excludes 3D reconstruction and surface extraction.Cylindrical surface is one of the most basic curvilinear geometric shapes and a common and important geometric structure in many mechanical parts (e.g. automotive engine, bearing, motor spindle, etc.). And we use a specimen called stepped cylinders shown in Figs. 1 and 2. It is often used as a phantom to evaluate performance of an ICT system and may be adopted as ISO reference standards for dimensional CT metrology. Thus we focus on this specimen in this paper. The proposed new way first detects the edge points that are located on the silhouette lines of the cylindrical surface on the sinogram image, and then fits the cylindrical surface from those edge points and X-ray focus by use of least square method. By use of the new way, radius, unit vector of central axis, and one point on central axis can be estimated. As 3D reconstruction is not utilized in our new way, the influence of the artefacts (cone beam artefact, beam hardening artefact, etc.) in the reconstruction image can be avoided, resulting in a higher measurement accuracy. And in the new way only dozens of sinogram images are used as input, which is far fewer than hundreds of sinogram images needed in the standard way, therefore the time and cost of CT measurement is reduced sufficiently. The same with the standard way, our new way also faces problems caused by partial volume, focus size, geometrical misalignment, etc.  [15].This paper evaluates the new way by use of both simulation data and actual data. Our CT simulation approach can produce projection image accurately, which is different from common ones as Monte-Carlo simulation  [16] and hybrid method  [17]. To close to the actual physical situation, each detector pixel is separated into as many small pixels as possible in the simulation processing. The actual CT data of stepped cylinders scanned from a precision CT machine is used. The results of both simulation and actual data show that the new way can fit the cylindrical surface accurately.The paper is structured as follows. The computation flow and detailed algorithm of the new way is described in Section  2. The result and discussion is shown in Section  3. Conclusion and outline directions for future work is given in Section  4.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
