@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Free-form surface machining error compensation applying 3D CAD machining pattern model

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
I propose the method for compensating for systematic errors of free-form surfaces.The basis for performing compensation is machining pattern model (MPM).MPM represents the most probable shape of errors in the machining process.MPM is available in a very convenient CAD format.The application of the MPM provides a high effectiveness of error compensation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Free-form surface,CNC machining,Coordinate measurement,Spatial regression analysis,NURBS modeling,Error compensation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The article presents a methodology for compensating for systematic influences of computer numerical control (CNC) machining processes on free-form surfaces. The proposed procedure is performed off-line by introducing corrections compensating for these influences to machining programs. The effect of systematic influences of machining are deterministic deviations of surfaces. CAD models of these deviations, averaged for a number of surfaces machined under repeatable conditions, represent a machining pattern model (MPM) which serves as the basis for performing compensation. The basis for developing such models is surface deviations determined during coordinate measurements carried out along a regular grid of points. For estimating surface MPMs, a methodology is proposed in which regression analysis, spatial statistics methods, an iterative procedure, and NURBS modeling are applied. An MPM with the opposite sign was used for compensating systematic influences of the ball-end milling process by modifying the nominal geometry data and correcting the machining program. The results of machining error compensation carried out on the basis of a previously developed MPM were compared to the results of compensation performed on the basis of raw measurement data as well as to the results these after compensation on the basis of a model of deterministic deviations for the surface under study.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Because of ever-increasing aesthetic requirements and the simultaneous development of manufacturing techniques, everyday objects containing free-form surfaces are designed more and more often nowadays. In the case of objects made of plastic or glass, their shapes are reflected by the surfaces of the molds and dies used for manufacturing them, which are produced with the use of multi-axis milling machines or using electric discharge or electrochemical machining methods. Such products and their forms can be made by applying additive manufacturing techniques. Manufacturing processes inevitably generate deviations from nominal surfaces.Due to the complex geometry of free-form surfaces, the design, manufacture, and accuracy inspection of such surfaces are performed in the CAD environment. Production is commonly carried out with multi-axis milling machine centers. Measurements are most often conducted using numerically controlled coordinate measuring machines (NC CMMs) equipped with touch probes; in consequence, the coordinates of the measurement points of a discrete distribution on the measured surface are obtained  [1]. At each measurement point, the local deviation or the distance between this measurement point and the CAD model is determined. Measurements can be conducted with reference to the bases; if this is the case, then the measurement results, in addition to including information on surface irregularities, also include deviations of position and orientation  [2] connected to workpiece mounting errors. To reduce deviations of position and orientation, fitting of the measurement data to the CAD model needs to be carried out, and then local deviations represent surface irregularities exclusively  [1,2]. Surface deviations, and, as a result, coordinate measurement data, carry information on errors of the machining process.The accuracy of machining can be improved off-line by means of modifying the machining program. Such improvement consists in introducing corrections compensating machining errors to the program. One of the methods of doing so is by introducing corrections on the basis of raw measurement data  [3–5]. The nominal geometry of the surface under concern is then modified by adding local deviations with the opposite sign to the nominal CAD model. This correction method, based on discrete measurement data acquired with CMMs, was proposed by Yang et al. in  [4], among others. Many authors suggest performing measurements at the same mounting location, performing on-machine measurements, and using part probes  [5–7]. Data acquired in this way are then used for introducing corrections which compensate for errors resulting from machining of the workpiece of concern. This is an appropriate error compensation method for milling of molds produced in single quantities (assuming that the accuracy of measurements is suitable for the given tolerance level). In the case of manufacturing multiple elements of the same nominal geometry, however, using a program modified in such a way to produce further items will no longer be effective, as production processes are unavoidably characterized by variability.Raw coordinate measurement data include a systematic component and a random component  [7–10]. In order to separate the systematic and the random component in data of a spatial nature, regression analysis and spatial statistics methods can be applied  [11–13]. A number of authors use this method not only to process measurement data for surfaces of complex spatial shapes but also to analyze measurement data for regular surfaces.Yan et al.  [8] applied Moran’sIstatistics and B-spline modeling of the regression surface to decompose the components of free-form surface deviations, and after that they assessed the uncertainty of the coordinate measurement of the surface under study on the basis of the separated random component. Chena et al. proposed the performance of error compensation based on the systematic component of the deviations from the nominal surface  [7]. They, too, used Moran’sIstatistics and B-spline modeling to remove the random component from the data obtained from measurements on a machine tool. As was the case with the procedure described in  [4], they carried out the procedure of introducing corrections to the machining program on the basis of measurement data for one surface. The effectiveness of the compensation performed was evaluated by them on the basis of the mean value of local surface deviations, which, after the second machining process, was reduced by approximately 60%. However, it is extreme deviation values that are important in accuracy assessment, and, to be more precise, the deviation of the highest absolute value is significant in this case  [2]. Results given only in the form of mean values do not include information on the influence of machining error compensation on the height of the irregularity profile. Moreover, the authors of  [7] used a ball tip 6 mm in diameter, and, as a result, much information on surface irregularities was filtered out mechanically.Removing the effects of random influences at the first stage of machining as well as modifying the machining program on the basis of a model of systematic deviations concerning one surface is not equivalent to compensating systematic influences of the machining process because it does not take into consideration the process variability, or, as a result of that, variability between surfaces obtained subsequently. Machining performed according to a machining program modified in such a way can only be efficient with respect to the same workpiece, and all the more so the more stable the machining process is. A different approach should be applied to producing multiple items of the same nominal geometry, where compensation should be based not only on the systematic component of the measurement data obtained for a single surface but also on the effects repeated systematically on surfaces in the manufacturing process. Such an original solution for machining error compensation is proposed in this article.Measurements performed on machine tools are characterized by a smaller resolution (of the order of 1 μm) and a higher uncertainty of determining the point coordinates (of the order of 5 μm). In this case, determining surface deviations without referring to the datum system is also not possible  [2]. It is only possible to precisely determine the surface of systematic deviations without referring to the datum system on the basis of data from a CMM (with a resolution of the order of 0.1 μm, and the uncertainty of point measurement of the order of 1 μm) after measurements have been carried out according to a suitable strategy. It has to be remembered that applying the sampling step and the ball tip results in a mechanical-geometrical filtration of surface irregularities  [14,15].For a few years now, in works concerning measurements and machining of free-form surfaces, the author of the present article has been suggesting the use of CAD spatial regression models representing not just one actual surface but also subsequent surfaces which have already been machined (and those which are yet to be machined) during the same process. Applied models are in essence spatial models of geometric errors of machining processes. Similarly to the authors of  [7,8] with respect to a single surface, the author of the present article applies the regression analysis, parametric surface modeling, and spatial statistics methods, but like, for example, Colosimo et al. in  [9] with respect to the roundness profile, she determines models of machining patterns left on the produced surfaces. The model described in Ref.  [9] and used there in planning the measurement strategy is an analytical regression model of a 2D profile. The spatial parametric models of machining patterns proposed by the author, which were developed for free-form surfaces on the basis of CMM data concerning a number of surfaces obtained during the process, are available in a very convenient CAD format  [16,17]. Such models can be applied to the manufacture of objects containing free-form surfaces, both in machining and in accuracy inspection of processes performed on NC machines. The machining pattern model (MPM) described in the present article was applied with great success in determining the most probable locations of surface critical points, and subsequently in planning an efficient sampling strategy on a CMM for inspecting the accuracy of the produced objects  [16]. The effects of using an MPM for correcting machining programs were partially presented at IMEKO ISMQC 2013  [18].The present article describes, for the example of ball-end milling, the methodology of correcting machining programs on the basis of CAD MPMs or averaged models representing models of deterministic (systematic) deviations of a number of surfaces machined under repeatable conditions. For estimating these models, a methodology is proposed in which regression analysis, Moran’sIstatistics  [11–13], an iterative procedure, and NURBS modeling are applied  [19]. The MPM determined using this method represents the most probable shape of deviations on subsequent machined surfaces. The application of this model provides a greater probability of effective correction of surface deviations than the application of a deviation model of one surface, as shown by the results of experimental research (Section  8). The proposed methodology has a universal character, and it can be applied for correcting deviations of free-form surfaces generated as a result of both material-removal machining and additive manufacturing carried out in the CAD environment in serial production.In the experimental part of the article, the MPM developed on the basis of 10 surfaces, with the opposite sign, was used for compensating the influences of systematic errors in the ball-end milling process by modifying the nominal geometry data and correcting the machining program. Precise CMM data pertaining to the surface irregularities comprising simple form deviations and waviness were used without taking into consideration the deviations of location or orientation. The results of compensation carried out in such a way were compared to the results of compensation performed on the basis of a model of systematic deviations as well as to the results of compensation conducted on the basis of raw measurement data for the same randomly selected surface. As a result of compensating the averaged influences of the systematic errors and of eliminating the random ones, surfaces machined after the correction according to the proposed methodology has been introduced are characterized by a considerably greater accuracy than those produced after correction performed on the basis of raw measurement data; the accuracy was also greater than the accuracy for the surfaces obtained after compensation based on the model of deterministic deviations of one surface. Deviations observed after the correction was made according to the proposed methodology represented the random effects from the second stage of machining, which it was impossible to compensate for, and the deterministic component of the deviations within the limits of its variability in the machining process. The values of deviations observed on the surfaces machined after the correction according to the new method had been introduced were within the range of ±8 μm with respect to the nominal surface.An actual surface is the effect of a complex manufacturing process characterized by both deterministic and random phenomena of a spatial nature. The resulting deterministic surface deviations are caused by deterministic errors of the manufacturing process. While deterministic deviations are spatially correlated, spatially random deviations do not show spatial correlation  [7–9]. Data obtained in coordinate measurements (Section  3) include information of a spatial character concerning surface deviations; they also include, in a much smaller proportion, measurement errors.In the methodology applied by the author of the present article, the different spatial nature of deviations is the basis for separating the random component and the deterministic component [11,12]. The methodology consists in iterative modeling of the regression surface on the measured deviations and in assessing the spatial randomness of the model residuals with the Moran’sItest (Section  4) at the consecutive iteration stages. In order to determine a model describing deterministic deviations, the NURBS method is applied. The NURBS surface of degreepin theudirection and degreeqin thevdirection is a vector function of two variables (Section  5)  [19]. In iterative modeling, the number of control points is changed in both directions (for the subsequent surface degrees), and the model residuals are tested at each stage. This methodology makes it possible to reject deviations (and other effects) of random character from measurement data according to the developed criterion  [17,20]. The regression model representing deterministic deviations takes on the CAD parametric form. An MPM is determined by averaging models of deterministic deviations for many surfaces manufactured under repeatable conditions (Section  6). A model determined in such a way represents the most probable shape of deviations on subsequent manufactured surfaces. In consequence, superimposition of the MPM onto the nominal CAD model makes it possible to obtain the most probable shape of products. It can be expected that applying this model in modifying the machining program will result in a lower scatter of systematic errors between machined surfaces than the scatter in the case of using raw measurement data or a model of deviations for one surface only. The estimation uncertainty of the MPM is dependent on the manufacturing process variability, the number of measured surfaces, the number of measurement points on each surface, and the uncertainty of coordinate measurement data.To collect measurement data representing deviations from the nominal surface resulting from the machining process in the first stage, coordinate measurements must be carried out along a regular grid of points, with an appropriately chosen sampling step and size of the ball tip, taking into consideration mechanical–geometrical filtration of irregularities caused by these factors  [14,20].To measure a free-form surface on a CAD base, the following must be performed:–locating of the object and of the CAD model in the common coordinate system,generating measurement points on the CAD model,an NC measurement,a comparison of the measurement points with the corresponding points on the CAD model.At each measurement point, the local deviation from the CAD model (nominal surface) is determined in the direction normal to the model, as shown in Fig. 1. In measurements based on the CAD model, the values of these deviations are determined automatically by CMM software. Each local deviation includes the systematic component and the random component  [8,9].In touch probe measurements, the problem of ball tip radius compensation occurs, as this process introduces additional measurement errors of significant values. In order to avoid the problem, a measurement strategy is applied in which measurements are conducted without any ball tip radius compensation and surface deviations are determined as the distance between the ball tip center and the off-set surface displaced from the given CAD model by the length of the ball tip radius.If data are virtually fitted to the CAD model, deviations of surface location and orientation are separated, and then measurement data represent surface irregularities  [1]. Under the same machining conditions, deviations of location and orientation on subsequently machined surfaces are characterized by great repeatability, and these deviations usually account for the majority of systematic deviations. Accuracy inspection and quality improvement procedures should be performed according to the geometric specification in each case.The range of the information represented in measurement data depends on the measurement parameters (the ball tip diameter and the sampling step) because these parameters result in the effect of mechanical filtration. This filtering effect has characteristic similar to that of a low pass, depending on the ball tip diameter or the sampling step; it is the parameter for which the cut-off frequency is lower which is decisive in this case. A smaller ball tip can penetrate smaller irregularity valleys better than a bigger ball. Complete information on a concave surface can only be obtained if the ball tip radius is smaller than the smallest local radius of the curvature of the probed surface  [21]. The size of the sampling step should be adjusted to the selected ball tip according to the rules used in tests on measurement signals derived from Nyquist theory. A theorem connected with this theory states that in order to obtain an accurate representation of a continuous signal, the sampling frequency, which is defined as the reciprocal of the sampling step, needs to be at least twice as big as the spectrum limit frequency. Taking into consideration the principles mentioned above, a sampling step equal to the length of the radius of the ball curvature is usually selected. Because of this filtering effect, different parameter values (position and form deviations) are obtained for the measured features, depending on the measurement parameters. In the case of surfaces of variable curvature, it cannot be assumed that all irregularities whose frequencies are lower than the cut-off frequency have been filtered out. Nevertheless, the influence of measurement parameters on the obtained data is unquestionable. Thus, measurement parameters also affect the range of information on a given surface represented in the model of deviations devised afterwards with the use of these data  [10], and hence measurement parameters affect the range of information represented in the developed MPM.Deviations of 3D free-form surfaces are the effect of manufacturing processes characterized by spatially variable phenomena, and in consequence (according to the terminology used in spatial statistics) they are spatial processes. The presence of spatial autocorrelation in such processes may be connected with the appearance of trends (or gradients) in the data. The right procedure in such situations is to determine a regression model with the mean as the input variable function. Such a process is non-stationary for the mean but stationary for the covariance structure. The appropriate model here is a spatial error model   [11–13]. Such a model assumes spatial autocorrelation of the residuals.Spatial modeling using spatial estimation methods aims at improving model specification. The adequacy of a model is checked with tests for spatial autocorrelation in the model residuals. The model needs to have a form that will eradicate trends but not regional variability. The existence of spatial autocorrelation in the observed residuals is demonstrative of an inappropriate specification of the model. A general form of a spatial error model is as follows  [11,13]:(1)Z=Xβ+r,r=λCr+ewhere:Z— spatial error modelX— independent variable matrix,β— regression coefficient vector,r— model residuals,λ— spatial autocorrelation parameter,C— spatial weighting matrix,e— random independent errors.Spatial error models are used to investigate whetherλ=0or whether there is no spatial autocorrelation.Autocorrelation is a characteristic of data obtained from a process that is articulated in one or more directions and describes the error structure of the data. Spatial autocorrelation refers to systematic spatial changes. In general, positive autocorrelation means that the observed feature values in a selected area are more similar to the features of the contiguous areas than would result from the random distribution of these values. In the case of negative spatial autocorrelation, the values in the contiguous areas are more different than would result from their random distribution. A lack of spatial autocorrelation means spatial randomness. The values observed in one area do not depend on the values observed in the contiguous areas, and the observed spatial pattern is as probable as any other spatial pattern.In order to test the existence of spatial dependence, global and local Moran’s and Geary’s statistics for a given variable are applied  [11–13]. A spatial autocorrelation measure may be used in a number of ways: for testing the existence of spatial autocorrelation and population characteristics, for determining the autocorrelation degree or the distance beyond which observations are independent, for determining a theoretical model suitable for the observed spatial structure, or finally for drawing conclusions about the spatial process. The spatial effects range may be researched by means of the structure of spatial dependence — by testing and selecting weighting matrices defined according to different criteria.In the case of deviations of a surface, we are interested in a spatial surface regression model including trends or gradients (the trend surface), which might be a basis for forming conclusions on systematic manufacturing errors and later for eliminating such errors or/and modifying the part program so as to later compensate for their influences on the manufactured surfaces.The literature data state that the Moran’sIstatistic is used in the majority of cases; it can be applied to the analysis of spatial data of both normal and unknown probability distributions  [9].The appropriate mathematical dependences concerning Moran’sIstatistics, comprehensively quoted from the monographs  [11,12], can be found in  [7,8], and therefore in the present article it suffices to provide the essential information only.The Moran’sIcoefficient of spatial autocorrelation in a form which is appropriate for examining model residuals can be written as follows  [11]:(2)I=ηS0rTCrrTrwhere:η— number of measurement points,r— vector of model residuals,C— weighting matrix of spatial relations between residuals in locationsiandj,S0=∑i=1η∑j=1ηcij.As surface irregularities are characterized by their wavelengths, which is reflected in the sizes of clusters of local deviations of similar values, it is assumed that the dependence between the data values at the pointsiandjdecreases when the distancedij​increases; this relation can be described in the following way  [11–13]:(3)cij=dij−kwhere:cij=0fori=j,k— constant(k≥1).The value of the constantkis decisive for the test result and thus for the result of modeling. In the majority of reference works, for example in [4,7], thekvalue is adopted using the ‘hit or miss’ method without a thorough analysis of the researched process. As a rule, a machining pattern model (MPM) should not contain any effects of random phenomena occurring in the process, while the model residuals should not include the systematic component. In the present article, the value of the constantk=3was adopted on the basis of simulation and experimental tests on irregularities represented in the surface regression model under study and on the basis of phenomena occurring during the machining process  [20]. It results from the research showing that a value of the constantk=4, which is adopted in some reference works, causes the sensitivity of the randomness test with reference to machining errors to be too low. Tests on spatial randomness can be successfully carried out using publicly accessible R-GUI software, which is widely applied in econometrics, geodesy, and cartography.After determining the coefficientI, a test of significance for its value needs to be conducted. A positive and significant value of theIstatistics implies the existence of positive spatial autocorrelation. Otherwise, lack of spatial correlation indicates spatial randomness of residuals  [11–13].In order to determine a regression model, the NURBS method is applied. NURBS surfaces are mathematically the most versatile method of presenting surfaces. Most modern CAD/CAM systems make it possible to model NURBS curves and surfaces; NURBS curves and surfaces are also supported by information exchange formats such as IGES or STEP. The NURBS surface of the degreepin theudirection and degreeqin thevdirection is a vector function of two variables in the form of  [19]:(4)S(u,v)=∑i=0n∑j=0mwi,jNi,p(u)Nj,q(v)Pi,j∑i=0n∑j=0mwi,jNi,p(u)Nj,q(v).Pi,jpoints  make up a two-direction control-points grid on which the surface patch is skinned (nandmare the numbers of control points in theuandvdirections respectively), andwi,jare the weights, whileNi,p(u)andNj,q(v)are the B-spline basis functions defined on knot vectors  [19]. The input data in surface design are a set of points forming a spatial grid of points. In the case under consideration, the data were obtained from coordinate measurements during which a two-direction grid of measurement points was obtained. In developing the geometric model, the method of global surface approximation was used. In modeling free-form surfaces, curves of at least the second degree should be used in order to maintain the continuity of the second-order derivatives at the points where two multinomial arcs described with different formulae meet.In iterative modeling, the number of control points is changed in both directions (for the subsequent surface degrees), and the model residuals are tested at each stage. This methodology makes it possible to reject deviations (and other effects) of random character from measurement data, according to the developed criterion (Section  4). The regression model representing deterministic influences of the manufacturing process on the actual surface takes on the CAD parametric form. This model can be applied at every production stage.It can be expected that the shapes of deterministic deviations on subsequent surfaces machined under the same conditions will be repeatable to a specific extent, which implies that there is a specific similarity between spatial models estimating these deviations [12,16]. Estimating the model of deterministic deviations on the basis of a set of properly sampled surfaces through averaging of the models built on these surfaces is suggested. During the iterative procedure of modeling of the regression surface representing deterministic deviations, the NURBS surface model with the smallest number of control points and the lowest surface degrees in theuandvdirections for which the model residuals met the criteria of a normal probability distribution and of spatial randomness is adopted as an adequate one.The averaged model represents the characteristic pattern left by the machining process on surfaces with a specific variability between the surfaces. In the present article, the procedure was applied in the processing of measurement data representing these surface deviations for which the location and direction deviations were minimized by fitting the measurement data to the CAD model. If measurement data are processed without being fitted to the CAD model, then the determined model will also include the location and direction deviations in relation to the basic elements in addition to surface irregularities.The procedure of determining the MPM for the numbersof surfaces in a synthetic way is illustrated in the diagram presented in Fig. 2.The recognition of the machining process’s systematic influence and its nature and estimation of this influence in the form of a digital CAD model (MPM) make it possible to minimize the effects of this influence on surfaces by correcting the tool path in the machining program. The nominal geometry can be modified by superimposing the reversed MPM on the nominal CAD model. In practice, this procedure can be carried out according to the following dependence:(5)M(u,v)=N(u,v)+(−MPM(u,v)n(u,v))where:M(u,v)— corrected points,N(u,v)​— nominal points,MPM(u,v)​— systematic machining error effects determined from MPM at theN(u,v),n(u,v)​— normal vectors at theN(u,v).The surface CAD model should be built on the corrected points, and a modified tool path should be generated in the new machining program on the basis of this model. The corrected machining program may be used in machining or producing subsequent items under the same conditions.The tests were conducted on 10 surfaces made of aluminum alloy with a base measuring 50×50 mm milled under the same conditions using a ball-end mill 6 mm in diameter, a rotational speed of 7500 rev/min, a working feed of 300 mm/min, and a zig-zag cutting path in the XY plane.The measurements were carried out on a Global Performance CMM (PC DMIS software,MPEE=1.5+L/333), equipped with a Renishaw SP25 probe and a 20 mm stylus with a ball tip 4 mm in diameter, in which 625 uniformly distributed measurement points were scanned along a regular gridu×v(25 rows × 25 columns). The distribution of the measurement points on the CAD model in the PC DMIS application is shown in Fig. 3, while Fig. 4presents the measurements performed with the CMM Global.Models of deterministic deviations were created for each surface. Regression surfaces were modeled on the obtained deviations using an iterative procedure (Fig. 2). The following parameters were determined for each of the residuals: the maximum value, the minimum value, the arithmetic mean, the probability distribution (normality was verified with the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test), and the coefficient of spatial autocorrelation I (2). The relationships between the deviations at the measurement points were made dependent on the reciprocals of the distance between the points. The elements of the weighting matrices, defining the dependences between the deviations at points i and j, were determined from the dependence (3), assuming the value of the constantk=3. In all statistical tests, the confidence levelP=0.99was adopted. Adequate regression models of all the surfaces under study were obtained for the number of control points equal to 15×15 and surface degrees of 3×3. In the next stage, the models of deterministic deviations were averaged. The resulting model represented the MPM left on the machined surfaces. Mastercam X4 and Rhinoceros 3.0 software was used for surface modeling.It is easiest to observe the distribution of surface irregularities using color maps (which is a common practice in econometrics, geodesy, and cartography). To facilitate both visual assessment of the effects of introducing the procedure of compensating for systematic errors and a comparison of all the three examined cases (Sections  1 and 8.3), all the maps of deviations are compiled in a single figure (Fig. 5). The map of deviations represented by the MPM can be analyzed using Fig. 5(i)L1.Samples were prepared after compensations had been introduced. The effects of the program corrections are presented for the example of three samples (i–iii). The nominal geometry was modified by adding a reversed MPM in the case of the first sample (i), by adding a reversed model of the deterministic deviations of one of the 10 surfaces (marked with the symbol S4) in the case of the second sample (ii), and by adding the raw measurement data of this surface with the opposite sign in the case of the third sample (iii). The same machining and measuring parameters which had been used before the correction were applied again. The lists of the deviation values for all three cases can be seen in Table 1, and the maps of deviations are compiled in Fig. 5L1–L2.Analyzing the obtained results (Tables 1 and 2), a significantly better effect of performing compensation on the basis of the MPM can be seen. The value of the biggest observed deviation from the nominal surface is close to the limit of the average variability range of the separated random effects occurring on ten surfaces (−0.0064÷+0.0066 mm). In addition, this deviation represents the deterministic component within the range of its variability (min. ±0.0043; max. ±0.0024 mm). Observing maps of deviations (Fig. 5(iii)L2), it is possible to find the reason for the worst effect of compensation performed on the basis of raw measurement data. The biggest deviations after the compensation has been introduced are found at the locations of the greatest random deviations on the surface before the compensation (Fig. 5(iii)L1) (with the opposite sign). The effects of random influences from the machining before the compensation, which had not been removed, were transferred to the surface obtained after the compensation, and they added to the random influences of the machining after the machining program had been corrected. This phenomenon does not occur on the surface machined after the program had been corrected on the basis of the model of the deviations of this surface (Fig. 5(ii)L2).After having applied the procedure described in Section  2 to separate the deterministic deviations and the random deviations on the surfaces after the compensation, the results shown in Table 2 and in Fig. 5L3–L4 were obtained.As can be seen, the scatter of the deterministic deviation components for the two samples (ii) and (iii) is similar. Comparing the results concerning the random component, it can be noticed that the scatter of the random component on the sample made after the correction based on the raw measurement data (Fig. 5(iii)L4) is twice as big as that for the remaining two samples (Fig. 5(ii)–(iii)L4). The conclusions drawn after analyzing the effects of the compensation performed on the basis of the raw measurement data are thus proved. The differences in the ranges of the deterministic components result from variability of the machining process, it being understood that, according to the principles of statistics, in the case of machining multiple samples after having corrected the machining program on the basis of the MPM, the probability of an efficient compensation is higher than in the case of the program correction on the basis of the deviation model of one surface.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
An innovative solution was applied to correcting a program for machining free-form surfaces, consisting in using a machining pattern model (MPM). The CAD machining pattern model was obtained by averaging models of deterministic deviations of many surfaces. Removing the random component from the measurement data and averaging the systematic component brought about a significant effect in the form of a greater surface accuracy after carrying out the correction based on the devised MPM.Modifying the tool path on the basis of the raw measurement data resulted in the accumulation of the random influences from both stages of machining (before the compensation and after it had been performed). Modifying the nominal geometry on the basis of the model of deterministic deviations, that is, after the random influences generated in the first stage of machining had been removed, yields better results. However, the probability of performing an efficient compensation is highest when the MPM has been applied.The essence of the proposed solution is the development of a model representing to the highest possible extent the systematic influences of the machining process on the machined surfaces, that is, the most probable shape of deviations. Surfaces produced after the correction has been introduced are characterized by random effects which it is not possible to compensate for as well as systematic effects within the process variability. The smaller the scatter of the machining process (and thus the smaller the uncertainty of estimating the MPM), the better the correction effects. The efficiency of the proposed method will increase further after applying the Statistical process control (SPC) methods.