@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Enriching the semantics of variational geometric constraint data with ontology

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The semantics of product data cannot be automatically exchanged by existing standards.An ontology is constructed by formalizing VGC specifications in OWL and SWRL.The ontology is instantiated by the VGC data extracted from CAD systems.The ontology can well express the explicit semantics of the VGC data.Consistency checking, knowledge reasoning and semantic queries can be performed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Semantic,Variational geometric constraint,Data semantic exchange,Ontology,OWL 2 DL,SWRL,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Lack of explicit semantics in the product data to be exchanged among product development systems is a major problem for existing product data exchange standards. To solve this problem, the semantics of product data should be enriched to form a basis for exchanging them. This paper proposes an ontology-based approach to enrich the semantics of variational geometric constraint data, one of the most important kinds of product data in product development systems. In this approach, an ontology for variational geometric constraint specifications is constructed by formalizing the specifications in the variational geometric constraint network theory in Web Ontology Language 2 Description Logic (OWL 2 DL) and Semantic Web Rule Language (SWRL). This ontology has rigorous computer-interpretable semantics due to the mathematic logic-based semantics of OWL 2 DL and SWRL. It is capable of providing a semantic enrichment model for the variational geometric constraint data extracted from CAD systems. The ontology is implemented with the use of the OWL 2 DL/SWRL ontology based technologies. As the benefits of the implemented ontology, consistency checking, knowledge reasoning and semantic queries can be automatically performed. These benefits will lay a basis for further exchanging the explicit semantics of variational geometric constraint data among heterogeneous product development systems.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The exchange of product data among different product development systems used at different phases of product life cycle has become an important requirement for industry. Various product data exchange standards, including the standard for the exchange of product model data (STEP)  [1], have been developed to meet this requirement during the last few decades. Although these standards are capable of exchanging geometric data correctly, they have a common drawback in transferring the meanings of product data in a specific context (i.e. the semantics of product data). For this reason, the product data related to product development process, such as the construction history data, parameter data, constraint data and feature data, are completely lost during the exchange process  [2]. To overcome this drawback, the semantics of product data should be expressed and interpreted explicitly  [3].Variational geometric constraint data is one of the most important kinds of product data that describes the geometric variation information used for product tolerance design  [4]. A systematic description of the data can be found in the variational geometric constraint network theory  [5] and the function oriented computer aided tolerancing (FOCAT) system  [6]. Even though the variational geometric constraint network theory and the FOCAT system have provided and implemented an approach to use the variational geometric constraint data to generate the variational geometric constraint types to construct a tolerance chain to facilitate product tolerance design, the semantics of the data were not expressed and interpreted explicitly in this implemented approach. Thus the approach is insufficient to satisfy the requirements of exchanging the semantics of variational geometric constraint data among heterogeneous product development systems. To overcome this limitation, ontology is introduced and an ontology-based approach to enrich the semantics of the variational geometric constraint data is proposed in this paper.Ontology, an explicit specification of a conceptualization, is well-known for having a capability to represent and exchange data semantics explicitly  [7]. Even though the application of ontology has its root in the field of the Semantic Web, it has been extended to many other fields during the past decade. In the field of geometrical product development, ontology has been used to enrich product data semantics  [8,9], facilitate knowledge sharing and reusing in product model development  [10] and implement the semantic interoperability among industrial information systems [11]. The role of ontologies with rigorous semantics is highlighted in a comprehensive review on the knowledge representation techniques in product design systems  [12]. With an ontology-based approach, variational geometric constraint specifications defined in the variational geometric constraint network theory  [5] are formalized in OWL 2 DL  [13] and SWRL  [14], two ontology representation languages developed by the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C). Then the formalized specifications are instantiated by the variational geometric constraint data extracted from CAD systems. By this way, the semantics of the data are expressed and interpreted explicitly due to the logic-based semantics of OWL 2 DL and SWRL, which forms a basis for the exchange of such semantics. As three benefits of the proposed ontology-based approach, consistency checking, knowledge reasoning and semantic queries are capable of being performed on the formalized variational geometric constraint data.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section  2 provides an overview of related work. Section  3 sketches a background about the variational geometric constraint network theory. The details of the proposed ontology-based approach are explained in Section  4. The implementation of the approach is presented and the benefits of this implementation are illustrated through an example in Section  5. Section  6 ends the paper with a conclusion.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
It is difficult for existing product data exchange standards to exchange the semantics of product data among heterogeneous product development systems used at different phases of product life cycle. This paper discusses how to formalize the semantics of product data with an ontology based approach to lay a basis for further exchanging these semantics. In the paper, the formalization process of the semantics of VGC data is reported. This process requires constructing a TBox and an RBox and designing SWRL rules for VGC specifications and extracting the VGC data from CAD systems to construct an ABox. The benefits of this formalization are outlined and illustrated with an example. As can be seen in the example, these benefits can facilitate the discovery of VGC data with the archive and lay a foundation for further exchanging the semantics of VGC data.In real world product data exchange, various standards are used, in which STEP  [1] is the most widely used one. STEP enables representing and exchanging the product data required at different phases of product life cycle. The STEP based product data models are described in EXPRESS  [16]. EXPRESS is capable of developing syntactically correct product data models. But it has great difficulty in formalizing the explicit semantics of product data. Thus, the semantics of product data cannot be correctly exchanged using STEP. This leads to the loss of the product data related to product development process during the exchange process. In response to this problem, many approaches have been proposed, where the ontology-based approach could be the most effective one  [11]. In this approach, product data is always modeled in OWL (DL) and SWRL. By this way, the data has rigorous semantics because of the logic-based semantics of OWL and SWRL, which makes it possible to automatically exchange these semantics. So from the perspective of semantic exchange, the ontology-based approach seems to be better than the STEP-based approach. However, the former one should not be seen as a replacement of the latter one but more as a complementary solution for representing and exchanging the semantics of product data since not all STEP based product data can be modeled by the ontology languages OWL and SWRL.The wider application of the proposed approach is mainly limited by the expressive capability of OWL 2 DL and SWRL. A future work will focus on extending these two languages with some language constructs to support the representation and exchange of more product data. Another future work is to apply this approach to study and implement the automatic exchange of the semantics of VGC data. It is also a valuable work to develop an ontology-based software tool to facilitate the semantic exchange of product data on the basis of all these studies.