@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Classification, representation, and automatic extraction of deformation features in sheet metal parts

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Classification, representation and extraction of deformation features addressed.Basic deformation features Bend and Wall defined as a specific arrangement of faces.Compound deformation features handled as a specific combination of Bends and Walls.Compound deformation features represented as a Basic Deformation Features Graph.Algorithms to extract basic features and compound features presented.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Deformation features,Sheet-metal,Walls,Bends,Feature classification,Feature extraction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents classification, representation and extraction of deformation features in sheet-metal parts. The thickness is constant for these shape features and hence these are also referred to as constant thickness features. The deformation feature is represented as a set of faces with a characteristic arrangement among the faces. Deformation of the base-sheet or forming of material creates Bends and Walls with respect to a base-sheet or a reference plane. These are referred to as Basic Deformation Features (BDFs). Compound deformation features having two or more BDFs are defined as characteristic combinations of Bends and Walls and represented as a graph called Basic Deformation Features Graph (BDFG). The graph, therefore, represents a compound deformation feature uniquely. The characteristic arrangement of the faces and type of bends belonging to the feature decide the type and nature of the deformation feature. Algorithms have been developed to extract and identify deformation features from a CAD model of sheet-metal parts. The proposed algorithm does not require folding and unfolding of the part as intermediate steps to recognize deformation features. Representations of typical features are illustrated and results of extracting these deformation features from typical sheet metal parts are presented and discussed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Constant thickness part models are encountered typically in two domains—injection molding and sheet-metal forming. Injection molding is widely used for manufacturing a variety of parts, from the smallest component to entire body panels for mechanical packaging. Sheet-metal has applications in automobile, aircraft, shipbuilding, HVAC works, medical equipment, architecture, farming, reactors, and roofs for building among many others. Since all injection molded features are not constant thickness features, the focus of this paper is restricted to the feature in the sheet metal forming domain.Sheet-metal can be cut and/or bent into a variety of shapes. A sheet-metal part is a combination of a number of individual features and each feature is related to other directly or indirectly. Sheet metal objects have been considered as solid models with constant thickness  [1–3] or surface models  [4,5] in the literature. However features in a sheet-metal object are created by removal of material, deformation or cut partially followed by local deformation. Sheet-metal features are classified into the following two categories:i.Deformation features: Deformation features are present in constant thickness part models, as a result of deformation of material, as forming of material to obtain sheet-metal parts. Features in a sheet metal are also referred to as constant thickness features  [2,3,6,7]. In this paper, the term deformation feature is used to refer features in a sheet metal part. Deformation features in constant thickness part model are not associated with addition or removal of volume. Examples of the deformation features are wall, bend, flange, jog, dimple, rib or bead, louver and lance. Some of these deformation features are illustrated in Fig. 1.These features are created by beading, bending, forming, folding, turning, joggling, embossing, lancing or louver operation. Example of sheet-metal deformation features are depicted in Fig. 1.Cut features: These features are associated with removal of material and are created by cutting, punching, stamping, shearing, nibbling, sniping, notching, or clipping operation. Examples of sheet-metal cut features are hole, slot, cutout, chamfer, fillet, vent, notch, and clip (Fig. 2). Extraction and recognition of these features are discussed by Nalluri  [8], Devarajan et al.  [9], Lipson and Shpitalni  [2] and Liu et al.  [3]. Cut features are also referred to as volumetric features as they are associated with subtraction of volume.It must be mentioned here that the deformation features shown above are distinct from free-form surface features (FFSFs) referred in the literature  [10]. While FFSFs are features that modify a free-form surface, deformation features in sheet-metal part are created by local deformation of a volume. The representation, classification and extraction of volumetric features can be found in literature  [2,3,8,9,11,12]. The representation, classification and extraction of FFSFs can also be found in literature  [10]. The representation, classification and extraction of the deformation features encountered in sheet-metal parts are presented in this paper.A formal classification of deformation features and algorithms to extract them from a CAD model are important from the point of view of better integration with process planning and other applications such as cost estimation. In industry, customers and suppliers often use different CAD tools which use different terms with different meanings and formats. The translation of a model results in loss of the engineering information such as that contained in features that are crucial for the downstream applications. For example feature information such as type of feature, thickness and bend radius present in the model is required for generating manufacturing plans. A formal taxonomy of features is also useful in enabling automatic translation of feature information across applications and forms an important motivation for the present work. The focus of this paper is representation, classification and extraction of deformation features encountered in sheet-metal parts.The main claim of the paper is a new classification and representation of deformation features of constant thickness. The paper also presents algorithms for automatic extraction of these features from a B-Rep of the part. Towards this objective the following new developments are reported.1.Definition of basic deformation features Bend and Wall as a characteristic arrangement of faces.Definition of compound deformation features as characteristic combinations of Bends and Walls.Basic Deformation Features Graph (BDFG) to represent compound deformation features.Algorithms to extract basic deformation features and compound deformation features from a B-Rep of a sheet metal part.This paper is organized as follows. Section  2 reviews the literature related to deformation features in sheet-metal parts and their classification and extraction. Section  3 first describes the definition and classification scheme for deformation features. The representation of deformation features as BDFG is presented next. The details of the procedure developed for the extraction of deformation features from a sheet-metal part are presented in Section  4. Section  5 describes the implementation details and presents results for some example sheet-metal parts with typical features. Section  6 discusses the advantages and limitations of the proposed classification and extraction. The paper concludes with a summary of work done and future work using the proposed representation.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
New representation, classification and extraction algorithms for deformation features in a constant thickness object have been developed. The deformation feature is represented as a set of faces which are available in the B-Rep along with the details of the relationship between these faces. This paper has proposed a new representation for deformation features that enables extraction and classification. Deformation features are classified into type and nature based on the characteristics of the feature’s ShellFaces and curvatures respectively. This representation and classification is consistent with volumetric and free-form surface features and has been defined in the DIFF model.The proposed approach relies only on the information that can be automatically extracted from the geometry and topology of the model containing the feature. The proposed classification of deformation features can be used to develop an ontology to determine semantic equivalences for the feature to be exchanged, mapped and used across PLM applications and can also be used to capture feature creation process.Table A.1 presents the information about the basic deformation features, the BDFG as well as the parameters that are used to identify the deformation feature. The parameters and BDFG extracted from the B-Rep are compared with the entries in each row to identify the corresponding feature.