@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Towards a social and context-aware multi-sensor fall detection and risk assessment platform

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a new extensible and adaptable cloud-based fall detection framework.An ontology-based approach is used to model the situation of patient and caregivers.The captured information from the sensors is combined with contextual information.Existing fall detection systems can easily be integrated to improve accuracy.Different combinations of fall detection systems and sensors can be used.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Fall detection,Fall risk assessment,Ontology,Semantic,Context-aware,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
For elderly people fall incidents are life-changing events that lead to degradation or even loss of autonomy. Current fall detection systems are not integrated and often associated with undetected falls and/or false alarms.In this paper, a social- and context-aware multi-sensor platform is presented, which integrates information gathered by a plethora of fall detection systems and sensors at the home of the elderly, by using a cloud-based solution, making use of an ontology. Within the ontology, both static and dynamic information is captured to model the situation of a specific patient and his/her (in)formal caregivers. This integrated contextual information allows to automatically and continuously assess the fall risk of the elderly, to more accurately detect falls and identify false alarms and to automatically notify the appropriate caregiver, e.g., based on location or their current task.The main advantage of the proposed platform is that multiple fall detection systems and sensors can be integrated, as they can be easily plugged in, this can be done based on the specific needs of the patient. The combination of several systems and sensors leads to a more reliable system, with better accuracy. The proof of concept was tested with the use of the visualizer, which enables a better way to analyze the data flow within the back-end and with the use of the portable testbed, which is equipped with several different sensors.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
For elderly people fall incidents are often life-changing events that might lead to degradation or even loss of autonomy. More than half of the elderly living in a nursing home and about one third of the elderly living at home fall at least once a year [1]. Of those who fall, 10–15% suffer severe injuries. The lack of timely aid can lead to further complications [2]. Although not all fall incidents lead to physical injuries, psychological consequences are equally important. Due to the high impact of falling, both fall prevention and reliable fall detection are necessities. The fall risk and detection work processes, as currently being employed, are visualized in Fig. 1(a).The increased risk factors that are related to falls can be divided into extrinsic and intrinsic risks.11http://www.euro.who.int/_data/assets/pdf_file/0018/74700/E82552.pdf.The first are directly related to the environment, while the second include, next to age and general clinical condition, sedentary behavior, impaired mobility and gait due to reduced muscle strength. To assess the risk of falling that a person has, formal caregivers carry out standardized tests. For example, the “Timed Get Up and Go Test (TUG)” is a test that is carried out in clinical environments on predefined, long time intervals [3]. Based on the results, targeted measures and advice are formulated. Further follow-up is done through direct interaction between a caregiver and the elderly. Today, attempts to automate this assessment and follow-up through domotics and monitoring systems are limited and not integrated [2].When the help desk is notified of a fall, either by one of the fall detection sensors or because the elderly pushes the button, the help desk operator tries to contact the elderly to obtain extra information. When the elderly does not respond or help is needed, the appropriate (in)formal caregivers are contacted by phone, in a pre-defined order until someone is found who is able to tend to the elderly. The help desk thus does not take into account the current context, e.g., location or current tasks of the (in)formal caregivers to assign the alarm. This leads to unnecessary delays and distractions, as caregivers are often called although they are unavailable. Moreover, a caregiver who is far away is often called, while a nearby (in)formal caregiver, e.g., a neighbor, could more quickly assess the situation or even tend to the alarm. In case the elderly is injured as a result of the fall, quick response and intervention is of the utmost importance.To counter undetected falls, false alarms and long intervention times, the FallRisk project22http://www.iminds.be/en/research/overview-projects/p/detail/fallrisk-2.aims to develop a social- and context-aware multi-sensor framework, called the OCarePlatform, which is able to automatically and accurately assess the fall risk of the elderly, detect falls and assign the alarms to (in)formal caregivers by taking their current context into account. The home of the elderly is equipped with a plethora of sensors and one or more fall detection systems. The OCarePlatform collects and integrates all the monitoring data, gathered by these devices. Unorganized, unprocessed raw data can be voluminous, but has no meaning on itself as it has no relationships or context. Information is data that has been given meaning by defining relational connections. For this, the platform uses an ontology [4], which is a semantic model that formally describes the concepts in a certain domain, their relationships and attributes. This way, an ontology encourages re-use and integration. Knowledge models and more specifically ontologies are already used in medicine and care [5–7]. By managing the data about the current context in an ontology, intelligent algorithms can be more easily defined that take advantage of this information to accurately assess the fall risk and detect calls. The envisioned fall risk and detection work processes supported by the OCarePlatform are visualized in Fig. 1(b).First, by monitoring the behavior of the elderly, based on the integrated sensor information, the OCarePlatform automatically checks whether the elderly is compliant with the given advice. Moreover, the Activities of Daily Living (ADL) patterns can be monitored. If a change in these patterns is detected, this might indicate a potentially higher risk for falls. In case of non-compliance or increased fall risks are detected, the appropriate caregivers are notified and informed of the gathered contextual information. This supports pro-active follow-up of the fall risk. The intervention of experts can thus be optimized in view of the time and point of need and the early warnings can contribute to increased effectiveness in view of fall prevention.Second, the OCarePlatform also aims to reduce the amount of false alarms and undetected calls, by integrating the information, gathered by the fall detection systems with the available context information.Third, the OCarePlatform also gathers context information about (in)formal caregivers associated with the elderly. It uses this information to more effectively assign one or more (in)formal caregivers to the alarm.For example, when an alarm button is pushed, but the context information suggests that it is a false alarm with a high probability, the help desk operator can contact a close by neighbor or other person. After a specific time, the help desk operator will contact this informal caregiver to check if it was actually a false alarm and to exchange information about the gravity of the alarm. When a caregiver and help desk receive an alarm, they also receive all the context information, which is perceived as important at that time, e.g., the last known location of the elderly, his or her fall risk and the sensor or detection system that caused the alarm. Finally, feedback given by the caregiver network after an alarm situation or follow-up of fall risk assessment, initiated by a notification of the OCarePlatform, will allow the OCarePlatform to adapt to the needs and preferences of the caregiver and the elderly.In this paper, a platform is presented capable of interacting with a wide range of heterogeneous sensors. Moreover, the platform is designed in such a way that intelligent, semantic techniques are used in order to deliver just-in-time information, about fall risk and fall detection, to the elderly and their (in)formal caregivers. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, an overview is given of the current state of the art. Section 3 details the general architecture of the proposed FallRisk system. Illustrative scenarios are detailed in Section 4 to highlight the possibilities of the proposed system and ontology-based reasoning. Sections 5–7 further detail the different components of the system, namely the used continuous care ontology, the sensor-based monitoring system and the ontology-based OCarePlatform. Section 8 details the implemented Proof of Concept to demonstrate the feasibility of the proposed FallRisk system. Finally, Section 9 highlights the conclusions and future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
