@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Five-axis tool path generation in CNC machining of

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
IntroducingT-spline surface to CAM area.Improved space-filling curve (ISFC) tool path forT-spline surfaces machining.ISFC generates a non-retracted tool path.Tool path planning algorithm for irregular boundaries and holes in pre-image.Compensation path algorithm to avoid uncut materials on tool path corners.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
T,-spline surface,Space-filling curve,Tool path generation,Five-axis machining,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Because of its flexible topology and robust data structure, theT-spline surface has become the trend of free-form surfaces representation in the realm of CAD design, animation and CAE. Yet its application in manufacturing has not been fully explored. In this work, the possibility of direct tool path generation on theT-spline surface has been discussed. An improved space-filling curve (ISFC) tool path planning algorithm has been proposed to exploit the advantage ofT-spline as a mathematical representation of free-form surfaces in CAM process, as well as to overcome its disadvantages such as irregular boundaries and holes in the pre-image. The turning problem in traditional SFC has been tackled using Hermite compensation curves. Finally, a prototype system has been developed to implement the proposed algorithm and actual machining has been conducted. The result shows the feasibility as well as the efficiency of the proposed method forT-spline surfaces tool path generation compared to commercial CAM system.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the field of computer-aided manufacturing, there are mainly two types of representation for free-form surface: the tensor-product parametric surface and the polyhedron surface. Both of them have several disadvantages in modeling complex workpieces. The tensor-product surface such as NURBS, as the term implies, is generated by tensor product of two NURBS curves. Every row in its control mesh must contain exactly the same number of control vertices. Most of them are superfluous and do not add information to the surface. In parametric space, the pre-image of a NURBS surface is a rectangular grid of knots. Due to such property, surfaces of arbitrary topology cannot be represented using a single NURBS surface  [1]. In practice, multiple trimmed NURBS patches are usually employed for complicated workpiece  [2–5]. The trimming and joining process not only are time consuming but also leave cracks or ripples between adjacent patches, making it difficult for tool path generation, as can be seen in Fig. 1(a).The polyhedron surface, also called tessellation surface, has been widely used in both commercial CAM system and academic research  [6–8]. In contrast to analytical representation, the polyhedron surface comprises of a large amount of triangular or quadrilateral facets. To represent complex shapes, finer facets are employed, and the total number of facets will greatly increase. Hence, a large storage memory is taken up for tool path generation, as shown in Fig. 1(b). Another problem of using the polyhedron surface is the lack of geometric information for discretized facets. The fitting of discrete surface normal and curvature are often used as a second best  [9].Researchers have been eager to find a mathematical model that is able to represent complex workpiece and is suitable for CAM processes as well. Not until the advent ofT-spline, this problem does not have a perfect solution.TheT-spline and its local refinement is first proposed in  [10,11]. It combines much of the flexibility of Point-based spline  [1] with the topology and structure of NURBS. It possesses unparalleled advantages in representing free-form surfaces compared to the tensor-product NURBS and the polyhedron surface. First, theT-spline does not require equal number of control vertices for each row in its control mesh. It keeps the least number of control vertices and offer convenience for CAD/CAM data exchange. Second, every control vertex has a dominating area. Only the surface points inside this area will receive contribution from the dominating vertex. The arbitrary topological structure ofT-spline makes it easy to represent complex free-form surface with a single, unified domain. For complicated workpieces, no trimming or gluing is required. As a result, tool path planning problems related to multi-patch machining, such as crack crossing and ripple smoothing between adjacent patches, will not be encountered. Tool path can be spread out over the whole surface, no unnecessary tool retraction is required.Moreover, theT-spline is a parametric analytical surface without discretization. CC (cutter-contact) point can be calculated analytically right on the surface. The tedious intersection process between surface facets and the tool can be avoided. The memory cost for recording the surface is also smaller compared to that of polyhedron surface. Furthermore, the local geometric property evaluation can be carried out in explicit form. The key properties for tool path side step determination, such as normal vector, principle curvature, and etc., can be easily derived through differential geometric calculation. No fitting or approximation is required.Nowadays,T-spline have been widely used in non-parameterized design  [12,13], movie and animation  [14]. There is also a growing trend of its application in CAE, especially in a newly flourishing area, the iso-geometric analysis  [15,16]. The Autodesk®T-splines®  Plug-in for Rhino®  is now the onlyT-splines modeling tool in the world  [17]. Even though the masses of research on the properties and characteristics ofT-spline in CAD and CAE realm, its application in CAM has not been fully exploited. This is definitely not a trivial problem, for an industrial design can never be called a product until it is manufactured. In this work, we will focus on the tool path generation forT-spline surface milling.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
