@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The role of real-time in biomedical science: A meta-analysis on computational complexity, delay and speedup

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Real-time: The promise of performance in real world scenarios.In this review we have discussed 120 real-time processing papers in the biomedical engineering field.The majority of papers lacks appropriate measures to support the real-time claim.An appropriate measure for theoretical claims on real-time is computational complexity.An appropriate measure for practical claims on real-time is speedup.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Real-time,Computational complexity,Speedup,Delay,Health care systems,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Purpose: The concept of real-time is very important, as it deals with the realizability of computer based health care systems.Method: In this paper we review biomedical real-time systems with a meta-analysis on computational complexity (CC), delay (Δ) and speedup (Sp).Results: During the review we found that, in the majority of papers, the term real-time is part of the thesis indicating that a proposed system or algorithm is practical. However, these papers were not considered for detailed scrutiny. Our detailed analysis focused on papers which support their claim of achieving real-time, with a discussion on CC or Sp. These papers were analyzed in terms of processing system used, application area (AA), CC,Δ, Sp, implementation/algorithm (I/A) and competition.Conclusions: The results show that the ideas of parallel processing and algorithm delay were only recently introduced and journal papers focus more on Algorithm (A) development than on implementation (I). Most authors compete on bigOnotation (O) and processing time (PT). Based on these results, we adopt the position that the concept of real-time will continue to play an important role in biomedical systems design. We predict that parallel processing considerations, such as Spand algorithm scaling, will become more important.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Biomedical engineering has to find solutions for escalating health care cost, varying availability of care, aging population and high burden of chronic disease related health behaviors. These physical problem solutions have to transform health care to improve the quality-of-life of patients and loved ones by being evidence-based, patient-centered, preventive, and proactive. Biomedical systems design is a key element to achieve these goals. Therefore, research in how to construct biomedical systems is so important. Now, biomedical science, as all sciences, is an evolutionary endeavor, where scientists and engineers collaborate and compete. The way in which these two actions are conducted shapes the direction of the research field. The advent of cheap and high performance computing has added a new direction to biomedical engineering. Biomedical scientists have started with the collaborative endeavor of constructing biomedical processing systems and they compete in terms of computational complexity (CC), speedup (Sp) and delay (Δ). However, one thing is special with the computing field: the rate of progress is incredibly high [1–4]. This enormous amount of change makes it difficult to keep a particular work relevant beyond the next hardware and software cycle. Especially, statements about real-time on specific processing systems tend to become outdated soon after implementation.Despite the detrimental exposure to the fast changing processing machines, the concept of real-time has become extremely popular with biomedical scientists. A keyword search on the PubMed11www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi accessed April 2013.database for biomedical publications reveals that a total of 8477 papers mention real-time together with processing. This number itself is already astonishing, but the real surprise is the way in which this number is reached. Fig. A1 shows how the number of publications is distributed over the years from 1964 to 2013. The bar graph shows an insignificant increase in the number of research papers from 1964 to 1985. This changes around 1986,22The area of theIBM©personal computer started during that time.from this time onwards the number of research papers increased by about 15 every year. A second marked change in the yearly increase of research publications comes around 2004.33During that time the Internet took off.From this year onwards the number of research publications increases by approximately 69. In 2013 the number of research publications jumps by 236 papers to a yearly total of 1075. There are several factors which contribute to this accelerating increase in real-time related papers. One of which is that more computing journals were indexed in PubMed. However, more fundamentally the increase of real-time related work can be linked to steep improvements in computers and computer science [5,6]. The origins of the term real-time can be traced back to the field of computer simulations, which, at that time, belonged to computer science. Until now, computer scientists hold up strict standards on what this term means [7,8]. Fundamentally, real-time just means that a system has the ability to perform a well-defined number of operations in an equally well-defined amount of time [9]. In order to support the claim that a system is real-time, we need to establish both the operations and the time available to execute these operations. Unfortunately, in the field of biomedical engineering, the meaning of real-time is blurred. This blurring is caused by a more abstract interpretation of real-time, which makes it more ambiguous. Many of these abstract interpretations reduce the concept of real-time to mean that asystem or an algorithm is implementable and that it works in practical settings. Regrettably, such statements are final, because in the process of abstraction the information, of what makes the system or the algorithm real-time, is lost. As a consequence, it is only possible to compete with such systems in an economic (price), but not in a scientific (CC, Spor Δ) way. This is a problem, because science needs competition to push the boundaries of what can be achieved. Therefore, a careless use of the term real-time hinders scientific process by putting up a smoke screen, i.e. in many cases there is a fundamental failure to communicate assumptions and boundary conditions used to achieve the real-time property.With this review we pay tribute to the rising importance of real-time for biomedical processing systems. We adopt the position that this importance will continue to rise in future and the term real-time will become synonymous with a high degree of practicality and realizability of proposed methods and systems. However, we recognize that there is a danger that high powered statements about real-time become empty, especially when the term is not well defined. The excessive use of the term real-time hinders the recognition of systems, which achieve real-time in the strict sense. We analyzed this problem by reviewing all papers in the PubMed database which mention real-time processing together with CC or Sp. The fact that only 134 papers, out of 8477 real-time processing related papers, mention CC or Spindicates that many authors fail to define real-time properly. The analysis of the 134 papers focused on seven different criteria. The first of which was a survey on the application area (AA) of the biomedical real-time processing system. The second criteria classified the work into either implementation (I) or algorithm (A). In general, I is more practical and A is more theoretical. The considerations on implementation/algorithm (I/A) impact on criteria three, the processing system used. Analysis criteria four to six were focused on CC, Δ and Sp. The final analysis rubric was concerned with competition. This criterion indicates whether or not the authors compete on specific real-time results either with their realizations of foreign work or with other published results. We present the analysis results in one table and four bar graphs. The results reflect the diversity of the term real-time processing in the biomedical domain. We found that it is used to describe work that ranges from very theoretical algorithm development all the way to practical system implementations on specific hardware and software environments. Furthermore, we detected that the ideas of parallel processing were not reflected sufficiently in theoretical work. Developing algorithms for parallel processing systems has great potential to speedup the processing time (PT). This needs further exploration, so that biomedical engineering stays on track to achieve preventive and proactive health care systems which serve patients in real-time.The review is organized as follows: the next section introduces the methods which were used to analyze real-time aspects of biomedical processing systems. Section 3 presents the review results. The discussion, in Section 4, focuses on the background of the review methodology and on result interpretation. The paper concludes with Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this review we have discussed 134 real-time processing papers in the biomedical engineering field. These papers were found through keyword searches on the PubMed database. Out of the 134 analyzed papers only 56 compete on real-time parameters. For the remaining 78 papers, the real-time concept indicates that the proposed method or implementation is practical or implementable. During the review we found that the concept of algorithm and processing delay is very important for real-time control systems. Spwas mentioned in 35 papers and only nine of these papers competed on the Spparameter. The relatively small number of papers that mention Spis a problem, because the concept of parallel processing, with Spas performance parameter, is crucial to utilize the full processing power of multicore processing systems. Hence, both implementation and algorithm development need to adopt the ideas of parallel processing and compete on parameters like Sp.The review results support our position that real-time is an important concept for biomedical engineering. It is applicable to diverse fields like bioinformatics, biomedical imaging and physiological signal processing. One reason for this wide application area comes from the fact that the underlying processing systems become more and more capable. Hence, it is natural to move offline processing algorithms, into the real-time domain. However, there is a danger that real-time becomes an empty promise, because without a discussion on performance parameters, such as CC or Sp, it is impossible to assess how difficult it was to achieve real-time. Furthermore, it is impractical to compete on real-time itself, it is only practical to compete on properties which enable real-time, such as processing system, as well as Spand CC of algorithms.We predict that in future the parallel nature of processing systems will have a profound impact on algorithm development and implementation of biomedical systems. Performance parameters, like scalability, communication overhead and communication load, will become more prominent. The ideas of parallel processing and constant information transfer in pervasive communication networks will pave the way to integrated health information systems which enable personalized care. On the medical side, these systems will acquire physiological data, support diagnosis and treatment monitoring. On the infrastructure side, these systems will generate, distribute and store heath records; thereby they shape clinical real-time work flows.None declared.Fig. A1shows how the number of publications is distributed over the years from 1964 to 2013. Fig. A2illustrates the layout of the review procedure. Fig. A3indicates the number of papers which discuss a processing system. Fig. A4lists the number of papers which focus on individual application areas. Fig. A5details the number of papers which use specific terminology to discuss CC. Fig. A6analyzes the number of papers which detail Δ, Sp, A and I. Fig. A7depicts the relationship between I/A and the technique used to describe the real-time capability.Table A1summarizes the studies on biomedical engineering evaluated based on real time properties.