@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Soft computing approach to 3D lung nodule segmentation in CT

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a multistage algorithm for 3D lung nodule segmentation.Soft computing: evolutionary computation and fuzzy connectedness is employed.The system is designed to extract various types of lung nodules.Two LIDC datasets with over 500 nodules have been employed for evaluation.A comprehensive efficiency analysis with original metrics has been proposed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Computer-aided diagnosis,Lung nodule,Segmentation,Soft computing,Fuzzy connectedness,Evolutionary computation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a novel, multilevel approach to the segmentation of various types of pulmonary nodules in computed tomography studies. It is based on two branches of computational intelligence: the fuzzy connectedness (FC) and the evolutionary computation. First, the image and auxiliary data are prepared for the 3D FC analysis during the first stage of an algorithm – the masks generation. Its main goal is to process some specific types of nodules connected to the pleura or vessels. It consists of some basic image processing operations as well as dedicated routines for the specific cases of nodules. The evolutionary computation is performed on the image and seed points in order to shorten the FC analysis and improve its accuracy. After the FC application, the remaining vessels are removed during the postprocessing stage. The method has been validated using the first dataset of studies acquired and described by the Lung Image Database Consortium (LIDC) and by its latest release – the LIDC–IDRI (Image Database Resource Initiative) database.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Lung nodules are sometimes assessed routinely in clinical practice. The diagnosis is usually based on computed tomography (CT) data. Although many studies have already been published, the delineation remains still a difficult task for the radiologist. Since the lung nodule delineation is time consuming and highly dependent on the observer experience, an application software for automatic measurement is desired.Since 1980s many attempts have been done to develop a system for the lung nodules (LN) detection, segmentation, and measurement. As the appearance of particular types of nodules in CT scans may vary depending on their type, malignancy, size, shape, solidity, density, and location, the segmentation and especially detection tasks are challenging and demand advanced, often multilevel methodologies, handling particular problems.Early works by Kostis, Reeves et al. present effective, geometrically driven ways to separate the nodules attached to the pleura by either common surface or a thin tail, as parts of wider methodologies [1,2]. One approach is the morphological processing with structuring elements of changing size, leading to the removal of nodule-attached structures [1]. The other one implements template functions [2]. Then, adaptive thresholding and geometric constraints are employed to delineate the nodule. A more effective approach dedicated to the juxtapleural nodules based on a cutting plane roughly inserted in between the nodule and pleura and iteratively moved into an optimal location [2]. It might be noticed that a rule-based inference system is used there to estimate and track the growth of a nodule in subsequent CT studies.The use of specific geometrical constraints is a common feature in pulmonary nodules’ segmentation methodologies. Okada et al. rely on an ellipsoid model of a nodule, as a specific type of a “blob”-like structure object to be segmented [3]. A robust anisotropic Gaussian fitting produces a probabilistic model. At the second stage, the nodule is extracted from the background by means of a likelihood ratio test with spatial and intensity constraints. The morphological operations play a crucial role in the work of Kuhnigk et al., where the basic region growing segmentation is followed by procedures leading to the separation of chest wall and vasculature via the assumption of the nodule convex shape and adaptive optimal erosion strength determination using a distance transformation [4]. Way et al. incorporated 3D active contours to establish the nodule surface [5]. It is done within the manually selected Volume of Interest (VOI), preprocessed by the k-means clustering. A dimensionality reduction has been employed by Wang et al., as the VOI around the nodule is transformed into a 2D image by a spiral-scanning technique [6]. As a result, the nodule surface becomes a curve, detected using a graph search via dynamic programming, and finally back-transformed into a volumetric space. A supervised segmentation methodology, based on multithreshold image representation and geodesic distance between nodule voxels preceded by anisotropic diffusive filtering has been proposed by Diciotti et al. [7,8]. Lu et al. employ the interactive edge-driven methodology using the Live-Wire algorithm [9,10]. Chen et al. [11] applied the integrated active contour model driven by fuzzy speed function and shape-intensity joint Bhattacharya distance in order to extract and separate nodules from attached vessels. A genetic algorithm has been introduced by de Carvalho Filho et al. [12] for nodule model generation. Individuals׳ genotypes refer to shape and texture features extracted from candidate nodules obtained via quality threshold clustering segmentation. The model is validated and classified using support vector machine (SVM).The methodology similar to ours in terms of the fuzzy connectedness-based region growing approach has been proposed by Dehmeshki et al. [13]. Based on manually indicated seed point, the local segmentation along with morphological corrections yields binary masks, subjected to the fuzzy connectedness analysis and, furthermore, sphericity-oriented region growing. Kubota et al. focused on the effectiveness of nontrivial nodule cases segmentation (especially low-density, juxtapleural and vascularized) [14]. Their approach takes advantage of the nodule convexity assumption and employs the distance transformation to extract the nodule core and subsequently its surface, separated from attached structures. The evaluation is based on the LIDC first dataset employed as well as a testing set in our work, moreover, it contains a detailed analysis and comparison of previously published LIDC-tested methodologies. Their segmentation overlap measure s0 (Jaccard index), ranging from 0.51 to 0.66, achieves 0.69 in [14]. This analysis is extended in Section 3.Practically all “state of the art” papers mentioned above focus on the nodule segmentation problem rather than on an automated detection. It is more effective and less time consuming to obtain a seed or VOI in the form of a “point click”, than to rely on automatically indicated nodule candidates. Several studies have focused on pulmonary nodule automated detection [15–19], yet the detection rate remains not applicable in clinical practice, as the developed methods still feature high false positive rate, that ranges between 4.4 and 10.3fpps (false positives per study); Wiemker et al. reported a less-than-1fpps value with the nodule size being at least 4mm [16,17].In this study, we introduce an approach that requires a “point click” to identify and mark each nodule. The selected voxel serves as a seed point for the 3D delineation procedure developed in this study. Our method combines the segmentation based on a multilevel approach with additional problem dependent procedures that separate the lung nodule from other structures of similar density attached to it, i.e. pleural wall or vessels. The non-solid low-density nodules are also taken into consideration and segmented. The methodology is based on a fuzzy connectedness approach with a soft computing stage incorporated in order to multiply the number of seeds and make the analysis more robust. The innovative approach to the 3D lung nodule segmentation discussed in this paper might be found in: (1) heuristic multiplication of seed points for a fuzzy connectedness analysis, (2) employment of a specific evolutionary computation into volumetric image processing, (3) modification of the relative fuzzy connectedness approach in terms of efficient algorithm termination with multiple background seed points. Moreover, a multipath workflow enables various types of nodules (well circumscribed, vascularized, pleura-connected, and low-density lesions) to be processed. The evaluation is based on 23 nodules from the first LIDC dataset and 551 cases included in the LIDC–IDRI database.The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the methodology and shows examples of its implementation. Section 3 offers the evaluation results matching the detection rate obtained by various combinations of the processing phases. Section 4 contributes the main conclusion of the study.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
