@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Application of wavelet techniques for cancer diagnosis using ultrasound images: A Review

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Application of DWT for cancer detection using ultrasound images is reviewed.Breast, thyroid, ovary and prostate cancers are considered.Preprocessing, segmentation and feature extraction using DWT are studied.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cancer,Breast cancer,Thyroid cancer,Ovarian cancer,Prostate cancer,Ultrasound image,Wavelet transform,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Ultrasound is an important and low cost imaging modality used to study the internal organs of human body and blood flow through blood vessels. It uses high frequency sound waves to acquire images of internal organs. It is used to screen normal, benign and malignant tissues of various organs. Healthy and malignant tissues generate different echoes for ultrasound. Hence, it provides useful information about the potential tumor tissues that can be analyzed for diagnostic purposes before therapeutic procedures. Ultrasound images are affected with speckle noise due to an air gap between the transducer probe and the body. The challenge is to design and develop robust image preprocessing, segmentation and feature extraction algorithms to locate the tumor region and to extract subtle information from isolated tumor region for diagnosis. This information can be revealed using a scale space technique such as the Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT). It decomposes an image into images at different scales using low pass and high pass filters. These filters help to identify the detail or sudden changes in intensity in the image. These changes are reflected in the wavelet coefficients. Various texture, statistical and image based features can be extracted from these coefficients. The extracted features are subjected to statistical analysis to identify the significant features to discriminate normal and malignant ultrasound images using supervised classifiers. This paper presents a review of wavelet techniques used for preprocessing, segmentation and feature extraction of breast, thyroid, ovarian and prostate cancer using ultrasound images.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Cancer is characterized by the abnormal growth of cells in the body. It can spread to other parts of the body via the bloodstream or lymphatic system [1]. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), cancer is one of the leading causes of death worldwide causing 7.6 million deaths in 2008 and 8.2 million deaths in 2012 [2]. Annual cancer mortalities are expected to rise to 22 million within the next two decades. In 2014, new cancer cases of 1,665,540 and cancer deaths of 585,720 are forecasted to occur in the United States alone [3]. The most common cancers causing these deaths are due to breast, thyroid and ovarian cancers.Breast cancer can be defined as an abnormal growth of cells in the breast region. It is second leading cause of death in women [4]. The middle-aged and older women are more prone to this cancer. There is no specific cause for breast cancer, however it has several risk factors, namely family history, continuous exposure to endogenous estrogens, genetic risk factors, dense breast tissue, radiation, obesity and consumption of diethylstilbestrol [5]. In 2014, the National Cancer Institute (NCI) reported estimate possibilities of 232,670 new cases of breast cancer and possibilities of 40,000 mortalities/deaths due to this cancer [3]. The common types of breast cancer depending on the location of tumor formation are ductal carcinoma (in the lining of the milk ducts) and lobular carcinoma (in the lobules/milk glands) [6].Thyroid cancer forms in the thyroid gland, one of the largest endocrine gland in the body. Thyroid gland is located at the base of the throat which is responsible for making the hormones that are required to regulate heart rate, blood pressure, body temperature and weight. It affects women more than men and those with a family history of thyroid disease. In addition, the death rates increase with age. The main causes of thyroid cancer are high radiation dosage, family history, ageing, low iodine diet, familial adenomatous polyposis, cowden disease and carney complex [7]. In 2014, the NCI reported estimate possibilities of 62,980 new cases of thyroid cancer and possibilities of 1,890 deaths due to this cancer [3]. Thyroid nodules, one of the common disorders of the gland, can be solid mass, cysts which are either benign (noncancerous) or malignant (cancerous) [8]. About 50% of the adult population have thyroid nodule problems; nevertheless, only 7% of them turn out to be malignant nodules [9]. The four main types of thyroid malignancies based on the different types of cells involved are Papillary Thyroid Cancer (PTC), Anaplastic Thyroid Cancer (ATC), Medullary Thyroid Cancer (MTC) and Follicular Thyroid Cancer (FTC) [10].Ovarian cancer, the sixth most frequent type of cancer in women, occurs in tissues of the ovary. In 2014, the NCI reported estimate possibilities of 21,980 new cases of ovarian cancer and possibilities of 14,270 mortalities due to this disease [3,6]. Prevalence of ovarian cancer increases in women with a family history of this disease. Ovarian cancer caused due to ageing, late menopause, genetic traits, endometriosis and family history [11]. The main two types of ovarian cancers based on the location affected are malignant germ cell tumors (in the egg cells) or ovarian epithelial carcinomas (on the surface of the ovary) [6].Prostate cancer is the second most common cancer in men and occurs in the prostate region. In this year (2015) 220,800 new cases are reported [1,2]. Moreover, 27,540 deaths are estimated in this year 2015 due to prostate cancer. The main risk factors of this cancer are age, family history, and genetic conditions [1,2]. Usually, early prostate cancer has no symptoms. In the advanced stage men may face symptoms such as weak, interrupted urine flow, blood in the urine. It spreads to bones which causes pain in the hips, spine and ribs [1,2].Even though, cancer is one of the leading causes of mortality worldwide, the survival rates can be increased, if it is diagnosed and treated at an early stage. All radiological modalities like Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), Computed Tomography (CT), Single-Photon Emission Computed Tomography (SPECT) and X-rays, and ultrasound can help in the process of disease diagnosis. Ultrasound is currently one of the most significant, widely used and versatile imaging modalities in medicine [12]. The combination of its advantages such as absence of ionizing radiations, short acquisition time, portability, low cost and sensitivity in determining the morphology of the organ, as well as the size, number and location of cancer tissues, make ultrasound a widely used diagnostic tool in clinical practice [13]. This imaging method aids the physicians in visualizing internal body structures and deduces useful information pertaining to the tissue characterization. According to Halliwell (2010) [14], currently, ultrasound is responsible for 20% of all diagnostic images. Applications have progressed from simple measurements of anatomical dimensions to detailed screening for fetal abnormalities, detection of subtle changes in tissue texture, and detailed study of blood flow in arteries [15]. Thus, ultrasound has become an important method for accurate diagnosis in variety of tissues and organs [16].Ultrasound is the single common imaging modality for the early diagnosis of cancer and in addition, it is used to identify the malignant and benign tissue in the organs (breast, thyroid and ovary) [17].The main causes of breast cancer in women and men are BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene mutations [18]. In women BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations causes breast cancer risk of about 45% among younger women. However, BRCA2 mutations develop breast cancer risk of about 6.8% in men [18]. The treatment options and survival rate increases with early diagnosis of breast cancer [19]. Both mammography and ultrasound are the two available tools (modality) competing for effective detection and diagnosis of breast cancer. Although mammography is the gold standard [20,21], it has a few limitations for early breast cancer detection. During breast cancer diagnosis radiologists misinterpret non-cancerous tissue as cancer and vice versa [22–24]. This increases the unnecessary (65–80%) biopsy operations [25], which in turn increase the cost and also emotional stress to the patients. Ultrasound imaging, an alternative to mammography for the detection of breast cancer, has showed impressive results and interest in the researchers [26–29]. Various studies using ultrasound have demonstrated significant high accuracy in discriminating benign and malignant breast cancer [30,31], 17% increase in overall cancer detection [32] and 40% decrease in unnecessary biopsies [33,34]. Ultrasound has shown significant sensitivity for identifying abnormalities in dense breasts, thus it is more useful in women younger than 35 years of age [32,34].Fig. 1 shows the typical ultrasound images of normal and malignant.Thyroid cancer is the seventh most common cancer in women and 15th most common cancer in men. It is hypothesized that reproductive and menstrual factors increases disparity of thyroid cancer among women as compared to men [38]. Ultrasound is widely used to identify thyroid nodule patterns and differentiate benign and malignant nodules. It provides information about potential predictors of thyroid malignancy such as location, number, size, echo-structure and echogenicity of thyroid nodules [35–37].Thus, many ultrasound features, including hypo-echogenicity, predominantly solid composition, assist in evaluating the benign or malignant character of a given nodule [39–41]. The incidence of thyroid nodules detected by ultrasound ranges from 10% to 67% [37,42]. Usually, malignant nodules have uneven boundaries and are mainly solid and hypo echoic [43]. The risk of malignancy increases, if solid sub centimeter nodules are hypo echoic with coarse micro and macro calcifications indicating the need for further assessment [44,45].Fig. 2 shows the typical ultrasound images of benign and malignant.The BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene mutations are the important causes of ovarian cancer among women [46]. Analysis of ultrasound images can assist in differentiating between benign and malignant lesions. It is the imaging modality of choice in the evaluation of ovarian masses prior to treatment [34]. The diagnosis of ovarian cancer from ultrasound images is based on morphological features. The features include the cystic and solid tumour composition, the presence and type of septations, and papillaries. According to Aletti et al. (2007) [47], the ovarian mass with both solid and cystic elements, occassionaly with internal echoes and septations are considered as highly significant features of ovarian cancer. In addition, the ovarian mass size is also a significant contributing factor in diagnosing ovarian cancer [48].Fig. 3 shows ultrasound images of benign and malignant ovaries. Several scoring systems for morphological features also been introduced to increase the test performance [49–51]. Although the use of a scoring system helps to improve the test performace, the existence of multiple scoring systems may pose problems in clinical practice [52]. Moreover, the ultrasound variables and their relative importance is arbitrarily defined in the available scoring system. In addition, there is a lack of consistency between ultrasound units and it is difficult to compare results of the reported studies [53].The main causes of prostate cancer are aging, family history and genetic conditions. The lynch syndrome, and BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene mutations are high risk inherited genetic conditions. Moreover, genetic studies show stong familial predisposition responsitble for 5–10% of prostate cancer [46]. Generally, it is diagnosed using prostate specific antigen and digital rectal examination. Further, biopsy is performed depending on transrectal ultrasound (TRUS) image [54,55]. The normal prostate has homogenous or uniform echo pattern. However, in early stage prostate tumor appear as anechoic, hypoechoic or isoechoic [54,55].Fig. 4 shows the ultrasound images of benign and malignant prostate.The development of Computer Aided Diagnosis (CAD) techniques using TRUS images may help the radiologists in screening and avoid unnecessary biopsies [54,55]. Usually, texture features of TRUS images are used to discriminate normal, benign and malignant prostate tissues [54,55].Although ultrasound imaging has proved to be one of the significant cancer diagnostic tools, this test to a greater extent is operator-dependent [56–59]. Malignant thyroid nodules having vague boundaries often merge with surrounding tissues making it difficult to delineate the shape of nodule [60]. The speckle noise present in the ultrasound images causes difficulties in interpreting small calcifications (microcalcifications), present in the breast which is an important indication of breast cancer [61]. Ultrasound has a tendency to underestimate the intraductal spread of breast cancer compared to other imaging modalities [62]. Thus, requires well–trained and experienced radiologists for interpretation of the ultrasound image [63–65]. Even experts also may have a higher inter-observer variation rate [66]. Despite vast studies and reviews many researchers are inconclusive about the ultrasound technique and diagnostic criteria which provide the best ovarian lesion characterisation [34]. Therefore, the readings and interpretations of the ultrasound images require a touch of automated techniques.The information processing of the organ is reflected in the ultrasound image as texture changes of the tissues characteristic in time, frequency and space. Thus, to understand the mechanics behind the information processing, different texture analysis methods can be used [67]. Among those methods the Wavelet Transform (WT) and time-frequency analysis technique stand out in terms of algorithmic efficiency [68]. Therefore, this present review paper is dedicated to the application of wavelet-based techniques in ultrasound image analysis for cancer detection.The limitations of the human visual interpretations of the ultrasound images may be overcome by developing a CAD system [69]. Automated diagnosis (CAD) has become a major research topic in medical imaging and diagnosis [70]. Various researches show that the automated diagnosis methods may reduce the cost, eliminate operator dependency and assist radiologists in the interpretation of medical images and distinguishing benign and malignant tissues [71–74]. Several software systems are implemented with the application of different ultrasound image texture processing techniques aiming at CAD of breast [17,75], thyroid [74,76,77], ovarian [17,78–82] and prostate [55] cancers. Among the many techniques, wavelet transformation has become very popular in recent times for its many salient features. This paper focuses the discussion on the research reported using wavelet-based techniques in ultrasound cancer detection. The aim is to summarize the different application aspects of wavelets in ultrasound imaging used for the diagnosis of cancers.Wavelet transform (WT) is in a number of ways more powerful as a signal processing technique compared to the Fourier transform and is used in variety of image processing applications [83,84]. Wavelets are mathematical functions which can be repeatedly used at different scales to decompose a signal and provide better resolution properties in the time-scale plane. Both 1D and 2D versions of wavelet transforms have been developed, where the latter is applicable to images. A wavelet transform decomposes the signal into approximation (low pass components) and detail coefficients (high pass components) [68,85]. The approximation coefficients in every level are further decomposed into next level of approximation and detail coefficients [86]. For images, the decomposition can be done with the application of 1D wavelets along rows first and then columns.Fig. 5 shows the one level 2D Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) computation. The images are decomposed using low pass and high pass filters which resulted approximation (LL), horizontal (LH), vertical (HL) and diagonal (HH) coefficients [87]. Further, the first level LL (Approximation coefficients A1) sub-band image is decomposed into level two wavelet coefficients [87]. Average energy [68] is calculated from these coefficients can be used to discriminate normal and abnormal classes.The wavelet transform provides both time/spatial and frequency (or scale) resolution information about the signal/image and the details of image in different frequency bands i.e. Multi-Resolution Analysis (MRA) [88]. The decimation operation provides the next scale level. The frequency bands are thus octaves. Many wavelets have been proposed by various researchers. Examples of various mother wavelets used in signal/image processing are: a) Daubechies (Db), b) Morlet, c) Orthogonal cubic spline (ocs), d) Biorthogonal (bior), e) Complex Gaussian (CG), f) Mexican Hat (MH), g) Haar, h) Coiflet wavelet (coif) [89].DWT technique has various applications in ultrasound image processing: used for de-noising, segmentation, and feature extraction. Wavelet transform based features are able to capture the subtle variations of texture in spatial and frequency domain and also details about the multiple frequency bands.Fig. 6 illustrates the result of 2D two-level DWT decomposition of benign (Fig. 6a) and malignant (Fig. 6b) ultrasound ovary images. It can be seen from the Fig. 6a and b that, the subtle changes are visible in the high frequency sub-bands of the images. The subtle changes are more visible in Fig. 6b as compared to Fig. 6a.In the first level of decomposition, the original image is decomposed into approximation coefficient (original A1) and three detail coefficients (horizontal H1, diagonal D1, and vertical V1). The approximation coefficient is further subjected to another level of decomposition in which the A1 is decomposed into A2, H2, D2 and V2 as shown in the Fig. 6. From each coefficient level, the features (energy, entropy) can be extracted [68]. The entropy feature provides the information about amount of variations/disorders present in the images. These extracted features can be used for automated classification of ultrasound images. From 2D DWT coefficients (Fig. 5), texture features can be extracted using different texture methods.Generally, automated diagnostic system developed using computerized image processing techniques involves stages such as pre-processing, segmentation, feature extraction and classification.Fig. 7 presents a block diagram for wavelet-based automated diagnosis of cancer (breast, thyroid, ovarian and prostate) system. Combination of expert׳s knowledge and CAD system may improve the accuracy of the cancer diagnosis.Ultrasound images are degraded due to the presence of signal dependent noise known as speckle [90]. The speckle noise arises due to the constructive and destructive interference of backscattering. It affects the small and low contrast lesions by limiting the contrast resolution [90].In addition to degrading the image quality, speckle noise also degrades the fine details, edge definition, and deteriorates the physician׳s interpretation and diagnosis efficiency. So speckle filtering is a main pre-processing step in feature extraction, and recognition using ultrasound medical images. Numerous approaches have been proposed for speckle reduction using WT [91,92]. The WT method translates the image into sub bands consisting of a set of details sub band orientation and resolution scale wavelet coefficient [93–95]. Thus, this time-variant decomposition WT method is very effective in separating noise from an image. Various wavelet-based techniques: wavelet shrinkage [96], wavelet de-speckling under Bayesian network [97] and wavelet filtering and diffusion [98] were developed to supress the ultrasound image noise. Summary of wavelet based denoising and segmentation methods for cancer detection are tabulated inTable 1.Ultrasound imaging is a coherent imaging system which sends the ultrasound waves to tissue. The primary scattering reflects the incident wave to the sensor and backscattered coherent waves experiences constructive or destructive interference. Hence, the images degraded with random granular patterns. This makes segmentation of the specific lesions more difficult [99]. WT decomposes the image using low and high pass filters. These filters are able to separate the specific lesions from the noise. Hence, several authors have used WT to segment the lesions in the ultrasound images [100].Chang et al. (2005) [101] proposed level set method for automatic segmentation of breast tissues and classified in to benign and malignant cases using Support Vector Machine (SVM) classifier and morphologic features. Huang et al. (2007) [102] developed automated deformation-based level set segmentation to extract precisely the contours of breast tumors from ultrasound images. The WT is employed on ultrasound images for segmentation [103]. Bharati et al. (2004) [103] discussed wavelet-based texture analysis method and provided insight into WT space/frequency decomposition behavior. Park et al. (2007) [104] used 1-level 2D WT to segment the solid nodule region of breast ultrasound images. Many wavelet-based speckle reduction methods [105–109] and segmentation techniques [110] are proposed.Boukerroui et al. (2003) proposed breast lesion segmentation from ultrasound images using DWT decomposition and Gray-Level Co-occurrence Matrix (GLCM) texture features. The features namely angular second order moment, correlation and sum average are extracted from the wavelet sub bands and k-means clustering is used to cluster the breast lesions using the extracted texture features. They performed four level wavelet decomposition to achieve better segmentation results. However, they didn׳t mention the wavelet family used for segmentation. Hausdorff Distance (HD) and Average distance measures used to evaluate the performance of the segmentation algorithm [111]. However, the quantitative results are not mentioned in the literature [111].Quadratic spline wavelet is used in [112] for speckle noise reduction and thyroid nodule boundary detection in ultrasound images. Quadratic spline wavelet decomposes the multiplicative speckle noise model into an addictive signal dependent noise model to discriminate the edges of the objects from the edges of speckle artefacts. Further, constraint Hough transform and local maxima detection are applied to segment the thyroid nodule boundary. Segmentation accuracy of their method is evaluated using Mean Absolute Distance (MAD). It measures absolute distance between the automatic and manual graders. They reported a MAD of 90.77% and 89.53% for first and second observers respectively.Tsantis et al. (2007) used dyadic WT for speckle noise reduction on thyroid ultrasound images. Initially, multiscale edge representation is performed using atrous dyadic WT, gradient vector and modulus maxima computation. Further, coarse to fine interscale analysis and singularity detection is performed on wavelet sub bands. Finally, the de-speckled image is obtained by inverse DWT. Their method is evaluated using Squared-Error-Ratio (SER) and reported a SER of 16.3dB [113].Raj et al. (2012) used Db wavelet to perform image sharpening. Breast ultrasound is subjected to DWT and Spherical Wavelet Transform (SWT) and the sub-bands are interpolated using bi-cubic interpolation. Further, the interpolated sub-bands are reconstructed using inverse DWT to obtain a sharper image. Finally, these sharpened images are denoised using median filtering [114].Alka et al. (2013) developed penalized thresholding for speckle noise removal using WT for ovarian cancer ultrasound images. The noise free and noise data is modeled from wavelet coefficients using Bayesian estimation. The initial classification mainly relies on useful wavelet coefficients across the scales. Finally, the hard selection of wavelet coefficients is used to reconstruct denoised image using inter-scale correlation. Their method obtained a Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR) of 46dB [115].Acharya et al. (2013a) used Complex Wavelet Transform (CWT) for speckle noise reduction of normal and thyroid ultrasound images. CWT decomposes the images into low and high pass components and Bayesian thresholding is used to process the wavelet coefficients with noise. Finally, inverse DWT is used to reconstruct the denoised image. Their method shows noise removed ultrasound images provides higher accuracy than the image without pre-processing [116].Devi et al. (2014) used Db wavelet for speckle noise reduction in thyroid ultrasound images for automated malignancy risk assessment. Initially, the ultrasound images are decomposed using DWT. Further, wavelet thresholding is performed on wavelet coefficients using Bayesian estimation. Finally, inverse DWT is applied to reconstruct the noise free image. Further, GLCM texture features are extracted from these pre-processed images to discriminate benign and malignant thyroid nodules. Their method obtained an accuracy of 90.9%. However, they didn׳t mention the performance evaluation of noise removal stage [117].Sindhuja et al. (2014) used Db wavelet for breast lesion segmentation from ultrasound images. Initially, ultrasound images are decomposed using WT. Further, high frequency sub bands and input image is interpolated to enhance the image quality. Finally, inverse DWT is used to recover the denoised image. Further, GLCM and Local Binary Pattern (LBP) texture features are computed from the wavelet sub bands to identify the breast lesions. Their segmentation approach is evaluated using Jaccard Similarity Measure (JSM) and obtained a JSM of 0.9 [118].Prabhakar et al. (2014) used wavelet decomposition for speckle noise reduction from breast ultrasound images. However, their method didn׳t mention the performance evaluation [119].Subashini et al. (2014) used wavelet decomposition and wavelet shrinking for speckle noise removal from breast ultrasound images. The ultrasound images are decomposed using DWT. Further, noise removal is achieved in wavelet coefficients. Finally, inverse DWT is applied to reconstruct the de-speckled image. Further, energy, contrast and entropy features are extracted from the wavelet sub bands to discriminate normal and breast lesions. However, they didn׳t mention the performance evaluation of their noise removal method and the classification [120].Tsantis et al. (2014) used dyadic wavelet transform for speckle reduction using the method explained in [121] from thyroid, breast and liver ultrasound images. Their method obtained a PSNR of 35.12dB in removing speckle noise from the images [121].Torbati et al. (2014) proposed medical image segmentation method using DWT and Moving Average Self Organizing Map (MA-SOM). Their method applied on breast ultrasound images, CT and MRI yielded a JI and RTI of 86.80 and 86.88 respectively [122].Fei et al. (2012) proposed automated segmentation of prostate cancer using DWT method applied on TRUS images [123]. SVM classifier is used to classify normal and prostate TRUS image pixels. Their method obtained the DICE overlap ratio of 92.4±1.1% [123].Zhang et al. (2007) proposed prostate boundary delineation method using tree-structured non-linear filter, directional wavelet transform and tree-structured wavelet transform methods [124]. Their algorithm yielded the segmentation accuracy of 97.6% and 90.2% with and without pre-processing respectively using TRUS images [124].DWT can be used to extract local textural features [125–128], to detect multiresolution characteristics, feature enhancement [129–132], texture discrimination and pattern recognition [133]. The feature extraction from the detailed coefficients at various levels or different frequency bands can reveal the characteristics of the image and can be used in automated cancer detection system [134]. Summary of wavelet-based CAD system using ultrasound images for cancer detection is tabulated inTable 2.Chen et al. (2002) [125] presented a Neural Network (NN) based approach to perform classification decision based on the set of input features (variance contrast, autocorrelation contrast and the distribution distortion of wavelet coefficients) extracted from the Region Of Interest (ROI). A Multi-Layered Perceptron (MLP) NN is used for the classification of normal and malignant breast tissues. Their method obtained a sensitivity of 98.77% and specificity of 81.37%.Few other examples of classification algorithms that have been used for cancer detection are: SVM [135–138], MLP NN [139], Artificial Neural Network (ANN) [140,141], Probabilistic Neural Network (PNN) [142], K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN) [142]. Moreover, various wavelet-based methods are applied on ultrasound images by different researchers for automated identification of cancerous and non-cancerous tissues. Kishore et al. (2006) [143] proposed an algorithm using first order statistics (mean and variance) features extracted from mutliresolution decompositions of energy-normalized sub-regions of ultrasound images of 84 subjects (43 malignant and 161 benign). The study reported 91% accuracy in the discrimination between breast lesions and surrounding normal tissues.Lee et al. (2009) [144] developed reversible round-off nonrecursive 1-D discrete periodized WT using Db wavelet. Their method is applied on breast ultrasound images to delineate the breast lesions. Further, six morphological features are extracted from the lesions and classified as benign and malignant using Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA). Their method obtained an accuracy of 95.1%.A recent work by Yang 2013 [145] used multiresolution ranklet and WT to extract the invariant texture features that improved the diagnostic performance from three databases (databases A: 116 subjects, B: 193 subjects and C: 161 subjects) of breast ultrasound images. The study experiment suggested that the ultrasound texture analysis using multi-resolution gray scale invariant features via ranklet and wavelet transforms are useful in developing a robust CAD breast cancer system.Yan and Yu et al. (2012) have analyzed the diffuse reflectance optical intensity, Low Intensity Focused Ultrasound (LIFU) signals and ultrasound images to discriminate healthy, benign and cancerous breast tissues [139]. Various texture features such as correlation, energy, contrast and homogeneity are extracted from ultrasound images. Backward stepwise regression is used to discriminate cancerous and non-cancerous masses. Their method obtained an Area Under the Curve (AUC) of 0.93 [146].Zhou et al. (2013) proposed shearlet transform based breast tumor detection using breast ultrasound images. Further, various texture features are extracted from shearlet transform coefficients [147]. Finally, these features are fed to SVM and AdaBoost classifiers to discriminate benign and malignant breast masses and obtained an accuracy of 91±3.8% and 90±2.8% for SVM and AdaBoost classifiers respectively [147].Granchi et al. (2015) used hyper-spectral analysis to discriminate infiltrating ductal carcinoma and fibroadenoma on Radio Frequency (RF) ultrasound signals and ultrasound images [148]. Initially, ultrasound images are decomposed using hyper-spectral algorithm and ultrasonic local estimator algorithm is used to discriminate the two classes with a sensitivity of 92.2% and specificity of 93% [148].Lee et al. (2009) proposed automated detection of breast tumor using 1-D discrete periodic wavelet transform [149]. 1-D discrete periodic wavelet transform is applied to extract octave energy features. Features coupled with LDA are used to discriminate benign and malignant lesions. Their method obtained an accuracy of 94.8%.Chang et al. (2008) [150] developed thyroid lesion segmentation and discrimination method using ultrasound images. Initially, the images are preprocessed using adaptive weighted median filter to remove the speckle noise. Further, morphological operations and graylevel compensation techniques are used to segment the thyroid lesions. The features namely mean and variance of Haar wavelet sub bands and homogeneity features are extracted from the segmented lesions. Finally, Radial Basis Function Neural Network (RBFNN) is used to discriminate the lesions and reported an accuracy of greater than 95%.Tsantis et al. (2009) [151] developed thyroid malignancy risk evaluation using morphological and wavelet based features. Initially, speckle noise removal and is performed using dyadic wavelet transform. Further, lesion boundary is segmented using maxima regularity estimation and Hough transform. Various morphological and wavelet local maxima features are extracted from the segmented thyroid lesions. Finally, SVM and PNN classifiers are utilized to evaluate the malignant risk.Chang et al. (2009) [152] used GLCM, Gray Level Run Length Matrix (GLRLM), Laws Texture Energy (LTE), Gray Level Dissimilarity Matrix (GLDM), homogeneity, histogram bins, block difference inverse probability and mean & variance of Haar wavelet sub band features for thyroid nodule lesion discrimination. Initially, histogram equalization and median filtering are used for ultrasound image enhancement. Further, various texture features are extracted from the suspicious nodular area and DT is used to segment the nodular regions. Finally, SVM classifier is used to discriminate the components of the thyroid nodules with an accuracy of 97.5%. Similar type of features used in [153] to classify various components of the thyroid lesions and reported an accuracy of 100% using SVM classifier.Acharya et al. (2011) [154,78] used texture and wavelet energy features to classify benign and malignant classes from thyroid ultrasound images. Their method obtained a classification accuracy of 98.9% using KNN classifier.Acharya et al. (2012) [68] showed that a combination of the DWT algorithm and an AdaBoost classifier achieved an accuracy of higher than rest of the reported works in Table 2. The study extracted DWT and texture features from ultrasound images of 20 thyroid nodules (10 with benign and 10 malignant) and reported 100% accuracy in classifying normal and malignant thyroid nodules. The same group extracted Hu invariant moments, Gabor wavelet features and entropies from 20 ultrasound images of women (10 with malignant tumors and 10 with benign), then coupled with PNN classifier achieved a significant accuracy of 99.8% in classifying normal and malignant ovarian tumors [155].Maggio et al. (2010) proposed CAD of prostate cancer using DWT and texture features extracted from TRUS images [156]. Initially, region of interest is selected from TRUS images to extract local information using various texture features. Generalized Discriminant Analysis (GDA)–Fisher Linear Discriminant (FLD) are used to discriminate healthy and unhealthy prostate region. Their method obtained area under the ROC of 0.92 and 0.87 with and without pre-processing respectively.Imani et al. (2015) proposed prostate cancer characterization using spectrum, fractal dimension and wavelet transform from TRUS RF time series data [157]. SVM classifier is used to classify normal and cancerous images and reported area under the ROC of 0.93.Pareek et al. (2013) used DWT coefficients and Higher Order Spectra (HOS) features to classify cancerous and non-cancerous prostate tissues [158]. They have reported an accuracy of 97.9% using 144 TRUS images [158].Different mother wavelets are used in the DWT to extract the features from ultrasound images combined with classifiers can be used to diagnose the malignant tissues.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
