@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Reprint of 'Model of unidirectional block formation leading to reentrant ventricular tachycardia in the infarct border zone of postinfarction canine hearts'

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Ventricular tachycardia is common after myocardial infarction.Reentrant ventricular tachycardia is often located in the infarct border zone.Conduction velocity of the leading edge of the propagating wavefront is not constant.Functional block occurs at locations where the wavefront becomes critically convex.Activation rate and IBZ geometric structure during reentrant ventricular tachycardia are determined.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Activation mapping,Isthmus,Unidirectional block,Ventricular tachycardia,Wavefront curvature,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundWhen the infarct border zone is stimulated prematurely, a unidirectional block line (UBL) can form and lead to double-loop (figure-of-eight) reentrant ventricular tachycardia (VT) with a central isthmus. The isthmus is composed of an entrance, center, and exit. It was hypothesized that for certain stimulus site locations and coupling intervals, the UBL would coincide with the isthmus entrance boundary, where infarct border zone thickness changes from thin-to-thick in the travel direction of the premature stimulus wavefront.MethodA quantitative model was developed to describe how thin-to-thick changes in the border zone result in critically convex wavefront curvature leading to conduction block, which is dependent upon coupling interval. The model was tested in 12 retrospectively analyzed postinfarction canine experiments. Electrical activation was mapped for premature stimulation and for the first reentrant VT cycle. The relationship of functional conduction block forming during premature stimulation to functional block during reentrant VT was quantified.ResultsFor an appropriately placed stimulus, in accord with model predictions: 1. The UBL and reentrant VT isthmus lateral boundaries overlapped (error: 4.8±5.7mm). 2. The UBL leading edge coincided with the distal isthmus where the center-entrance boundary would be expected to occur. 3. The mean coupling interval was 164.6±11.0ms during premature stimulation and 190.7±20.4ms during the first reentrant VT cycle, in accord with model calculations, which resulted in critically convex wavefront curvature and functional conduction block, respectively, at the location of the isthmus entrance boundary and at the lateral isthmus edges.DiscussionReentrant VT onset following premature stimulation can be explained by the presence of critically convex wavefront curvature and unidirectional block at the isthmus entrance boundary when the premature stimulation interval is sufficiently short. The double-loop reentrant circuit pattern is a consequence of wavefront bifurcation around this UBL followed by coalescence, and then impulse propagation through the isthmus. The wavefront is blocked from propagating laterally away from the isthmus by sharp increases in border zone thickness, which results in critically convex wavefront curvature at VT cycle lengths.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In postinfarction hearts, a reentrant circuit causing ventricular tachycardia (VT) can form within the infarct border zone, which is the thin region of remaining viable myocardium located between the infarct and the epicardial surface of the heart [1]. In canine postinfarction, a complete reentrant circuit is often apparent when the epicardial surface of the epicardial border zone is mapped with a multielectrode array [2]. In humans, post myocardial infarction reentrant VT circuits are mostly endocardial; however, epicardial circuits have also been described [3]. It has been shown that the isthmus, or diastolic pathway, present when the pattern of reentrant VT is that of a double-loop, coincides with the region of thinnest border zone [4–6]. Based in part on this observation, it was previously demonstrated that changes in activation wavefront curvature along the border zone Z-axis (thickness axis) likely result in very slow conduction or functional conduction block at the lateral isthmus boundaries during VT [6]. The wavefront becomes critically convex when it propagates in the outward direction at those locations due to the sharp spatial gradient from thinner to thicker border zone (lesser to greater volume of tissue activating), with a resulting source/sink mismatch. Because the current available forward to the propagation direction is insufficient to activate the larger volume of tissue downstream, the wavefront slows and blocks. Yet, block due to convex wavefront curvature is also activation rate dependent [7], and the relationship of activation rate to Z-axis thickness changes has not yet been considered.More recently, it was shown that if the spatial change from thin to thick at the lateral isthmus boundaries has variable steepness, it can result in very slow and variable conduction across the lateral boundaries [8]. The resulting discontinuities in the laterally propagating electrical activation wavefront are a source of electrogram fractionation. Fractionation is defined as the presence of multiple variable deflections in the electrogram arising from asynchronous electrical activity. This compares with the normal condition in which a single activation wavefront is present, the source of the biphasic electrogram shape which is recorded from healthy myocardium. Because the geometric configuration of the conducting medium in postinfarction hearts is intransigent over time intervals of hours or more, electrogram fractionation can often be observed at the same recording location during normal sinus rhythm as well as during reentrant VT, depending on the wavefront direction [8] and the coupling interval for electrical activation.Although the functional block lines forming at the lateral isthmus boundaries, and electrogram fractionation arising from those locations, can be explained on the basis of critically convex wavefront curvature, the cause of unidirectional block line (UBL) formation during premature stimulation, which leads to onset of reentrant VT with a double-loop reentrant circuit pattern, has not been entirely elucidated. It is possible that large spatial changes in refractoriness are partially responsible for UBL formation leading to reentrant VT, as was shown in some prior canine experiments [9,10]. However in canine postinfarction, the effective refractory period at the isthmus location (inner pathway), versus immediately outside the isthmus (outer pathway), may also have little or no difference [11,12]. A low safety factor associated with longitudinal propagation in a non-uniformly anisotropic substrate can also contribute to conduction block [13]. Alternatively, herein it is shown how critically convex wavefront curvature, caused by changes in infarct border zone thickness, can result in unidirectional conduction block during premature excitation, and lead to the formation of a double-loop reentrant circuit with central isthmus at VT onset. The model can be helpful for understanding reentrant circuit formation because wavefront curvature changes have an anatomical, i.e., structural basis, and do not require the presence of sharp spatial changes in molecular-level properties at locations where functional block lines arise.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Based on the quantitative model described herein, functional block line locations can be estimated after measurement of infarct border zone thickness, for example by using enhanced magnetic resonance imaging or MRI (Fig. 8, top). Mapping ΔT/T and detecting areas of maximal absolute change in ΔT/T are key to the estimation process (Fig. 8, lower left panels). In instances when the premature excitation cycle leads to a stable reentrant VT circuit pattern initiated on the next cycle, the characteristics of wavefront curvature due to changes in border zone thickness along the Z-axis are useful to describe the electrophysiologic events that occur. When the premature coupling interval during programmed electrical stimulation is sufficiently short, conduction blocks unidirectionally along the surface area with steepest thin-to-thick transition, which corresponds to the isthmus entrance during reentrant VT (Fig. 8, PS). The UBL tends to coincide with the isthmus entrance boundary on three sides, where ΔT/T would be largest since T is minimized there and ΔT changes from thin-to-thick in the direction of wavefront propagation (Eq. (1)). Due to the bifurcation and curving of the premature stimulation wavefront around the UBL, followed by coalescence, and then by breakthrough into the previously excited region, with the constraint that the electrical impulse within the isthmus blocks in the direction of the lateral boundaries, the pattern of activation during subsequent reentry cycles with a double-loop circuit is established (Fig. 8, VT panel). This double-loop circuit pattern with central common pathway is often observed in canine postinfarction, and also in clinical cases of reentrant VT [23].The quantitative model described in this study cannot be used to predict the reentrant circuit activation pattern when VT onset is unstable. In previous work, reentry episodes with unstable onsets were not excluded, resulting in more varied locational relationships between the UBL and isthmus location [24]. In some cases when VT onset is unstable, the UBL can form at the isthmus end that is most proximal to the stimulus site, or even proximal to the isthmus location itself [6,24].The precise rate dependency of conduction block occurring at the isthmus entrance, with respect to the steepness of the thickness transition, is unknown and should be determined in future experiments. Furthermore, experiments with magnetic resonance imaging or histological analysis are needed to determine whether the UBL leading edge coincides exactly with the location of the isthmus center-entrance boundary as defined in Fig. 2. To develop the model described herein, isotropic conduction was supposed. The effect of anisotropic conduction in delaying propagation in the direction transverse to muscle fibers [25], as well as the effect of safety factor on myocardial conduction [13], should be considered for further development of the model. Propagation through constricted regions along the XY plane (i.e., the surface plane of the heart) [26] can also lead to critically convex wavefront curvature, and may be responsible for some of the slowing and block that was observed in this series of experiments. Further development of the model should include wavefront curvature in the XY plane as well as along the Z-axis.VT caused by a reentrant circuit can occur in myocardial infarction patients and is a major public health concern. Untreated, it can lead to sudden cardia death. To treat the arrhythmia, radiofrequency ablation is often used to destroy arrhythmogenic tissue. A common clinical problem is that the best region to ablate the heart to interrupt the circuit and prevent reinduction of reentrant VT is difficult to ascertain. This can be due to the fact that during patient electrophysiologic study, it may not be possible to induce the clinical tachycardia so that it can be characterized. Even if the clinical tachycardia is inducible, the patient can be hemodynamically compromised and will not tolerate the induction of tachycardia well; thus it must be terminated prior to characterization. The model described herein suggests a mechanism by which functional electrical conduction block forms during premature stimulation and during reentrant VT. Since, according to the model, block depends on geometric changes in the structure of the infarct border zone, the narrow region of surviving tissue in proximity to the infarct, imaging methods with sufficient spatial resolution, notably cardiac magnetic resonance imaging, can be used to determine the structural configuration, for estimation of functional block locations. Other types of imaging methods coming online may also soon be capable of detailing the heart structure with sufficient resolution to determine structural configuration and functional block. Once functional block locations are known, radiofrequency ablation across the narrowest isthmus width would likely prevent reinduction of the reentrant VT morphology, since impulse propagation is the most constrained at this location. The methods described herein can therefore potentially improve patient treatment by eliminating the need to induce VT, and by shortening procedure time.The authors have no conflicts of interest.