@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Evidence for the relationship between the regulatory effects of microRNAs and attack robustness of biological networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We introduce miRNA-based measures of importance of nodes in a network.The concept of “attack robustness” is used to study the relevance of these measures.We show that these measures can locate the important network components.Our results suggest that miRNA regulation and network robustness are related.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Attack robustness,Vulnerability,Centrality measures,Biological networks,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
It has been previously suggested that microRNAs (miRNAs) have a tendency to regulate the important components of biological networks. The goal of the present study was to systematically test if one can establish a relationship between miRNA targets and the important components of biological networks (including human protein-protein interaction network, signaling network and metabolic network). For this analysis, we have studied the attack robustness of these networks. It has been previously shown that deletion of network vertices in descending order of their importance (e.g., in decreasing order of vertex degrees) can affect the network structure much more considerably. In the current study, we introduced three miRNA-based measures of importance: “miRNA count” (i.e., the number of miRNAs that regulate a given network component); average adjacent miRNA count, “AAmiC” (i.e., the average number of miRNAs regulating the targeted components adjacent to a given component); and total adjacent miRNA count, “TAmiC” (i.e., the total number of miRNAs regulating the targeted components adjacent to a given component). Our results suggest that “miRNA count” is only marginally capable of locating the important components of the networks, while TAmiC was the most relevant measure. By comparing TAmiC with the classical centrality measures (which are solely based on the network structure) when simultaneously removing vertices, we show that this measure is correlated to degree and betweenness centrality measures, while its performance is generally better than that of closeness and eigenvector centrality measures. The results of this study suggest that TAmiC which represents a measure based on both network structure and biological knowledge, can successfully determine the important network components indicating that miRNA regulation and network robustness are related.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a growing class of small non-coding RNAs. These RNAs generally act as negative regulators of gene expression [1–3]. MiRNA-mRNA pairing, which leads to mRNA cleavage or translational repression, occurs in the seed (nucleotides 2–7) of miRNA. The “seed region” and degree to which a miRNA matches a potential mRNA target site has been extensively studied, and consequently, a number of miRNA target prediction methods have been introduced [4,5].It has been previously shown that many miRNAs, act both on single target genes as well as systems level. For example, a number of genome-wide studies suggested that feedforward loops containing miRNAs are network motifs [6–8]. Following, we first discuss the basic concepts of network biology and its robustness, and then, review the current literature on the relationship between network structure and miRNA regulation.Complex biological systems can be represented by networks. In such a representation, each individual component is represented as a vertex (node) of the network. Additionally, each edge (link) that connects two vertices of the network, represents an interaction between two interacting components of the system [9,10]. Protein–protein interaction network (PPIN), metabolic network and signaling network are examples of active biological networks in a cell. Although biological networks are typically considered as static systems, in fact they are dynamic entities [11] influenced by gene regulation.One of the key aspects of biological networks is the network robustness against the failure of its components [12,13]. Thus, an important question is to find out how perturbing the components of the system may affect the functionality of the network. It is clear that vertices of a given biological network are of different structural and functional importance. Therefore, detecting those vertices whose perturbation critically influences the structure and operation of a biological network is of great importance. The term “centrality measure” is referred to as a measure of “importance” of a vertex based on its connection to other network vertices [14]. The basic mathematical definitions used throughout this paper are introduced in details in Section 2.Many classical studies on the robustness of networks have used the strategy of removing vertices at random, or alternatively, in descending order of vertex importance [15–18]. For example, in some of these studies, the vertices are firstly sorted based on their degree or betweenness centrality values. Then, the robustness of each network after removing important vertices has been investigated [19,20]. In a more recent comprehensive study [12], the importance of vertices of a wide variety of networks (including some empirical and model networks) was determined. Different measures of importance were investigated in this analysis, namely degree, betweenness, closeness and eigenvector centralities. Moreover, two strategies for removing important vertices, i.e., simultaneous vs. sequential targeted attack, were considered. It was shown that, generally, in case of simultaneous targeted attack, degree centrality was the best in detecting the most important vertices, while in sequential targeted attack betweenness centrality was the best measure. Furthermore, it was shown that robustness of a network may depend on different properties, such as degree distributions, clustering coefficient and coefficient of assortativity.It has been proposed, based on network-based analyses, that miRNAs regulate biological networks through specific patterns. For example, using a reaction-centric model of human metabolic network, it has been shown [21] that miRNAs prefer to regulate hub nodes (the highly connected nodes) and cut points (the bottlenecks of metabolic flows), but not the intermediate nodes. In related works, several investigations were conducted to understand how miRNAs particularly regulate human’s PPIN [11], signaling network [22], transcriptional regulation network [23] and cancer-related pathways [24]. In general, miRNAs appear to govern effectively the functional state of biological networks via controlling the essential elements of a network.An accumulating body of efforts have been devoted to investigating potential effects of regulatory factors such as miRNAs on the robustness of functions in biological networks [25]. [26] suggested that mir-7, which operates on feedforward loops (FFLs) and feedback loops has a specific role in maintaining the network robustness against environmental perturbations. On the other hand, through a computational analysis, Osella et al. demonstrated that miRNAs accompanied by their target FFLs could buffer noise [27].Therefore, the role of miRNAs in regulating some important network motifs (like FFLs) has been studied to some extent [26,27]. However, to the best of our knowledge, there is no comprehensive study on the relationship between miRNA regulation and the network-based importance of cellular components.In the present study, we systematically analyzed the possible link between miRNA regulation and the robustness of biological networks. More precisely, we showed that miRNAs have a strong tendency for regulating those components that govern the network robustness. Based on these results, we introduce a “biology-based” measure to identify the potentially important vertices of a network. Finally, we compare this measure with the commonly used centrality measures, typically applied for identification of the important network components.In this study, the biological networks under investigation comprise three different versions of human protein–protein interaction networks, the human metabolic network, the human signaling network, and the C. elegans protein-protein interaction network.•PPINs: The three PPINs used in this study are as follows. The first PPIN, namely CCSB-HI1, is a network containing 2754 edges obtained from a high-throughput yeast two-hybrid (Y2H) system. The second PPIN, that is LCI, includes 4067 literature curated protein–protein interactions. The third PPIN, which will be referred to as CCSB-HI1+LCI, is basically constructed by merging the two above-mentioned PPINs. This network contains 6726 edges [28].Signaling network: The human signaling network is a literature-mined undirected network containing 540 nodes and 1257 edges, showing the signaling relationships between proteins [29].Metabolic network: We used a previously reported reaction-centric metabolic network of human [21], which is obtained from the KEGG database. This network includes 1099 vertices (i.e., reactions) and 4169 edges (i.e., linking metabolites).PPIN of Caenorhabditis elegans (cPPIN): This network contains 2500 nodes and 3706 edges established using a highly specific high-throughput Y2H system [30]. We included this network in our analysis to show that our findings are not limited to human networks, and similar patterns may be observed in other species.The genome-wide predicted human miRNA target genes were obtained from the TargetScanS web server (version 6.2) [31]. This dataset contains a total of 11,161 genes regulated by 6101 miRNAs (grouped in 153 conserved miRNA families). We also used another dataset of predicted miRNA target genes obtained from PicTar [32]. The latter dataset includes 6243 genes regulated by 168 miRNAs. The C. elegans miRNA target genes were acquired from the TargetScanS of worm (available at the http://www.targetscan.org/worm_52/).We obtained the human essential genes from the Database of Essential Genes (DEG) v10.6 [33] (available from: http://tubic.tju.edu.cn/deg). A list of 2570 human essential genes in this database are extracted from Liao et al. [34] and Georgi et al. [35].A list of 780 candidate oncogenes used in this study are obtained from Khosravi et al. [36].To investigate the robustness of a biological network against removal of its vertices (i.e. attack robustness), a simple and effective approach is to measure how the size of the largest component of the network changes. This approach is sensible because when the size of the largest component reduces to a sufficiently small degree, the function of the biological system will be interrupted. LetN=(V,E)be an original network, with the set of verticesVand the set of edgesE. Definen=|V|as the number of vertices ofN, which will be called the size of the network. Suppose that a subsetS⊆Vof vertices (i.e. a fraction of vertices) besides its connecting edges are removed from the network. The remaining subnetwork will be represented byNS. LetL(NS)be the largest connected component of the remaining subnetwork. The subsetSis chosen by selecting a number of vertices based on a certain pre-specified strategy (e.g., by selecting vertices with the highest degree values, or by selecting vertices randomly, and so on). Then, the subnetwork-based robustness, that is, the network robustness after removing a subsetSof vertices is defined asσ(N,S)=|L(NS)|/n, where|L(NS)|represents the size of the largest connected component of the remaining subnetwork. Throughout the text, we will use this definition to describe the robustness of a network.Obviously, the vertices of a given biological network can be of different functional importance. In other words, the network function is robust against mutation in some (but not all) of the components while vulnerable against mutation in some others. For computing the robustness of a network, the simplest strategy is to remove (i.e., to attack) vertices randomly, i.e., irrespective of their importance. The other alternative is the “targeted attack”, that is, to remove the vertices of the network in decreasing order of the vertex importance. A wide variety of measures have been proposed previously to predict the importance of network vertices [12,14]. The importance of a network vertex can be defined based on the way that the vertex is connected to other vertices. Such measures are typically referred to as “centrality measures”. These measures will be formally defined below.By choosing a strategy for removing vertices of a network, the vertices of the subsetS⊆Vcan be deleted based on the specified strategy (for example, in decreasing order of vertex degrees). LetSi⊆Vbe the set of removed vertices at iterationi, such that,|Si|=i(fori=1,2,…,n). This procedure is continued until all vertices are removed from the network. The overall network robustness,R, can be computed as [12,37]:R=1n∑i=1nσ(N,Si).The ratio1/nnormalizes the robustness,R, and provides possibility of comparing the robustness of networks with different sizes [12,37]. Clearly, we have1/n≤R≤0.5(1−1/n)for any vertex removal scheme and any network. Therefore, for all networks we haveR∈[0,0.5]. Network vulnerability,V, which is a complementary concept for robustness, can be defined as:V=12−R.In the present work, we assume that biological networks are simple graphs [12]. That is, they are undirected, and additionally, they include no multi-edges and self-edges. For any networkN=(V,E)of sizen=|V|, the adjacency matrixAis defined asAij={1whenverticesiandjareconnectedbyanedge0otherwise.Note thatAis a symmetric matrix. Assuming thatNis simple,Aii=0for every vertexi. The set of all neighbors of vertexiis denoted byΓ(i)={j∈V:Aij=1}.We now briefly review the definition of the most commonly used centrality measures, including degree, betweenness, closeness and eigenvector.•Degree centrality: The number of neighbors of a given vertex which is generally referred to as degree centrality, can be computed as:di=∑j=1nAij.Eigenvector centrality: In contrast to degree centrality, eigenvector centrality focuses on the important neighbors instead of all neighbors. For computing eigenvector centrality, it is assumed that a given vertex is more important if it is connected to some other important vertices. The eigenvector centrality of a vertexi, denoted byei, is defined asei=1ρ∑j∈Γ(i)ej=1ρ∑j=1nAijejwhereρis a constant. It is assumed that the eigenvector centrality of each vertex is non-negative: i.e.ei≥0for all i.Closeness centrality: Informally speaking, the inverse of average distance between a certain vertex and every other vertex in the network is called closeness centrality. Define the geodesic path between two verticesi,j∈Vas the shortest path betweeniandj. Letγijbe the length of this path. Then, closeness centrality of a vertexi, denoted byci, is defined asci=n/∑j∈Vγij.Betweenness centrality: This measure of centrality, for a certain vertexi, counts the number of geodesic paths between each pair of vertices that traverse vertexi. By defining the indicator variableνis,t=1ifthegeodesicpathbetweens,tpassesthroughi0otherwiseThe betweenness centrality of a vertexi, denoted bybi, can be defined as:bi=∑s,t∈Vνi(s,t).We used here the NetworkX [38] (available at: https://networkx.github.io) to calculate the degree, betweenness and closeness centralities. For computing eigenvector centrality, we used the igraph software package [39] (available at: http://igraph.org/).In this work, we investigated whether miRNAs are capable of detecting those vertices which are critical in establishing the robustness of a biological network. To do so, we defined three importance measures based on the number of miRNAs which regulate a network component and/or its neighbors. Needless to say, measures based on miRNAs are biology-based measures and are conceptually different from any commonly used centrality measure. Letmibe the number of miRNAs regulate a vertexi. We considermias the first importance measure based on miRNAs. This measure will be called “miRNA count” henceforward throughout the text.The second measure, which will be referred to as “TAmiC” (total adjacent miRNA count) denoted byθi, is defined as the total number of miRNAs which regulate the targeted neighbors of vertexi. This measure can be computed as:θi=∑j∈Γ(i)mj.The third measure, which will be referred to as “AAmiC” (average adjacent miRNA count) dented byαi, is defined as the average number of miRNAs which regulate the targeted neighbors of vertexi. LetT(i)be a subset of neighbors ofi(i.e.,T(i)⊆Γ(i)) that are regulated by at least one miRNA. Then,αiis defined as:αi=∑j∈T(i)mj/|T(i)|.All of the three measures introduced in the present work, namely miRNA count, AAmiC and TAmiC, try to show how miRNAs cooperate. More specifically, miRNA count shows to what extent a gene is directly regulated by miRNAs. On the other hand, AAmiC and TAmiC show to what extent the direct “partners” of a gene must be regulated for fine-tuning the activity of that certain gene.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
