@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Topologically guaranteed bivariate solutions of under-constrained multivariate piecewise polynomial systems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A subdivision algorithm for 2-DOF nonlinear algebraic systems.Topologically guaranteed subdivision termination criteria inRn,n≥3.A tessellation method for two-manifolds inRn.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Subdivision solvers,Polynomial equations,Implicit surfaces,B-spline basis functions,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We present a subdivision based algorithm to compute the solution of an under-constrained piecewise polynomial system ofn−2equations withnunknowns, exploiting properties of B-spline basis functions. The solution of such systems is, typically, a two-manifold inRn. To guarantee the topology of the approximated solution in each sub-domain, we provide subdivision termination criteria, based on the (known) topology of the univariate solution on the domain’s boundary, and the existence of a one-to-one projection of the unknown solution on a two dimensional plane, inRn. We assume the equation solving problem is regular, while sub-domains containing points that violate the regularity assumption are detected, bounded, and returned as singular locations of small (subdivision tolerance) size. This work extends (and makes extensive use of) topological guarantee results for systems with zero and one dimensional solution sets. Test results inR3andR4are also demonstrated, using error-bounded piecewise linear approximations of the two-manifolds.The general problem discussed in this paper is the solution of equation systems of the form:(1)F(x̄)=0̄,where the multivariate functionFis a piecewise polynomial, defined on some compactn-dimensional boxD⊂Rnwith values inRn−2. We assume0̄∈Rn−2is a regular value (as defined in Section  2) ofF.The need for an efficient and robust method for finding all solutions of equation systems (1) in a given domain arises in a variety of fields such as Computer Aided Design (CAD), engineering, robotics, and in fact whenever the geometric constraints of the problem can be formulated as a set of algebraic (non-linear in general) equations. Bisector surfaces  [1], sweep-surfaces  [2], medical iso-surfaces  [3], and the possible states of any 2-DOF (Degrees of Freedom) kinematic system (Ch. 06 of  [4]) are all examples of application domains that can be mapped to an under-constrained system with a bivariate solution inRn, wheren≥3.The general problem of solving non-linear algebraic constraints with any solution set’s dimension (not necessarily two) is typically addressed via either local methods and/or global methods. The local methods refer to a family of numeric iterative algorithms, such as the Newton–Raphson procedure or other prediction–correction methods. Although very useful and typically of quadratic convergence, these techniques depend on the quality of the initial candidate/starting point, and cannot guarantee the global solution: all roots or all connected components of the solution manifold, and its topological properties.As for global methods, the problem of finding all (real or complex) solutions for equations such as (1) has been mainly addressed via three major approaches. Algebraic geometry techniques (elimination theory and the use of Gröbner bases,  [4]) and Homotopy techniques   [5] are typically less efficient for finding only the real roots in a bounded domain, due to various practical considerations (for a detailed survey refer to  [6,7]). The third class of methods (and the one discussed in this paper), are the subdivision techniques, which are reviewed in Section  3, and are the framework for the results introduced herein.The main result in this paper is a topologically guaranteed subdivision termination condition for equation systems with bivariate solutions (two-manifolds). The technique extends and exploits previously achieved topological guarantee results for the zero and one dimensional solution manifolds in  [8–10]. Since these results play a significant role in the development of the methods introduced in this paper, they are reviewed in more detail in Section  3. Subdivision algorithms with topological guarantee are known for implicit regular surfaces inR3, for example as in  [11,12]. To the best of our knowledge, the criteria introduced in this paper is the first to provide topological guarantee for two-manifold solutions inRn, when the co-dimension is greater than one (n>3).The problem of guaranteeing the topological properties of manifolds given as (solutions of) algebraic constraints has been widely addressed. Methods for guaranteeing the topology of implicit plane curves are presented in  [13,14], and are based on locating the critical points and subdividing the domain such that each piece of the solution is a monotone arc. Further, a numerical method with topological guarantee for implicit planar curves is given in  [15], which also detects isolated singularities and computes their degree, using the number of connected components of certain topological structure in the neighborhood of the singularity. The topology of implicit surfaces has also been extensively investigated inR3, within the framework ofϵ-sampling ([16] and more), in the contexts of polygonization and rendering  [3,17–19], with results for the non-regular cases as well  [20,21]. More recent results for level sets of a given implicit function inR3are in  [11,12], presenting algorithms for correct connectivity of the reconstructed surface by a careful case analysis and subdivision until ambiguity can be resolved, using additional information such as parameterizability and bounding gradient norm. In  [22], methods for contouring one- and two-manifolds, generally inRn, are proposed, but without a topological guarantee. In  [21], results from Morse theory are used to locate and classify singular points of an implicit surface inR3, and conclude correct topology via interactive polygonization. Other related aspects of nonlinear systems are treated in  [23] on dimension reducing, in  [24] on expression trees representation, in  [25] on parallel computation and convergence guarantee of Newton–Raphson via the Kantorovich theorem, and more. Our focus in this paper is mainly on the subdivision stage, the topological properties of the solution set (rather than the numeric properties) in an attempt to guarantee the topology of the result, and we make frequent use of the properties of the B-spline representation.The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section  2 introduces the terminology and the problem setting. Section  3 provides a brief review of the subdivision paradigm for algebraic constraints solving, focusing on useful results to our problem. Section  4 provides the solution to the problem of a topologically guaranteed subdivision termination criteria for under-determined systems with bivariate solution spaces. Section  5 introduces a triangulation method for the numeric reconstruction in the topologically guaranteed sub-domains. Some examples are given in Section  6, and finally, Section  7 concludes and discusses further optional problems for this research.We now provide the problem formulation, state general assumptions, and review frequently used basic concepts. LetFbe a multivariate function defined on some compact,n-dimensional box:D=[a1,b1]×⋯×[an,bn]⊂Rn, with values inRn−2. For differentiability considerations,Fcan always be viewed as a function defined on some open setU⊂RncontainingD. Unless otherwise stated,Fis at leastC1smooth, and is typically given in a tensor product Bézier or B-spline form (a detailed study of these representations can be found in  [26]), generally represented as:(2)F(x1,…,xn)=∑i1⋯∑inPi1…inBi1,m1(x1)…Bin,mn(xn).The pointsPi1…in∈Rn−2are the control points ofF, and theBij,mj’s are the B-spline basis functions of ordermjofF. The zero set ofFis denoted by:Z={x̄∈U:F(x̄)=0̄∈Rn−2}=F−1(0̄).Our main interest is inZ∩D, the region of the zero set belonging to the compact domain. The concepts we now refer to, can be found in textbooks on topology and differentiability such as  [27,28]. Recall that a homeomorphism is a continuous function between topological spaces that has a continuous inverse. Homeomorphisms are the equivalence relation between topological spaces. When we later claim that the “topology of the solution set is guaranteed”, we mean that we have successfully classified the solution set “up to homeomorphism”.Omitting the precise and somewhat technical definition  [27,29], recall that a two dimensional sub-manifold ofRn,(n≥2)is a subsetM⊂Rn, such that everyp∈Mhas a neighborhood (in the topology inherited fromRn) that is homeomorphic to (an open subset of) the planeR2. The ability to treat the solution set as a manifold is made possible by the regularity assumption which we now describe. Denote byfithei’th scalar component ofF. The Differential ofFat a pointp∈Dis the linear map denoted bydFp, represented in the standard bases by the(n−2)×nmatrix:[dFp]ij=∂fi∂xj(p);i=1,…,n−2;j=1,…,n.Definition 1LetF:U⊂Rn→Rn−2be a differentiable mapping of an open setU⊂Rn. A pointp∈Uis defined to be a critical point ofFif the differentialdFp:Rn→Rn−2is not surjective. The imageF(p)of a critical point is called a critical value ofF. A pointa∈Rn−2that is not a critical value is called a regular value ofF.From Definition 1, it is evident that forc∈Rn−2to be a regular value ofF,dFpis surjective for allp∈F−1(c). When this is the situation,F−1(c)is called a regular level set. Our regularity assumption is that the solutionF−1(0̄)is a regular level set. As another interpretation, the regularity assumption is equivalent to the linear independence of then−2gradients offi, for allp∈Z.The term “general position” usually refers to a situation where an arbitrarily small perturbation of non-regular input, re-attains regularity. Put differently: the configurations of the input that do not satisfy the assumption, occur with zero probability.11The precise definition for general position varies according to context. A more detailed exposition can be found in Ch. 1 of  [30].Indeed, this is precisely our case, as stated in Sard’s theorem  [27], which roughly says that the set of critical values of a smooth function has measure zero in the range. In our setting, this is equivalent to saying that ifZ=F−1(0̄)is not a regular level set, then for any arbitrarily smallϵ>0, there is another valuec∈Rn−2such thatF−1(c)is a regular level set, and‖c‖<ϵ. Although rare in the pure mathematical sense, a non-surjective differential is in fact a common configuration in real life problems (i.e. tangential curves/surfaces). We briefly address this issue in Section  7.Finally, the following theorem is what enables us to use the properties of a manifold for regular level sets:Theorem 1Regular Level Set TheoremEvery regular level set of a smooth mapFis a closed, embedded, sub-manifold whose co-dimension is equal to the dimension of the range ofF.The proof is a consequence of the implicit function theorem (for manifolds) and can be found in  [27,29]. We summarize our setting: the solutions our problem formulation produces are two dimensional manifolds (possibly with several connected components), trimmed to a compact boxD. Trimming the solution toDintroduces a piecewise-smooth boundary that did not exist before (and may also have more than one component). Therefore, boundary points ofZ∩Dcan originate only from the intersection with the domain’s boundary, namely:∂(Z∩D)⊆Z∩∂D.For the last relation to become an equality, another general position assumption is required: the intersection ofZwith∂Dis transversal, not tangential. For example: a sphere that is tangent to one of the domain’s faces—is a surface without a boundary, but does have a non-empty intersection with∂D. For the theoretic derivation we shall exclude such cases. However, in practice, a much less strict assumption is required. Tangency points and curves on the boundary that are detected by the univariate solver can be handled: isolated tangency points are ignored, and as will be revealed by the methods in Section  4—the topological classification using the information attained from the univariate boundary solution, is not harmed. Further, if tangency with the boundary occurs along curves, one of the suggested tests introduced in Section  4 will not pass and the domain will be subdivided. A degeneracy case that is not handled, however, is the case of an entire 2D surface patch contained in the domain’s boundary. This shall fail the univariate solver used for the boundaries, and must be excluded in this work (detecting such situations is a challenge for future work).We review the rather general framework of subdivision solvers that is relevant regardless of the dimension of the solution set. When referring to subdivision solvers we generally mean two steps. The first is the recursive subdivision of the domainDuntil either one of the following holds for some sub-domainDi:1.No solutions can exist inDi. This is usually detected using the convex hull property   [26], which enables ruling out the possibility of solutions inDiby inspecting a much simpler, typically convex, bounding volume, providing a sufficient, but not necessary condition for domain purging.Some other subdivision termination criteria is satisfied. The simplest one may be the size of the domain. A more advanced requirement is some topological guarantee on the region of the solution set belonging toDi.The use of subdivision solvers originated first for univariate problems such as in  [31], later for fully constrained multivariate systems in [7,9] as well as for under-constrained systems in[10,32]. The need to guarantee the topological properties of the solution (number of roots, loops and connected components of curves, etc.) gave rise to the concept of bounding cones and pyramids, appearing in  [33,34] and generalized in  [8,10,35]. This notion is frequently used in this paper, and reviewed herein.When referring to the normal cone (Fig. 1) of a hyper-surface (any manifold of co-dimension one) we mean any double-cone that contains all possible normal vectors of the manifold. In the implicit representation case, thei’th hyper-surface of our problem is represented byfi(x1,…,xn)=0, and hence any cone containing the set{∇fi(x̄),x̄∈D}can be considered as a normal cone offi. Such a cone is usually computed using the control points of∇fi, and is characterized by an axis and a span angle (namely, this approach chooses a circular cone, but this need not always be the case). This concept is widely used in the analysis of NURBS surfaces, and the smaller the span angle the “flatter” the surface is. Finally, by considering the complementary angle and the same axis, we obtain the tangent bounding cone (Fig. 1)—with the property that it contains all possible tangent directions of the implicit hyper-surfacefi(x̄)=0.We give special attention to three important previous results that are essential for the termination criteria in this work. The first is the tangent cone’s non-overlapping test from  [9]. In  [9], it is proved that fornequations withnunknowns, if the correspondingntangent cones share only the origin as their common point, there exists at most a single solution in the domain. This test is referred to as the cone test and abbreviated CT. A tractable algorithm is provided in  [10] to compute the CT, using a dual hyper-plane representation of the hyper-cones, enabling to test the criterion by means of solving linear systems. Next, in  [8] the No Loop Test (NLT) and the Single Component Test (SCT) are introduced, for cases with univariate solutions. The NLT inspects the tangential image on the unit hyper-sphere (Sn−1) of the (possible) solution curve in the domain, and if this image is contained in a semi-sphere, then it is impossible for the solution curve to contain closed loops. For a curve with no loops, the SCT guarantees it has a single component in the domain by testing for exactly two boundary intersections: one entry point and one exit point from the domain. The CT, NLT and SCT are generalized in this work, with several new ingredients, as bivariate solutions naturally introduce more options in the process of the topological classification.We can now precisely describe the problem and our proposed solution. Before going into detail, we give a more intuitive and motivational overview in Section  4.1. In Section  4.2, the Single-Loop Boundary Test (SLBT) is introduced, followed by the Injective Projection Test (IPT) in Section  4.3. Then, we summarize the algorithm in Section  4.4. In order to formulate the problem of the subdivision termination criteria with topological guarantee for bivariate solutions, the local question is considered first: the topology ofZ∩Difor some sub-domainDi⊂D. The global homeomorphism of the approximated solution inDand the exact solution is considered later, and shall follow from the local treatment inDi.The motivation comes from the lower dimensional cases: the classification of a zero-manifold amounts to counting the points. For the classification of one-manifolds, counting connected components are not enough, it is still required to distinguishS1(a closed loop) from an interval. The fact that these are the only options for one-manifolds is the content of the classification theorem for one-manifolds (refer to the appendix in  [36] for a proof).An important step is that the topology of an interval was chosen as the termination criteria in  [8]. Viewing the interval as the “one dimensional disc” we are lead to define:Definition 2LetDi⊂Dbe a sub-domain such that its interior has a non-empty intersection with the zero set. We say that the topology ofZ∩Diis guaranteed ifZ∩Diis homeomorphic to a closed disc.Fig. 2presents some cases where the topology ofZ∩Dicannot be guaranteed.Inspired by the method in  [8], the No Loop Test for curves should be generalized to a test guaranteeing no closed surfaces (i.e. surfaces that are compact with no boundary). To proceed with the analogy, the Single Component Test for curves in  [8] tested that the boundary solution is the boundary of an interval (one entry point and one exit point). Hence, it should be generalized to a test checking that the boundary solution is a simple closed loop: the boundary of a closed disc. If this is correct, it should guarantee that the solution is a connected surface with a single boundary curve. But there is still topological ambiguity that did not appear in the lower dimensional case: a connected, compact (orientable) surface with a single boundary component can, topologically, be a disc, a torus minus a disc, a double torus minus a disc, etc. In other words—determining that the solution has genus zero is still required. On the other hand, such a “Genus Zero Test” would complete the classification, as this is exactly the content of the classification theorem for compact, oriented two-manifolds (Ch. 5 of  [37] or Ch. 12 of  [28]).It turns out that the above described scheme indeed works, but that some of the tests we propose cover a bit more than needed—enabling to skip others. Thus, the final form of our solution outline is as follows, for a sub-domainDi:1.Guarantee that the solution has (at most) a single loop as its boundary curve. We call this the Single-Loop Boundary Test (SLBT).Guarantee that there is a two dimensional plane into which there exists a one-to-one projection of the solution. We call this the Injective Projection Test (IPT).Upon failing any of these two steps, the domain shall be subdivided. The rest of this section is devoted to proving that passing both the SLBT (Section  4.2) and the IPT (Section  4.3) implies that the solution is either empty or is a topological disc, to correctly choosing from these two alternatives, and to providing practical algorithms to execute these tests.Remark 1The suggested methods guarantee the topology “up to subdivision tolerance”, in the sense that topological features that are larger than subdivision tolerance are guaranteed to be detected before the subdivision terminates. Other thresholds that effect the topological classification are the numerical tolerance that terminates the Newton–Raphson steps, the prediction step size of the curve tracing on the domain’s boundary, the maximal allowed triangle edge length in the tessellation process, and the concatenation threshold—under which points are considered equal, for the connectivity of boundary curves. Typical choices (for a unit size problem) used for the examples in this work are 10−3 for subdivision tolerance, 10−10 for numeric iterations, 10−4 for tracing step size, 0.02 for the maximal triangle edge length, and 10−5 for the concatenation of boundary curves.Remark 2In what follows, the linear independence of the gradients at solution points (the regularity assumption) is essential. It shall enable the theoretical derivation of the topological conclusions, as well as the termination proofs of the algorithms. However, we now shortly describe the behavior of the suggested method for non-regular input, which is demonstrated later using the implicit equation of the Steiner surface (Fig. 6)—a highly non-regular equation. In such cases, sub-domains that contain singular solution points are constantly subdivided since the tests will fail. The new (smaller) sub-domains either do not contain the singularity anymore, or still contain it. In the latter case, subdivision shall terminate only upon reaching subdivision tolerance (smallest handled sub-domain size), and return as “unknown”. Consequently, for non-regular input, regular areas are successfully resolved, and singular solution points are bounded by a set of small sub-domains. The subdivision tolerance directly bounds/governs the size of the regions holding singularities.The first step towards the required homeomorphism is given by what we can deduce regarding the topology of the solution surface, from the topology of the boundary curve. We distinguish two cases: an empty boundary, and a single loop boundary. A boundary with more than one connected univariate component is considered as a failure of the test. A useful and well known property of manifolds with boundary we rely on, is that the boundary of a two-manifold must be a one-manifold with no boundary  [27]. By compactness—it is a set of closed loops.Lemma 1LetDi⊂Dbe a sub-domain such that the boundary solution (curve) is empty. Then, exactly one of the following holds:1.The sub-domainDimay be purged:Z∩Di=ϕ.Every connected component ofZ∩Diis a closed surface.ProofIf the solution is non-empty it is compact, and by assumption it has no boundary, hence all of its components are closed surfaces by definition.□The importance of this seemingly trivial fact will be revealed later: once we establish the next (IPT) test, its success will enable us to decide between the two options Lemma 1 provided. This means that we shall be able to purge sub-domains due to purely topological considerations, even if they were not purged by less delicate purging tests (usually based on the control coefficients and their signs). Next, the non-empty boundary case is treated, when a single loop is detected:Theorem 2LetDi⊂Dbe a sub-domain such that the boundary solution (curve) is a single (connected) loop. Then, exactly one of the following holds:1.The solution surface,Z∩Diis connected.The solution surface,Z∩Di, has one component that is not a closed surface, and other components, all of which must be closed surfaces.ProofThe two alternatives clearly are mutually exclusive. IfZ∩Diis connected, the first option holds, and we are done. AssumeZ∩Diis not connected. The main assumption is that the unique loop on the domain’s boundary is connected, hence it is entirely contained in one of the surface components, now denotedC1. Therefore,C1is not a closed surface, as it is a (connected) surface with a non-empty boundary. In order to show that the second option of the theorem holds, it remains to justify why any component other thanC1, denotedC2, must be a closed surface: sinceC1andC2are disjoint,C2has no common points with the boundary loop. Thus, hadC2not been a closed surface, it would have a non-empty boundary, consisting of points that are interior toDi: a contradiction to the regularity assumption and Theorem 1.□Here as well, choosing the correct of the two alternatives Theorem 2 guarantees, will be made possible by the success of the next (IPT) test, revealed soon. The incorporation of Lemma 1 and Theorem 2 in our solver is achieved as follows: at all recursion subdivision levels, the restriction of the problem to the sub-domain’s boundary is solved as part of the new sub-problem construction. For the initial domainD, each of the2nfaces are resolved and then the intersection curves are properly concatenated, forming the initial boundary curve(s). Then, and since each domain subdivision induces a subdivision of the boundary curve(s), the only new equation solving effort engaged, is for the restriction of the problem to the splitting hyper-plane. Then, a copy of the new “middle” solution curve(s) is concatenated with each of the two sides, and consequently the two sub-problems have their boundary problems resolved. Finally, the actual SLBT execution amounts to testing if the number of boundary components is zero, one, or more (since the connectivity is treated already, it is simply the number of closed-loop polylines). Components that are isolated points are ignored, and considered as tangency points of the solution and the sub-domain’s boundary (not counted as boundary curve components).In terms of algorithm termination, we argue that over a sequence of sub-domains approaching diameter zero, and under the regularity assumption, the number of boundary loops must eventually be zero or one. This follows from the definition of a (smooth) manifold: small enough neighborhoods must be homeomorphic to a disc. More precisely, a situation where arbitrarily small neighborhoods of a point still contain a region of the solution with more than one boundary solution is a contradiction to the existence of a positive injectivity radius   [38]: a positive distance from a pointp∈Sfor which the exponential map is a diffeomorphism, i.e. a disc in the tangent plane is mapped to a geodesic disc on the surface. For details on the exponential map and the existence of a positive injectivity radius, refer to Ch. 6 of  [38].To proceed we need the following trivial observation:Lemma 2A planar surfaceMthat is compact must have a non-empty boundary. In other words: there are no closed surfaces in the plane.ProofThe continuity of the norm function,‖⋅‖, and the compactness ofMimply that there is a pointp∈Mthat has maximal distance from the origin. But sinceMis planar, this farthest point must be a boundary point, henceMhas a non-empty boundary.□We use the above fact to show the underlying idea behind the IPT:Lemma 3LetMbe a compact, two manifold with a connected boundary. If there is a homeomorphismφofMintoR2, thenMis homeomorphic to a closed disc.ProofFirst, we argue thatMis connected. Otherwise, by Theorem 2,Mhas at least one component that is a closed surface. By assumption, the homeomorphic image,φ(M), is planar. The restriction ofφto the closed surface component is a contradiction to Lemma 2, thereforeMis connected. Observe that∂φ(M)is a simple, closed, planar curve. By the Jordan curve theorem  [37],∂φ(M)separates the plane to two connected components, the bounded (interior) one, denotedI, and the unbounded (exterior) one, denotedE, having∂φ(M)as their common boundary. Had there been any points ofφ(M)inE, by compactness there would have been another boundary component—a contradiction. On the other hand, all points ofImust also belong toφ(M), since missing points would again imply an additional boundary component. We have shown thatφ(M)coincides withI∪∂φ(M). It is a sharper version of the Jordan curve theorem (due to Schonflies  [37]) that guarantees thatIis indeed an open topological disc, henceφ(M)(and thereforeM) are closed discs, as required.22Allowing less elementary tools to prove this simple claim, a more direct proof of Lemma 3 can be given by explicitly computing the Euler characteristic ofM. This is a consequence of the Gauss–Bonnet theorem and the total curvature of a closed planar curve  [39].□We now give an explicit candidate to take the role of this “flattening homeomorphism”, along with a tractable algorithm to test for its existence.Theorem 3LetF:Di⊂Rn→Rn−2. AssumeZ∩Dipassed the SLBT, and a single boundary component is detected. Fori=1,…,n−2, denote byCiNthe normal cone associated with thei’th scalar component ofF. Letej(thej’th standard basis element ofRn), be viewed as a degenerate normal cone (with cone angle zero, seeFig.  3). Assume there is some pair1≤k<l≤nsuch that the correspondingntangent cones obtained from normal cones{C1N,…,Cn−2N,ek,el}, do not overlap (intersect only at the origin). ThenZ∩Diis homeomorphic to a closed disc, and the homeomorphismφcan be chosen as the projection on directionsk,l.ProofConsider the projectionπ:Z∩Di→R2, mapping(x1,…,xn)↦(xk,xl). First, we verify there cannot be two distinct points ofZ∩Dimapped to the same pair(u,v)∈R2. This is equivalent to the uniqueness requirement of the followingnconstraints:n−2of original problem, together withxk−u=0andxl−v=0. This seemingly infinite(u,v)parameterized family of problems can be simultaneously tested for uniqueness: recall the cone test  [9] (CT) reviewed in Section  3, guaranteeing uniqueness of the solution (regardless of the question of existence, not to say of the exact solution) for fully determined systems. The tangent cones of the scalar components ofFdepend on the gradients only, and thus independent ofu,v. In particular, the normal cones associated with the last two constraints are exactlyekandel(the gradients of the respective constraints). The main assumption of the theorem is exactly the success of CT, which meansπis one to one. The continuity ofπis obvious from its definition. The continuity ofπ−1follows from a well known exercise in elementary topology  [28]: a continuous injective function from a compact space (Z∩Di) to a Hausdorff space (R2in our case) is a homeomorphism onto its image. Therefore,πcan be chosen as the “flattening homeomorphism”.□As a last conclusion, we can finally resolve the ambiguity in the empty boundary case as well (i.e. make the correct choice between the alternatives of Lemma 1), since in the plane there are no closed surfaces (Lemma 2):Corollary 1LetDi⊂Dbe a sub-domain for which SLBT detected an empty boundary, and IPT returned that the topology is guaranteed. ThenDimay be purged.The actual test in our solver is executed by checking all possible coordinate pairs until either the corresponding uniqueness condition is satisfied, or, if not, subdivide further. For each choice of a possible pair, we apply the CT to the particular fully determined system: the set of cones is obtained by the cones of the original problem together with two basis elements ofRn(taking the role of the degenerate normal cones). The details of the algorithm and its termination proof are described next.The general subdivision scheme is summarized in Algorithm 1, providing the top level procedure. Each of the closed solution curves obtained, is later triangulated according to the method in Section  5. Then, Algorithm 2, details the IPT, which essentially traverses the optional direction pairs and tests if the projection can be guaranteed to be injective. However, it should be noted that an orthogonal projection on any two dimensional plane is sufficient for guaranteeing the required homeomorphism (not just the optional coordinate planes). Hence, one may choose a better candidate exploiting the geometry of the problem, such as the plane orthogonal to then−2gradients, when evaluated at a single point of the unknown surface, such as the center of the sub-domain. Given that the sub-domain is small enough—this option is likely to produce a successful, and possibly more stable, injective projection.Lemma 4Over a sequence of subdivisions with sub-domain diameter approaching zero (and under the regularity assumption), Algorithm  2  terminates.ProofAs the sub-domains approach a pointp, byC1continuity, each normal coneCjN, associated withfj, approaches a single vector, denotedNj. Equivalently,CjTapproaches the single hyper-plane orthogonal tofj’s respective normal. These hyper-planes are linear sub-spaces ofRn(contain the origin). The failure of the CT means that there is a point other than the origin belonging to the intersection of thesenhyper-planes (and consequently an entire sub-space of dimension0<d<n). We now argue that this cannot happen for all possible selections of a pairk,lof indices. The firstn−2equations, by the regularity assumption, yield a linearly independent set of theNj’s, since they are gradients of the originaln−2constraints atp. Now, since{Nj}j=1,…,n−2only span a sub-space of dimensionn−2, there must exist a pairek,elsuch that{Nj}j=1,…,n−2∪{ek,el}spanRn. In other words, theCTmust succeed and the algorithm terminates on a domain of some (finitely) small enough size.□Remark 3For the specialn=3case, guaranteeing an injective projection can be done by finding a non-vanishing partial derivative of the single constraint  [11,12].We make a final comment to conclude this section. The main goal is that the approximated solution and the exact solution will be homeomorphic, globally inD. However, in eachDi, all we know is the existence of a homeomorphism from the exact solution to a closed disc, and hence (using the method we introduce in the next section), we may approximate this disc using a polygonal mesh from the boundary curve—obtaining a local homeomorphic approximation. Uniting the local homeomorphisms to a global one is possible only if, in neighboring sub-domains, we can somehow guarantee that the local homeomorphisms agree on the common boundary. Indeed, this is possible, while we omit the full proof, and only mention that it is a consequence of two well known topological facts: the ability to extend a homeomorphism of closed loops to a homeomorphism of closed discs, agreeing on the boundary loops (known as the Alexander Lemma  [37]), and the pasting lemma  [28], enabling to unite the carefully constructed local homeomorphisms to a global one, now that they agree on common boundary curves.To the extent of the subdivision termination, and with the regularity assumption, the topology is resolved. However, seeking a two dimensional, piecewise linear approximation of the exact solution manifold, we now encounter the problem of reconstructing a (triangular) mesh inDi, close toZ∩Diin some sense/metric, and homeomorphic to a disc, with the constraint of a given boundary curve. Versions of this challenge arise in the domains of implicit surface polygonization and/or rendering (reviewed in Section  1) inR3. However, the main issue encountered in our problem setting here is that we cannot assume the underlying implicit function is scalar valued (i.e. the co-dimension of the solution manifold is one). This is an essential assumption used in the previously referred methods: a notion of inside and outside the implicit surface can be assigned to the points of the embedding space. As another example, ray tracing techniques cease to be applicable since a ray shall hit a two-manifold inRnwith zero probability, ifn>3. We introduce a method designed to handle this issue, while taking advantage of the topological information obtained so far: we not only know that the solution set we seek is homeomorphic to a closed disc inDi, we also know the specific coordinate pair with respect to which it may be treated as the graph of an explicit function.Letxk,xlbe the coordinates with respect to which the IPT succeeded, letπdenote, as before, the orthogonal projection on thek,lcoordinates, and letγdenote the known, closed, boundary curve (a polyline) inRn. The problem of triangulating the closed, simple, planar polylineπ(γ)is solved, by methods that can be found, for example in  [40], as well as the refinement of such planar triangulation to any desired tolerance of the triangle edge length. The required bound on the edge length can be determined by the required tolerance of the input function values (zero set of which we seek), as will be revealed shortly.For any fixed vertexv=(vk,vl)of the planar triangulation ofπ(γ), we may consider the problem of solvingn−2equations withn−2unknowns:F(x1,…,vk,…,vl,…,xn)=0̄∈Rn−2. From now on we refer to this problem as the the back projection problem.As a consequence of the IPT success, we have both the existence and the uniqueness of a solution guaranteed, for each such back projection problem. We assume fully determined problems are solved to any required precision and hence solving it yields the missingn−2coordinates of the point guaranteed to lay on the solution surface, denotedz̄∈Z.Finally, the required triangulation is defined as follows:{z̄1,z̄2,z̄3}is a solution triangle if and only if{v1,v2,v3}is a triangle in the planar triangulation of the polylineπ(γ): eachz̄iis the elevation ofvitoRnvia the normal space (“back projection”). It is easily verified that the above construction gives a non degenerate triangulation with the property thatγis indeed its boundary curve, and it is a manifold with a disc topology. Further, for any scalar componentfiofF, one can always obtain an upper boundMon‖∇fi‖inDifrom the control points. IfLis an upper bound on the triangle edge length, by straight forward calculus estimations it follows that for any pointpin the triangle:|f(p)|≤2ML, giving a bound on the numeric error, for the above described triangulation method.To conclude this section, we briefly mention two technical challenges arising in the implementation. The first is the orientation problem of the triangles: the closed loops, resulting from the subdivision step, need not be correctly oriented. Hence, once triangulated, the situation potentially introduces the solution mesh with regions of incorrect orientation. To resolve this, we require that triangle edgesE1,E2together with the gradients of the original constraints, evaluated at the common vertexz̄∈Rn, form a positively oriented basis forRn. The general form for this requirement is:det[E1,E2,∇f1(z̄),…,∇fn−2(z̄)]>0.Forn=3this coincides with the familiar condition for choosing the normal line in the direction ofE1×E2. Now, if the result is negative—the orientation of the triangle is flipped. The second technicality is referred to asT-Junctions: missing points on one copy of a common boundary curve, with respect to the second copy in its neighboring sub-domain. This occurs since two sub-domains with a common face undergo independent (and usually different) further subdivision events. Hence, new points are created in the different split locations of the common boundary curve.This section presents some results. To demonstrate the topological correctness of the termination condition—we also show the boundary curves at times: these are the closed loops on the boundary of each sub-domain which succeeded to terminate subdivision (SLBT and IPT returned TRUE). Then, we also show the full triangular mesh approximation of the solution.All examples are solved in the domain[0,1]n. It should be noted that the algorithm does not use any symbolic factorization or elimination methods: whenever we choose an equation that factors to a product of simpler polynomial expression—it is for instructive reasons, having a known solution, and it is used in no way during the solution process.We start with a simple example, which is a product of a plane and a sphere (see Fig. 4):(3)(x2+y2+z2−0.52)(z−0.75)=0,as a cubic constraint, in three variables. As can be seen in Fig. 4(b), the algorithm required further subdivision steps in the areas where the two components are closer, in order to guarantee the topology and distinguish the connected components.Next, we choose a more topologically challenging example, still inR3, of degree 14:(4)∏i=06(x2+y2+z2−(0.8×0.5i)2)=0,solution of which are seven concentric spheres of geometrically decreasing radii (Fig. 5),  from 0.8 to about one hundredth. With a subdivision tolerance of 0.001, all sub-domains are correctly resolved, not reaching this subdivision tolerance.Another topologically challenging example is the implicit representation of the Steiner surface (scaled to a radius of 0.3 and translated to the domain’s center):(5)(x−0.5)2(y−0.5)2+(y−0.5)2(z−0.5)2+(z−0.5)2(x−0.5)2−0.32(x−0.5)(y−0.5)(z−0.5)=0,which is not a regular manifold. Indeed, the algorithm fails near the self intersections. However, in the regular regions, the topology is guaranteed. In Fig. 6, the guaranteed regions are shown, at three different subdivision levels.To demonstrate the method forn>3, we first apply it to the bisector  [1] problem between two parametric surfaces: finding the locus of points for which the (locally) shortest distance to each of the input surfaces,S1(u,v),S2(r,s), is equal. One possible formulation of this requirement is given by:〈(S1(u,v)−S2(r,s))×n1(u,v),n2(r,s)〉=0(6)‖n2(r,s)‖2〈(S1(u,v)−S2(r,s)),n1(u,v)〉2−‖n1(u,v)‖2〈(S1(u,v)−S2(r,s)),n2(r,s)〉2=0,wheren1(u,v),n2(s,t)denote the normal vectors of the surfaces at the respective points. The first constraint requires that the two normal directions meet at a point, whereas the second constraint has the equidistant semantics (requiring an isosceles triangle is formed by the normal vectors and the line segment connecting the surface points). We have two equations and four unknowns. The solution is a two-manifold in(u,v,r,s)space. But each such(u,v)or(r,s)location determines, by construction, an(x,y,z)location on the bisector (for the precise mapping refer to  [1]). In Fig. 7, the bisector surface of a plane and a bi-quadratic surface is shown: it is the result of properly mapping the solution triangular mesh fromR4toR3, in post-processing. A more complex example is shown in Fig. 8, where the bi-quadratic surface admits hyperbolic areas (unlike the previous example where all points are elliptic), causing the normals on both sides of the surface to realize equidistant points with the plane, resulting in several disjoint components.Finally, we demonstrate how the presented method can be applied to the problem of sweeping an implicit space curve along a parameterized curve. We adopt the general notion of swept surfaces from the description on p. 472 of  [41]. A section curveC(u)is swept along a trajectory curveT(v), yielding the surface defined byS(u,v)=T(v)+M(v)C(u). The 3×3 matrixM(v)is used for rotating and non-uniform scaling, choice of which is affected by the required regularity of the resulting surface and is a separate challenge on its own. In the examples here we simply use the identity matrix, but the suggested method can be applied for any non-singular matrixM(v), given that its elements are polynomial functions ofv. Now, consider the following modification: assume a parameterization of the section curveC(u)is not in hand (either difficult to attain or not given by a rational formula), but it is given as the simultaneous zero set off1(x,y,z),f2(x,y,z). In such a case, in order to sweep the section curve along a parametric trajectory curveT(v),v∈[0,1], we may consider the two constraints:f1((x,y,z)−T(v))=0,(7)f2((x,y,z)−T(v))=0.We again have two constraints with four unknowns,(x,y,z,v), yielding a two-manifold solution inR4. However, projecting it on the first three coordinates gives the required sweep surface. In Fig. 9, solutions for some choices offiandT(v)are shown. The section is a curve on a torus given implicitly byf1, intersecting a plane33Also known as the Oval of Cassini.(Fig. 9(a)) or a sphere (Fig. 9(b)) given implicitly byf2. This section curve is swept along cubic parametric curves.To get some idea on the computational costs, the running times are presented in Table 1, tested on an Intel Core i5-2300 CPU, 2.8 GHz with 4 GB memory. It is evident from these running times that the bottleneck varies according to the problem in hand and can be either the topological guarantee subdivision step or can be at the numeric triangulation approximation stage. Not surprising, an extreme example is the Steiner surface (Fig. 6) example, where almost the entire effort is invested into the topological testing, due to the topological failures near the self intersections.In this paper, we presented an algorithm for solving under-constrained piecewise polynomial systems with two degrees of freedom. Our derivation assumed the constraints are independent. Weaker regularity assumptions is a clear further direction of research: we intend to address isolated singularities first. Then, the topological classification of the solution in the presence of non-isolated critical points, is an extremely challenging problem. Another related problem is adding inequality constraints. Typically, these do not reduce the dimension of the solution, but trim it to a smaller domain. A possible approach may begin by finding the (univariate) boundary of this domain and trimming the solution according to the inequality constraints. Finally, optimizing cone and gradient estimates is to be further investigated. As the tangent and normal cones of hyper-surfaces are essential and frequently used tools in subdivision solvers, but at a significant computational cost, methods for constructing tighter bounds on the normal/tangent fields of the input surfaces are to be studied.Additional points for improvement include, for example, tighter bounds on the (piecewise linear) approximation of the solution manifold, and better ways to estimate the solution normal space, especially if in (projection onto)R3. However, the exploitation of these introduced solution abilities in the presented and other applications, to their full potential, is yet to be revealed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
