@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Effects of offset values for artificial teeth positions in CAD/CAM complete denture

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We evaluated the optimal offset required for artificial teeth positioning during fabrication of CAD/CAM complete dentures.The optimal offset values differ with the basal shape of artificial teeth.Optimal offset values were 0.15–0.25mm for upper left central incisor, 0.15 and 0.25mm for upper left canine, 0.25mm for upper left first premolar, and 0.10–0.25mm for upper left first molar.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Complete denture,Accuracy,Artificial teeth,Measurement,Offset,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Recently, computer-aided design/computer-aided manufacturing (CAD/CAM) technology has been applied to the field of removable complete denture prosthodontics. We developed a system for fabricating complete dentures applying CAD/CAM technology. In this system, artificial teeth were bonded to the recesses of a milled denture base. However, the offset values needed for the recesses are not known. The purpose of the present study was to evaluate the accuracy of bonded artificial teeth positions in 0.00 (control), 0.10, 0.15, 0.20, and 0.25mm offset recess groups. Four types of artificial teeth, upper left central incisor (UL1), upper left canine (UL3), upper left first premolar (UL4), and upper left first molar (UL6), were used. Each type of artificial tooth was arranged at regular intervals on the denture base model with the CAD software. These data were defined as the master data. The artificial teeth parts were subtracted from the denture base model by Boolean logic operations in order to make recesses, and the recesses were then offset in five values. Based on these denture base data, prepolymerized resin blocks were milled (n=3). After bonding artificial teeth on the milled denture base model, a cone beam computed tomography (CBCT) scan was performed to obtain scanned data. Deviations between the master data and the scanned data were calculated. Based on the results, the optimal offset values were found to be 0.15–0.25mm for UL1, 0.15 and 0.25mm for UL3, 0.25mm for UL4, and 0.10–0.25mm for UL6.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Many treatment and laboratory procedures involved in the fabrication of complete dentures are complicated [1]. Problems encountered during fabrication have been mostly solved by computer-aided design/computer-aided manufacturing (CAD/CAM) technology, which was initially applied to fixed partial dentures [2]. Application of CAD/CAM technology was introduced to complete denture prosthodontics in the 1990s. Stereolithography and a computerized numerical machine were used for fabricating complete dentures [3,4]. Virtual arrangement of artificial teeth on CAD software has been reported in the 2000s [5,6]. In recent years, anterior teeth positions were determined based on muscular movements and pronunciation for CAD/CAM complete dentures [7]. In the United States, some CAD/CAM complete dentures have been launched in the dental market [8], and this is gradually becoming common. However, the abovementioned reports described the fabrication methods and did not mention the accuracy of the finished dentures.Previously, we developed systems for fabricating CAD/CAM complete dentures [9–11]. We also reported the fabrication accuracy of milled complete dentures [12]. In the report, the polished surface of dentures showed high accuracy, whereas the occlusal surface showed low accuracy. In this system, the final impressions were scanned with cone beam computed tomography (CBCT). The obtained Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine (DICOM) data were translated into Standard Triangulated Language (STL) data. With CAD software, the artificial teeth were arranged on the impression data, and the polished surface was designed. After designing was completed, the artificial teeth parts were subtracted from the denture bases by Boolean logic operations. In this way, denture bases with recesses for bonding artificial teeth data were obtained. Based on these data, denture bases were milled from prepolymerized resin blocks, and the artificial teeth were bonded to the recesses. In the bonding process, artificial teeth have occasionally not been returned to the specified positions, when there was no space between artificial teeth and the recesses. If there is appropriate offset recess in the socket, the artificial teeth fit into the recess. Meanwhile, if the offset value is too big, the artificial teeth may sink. Thus, offset recess data are needed to create spaces between recesses and artificial teeth. However, optimal offset values have not been set. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the accuracy of bonded artificial teeth positions in 0.00 (control), 0.10, 0.15, 0.20, and 0.25mm offset groups.The denture base model was designed with CAD software (FreeForm; Geomagic, Morrisville, NC, USA) (Fig. 1a). In this study, the STL data of the upper left central incisor (UL1), upper left canine (UL3), upper left first premolar (UL4), and upper left first molar (UL6) of the artificial teeth (SURPASS G; GC, Tokyo, Japan) were obtained using a three-dimensional (3D) scanner (ATOS Triple Scan; GOM mbH, Braunschweig, Germany) (Fig. 2). These artificial teeth were arranged on the denture base model with CAD software (CATIA V5R19; Dassault Systemes, Vélizy-Villacoublay, France). Each type of artificial teeth was arranged at regular intervals on the denture base model; these data were defined as the master data (Figs. 1b and 3).The artificial teeth were subtracted from the denture base model by Boolean logic operations in order to make recesses (Fig. 1c). The recesses were then offset with five different values. There was no offset in the control group. The offset values were 0.10, 0.15, 0.20, and 0.25mm (Fig. 4). By this process, offset recesses for the artificial teeth were prepared on the denture base model (Figs. 1d and 5). Based on these data, a machining center (GM-1000; GC, Tokyo, Japan) milled three prepolymerized custom fabricated acrylic resin (ACRON; GC, Tokyo, Japan) blocks to obtain denture base models with recesses (Fig. 1e). There were three samples in each offset group. Self-curing resin (UNIFAST III; GC, Tokyo, Japan) was used for bonding artificial teeth on the base model with recesses. In order to avoid technical errors, examiners practiced returning artificial teeth into the recesses without bonding agent. Three examiners who had more than 3 years of clinical experience in prosthodontics at the Dental Hospital, Tokyo Medical and Dental University (TMDU) bonded one sample piece each. While setting of self-curing resin, artificial teeth were held by hand for 3min and 30s. These denture base models with bonded artificial teeth (Figs. 1f and 6) were scanned by CBCT (Finecube; Yoshida, Tokyo, Japan) (Fig. 1g). CAD software (Mimics; Materialise, Leuven, Belgium) translated the obtained DICOM data into STL data, which were defined as the scanned data.The scanned data were superimposed on the master data in accordance with the semi-cylindrical part of the denture base model (Fig. 1h). The excess parts of artificial teeth were trimmed with FreeForm (Figs. 1i and 7). The deviation analysis between the master data and the scanned data was performed with CATIA. Deviation was defined as the normal distance between point clouds of the master model and the scanned model surface (Fig. 8). Deviation analysis of STL models did not compare two corresponding points. In this study, the distance between a point of scanned model and a point of master data, which is located in the normal distance from the scanned model point, was calculated as the deviation. The maximum deviation and the mean deviations of the absolute value were calculated. The mean deviations were obtained by dividing the sum of all the absolute values of the deviations by the number of point clouds.Data were statistically analyzed by one-way analysis of variance with Tukey post-hoc test. The analysis of variance was used to compare the mean absolute value of deviations and maximum absolute value of deviations for each artificial tooth between the five groups. Data were analyzed using statistical analysis software (SPSS version 16.0; SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA). The level of significance was set at P=0.05.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Within the limitations of this study, it was shown that in CAD/CAM complete denture, the recesses need offset for accurate teeth positions. The optimal offset values differ with the basal shape of artificial teeth. Optimal offset values were 0.15–0.25mm for UL1, 0.15 and 0.25mm for UL3, 0.25mm for UL4, and 0.10–0.25mm for UL6.Recently, CAD/CAM technology has been applied to removable complete denture prosthodontics. We developed a system for fabricating complete dentures applying CAD/CAM technology in which artificial teeth are bonded into recesses in a milled denture base. However, the offset values needed for recesses are not known. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the accuracy of bonded artificial teeth positions in 0.00 (control), 0.10, 0.15, 0.20, and 0.25mm offset groups.Four types of artificial teeth, upper left central incisor (UL1), upper left canine (UL3), upper left first premolar (UL4), and upper left first molar (UL6), were used. The denture base model was designed with CAD software. Each type of artificial tooth was arranged at regular intervals on the denture base model; this was defined as the master data. Then, the artificial teeth were subtracted from the denture base model by Boolean logic operations to make recesses. The recess data were offset in five different values. Based on these denture base data, a machining center milled prepolymerized resin blocks (n=3). Three examiners, who had more than 3 years of clinical experience in prosthodontics, performed this procedure. In this process, one examiner treated one sample piece. Artificial teeth were bonded by self-curing resin. After bonding artificial teeth on the denture base model, CBCT scan was performed to obtain the scanned data. The scanned data were superimposed on the master data. The excess parts of artificial teeth were trimmed. Then the mean and the maximum deviations between the master data and the scanned data were calculated. Data were analyzed using one-way analysis of variance with Tukey post-hoc test. The level of significance was set at P=0.05.For UL1, a significant difference was observed between the control group and the 0.15–0.25mm offset group for both the mean and maximum absolute value of deviations. For UL3, a significant difference was observed between the control group and the 0.15 and 0.25mm offset groups for both the mean and maximum absolute values of deviations. For UL4, a significant difference was observed between the control group and the 0.25mm offset group in both the mean and maximum absolute value of deviations. For UL6, a significant difference was observed between the control group and the other offset groups for both the mean and maximum absolute values of deviation. From color-coded maps of deviation analysis, UL1, UL3, and UL4 control groups showed inclination towards the buccal side, probably due to the influence of the artificial tooth basal area shape. In the bonding procedure, the forces were applied from the occlusal surface to the basal surface. The force vector was directed to the buccal surface because of the slope of the UL1, UL3, and UL4 basal area.Within the limitations of this study, it was shown that in CAD/CAM complete dentures, recesses require offset for accurate tooth positioning. Optimal offset values were 0.15–0.25mm for UL1, 0.15 and 0.25mm for UL3, 0.25mm for UL4, and 0.10–0.25mm for UL6.None declared.