@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Quantitative assessment of responses of the eyeball based on data from the Corvis tonometer

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The proposed algorithm enables to determine responses of the eyeball to an air puff.Responses of the eyeball can be linked to some features of corneal deformation.Using profiled algorithm enables to measure additional parameters from the Corvis.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Air-puff,Biomechanics,Corvis,Eye,Image processing,Measurement automation,Tonometer,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundThe “air-puff” tonometers, include the Corvis, are a type of device for measuring intraocular pressure and biomechanics parameters. The paper attempts to analyse this response and its relationship with other parameters measured in the Corvis tonometer.MethodsA number of 13,400 2D images were acquired from the Corvis device and analysed (32 healthy and 16 ill people). A new method has been proposed for the analysis of responses of the eyeball based on morphological transformations and contextual operations.ResultsThe proposed algorithm enables to determine responses of the eyeball to an air puff coming from the Corvis tonometer. Additionally, responses of the eyeball have been linked to some selected features of corneal deformation. The results include, among others: (1) distinguishability between the left and right eye with an error of 7%; (2) the correlation between the area under the curve in corneal deformation and the response of the eyeball −0.26; (3) the correlation between the highest concavity time and the maximum deformation amplitude of 0.4. All these features are obtained fully automatically and repetitively at a time of 3.8s per patient (Core i7 10GB RAM).DiscussionIt is possible to measure additional parameters of the eye deformation which are not available in the original software of the Corvis tonometer. The use of the proposed methods of image analysis and processing provides results directly from the eye response measurement when measuring intraocular pressure.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The rapid advances in technology and, in particular, methods of image analysis and processing enable to perform a fully automatic measurement of intraocular pressure (although the measurement is not considered the gold standard). One such device is the Corvis tonometer [1,2]. Apart from the measurement of intraocular pressure, it also allows for the measurement of other parameters of the eye [3]. The measurement method involves corneal flattening forced by an air puff—Fig. 1. Next, the corneal contour image analysis enables to measure the corneal thickness, deformation amplitude, applanation length, rate of corneal deflection and intraocular pressure [4,5]. They are shown inFig. 2. In addition, the information about applanation points, pachymetry, and others is provided [6,7]. For example, determination of temporary states of corneal flattening during a convex/concave transition and vice versa enables to designate two moments in time [3,5]. For these moments, the pressure value is read and then the mean value is calculated. This value after linear calibration is the IOP value. There are also other parameters of corneal deflection calculated in the Corvis tonometer (Fig. 2).Modern methods of image analysis and processing allow for the measurement of a much larger number of parameters than those that are available in the Corvis tonometer and proprietary software. Their determination requires the use of the Roberts, Sobel and Prewitt edge detection methods [8]. Morphological operations such as opening and closing, also treated as conditional, are useful here. The created software is characterized by much greater functionality, full access to data and almost limitless possibility of further processing, in particular statistical processing. This is particularly important because in the current version of the Corvis software it is not possible to access data, e.g. the results of the designated corneal contour. Additionally, the contour is not designated in the full range of the cornea visible in the image.Groups of studies related to the analysis of biomechanical parameters of the cornea for the ORA tonometer [9,10] and the effect of patients’ age [11–14], glaucoma [15] or wound healing [16] on the results obtained are known from the literature. Predictive numerical simulation of corneal biomechanical properties was considered in an equally interesting way [17]. The methods for measuring the ultrastructure of the corneal stroma are presented in paper [18]. There are also very interesting studies profiled to the analysis of the cornea in Brazilian patients [19] or children with the use of the ORA tonometer [20,21]. There also exist publications which show the correlation between the hysteresis obtained using the tonometer and pachymetry [22]. By contrast, Congdon et al. [23] present hysteresis in correlation with glaucoma damage. The paper [24] deals with these issues (hysteresis) but in the Reichert ocular response analyser. Gatinel et al. [25] draw attention to the corneal hysteresis, resistance factor and topography. There is also a known group of studies related to the analysis of biomechanical parameters of the cornea in keratoconic eyes, [26,27], or hypertension and glaucoma [28]. Also other examinations of the cornea are described which certainly contribute to the understanding of the biomechanical properties, for example, the corneal strip extensometry comparison presented in the paper [29]. In a review of the literature there are no studies related to the analysis of corneal images from the Corvis tonometer and, in particular, to the analysis of responses of the eyeball based on these images. Only in the paper [30] the authors show the division of the reaction to an air puff into the eyeball response and corneal response. The eyeball response itself is not analysed in the context of other biomechanical parameters, especially those available in the original software of the Corvis tonometer. The same applies to the paper [31] which shows the algorithm designed to acquire additional parameters from the Corvis tonometer, but without correlation analysis with the existing, well-known and aforementioned parameters. For this reason, this publication shows: (1) new biomechanical parameters of the eyeball response measured during corneal deformation; (2) correlation of the determined biomechanical parameters with the parameters measured by the original software of the Corvis tonometer; (3) analysis of results and evaluation of their practical usefulness.For the purposes of analysis, images with an M×N×I resolution of 200×576×140pixel were acquired from the Corvis device in the source recording format *.cst. The patients ranged in age from 17 to 63 years. They were healthy (32 people including 16 women) or ill (16 people including 9 women). The ill ones were patients with AMD (age-related macular degeneration) or other diseases that cause abnormal pressure in the eye. For each patient, there were 140 images in a sequence, which for 96 eyes gave a total of 13,400 2D images for analysis. Examinations of the patients were performed during routine tests in the Clinical Department of Ophthalmology, District Railway Hospital in Katowice, Poland in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. All the patients’ data were anonymised. In addition, all available information measured by the Corvis tonometer was archived for each patient, in particular, the IOP, pachymetry, applanation times and others.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The paper presents a fully automatic method for measuring responses of the eyeball calculated on the basis of data from the Corvis tonometer. In addition, a set of 4 different features, relevant from a practical point of view of the eyeball response assessment, was proposed. Moreover, the obtained results of responses of the eyeball were compared with the results of corneal reactions. The presented methodology of image acquisition and acquisition of individual parameters is not exhaustive of this extremely interesting phenomenon.The presented, automatically measured new parameters (w(1) to w(4)) can be linked with other dependencies and relationships presented in the well-known publications of other authors. For example, Hong et al. [1] showed the clinical comparison with noncontact and Goldmann applanation tonometers.There was no statistically significant difference in IOP measurements among the tonometers except between the Corvis ST and Topocon noncontact tonometer. Correlation analysis showed a high correlation between each pair of devices (p<0.001). The Corvis ST displayed the best intraobserver variability and interobserver variability. Bland–Altman analysis revealed a bias between Corvis ST and Goldmann applanation tonometer, Corvis ST and Topocon noncontact tonometer, and Goldmann applanation tonometer and Topocon noncontact tonometer of −1.3, −2.4, and −1.1mmHg, with 95% limits of agreement of −6.2 to 3.5mmHg, −10.1 to 5.2mmHg, and −8.3 to 6.2mmHg, respectively. Valbon et al. [2] showed some selected biomechanical metrics in healthy Brazilian patients. In this study, mean central corneal thickness was 547.50±32.00μm and mean deformation amplitude was 1.05±0.08mm. Valbon el at. showed that highest concavity time was 18.38±0.93ms and intraocular pressure was 16.43±2.15mmHg. First applanation time was 8.32±0.33ms (length, max, was 2.07±0.38mm) and second applanation time was 23.80±0.44ms (length, max, was 2.37±0.47mm). The variability of selected parameters from the Corvis tonometer was also shown for healthy subjects and patients by Lanza et al. [4]. They evaluated 64 healthy eyes of 64 patients with a mean refractive error of −0.65±1.68 D, 17 eyes of 17 patients that underwent myopic photorefractive keratectomy for a mean refractive defect of −4.91±2.05 D, 16 eyes of 16 patients affected by keratconus, and 13 eyes of 13 patients affected by keratoconus that underwent corneal collagen crosslinking. According to the data obtained by Lanza et al., corneal curvature would influence corneal deformation to a greater extent than central corneal thickness. Linking the parameters w(1) to w(4) with keratoconic eyes [21,26] and other parameters can also be of interest.The described profiled algorithm can consist of other image analysis and processing methods. For example, random methods of analysis of layers in the tomographic image of the eye [33,34], the methods of mathematical morphology [35] and others [36] can be used here. The final choice of the analysis method is highly dependent on the results obtained in practice, which is a vital element taking into account large inter-individual variability. For instance, the authors of paper [30] divided corneal reactions into four different groups based upon the characteristics of their responses to an air puff. However, they did not provide the analysis of responses of the eyeball. Publications [31,37] present other parameters, that are not available in the origininal software of the Corvis tonometer, but they are not related to the eyeball response. Similarly, in other publications, for example [38–41], the conclusions and the whole analysis are only related to the parameters available from the Corvis tonometer [42,43]. On the other hand, the presented selection of parameters acquired from the obtained responses of the eyeball is very important. This selection was carried out on the basis of biomechanical evidence of both deformed cornea and a response of the eyeball to the measurement with the Corvis tonometer. In subsequent papers, these features will be verified in terms of repeatability of their measurement and sensitivity to changes in parameters, including both patient positioning and tonometer settings [44]. Indeed, biomechanical parameters of the eye, measured in dynamic states, still represent a new area of interdisciplinary research.