@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
High-quality vertex clustering for surface mesh segmentation using Student-

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a method for high-quality vertex clustering using Student-tmixture model.Less redundant clusters, which have no small isolated fragments, have been obtained.High-quality clusters have been obtained which correspond to the underlying surfaces.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Segmentation,Underlying surface extraction,Vertex clustering,Student-,t,mixture model,Variational Bayes approximation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In order to robustly perform segmentation for industrial design objects measured by a 3-D scanning device, we propose a new method for high-quality vertex clustering on a noisy mesh. Using Student-tmixture model with the variational Bayes approximation, we develop a vertex clustering algorithm in the 9-D space composed of three kinds of principal curvature measures along with vertex position and normal component. The normal component is added, because it well describes the surface-features and is less influenced by noise, and the positional component suppresses redundant clusters due to the normal one. Furthermore, in order to enhance the robustness for noisy data, considering mesh topology as a spatial constraint and letting the vertices in its surroundings belong to the same cluster by diffusion process, we protect generating many small fragments due to noise. We demonstrate effectiveness of our method by applying it to the real-world scanned data.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Surface mesh segmentation has been an important research item in areas such as computer vision, computer graphics and geometric modeling, and its goal is to partition a mesh into several patches that have a similar geometrical or consistent property corresponding to each practical purpose. Among considerable research papers,  [1–3] surveyed mesh segmentation techniques in detail. According to  [2], segmentation is classified into two categories: surface-type and part- (volumetric-) type.In this paper, we focus on the surface-type segmentation which becomes a pre-image of the final CAD (underlying surface) model  [4], and treat industrial design objects measured by a 3-D scanning device. In reverse engineering, the scanned data are converted into a CAD model composed of underlying surfaces, which are classified into two types: analytic and free-form surfaces  [5]. The former is characterized by a quadric surface or constant curvature, and the latter by monotonically varying curvature. Since curvature analysis is an important clue to partitioning the data for both types of surfaces, the majority of the segmentation methods uses curvature-based descriptors, but has great drawbacks as follows:–this approach may generate a lot of small isolated fragments, called over-segmentation, since curvature is a higher order differential invariant and very sensitive to noise;it is difficult to find thresholds necessary for partitioning the data according to some levels of curvature value corresponding to the underlying surface.Our research objective is to propose a robust and high-quality vertex clustering method for segmentation of noisy scanned data. Fig. 1(a) and (b) show an input noisy mesh with a mean curvature map, and Fig. 1(d) indicates a segmentation result which is produced by a simple post-processing of our high-quality vertex clustering Fig. 1(c) in which the speckled pattern shown in Fig. 1(b) does not exist and the underlying surfaces are well extracted.The main ideas behind our approach for tackling the above problems are based on the following three items:(i)Student-tmixture model with the Bayesian statistical framework;vertex clustering in a 9-D feature space: three kinds of principal curvature measures (3-D), vertex position (3-D) and its normal vector (3-D);spatial constraint by a diffusion process in the 9-D space.First, we apply the Student-tdistribution, which has a heavy tail, to the vertex clustering for mesh segmentation. Gaussian distribution or Gaussian mixture model (GMM) is widely used in geometry processing for the ease of computation. Unfortunately, such assumption is not correct since usually data are distributed in different ways because of outliers from the normal distribution. Hence, we apply the Student-tmixture model (SMM) to the vertex clustering and solve the SMM with the variational Bayes approximation, since the framework is robust to the over-segmentation problem and is able to automatically find the thresholds for partitioning the noisy data. Compared with the existing methods, we can perform the vertex clustering effectively for the subsequent region growing and merging process.Second, we perform the vertex clustering in a 9-D space composed of three kinds of principal curvature measures along with a vertex position and its normal vector. Each mesh vertex is represented by a point in this space and clustered by the SMM. The normal vector is added, since it well describes surface-features and is less influenced by noise  [6,7]. And the positional component suppresses the redundant clusters in such a shape as a cylinder, which may be clustered due to the normal component. Thus, we can classify the features more robustly than the approach based only on curvature values.Third, in order to protect generating many small fragments due to clustering in a high dimensional space in which local similarity of real space (i.e. mesh topology) makes less sense, we introduce a diffusion process in which cluster label (called responsibility) of each point in the 9-D space is diffused in neighborhoods of the corresponding 3-D mesh vertex.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section  2 presents a brief overview of related works. Section  3 addresses our insistence on applying the SMM with the Bayesian framework. In Section  4, we introduce a clustering algorithm in the 9-D space. Experimental results are described in Section  5, and finally we conclude the paper in Section  6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We have proposed a high-quality vertex clustering method for surface mesh segmentation using the Student-tdistributions model with the variational Bayes approximation. In order to compensate the side-effect of the existing curvature-based clustering, we have constructed the 9-D clustering space of log-scaled standardized curvatures along with vertex normal and position components accompanying the diffusion process.We have shown its effectiveness from some experimental results, comparing with the representative and widely used methods in the existing studies. In our method, we have obtained less redundant clusters, and furthermore, high-quality clusters which correspond to the underlying surfaces of the desirable segmentation.Future research includes improving the prior distributions and the likelihood function so as to be able to select the model complexityM, i.e. the number of clusters, automatically in the Bayesian framework, and applying our method to the surface fitting, and so on.