@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A quantitative cell modeling and wound-healing analysis based on the Electric Cell-substrate Impedance Sensing (ECIS) method

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Cell behavior is continuously measured by the change in resistance on an ECIS system.ECIS allows an easier way in cell wound healing assay than does the traditional way.The wavelet transform allows an unprecedented multi-scale analysis in cell dynamics.The regression line of cell fluctuation versus resistance gives cell electroactivity.The cell power and electroactivity are used for quantitative wound healing analysis.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Electric Cell-substrate Impedance Sensing (ECIS),Modeling,Negative pressure,Wound healing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, a quantitative modeling and wound-healing analysis of fibroblast and human keratinocyte cells is presented. Our study was conducted using a continuous cellular impedance monitoring technique, dubbed Electric Cell-substrate Impedance Sensing (ECIS). In fact, we have constructed a mathematical model for quantitatively analyzing the cultured cell growth using the time series data directly derived by ECIS in a previous work. In this study, the applicability of our model into the keratinocyte cell growth modeling analysis was assessed first. In addition, an electrical “wound-healing” assay was used as a means to evaluate the healing process of keratinocyte cells at a variety of pressures. Two innovative and new-defined indicators, dubbed cell power and cell electroactivity, respectively, were developed for quantitatively characterizing the biophysical behavior of cells. We then employed the wavelet transform method to perform a multi-scale analysis so the cell power and cell electroactivity across multiple observational time scales may be captured. Numerical results indicated that our model can well fit the data measured from the keratinocyte cell culture for cell growth modeling analysis. Also, the results produced by our quantitative analysis showed that the wound healing process was the fastest at the negative pressure of 125mmHg, which consistently agreed with the qualitative analysis results reported in previous works.A microelectrode-based biosensor device, referred to as the Electric Cell-substrate Impedance Sensing (ECIS), is known as a continuous data acquisition system that is able to measure as well as monitor the structural and functional properties of living cells in a real-time fashion [1]. In ECIS, living cells are inoculated in a culture well. Then, the cells will attach and grow on a small gold electrode deposited on the bottom of the well. The ECIS technique can continuously monitor the impedance of the small gold electrode in a real-time manner. Traditionally, cell attachment and spreading measurements are carried out with intensive labor involving a lot of manipulations of the cultures for microscopic evaluation of cell behavior. With ECIS, these same measurements can be made in a much easier and more convenient way [2–4]. This is because the cell attachment and spreading would result in a drastic increase in the measured impedance and thus, the analysis results on the cell impedance time series may provide an insight into the underlying mechanisms of cellular behavior. To date, ECIS has been applied for quantitatively detecting subtle, continuous and dynamic changes in cellular behavior such as adhesion, spreading and proliferation. There are a number of previous research works in the literature having employed such an automated approach to explore a variety of interesting research topics, including cell attachment and spreading [5–7], wound healing and cell migration [8–11], cell toxicology [3,4,12–15], cell invasion [16,17], and evaluation of the barrier function of cell monolayers [18–27]. In addition, ECIS can be also used for clinical applications. In this aspect, some researchers employed ECIS to show that Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor Repressor (AHRR) can be considered as a new tumor suppressor gene in multiple types of human cancers [28]. Moreover, there is a previous research in the literature using ECIS to demonstrate that Monocyte Chemoattractant Protein-1 (MCP-1) would result in the proliferation of Bronchial Epithelial Cell (BEC), thus initiating the repair process of an injured BEC monolayer for airway epithelial injury [29]. Also, we have developed a theoretical model that is applied to the ECIS derived resistance time series for quantitatively evaluating the cultured cell growth in a previous work [30]. In addition, due to the dynamic nature associated with the ruling action of the cellular behavior, we have also introduced a wavelet-based multi-scale analysis with the applications into computational cell biology [30]. In fact, the wavelet transform allows one to zoom in to the details of the signal with a variety of observational scales as well as to zoom out to the coarse shape of the signal, thus being well suited for the biological signal processing.Inspecting the cell resistance time series data, one may notice that the fluctuation is always seen in the resistance signal measured from living cells, no matter before or after the cells become completely confluent. Previous research works in the literature have indicated that such an intriguing phenomenon is caused by the micromotion of the living cells [3,30], and hence we may further hypothesize that the power dissipation required for the cells to move can be quantified using the small resistive fluctuation data derived from the ECIS. Also, the linear association between the level of small resistive fluctuation and the resistance value that was quantified by performing a linear regression analysis can be used to quantitatively characterize the cell electroactivity.In this study, first we applied our theoretical model to extracting the modeling parameters related to the growth of the keratinocyte cells so comparisons between the different conditions can be consequently performed. Secondly, we employed the wavelet transform to perform a multi-scale analysis on the ECIS-derived cell resistance. Note that in this study we developed two novel indicators, referred to as the cell power and cell electroactivity, respectively, and incorporated them into the wavelet-based multi-scale analysis for quantitatively assessing the wound-healing process in keratinocyte cells across multiple time scales. Since negative pressure-wound therapy has been considered as a treatment used to facilitate wound healing at controlled subatmospheric pressures [8,11,31–33], activation due to different negative pressures may result in different effects on cell migration in wound healing process. In this regard, we used an electrical “wound-healing” assay as a means to investigate and compare the wound healing of the keratinocyte cells at a variety of pressures using the wound closure speed, the cell power and cell electroactivity.In this study, cells of a fibroblast cell line (3T3), derived from the embryo (ATCC #CCL-163), were cultured in Dulbecco׳s Modified Eagle׳s Medium (DMEM, from GIBCO; Grand Island, NY) supplement with 10% Fetal Calf Serum (FCS) and antibiotics (100IU/mL penicillin). In addition, a human skin keratinocyte cell line (HaCaT, kindly provided by the Institute of Pharmacology, National Yang-Ming University, Taiwan) were cultured in DMEM/F-12 (Sigma-Aldrich Corporation, St. Louis, MO, USA) solution containing 10% FCS and antibiotics (100IU/mL penicillin). Cells were cultured in 75cm2 flask and were incubated at 37°C and in an atmosphere of 5% CO2. When confluent, cells were detached from the flask using trypsin with EDTA solution. Cell number in the suspension was then determined using the hemacytometer under a microscope.As described above, 3T3 fibroblast and HaCaT keratinocyte cells were seeded onto the tissue culture polystyrene (TCPS) dish and incubated at 37°C with 5% CO2. Here, the cellular size in terms of area was evaluated for both fibroblast and keratinocyte cells. To estimate the cell areas of fibroblast and keratinocyte cells on the TCPS, the microscopic image data obtained from monitoring both the cell growths at the time instant 32h were used. Then, a commercial image processing software, called the Image-Pro Plus, was employed to process the microscopic image data for automatically capturing the cell, counting the cell number and evaluating the cell size/area.A commercial ECIS system (Applied Biophysics, Troy, NY, USA) was employed to measure the resistance associated with the proliferation of live keratinocyte cells. Here, an 8W10E sensing chip consisting of eight separate wells was used. The detecting electrodes, deposited on the bottom of each well, are connected in series to a 1MΩ resistor, an AC signal generator and a large gold counter electrode. Since the AC signal amplitude is set to 1V, it results in a current source signal with the amplitude of 1μA. Note that in order to determine the most sensitive frequency for measuring the changes in resistance time series in our experimental settings, a frequency scan was performed before the assay. Our frequency scan results confirmed that the large changes in resistance generally occurred at 4kHz for both the keratinocyte and fibroblast cells and thus we set the operating frequency of ECIS to 4kHz.The ECIS system can simultaneously measure cell resistance and capacitance during cell culture. The principle of the ECIS measurement is as described in detail previously [18]. In this study, we collected a number of resistance time-series datasets using the ECIS system for our modeling analysis. Note that since the size of a keratinocyte cell is generally about twice as much as that of a fibroblast one when attaching to the electrode, here we only inoculated a smaller number of keratinocyte cells than that of fibroblast cells as seeded in our previous work [30]. According to our model, denoting the time lag as τ, we model the time response function of the resistance R(t) evaluated during the course of exponential growth phase as(1)R(t)=R0ek(t−τ)=R0e−kτ⋅ekt=R1ektwhere t represents the time in hour, k is the rate constant, R0 denotes the modeled cell resistance (in Ω) corresponding to the temporal point at which the exponential growth phase begins, and R1 denotes the y-intercept of the exponentially modeled cell resistance curve. The population doubling time (PDT) can be determined by(2)PDT=ln2kWe then used the model as indicated in (1) to evaluate the proliferation of keratinocyte cells on the ECIS system.Instead of disrupting the cell using the traditional “scrape,” the ECIS wounding assay allows one to employ electric signals (i.e., the “electrical shock”) to wound the cells and monitor the subsequent healing process. In our experimental settings, 0.5ml of cell suspension (with concentrations 5×105 and 1.6×105 cells/ml for fibroblast and keratinocyte cells, respectively) was inoculated into each well of the 8W1E sensing chip. The resistance of the culture medium between the detecting and counterelectrodes was continuously measured in a real-time manner. When confluent, the cells on the surface of the small gold electrode in each well were killed by applying an AC current of 2000μA at 60kHz for 20s, thus resulting in an abrupt resistance drop.Fig. 1 presents plots of raw ECIS impedance, resistance and capacitance signals measured during the course of keratinocyte and fibroblast cell migration before and after the electrical shock. Note that although the ECIS system can simultaneously derive cell resistance and capacitance, these physical quantities are actually dependent upon different cell characteristics as well as the measurement frequency. Fig. 1 reveals that based on measurements at frequency 4kHz, the changes in resistance seemed more significant than those in capacitance throughout the entire wounding experiment. Therefore, we here focused more on the changes in resistance at different stages. Also, it is evidently revealed from Fig. 1 that shortly after the electrical shock the surrounding living keratinocyte or fibroblast cells actually migrated inward to replace the dead cells rather than descending to the bottom of the well to attach on the surface of the gold-film electrode as seen in the beginning of cell culture. The electrode can be thought of as being analogous to the wounded area. In fact, the ECIS wounding assay is a completely automated assay requiring only a minimum of effort. Both cell wounding and measurements of the subsequent healing process are carried out under computer control.In order to show the validity of the ECIS measurement in wounding assay as stated above, we here further included the microscope images of fibroblast cell healing processes, as shown inFig. 2. In our experimental settings, 2ml cell suspension with concentration of 2.5×105 cells/ml of fibroblast cells were inoculated into the 3.5cm dish and incubated at 37°C with 5% CO2. When cell became 80% confluent, the confluent monolayer was scored with a sterile plastic stick to leave a scratch of approximately 0.8–0.9mm in width. The dish was then placed on an inside incubator microscope (LumaScope model 620, Etaluma) with 10× objectives and images were captured every 15min for 48h. The images can be further strung together to create short videos displaying the dynamic motion of cell wound healing process. Using the microscope images as shown in Fig. 2, the percentage of monolayer cell wound healing (PWH) can be estimated as(3)percentageofwoundhealing(PWH)=(L0−Ln)L0×100%where L0 represents the initial length of a line across the wound area and Ln represents the length of the line at the same position after x hours of healing process. Therefore, the PWH at initial and end wound-healing process would always be 0 and 100, respectively. It should be further noted that while the PWH, as expressed in (3), can only provide rate estimate of cell spreading by lumping the cell migration and cell proliferation together, Johnston et al. have presented a method that can distinguish the relative roles of cell migration and cell proliferation to quantify the rate of collective cell spreading [34].Moreover, we also quantitatively evaluated the effects of a variety of negative pressures on keratinocyte cell migration in wound healing which has been qualitatively explored by previous studies [8,11]. In this regard, as described in detail previously [8], we here simply integrated the ECIS system into a commercial negative pressure incubator that is capable of creating a negative pressure environment for cell culture and hence the cell behaviors in wound healing at different pressures can be continuously monitored. Note that in such aspect of application, the wounded keratinocyte cells were cultured in the incubator, immediately after the shock, at ambient pressure (AP), the negative pressures of 125mmHg (NP125), and 175mmHg (NP175), respectively.It is widely known that the wavelet transform allows one to zoom in to the details of a signal with a variety of observational scales as well as to zoom out to the coarse shape of the signal. In fact, the source of the ECIS impedance fluctuations can be attributed to rapid motility of the cell periphery due to membrane ruffling and random cell movements, the so-called micromotion. These variations in impedance (or resistance) due to micromotion can be decomposed into a number of short-term and long-term components that may reveal different cell behaviors and characteristics on a variety of time scales. Since it has been demonstrated that the wavelet transform can be used to quantify the fluctuations associated with cellular micromotions in a multi-scale manner [30], we thus aimed to further develop novel indicators and seek for their applicability into continuous and quantitative assessments of the cellular dynamics across a number of observational time scales on the ECIS-derived cell resistance time series.Given a measured ECIS resistance time series, first a four-level Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) was computed. We here employed the Daubechies 4 wavelets in our analysis. All the detail signals, denoted as dj(n), and the coarse signals, denoted as cj(n), were then obtained (where j=1, …, 4). Recall that the wavelet representation dj(n) shifts from the fine scale (i.e., the short-term and local disturbance in the higher frequency bands) to the coarse scale (i.e., the long-term and global disturbance in the lower frequency bands) as j increases. In this study, two novel indicators were defined using the wavelet transform results for quantitatively assessing the cell dynamics over a number of discrete time scales j (as described in the subsections below).In conjunction with the definition of signal power calculation, the average cell power at the jth scale level, denoted as Pj, can be estimated as(4)Pj=I2⋅1Nj∑n=1Njdj2(n)where j denotes the scale level (j=1, …, 4), Njrepresents the length of dj(n) and I represents the current intensity. That is, we evaluated Pj(in watts) simply using the square of the current intensity (in amperes) times the Root-Mean-Squared (RMS) resistance (in ohms) at the jth scale level. Since in ECIS system, we have I=10−6, Pjcan be thus alternatively evaluated by(5)Pj=1Nj∑n=1Njdj2(n)with the unit in pico-watts (pW). It is worth noting that such a wavelet-based cell power estimation is unprecedented in cell analysis. It allows one to quantitatively evaluate the power dissipation due to the cellular micromotion.Furthermore, while each coarse signal cj(n) can be viewed as a smoothed version of the original cell resistance signal, each detail signal dj(n) can be actually thought of as being the fluctuation associated with the cell micromotion corresponding to a particular frequency band. In order to estimate the level of fluctuation, we calculated the moving RMS waveform of the detail signal dj(n), denoted as fj(n), where fj(n) can be used to represent the level of fluctuation at the jth scale. According to previous research works in the literature, the small fluctuation is actually due to the micromotion of the living cells [3,30]. Some previous research further provided evidence showing that while the number of cells was increasing due to cell proliferation, the level of fluctuation due to cell micromotion was getting higher [30], thus implying that the motion might be positively correlated with the cell number. Therefore, it is reasonable to hypothesize that the level of fluctuation should be positively correlated with the number of cells before the cell culture becomes confluent. A multi-scale based linear regression analysis used to relate the RMS fluctuation fj(n) to the cell resistance cj(n) can be thus expressed as(6)fj(n)=fj0+σj⋅cj(n),where j denotes the scale level (j=1, …, 4), n denotes the discrete time, fj0 and σjare the modeling parameters that control the behavior of the model and can be found using the least-squares estimation procedure. We here refer σjto as the cell electroactivity at the jth scale level. The cell electroactivity, as defined in (6), can be thought of as being an indicator of cell viability since the new index actually characterizes the association between the fluctuating magnitude due to cell micromotion and the number of living cells by evaluating the level of small resistive fluctuation per unit resistance, which is unprecedented.Recall we first cultured both the fibroblast and keratinocyte cells on TCPS Dish and evaluated the areas for both cells. Here, we had 2×104 fibroblast cells and 2×104 keratinocyte cells seeded for the growth on TCPS Dish.Fig. 3(a) shows the microscopic data obtained using the photographic arrangements to monitor both the keratinocyte and fibroblast cell growths at the time instant 32h. Recall also that the areas of fibroblast and keratinocyte cells were then respectively evaluated from the microscopic image data using the Image-Pro Plus software, as mentioned previously (in Section 2.1). In this regard, we processed the microscopic image data using the Image-Pro Plus for automatically capturing the cell, counting the cell number and evaluating the cell size (in terms of area), as shown in Fig. 3(b). As a result, the average area estimates of keratinocyte and fibroblast cells were then obtained as 233μm2 and 121μm2, respectively.In our study, two sets of mean R(t) time series data corresponding to 0.617×105 and 0.309×105 keratinocyte cells, respectively, were fitted to the model as expressed in (1). Modeling parameters such as R0, the lag period τ, and the rate constant k were obtained. The PDT can be then determined using (2). In addition, the percentage ratio of the residual signal energy to the original signal energy, defined as percent error energy (PEE), was also calculated. All the numerical results are tabulated inTable 1. On the other hand, since DL Vaux et al. have indicated that the evidence that the results are convincing and reproducible needs be provided [35], we repeated performing the cell culture experiment independently twice in this cell growth modeling analysis. Another set of numerical results obtained from an independent experiment are also provided inTable 2. Inspecting the numerical results listed in both tables, first we may see that our mathematical model was also applicable to the growth modeling analysis of keratinocyte cells (with PEE«5%) and both sets of results (such as k, τ, and PDT) as shown in Tables 1 and 2, respectively, generally agreed each other. Moreover, we may also see that while the numbers of keratinocyte cells were obviously less than those of fibroblast cells, the former showed shorter estimated PDTs than the latter. According to the cell area estimation results as presented in the previous subsection, this could be partly attributed to the fact that a keratinocyte cell generally has larger area than does a fibroblast one when attaching and spreading on the electrode and thus, the keratinocyte cell proliferation may be faster. Therefore, the analysis obtained from TCPS Dish could provide as a test performed to show the validity of the ECIS measurement since both TCPS Dish and ECIS analysis results actually consistently agreed each other.First, results of a cell power analysis on ECIS time series data in wound healing are presented and discussed. Here, an 8W1E sensing chip was used to measure the cell resistance. The resistance of each well filled with 0.2ml of culture medium (DMEM) without cells was about 2kΩ. Note that for fibroblast cells, the resistance signals measured from 0h to 23.33h before the shock (wounding) and from 0.07h to 48.51h after the shock (wounding) were used for the analysis. As for keratinocyte cells, the resistance signals measured from 0h to 18.32h before wounding and from 0.38h to 23.28h after wounding were used for the analysis. Note that in this experiment we obtained the data from eight independent replicates (or eight culture wells). In fact, as indicated previously, the evidence that the results are convincing and reproducible needs be provided. Thus, we repeated performing this experiment (as stated above) independently twice, where there were eight independent data sets obtained from the experiment each time. That is, denoting the number of experiments performed as N and denoting the number of replicates as n, in this study we have N=2 and n=8.Table 3 shows the capacitance, resistance, times required for reaching the minimum capacitance and maximum resistance, respectively, and average cell power evaluated before applying the electrical shock for both the keratinocyte and fibroblast cells during the cell culture. Data were all expressed as mean±standard deviation. Here, C0 represents the initial capacitance value of an ECIS sensing chip (8W1E). In fact, the ECIS sensing chip is a sterile disposable chip. In the manufacturing process of such a chip, the value of C0 is not guaranteed to be constant. Since the initial capacitance value is chip-dependent, it is independent of the cell types.Observing both Table 3 and Fig. 1, one may see that it took shorter time for keratinocyte cells to reach the minimum capacitance (denoted as Tmin) or the maximum resistance value (denoted as Tmax), indicating that it would be faster for keratinocyte cell culture to become confluent. Further note it has been shown previously that while the capacitance levels stabilize once cells are confluent, the resistance levels may continue to increase due to that cell-cell contacts are being established. This has been also validated by our numerical results as tabulated in Table 3. From Table 3, it is actually revealed that Tmax was always substantially greater than Tmin for both the keratinocyte and fibroblast cells during the cell culture.Moreover, in order to validate the ECIS measurement, the microscopic data of fibroblast cell healing were obtained using the photographic arrangements and the PWH, as indicated in (3), was then evaluated to monitor the healing at different time instants (since cell injury): 0h, 5h, 10h, 15h, 20h, and 25h, respectively. The PWH estimates are tabulated inTable 4. It is revealed from Table 4 that the fibroblast cell became over 90% confluent at 25h after injury, consistently agreeing to the ECIS resistance measurement as shown in Fig. 1(b).As for the numerical experimental results produced by the cell culture after the electrical shock, we focused on the average cell power estimates, Pj, as tabulated inTable 5. Note first that the data in Table 5 were derived from two independent experiments (N=2), where there were eight replicates (wells) in each experiment (n=8). Inspecting Table 5, one may see that both keratinocyte and fibroblast cells still showed comparable cell powers at different scale levels. However, if further compared with the numerical results obtained before the shock, the cell powers respectively derived from the keratinocyte and fibroblast cells were both reduced after the shock. The detail information of P4* and P4 as shown in Table 5 is further depicted inFig. 4.We then performed statistical analysis of these power data using both the paired t-test and independent t-test. The p-value less than 0.001 (i.e., p<0.001) was considered statistically significant. Note that here we used P4 (i.e., the average cell power at the 4th level) which simply reflected the work due to long-term and global cellular motion. First, for each type of cell (i.e., fibroblast or keratinocyte) we compared its P4* and P4 by performing the paired t-test. As a result, significant differences were observed between P4* and P4 (p<0.001) for either fibroblast (t=−7.411) or keratinocyte (t=−6.524) cells (as indicated in Fig. 4). That is, we may conclude from our data that the cell power would be significantly reduced after the shock, no matter for fibroblast or keratinocyte cells (i.e., P4*>P4, p<0.001). On the other hand, we then compared P4* between fibroblast and keratinocyte cells and also compared P4 between both types of cells. After performing the independent t-test, we found that there were no significant differences observed between fibroblast and keratinocyte cells in P4* (t=1.083, p=0.289) or P4 (t=−1.977, p=0.061) estimates.As mentioned previously, we carried an ECIS wound healing assay in order to study the healing process. In addition to quantitatively assessing and comparing the cell powers measured before and after the shock as stated above, we also attempted to evaluate the effects of different negative pressures on keratinocyte cell migration in the wound healing process.Fig. 5 shows the numerical results of the cell electroactivities, time constants, and cell powers derived from all the four frequency bands (j=1, …, 4) of the resistance signals respectively measured after the injury at different pressures (AP, NP125, NP175). Note further that here the resistance signals measured from 0.38h to 23.28h after wounding at AP and from 0.2h to 20h after wounding at negative pressures (i.e., NP125 and NP175) were used for the calculation of the data. Recall time constant is a parameter representing the time required for the cell fluctuation curve to reach approximately 63.2% of the maximum level. Note that here time constant can be actually thought of as being a quantitative measure of the effective time required for becoming confluent in cell culture [30]. In order to consequently perform the comparisons in wound healing of keratinocyte cells at different pressures, statistical analyses of cell electroactivity, cell time constant, and cell power were performed using ANOVA with Tukey׳s post-hoc test.Observing Fig. 5, first one may see that the keratinocyte cells healed at NP125 had the lowest electroactivities at all the four levels, which were significantly lower (p<0.001) than those healed at AP and NP175, respectively (Fig. 5(a)). In addition, the cells healed at NP125 also showed the smallest time constants and cell powers at all levels (Fig. 5(b) and (c)). Among these, the cell powers obtained at NP125 and NP175 were both significantly smaller (p<0.001) than those obtained at AP (Fig. 5(c)). Therefore, according to the numerical results produced by our quantitative analysis we may conclude that the wound healing process should be the fastest at NP125, which agreed with the qualitative analysis results reported in a previous work in literature [8]. More than that, our analysis further indicated that the keratinocyte cells healed at NP125 had the minimum power dissipation with the smallest electroactivity, which was novel and unprecedented.In this discussion, first we would like to explain how the two proposed new indicators, the cell power and cell electroactivity, are correlated with the power dissipated by cell micromotion and cell viability. Since the cell membrane would impede current flow across the cell layer and meanwhile, living cells would keep moving during the cell culture, an increase associated with fluctuations in the measure of ECIS resistance is thus seen. It has been indicated by a number of previous researches in literature that the increase in resistance can be attributed to the cell spreading and attachment, while the fluctuations in the resistance data may reflect the information about the kinetics of cell micromotion and can be thus used as in indication of cell viability [1,36–39]. Therefore, the correlation between the two new indicators and the power dissipated by cell micromotion and cell viability has been experimentally justified and supported by the previous works in literature as indicated above. In fact, both new indicators were defined based on the quantification of cell fluctuations.Furthermore, in order to discuss and interpret the results produced by our analyses, as presented above, in a more comprehensive fashion, we also performed a number of numerical experiments by evaluating generally accepted indicators on our ECIS data, including the variance32 (Var32), Hurst exponent and power slope (β) [4], to discuss the two novel indicators, cell power and cell electroactivity, introduced by this work and then validate the presented assumptions of both new indicators. As described in detail previously [4], Var32 was obtained by evaluating the variance for each 32-point segment of the entire time series and then taking the average of all these variances, while β was estimated as the power slope of the log–log plot of Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) power spectrum (i.e., characterized as the f–βnoise, where f represent the frequency in Hz).Table 6 shows the statistical results of power slope, Var32, and Hurst exponent derived from the ECIS resistance signals measured before and after the electrical shock for fibroblast and keratinocyte cells (n=8 for each cell type). It is revealed from Table 6 that Var32 and Hurst exponent were generally reduced after the shock for both types of cells, while the power slope β showed no significant difference in the power spectra evaluated before and after the shock, respectively. Recall that it was revealed from Table 5 that the cell power also exhibited a reduction after the shock. We may thus conclude that such a reduction in these parameter values can be attributed to the cell injury caused by the electrical shock.Moreover,Table 7 provides the numerical results in terms of means and standard deviations of β, Var32, and Hurst exponent derived from the ECIS resistance signals of keratinocyte cells measured before the shock at AP, after the shock at AP, NP125, and NP175, respectively. Similarly, the power slope β still showed no significant difference in the power spectra evaluated at different pressures. In addition, either the Var32 or the Hurst exponent derived from NP125 was the smallest of all the three cases corresponding to different pressures. Further inspecting the results as shown in both Fig. 5 and Table 7, we may conclude that the values of the indicators, including cell electroactivity, cell power, TC, Var32 and Hurst, seemed to all achieve the minimum when being evaluated at NP125 after the shock.It should be noted that a value of Hurst exponent ranging from 0.5 to 1 indicates a long-term positive correlation within a given time series. In our study, the Hurst exponents either derived from the fibroblast and keratinocyte cells before and after the shock, or from the keratinocyte cells in response to a variety of pressures were all in the range of 0.5–1, suggesting that the cells always remained a degree of dependence (Tables 6 and 7).Recall it is revealed from Table 5 and Fig. 4 that the cell powers derived from fibroblast and keratinocyte cells both showed a significant reduction after the shock. One of possible reasons could be attributed to the cell injury caused by the electrical shock. Another possible explanation for this fact is described as follows. Upon the electrical shock, while the ECIS resistance dropped to almost the same point as that measured at the initial stage of cell culture, the level of the resistive fluctuation due to the cell micromotion also abruptly dropped to nearly zero, and so did the cell power. This is because the cell micromotion ceased due to sudden cellular death [30]. Then, the level of fluctuation was gradually increasing over the course of time again, manifesting that the cell micromotion was getting recovered from the electrical shock. Since the indicator of cell power as proposed by our study actually provided the average cell power estimates derived from the ECIS signal, obviously the average cell power evaluated after the shock should be smaller than that evaluated before the shock. This is because the instantaneous cell power estimate would become zero upon the time instant immediately after the electrical shock, no matter for the fibroblast or keratinocyte cells.Furthermore, we also noticed that while NP125 achieved the fastest wound healing speed, it only had the minimum power dissipation of all the three cases. One of the possible rationales behind this could be attributed to a fact that NP125 can induce Rho family protein translocation in cells and thus result in actin polymerization [11]. According to [11], this alteration can facilitate cell migration, instead of cell growth, and hence efficiently accelerate the wound-healing process with the minimum power dissipation (i.e., the work required by cell migration for healing the wound was the minimum), even when the cell electroactivity was small. In fact, the presented results indicated that our analysis can be used as a novel approach to interpret the possible mechanisms behind the healing speed and thus could provide valuable insight into the wound healing process.On the other hand, as described in detail previously [11], the fluorescent staining of actin filaments of keratinocyte cells incubated at different pressures also showed that the wounded cells cultured at NP125 had an increase in cell length and a decrease in thickness, compared to those at the other pressures. Such a morphological change also provided evidence showing that a more active cell spreading might occur at NP125, thus accelerating the cell migration with the minimum cell electroactivity and power dissipation, which consistently agreed with our results as shown in Fig. 5. We may thus conclude that the wounded cells cultured at NP125 may not only achieve the fastest healing speed, but also have the highest efficiency since the cell migration occurring at NP125 only consumed the minimum power with the minimum electroactivity. Therefore, we may see that without the cell power and electroactivity framework as developed in our study, it was not possible to get the whole picture of the mechanisms behind the wound healing process. In fact, monitoring wound healing by ECIS has not been considered as a standard procedure and there still remains an enigma to be explored. Thus, our study may pave the way for an ECIS-based quantitative analysis in elucidating the physical and biological issues involving the wound healing of keratinocyte cells.In this study, a quantitative modeling and wound healing analysis of keratinocyte cells with the ECIS technique was performed. In short, our study aimed at developing novel indicators and seeking for their applicability into continuous and quantitative assessments of the cellular dynamics during the cell culture under different conditions (i.e., cell culture before wounding vs. after wounding) as well as studying the effects of negative pressures on the cellular wound healing. In this regard, since the ECIS system can produce the on-line resistance data that may reflect subtle changes in cellular micromotion, the electric power evaluated based on the basic electric circuit theory (i.e., power=(current)2×resistance) can thus provide as a convenient index that may be used to quantify the power transferred from the kinetics of cellular movement. We first sought for the modeling analysis of keratinocyte cell growth on the datasets obtained from both the ECIS and conventional TCPS methods, respectively. The numerical results produced by the new cell culture experiments consistently agreed to those having been reported previously, demonstrating the validity and reliability of our theoretical model as indicated in (1) and (2). Secondly, we applied the wavelet transform to the ECIS-based resistance processing. Then, we quantified the cell power and cell electroactivity, based on the resistive fluctuations due to cellular micromotions, in a multi-scale manner using the wavelet analysis results. Note that the use of both new indicators in characterizing the cell behavior across a variety of observational time scales is unprecedented. We also conducted an electrical wound-healing assay to quantitatively assess the healing speed, the cell power and cell electroactivity of the keratinocyte cells in a healing process at a variety of pressures. Our numerical results indicated that while NP125 achieved the fastest wound healing speed, it also allowed the smallest power dissipation of all the different cases. In conclusion, our analysis can be used as a novel approach to interpret the possible mechanisms behind the healing speed and thus could provide valuable insight into the wound healing process.None Declared --The authors declare no conflictsof interest.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
