@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A physiological study of relationship between designer’s mental effort and mental stress during conceptual design

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a new approach to process EEG and HRV signals for design activities.We assume that an inverse U curve relationship exists between mental effort and mental stress.We found that designers’ mental effort is the lowest at the highest mental stress.There is no significant difference in mental effort at low and medium stress levels.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Electroencephalography (EEG),Mental stress,Heart rate variability (HRV),Design activity,Design creativity,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In the development of the next generation computer-aided design (CAD) systems, it is important to consider systematically the interactions between designers and design tools. As one of the first steps in quantifying such relations, we propose a method to investigate the relation between a designer’s mental stress and mental effort. We hypothesize that mental effort is low at low and high stress levels but high at a medium stress level. To test the hypothesis, we conducted experiments on seven subjects. Design activities, body movements, brain signals and heart rate were recorded during a design process. Mental stress was quantified by LF/HF ratio and mental effort was quantified by EEG energy. The statistical analysis shows that mental effort is the lowest at high stress level and there is no significant difference in mental effort between medium stress level and low stress level.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the development of the next generation CAD systems, it is important to consider systematically the interactions between a designer and design tools [1]. This hangs on the designer’s cognitive model [2]. Such a model should account for both creative design and routine design processes. It is not unusual to observe that sometimes designers may produce creative solutions even when they did not intend to and sometimes designers may not be able to produce creative solutions even when they tried very hard. One implication of this observation is that a good design process model should imply a creative design process and a creative design process model should imply a routine design process. There should be no difference between a design process model and a design creativity model. Therefore, a good design process model should have two major components: a general design process model and the conditions under which the general design process model may lead to creative solutions.In our previous work, we proposed a theoretical model of design creativity which includes the Environment-Based Design [3,4] as a general design process model and the following two postulates defining conditions for creative design [5]:•Postulate 1: Design reasoning follows a nonlinear dynamics, which may become chaotic.Postulate 2: Design creativity is related to a designer’s mental stress through an inverse U shaped curve.The first postulate addresses the relation between evolving design states. Designing is formulated as an environment evolution process where an earlier design solution becomes a part of the environment for the current design stage. This environment evolution implies a nonlinear chaotic dynamics, in which design problem, design solution, and design knowledge will change in a recursive and interdependent manner  [6,7]. A great uncertainty is thus inherent in this nonlinear recursive design process, which may lead to mental stress on designers. The second postulate then relates a designer’s mental stresses to creativity through an inverse U shaped curve (Fig. 1), which is adopted from the well-known Yerks–Dodson law [8].The present paper is one of the first steps in quantifying the second postulate: the inverse U shaped curve relation between a designer’s mental stresses and design creativity.It is widely known that mental stress can be measured from physiological responses such as respiration rate, heart rate, pupil diameter, skin temperature, and galvanic skin response. However, when it comes to the assessment of creativity throughout a design process (that is to say, creativity has to be assessed at any particular moment), to the best of our knowledge, no effective method has been reported in the literature. Therefore, mental effort is adopted as an indirect assessment of creativity in this paper.Mental effort can be defined as the total use of cognitive resources [9]. Sun and Yao found that mental effort is positively related to design novelty and quantity [10]. Therefore, in design, we assume that high mental effort is associated with high creative ability while low mental effort is associated with low creative ability.Heart rate variability (HRV) is the variation in time intervals between consecutive heartbeats. A heartbeat is composed of five waveforms denoted by P, Q, R, S, and T as shown in Fig. 2(a). The time interval between two heartbeats is the time between two R and R components as shown in Fig. 2(b). The HRV spectrum is classified into four bands: ultra-low frequency less than 0.003 Hz (ULF), very low frequency from 0.003 Hz to 0.04 Hz (VLF), low frequency from 0.04 Hz to 0.15 Hz (LF), and high frequency from 0.15 Hz to 0.4 Hz (HF) [11].Mental stress is the body’s response to an uncomfortable or a threatened event which can be internal or external. The stress mechanism is closely related to the autonomic nervous system, which consists of the sympathetic nervous system (SNS) and the parasympathetic nervous system (PNS). The SNS stimulates organs, dilates pupils, activate sweat glands, elevates blood pressure and increases heart rate [12] whereas the PNS does the opposite. Under stressful situations, SNS becomes dominant, causing physiological, biological and psychological changes to adapt the body to the situation.The measurement of mental stress using HRV frequency components dated back to 1981. From a study of HRV in dogs, Akselrod et al. found the contribution of PNS activity to the high frequency component (HF) of the HRV spectrum and the contribution of both PNS and SNS activity to the low frequency (LF) component [13]. To answer the question if a similar association can be observed in humans, Pomeranz et al. conducted a similar study on humans and concluded that LF power of human HRV also reflects both PNS and SNS while HF power is mediated by only PNS activity [14]. Since then, there are a large number of studies using HRV power spectral components as an index of psychosocial stress. For instance, psychosocial stress is found to be associated with rising LF, increasing LF/HF ratio [15] and/or decreasing HF [16]. Nesvold et al. found that meditation reduces stress through increasing HF and decreasing LF/HF during the practice [17]. In a study of mental stress induced by demanding computer work and an unfriendly environment, Hjortskov et al. observed lower HF and higher LF/HF in a stress session than in a control session [18]. Kristiansen et al. compared between resting and working conditions and concluded that the group shows higher LF/HF ratio, lower HF and higher LF when working [19]. Studying 32 subjects during a arithmetic task, Colombo et al. found significant increase in LF and significant decrease in HF [20]. Comparing among HRV measures, Boonnithi and Phongsuphap claimed the LF/HF ratio to be the most accurate indicator of mental stress in the frequency domain [21]. The sensitivity of LF/HF to mental stress is also supported by several other studies [22–24].Even though the number of studies above seem to confirm the use of HRV components (LF, HF, and LF/HF) as reliable indices of mental stress, another group of studies failed to show the relation between HRV components and stress [25]. For instance, Jokkel et al. showed that blockage of SNS does not reduce LF while blockage of PNS significantly reduces both LF and HF [26]. Therefore, the authors argued that mental stress might not be associated with increase in LF or LF/HF as widely believed. Similarly, Muth et al. reported no correlation between LF and cold stressors  [27]; Sloan et al. found neither correlation between LF and norepinephrine (a type of hormone secreted during stress) nor correlation between LF/HF and norepinephrine [28].Due to these inconsistent results, a member in our group conducted experiments to test the sensitivity of different HRV parameters [29]. It was found that LF/HF was the most sensitive variable. Based on that test, we use the LF/HF ratio to quantify mental stress in our experiments.Electroencephalography (EEG) is a method to record electrical signals emitted from the brain. The EEG signals are usually divided into four bands based on frequency: delta (from 1 Hz up to 4 Hz), theta (from 4 Hz up to 8 Hz), alpha (from 8 Hz up to 13 Hz) and beta (from 13 Hz up to 30 Hz).Mental effort is believed to be reflected to some degree by various physiological parameters such as facial muscle activity [30], eye blink frequency [31], pupil diameter [32], eye movement (saccade) [32,33], eye fixation [32,34], HRV [35,34], skin conductivity [33], and EEG [33,36,37]. Among these, EEG is the most sensitive to changes to cortical activation [38].Under the assumption that a high cognitive task demand usually requires additional mental effort, researchers have studied how EEG changes at different levels of task difficulty. In particular, researchers have reported an increase in the theta band and a decrease in the alpha band as task difficulty increases [39–42]. During video game play, mental effort is reflected in an increase in frontal midline theta and a decrease in posterior alpha [41]. In a visual scanning task, a decrease in alpha over parietal and occipital lobe and an increase in theta over left frontal lobe were observed at high difficulty level [40]. In another visuomotor tracking task, increasing alpha after practice implies that less effort is needed after subjects have gained the necessary skills to perform the task [43]. However, also in a tracking task, no significant alpha decrease was found when subjects performed low, medium and high load tracking tasks [31]. In a flight simulation task, decrease in alpha was found at high load, but no significant difference was detected between low and medium load [44]. The report of EEG power over time also showed that when the condition was switched from high to low visibility, EEG alpha power accelerated considerably. Subjects reported “losing situational awareness” in this situation [44]. This could mean that since the situation was too hard to control, subjects gave up and did not put any effort to complete the task. Among theta, beta and alpha, only theta over parietal site can be used to identify low and high task demand [45]. Regarding beta band, it is often associated with cortical activation. The increase in beta band over occipital lobe (visual cortex) is related to the increase in visual attention [46].After reviewing existing works, we assume that theta and beta bands are positively correlated with mental effort whereas alpha is negatively correlated with mental effort.Our efforts in quantifying the inverse U curve for design were initiated in 2005 [47,48]. The first result was reported in [49,50], which aimed to quantify a designer’s mental stress during a conceptual design process. In that effort, we used design protocol data from an earlier experiment aiming for general understanding of a conceptual design process [51]. In the experiment, all the information was collected from the video, audio media and screen recording. A semantic model, Recursive Object Model (ROM) [52], was used to quantify mental stress corresponding to each segment during the design process. It was shown that the difficulty level of a design task is correlated with linguistic properties of the verbal protocol data for describing the problem, solution, and thought processes. To validate the results from [49,50], we attempted to quantify a designer’s mental stress through his/her body language by using the same design protocol data  [53,54].In these efforts, mental stress was evaluated through the data collected by retrospective interview. They cannot lead to results of enough reliability because subjects might not be able to correctly recall their mental processes and emotional states at different design stages even when being shown the video cue.In preparing a more objective analysis of a designer’s physiological data, we tested our EEG and HRV devices through the Stroop test [55,29], through which we have collected and developed HRV and EEG analysis tools.On the basis of these efforts, we conducted a pilot study by applying EEG to design activities [56,57]. The lessons that we have learned from this pilot study have led to the experiment setting described in this section and the analysis approaches reported in this paper.The experiment protocol was approved by Human Research Ethics and Compliance, Concordia University. Eleven subjects volunteered to participate in the experiment. All of them are graduate students from the Quality System Engineering program at Concordia University. The ages of subjects range from 25 to 35. Every subject was compensated with a gift card.Every subject was asked to work on an open-ended design problem chosen by the experimenter. Most of the designers were assigned the house design problem. However, we had to give some subjects different design tasks because they had already known about the flying house design problem. We assume, however, this will not affect the analysis result because the relationship between mental stress and mental effort is independent of design task. Design problems are listed in Table 1. The advantage of this experiment setting is that it reflects the real design process. However, data processing and analysis is difficult due to the unstructured and uncontrolled data.In the experiment, fourteen EEG channels (Fpz, Fz, F4, F3, C4, C3, T4, T3, P4, P3, T6, T5, O2, O1), as shown in Fig. 3(b), were recorded by Grass 15LT. The recording was referenced to left ear. Heart rate variability was recorded by Polar RS800G3. Fig. 7 shows EEG and HRV signals collected from the experiment. Body movement and tablet screen were recorded by cameras and screen recorder. The experiment area was divided into an experiment room and a monitor room as shown in Fig. 3(a). From the monitor room, researchers could see a designer’s sketch, body movement and EEG signals as presented in Fig. 4.The following lists the main experiment procedures:•Step 1 — preparation: a subject was informed of the experimental procedure. After the subject signed the consent form, the experimenter helped the subject wear HRV and put the EEG cap on his/her head. Meanwhile, the subject learnt to use the tablet.Step 2 — data collection: after the subject felt comfortable in using the tablet, the experiment started. First, the subject was asked to rest for three minutes with eyes open, followed by three minutes rest with eyes closed. Then, the subject was given the design problem to start. The internet can be used during the process. After completing the design, the subject was asked to rest for another three minutes with eyes closed. Finally, the experimenter interviewed the subject.Step 3 — data processing: EEG data were filtered and video data were segmented.Step 4 — data analysis: HRV LF/HF ratio and EEG power were calculated.The collected data were segmented based on changes in a designer’s actions observable on the tablet. The rule is shown in Fig. 5. An example of data segments is presented in Table 2. The activities in brackets are observed from the cameras and are added for informational purpose only. They play no roles in the segmentation. An in-house software system was used for the segmentation process. Annotations can be added for each segment and small segments can be merged into larger ones. Fig. 6shows the interface of this software.Not all the segments are considered in the analysis. A segment is excluded from the analysis if it falls into one of the following categories:1.It is not related to the design process. Usually, the first and the last segments fall into this category. In the first segment, the subjects get ready for the experiment, in the last segment the subjects complete the design and talk to the experimenter.EEG signal is extremely noisy. This happens when the subjects move excessively (turning heads, scratching).Table 3shows the total number of segments and the actual number of segments used in the analysis for each subject. Duration is the time a subject spent in designing so it does not include the time of the first and last segments. Although there are eleven subjects participating in the experiment, only seven subjects were analyzed because the data files of the other four subjects were corrupted.EEG power is computed from power spectral density (PSD). PSD shows the distribution of signal power across frequency. Methods to compute PSD can be divided into two main categories [58]: non-parametric and parametric approaches. The non-parametric approach computes PSD directly from the signal. The parametric approach computes the PSD from the model of the signal. The power of a frequency band is taken as the area under the curve within the frequency range of that band.The AR model Burg method [59] was used to compute PSD. To select an appropriate model order for each subject, Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) was computed for the eyes-closed relaxing state data at the Fpz channel using the Matlab function aic. The model order is tested from 1 to 40.The chosen order (usually the minimum value) is validated by computing PSD during eyes-closed resting state at channels O1 and O2. It is well known that during the eyes-closed relaxing state, alpha is dominant. Using Burg with the selected order during the eyes-closed condition should show a peak in alpha band at O1 and O2. In Fig. 8, minimum AIC is −12.5401 at 32. Computing PSD for O1 and O2 at 32 (Fig. 9) gives us peaks within alpha band (8–13 Hz) as expected during eyes-closed resting state.EEG data were highpass filtered at 0.3 Hz, zero phase, 12 dB/octave, lowpass filtered at 40 Hz, zero phase, 24 db/octave and notch filtered at 60 Hz. All the filtering was performed by the BESA software.The signal strength or PSD was computed for each second. The power of each band (theta, alpha, and beta) is the area under the PSD curve within the corresponding frequency interval. EEG energy of a video segment was calculated as the sum of consecutive one-second EEG energy. The equation is presented in (1). The computation is illustrated in Fig. 10:(1)eX=∑i=1n(ti×pi)whereeXis the energy of segmentX,nis the total number of components in segmentX, andtiandpiare respectively the duration and power of theith component included in segmentX. In our analysis,piis the power of a one-second data.Then, relative energy of each band is computed as the ratio of the band energy to the total energy. For instance, relative alpha is the ratio of alpha energy to the sum of delta, alpha, theta and beta energy.Mental stress is calculated based on the LF/HF ratio of HRV data and was computed by HRVAS software (Fig. 11) [60] at each 0.5 s using the wavelet transform. Mental stress for each video segment is the ratio of the sum of (consecutive 0.5 s LF/HF times the duration of the 0.5 s LF/HF within the segment) to the segment duration.Then, mental stress was clustered into 3 groups (low, medium and high) using the built-in Matlabk-means function. For each subject,k-means was repeated for twice the number of segments. Fig. 12shows the cluster of a subject.So far, we have divided the design process into primitive segments based on video-taped sketching data, computed mental stress and calculated EEG relative energy for each segment. The segments were grouped based on the mental stress. We assume that EEG signals in the same group reflect similar mental effort.The effect of mental stress on design activities and on mental effort can be quantified through the following four relations:(1)Number of segments at each stress levelEq. (2) measures how frequently a designer experienced stress during the design process(2)fi=siSwherefiis the number of segments at stress leveli,siis the number of segments at stress leveli, andSis the total number of segments during the entire design process.(2)Time spent at each stress levelEq. (3) measures the time ratio a designer spent at each stress level during the entire design process:(3)t̄i=tiTwheret̄iis the proportion of time a designer spent at stress leveli,tiis the total duration of stress leveliandTis the total time spent on the entire design session.(3)Average time per segment at each stress levelEq. (4) measures average time per segment at each stress level(4)d̄i=tisiwhered̄iis the average time per segment at stress leveli,tiis the total duration of stress leveliandsiis the total number of segments of stress leveli.(4)Mental effort at each stress levelEq. (5) shows how much energy spent per segment at each stress level during the entire design process:(5)Ei=∑j=1si(Rij)siwhereEiis the energy per segment at stress leveli,Rijis the relative band energy corresponding to stress levelifor segmentjandsiis the total number of segment at stress leveli.In our case, since the number of subjects is small, we use non-parametric tests. Siegel stated that if the sample size was as small as 6, a nonparametric test should be used [61].For each subject, the design process was divided into two parts of equal time. Percentage of the number of segments at each stress level was computed for each part as presented in Table 4. Stress is not significantly different between the first half and second half although five out of seven subjects experienced more stress at level 3 in the first half than in the second half of the design as illustrated in Fig. 13.No significance in theta and alpha is found for the first and second half of the design process. However, there is significantly greater beta at P4 and F4 in the second half of the process as shown in Fig. 14. This implies that the subjects were more active and attentive in the second half of the process.A Friedman test shows significant difference in the number of segments associated with each stress level. A Wilcoxon test shows that frequency of occurrence of stress level 1 is greater than frequency of occurrence of stress level 2 (W(7)=28,p<0.05, one-tailed test), and frequency of occurrence of stress level 2 is greater than the frequency of occurrence of stress level 3 (W(7)=28,p<0.05, one-tailed test). The data for each subject are shown in Fig. 15.A Friedman test shows significant difference in the time spent at each stress level. A Wilcoxon test shows that the time spent on stress level 1 is greater than time spent on stress level 2 (W(7)=28,p<0.05, one-tailed test), and time spent on stress level 2 is greater than time spent on stress level 3 (W(7)=28,p<0.05, one-tailed test). This implies that most of the time the subjects were not under high stress during the entire design process. The data for each subject are shown in Fig. 16.There is no significant difference in the average time (in seconds) per segment between stress levels. However, Fig. 17shows that only subject 5 has the time spent at stress level 3 greater than the time spent at other stress levels. Looking at design solutions from each subject, we notice that the design solution of subject 5 is very simple (see Fig. 18) when compared to the design data of subject 1 who spent less time in the design (see Fig. 19) and when compared to the design data of subject 2 who spent a longer time in the design (see Fig. 20). Moreover, during interview, it was revealed that subject 5 did not consider any design conflicts. Therefore, we decided to remove subject 5 from the analysis and recomputed the Friedman test. The test shows significant difference in the time per segment among stress level. From a Wilcoxon test, the time per segment at stress levels 1 and 2 is found to be greater than the time per segment at stress level 3. No significant difference appears between stress level 1 and stress level 2.Friedman tests show significant difference in theta energy between stress levels. A Wilcoxon test shows that theta energy per segment at stress level 1 is greater than the theta energy per segment at stress level 3 in the Fpz channel (W(7)=28,p<0.05, one-tailed test) and the T3 channel (W(7)=28,p<0.05, one-tailed test). Data for each subject are presented in Fig. 21.After removing subject 5, Friedman tests show significant differences in Fz, F3, F4, C3, C4, T3, P3, P4, T5, T6, O1, and O2 for alpha band. Significant differences are also observed in Fz, F4, C3, C4, T3, P3, P4, T5, T6, O1, and O2 for beta band and in all 14 channels for theta band.Follow-up Wilcoxon sign rank tests show that the significance in Fpz theta, Fz (theta, alpha, beta), F4 (theta, beta), F3 theta, C4 (theta, beta), C3 theta, T4 theta, T3 (theta, beta), P4 (theta, beta), P3 (theta, beta), T6 (theta, beta), T5 theta, O2 (theta, beta), and O1 (alpha, beta) reflects greater energy per segment at stress levels 1 and 2 as opposed to that at stress level 3.Significantly greater energy per segment at stress 1 as opposed to the energy per segment at stress 3 is also found in F3 alpha, C4 alpha, C3 alpha, C3 beta, T4 beta, T3 alpha, P4 alpha, P3 alpha, T6 alpha, T5 alpha, T5 beta, O2 alpha, and O1 theta.There is no significant difference between the energy per segment at stress levels 1 and 2.Figs. 22–24present the energy per segment (normalized from 0 to 1) for each subject at channels having significant results.In summary, theta, alpha and beta at stress levels 1 and 2 are found to be significantly higher than that at stress level 3. This can imply that at stress levels 1 and 2, mental effort (indexed by theta and beta) is higher than at stress level 3. However, contrary to our expectation, alpha at stress levels 1 and 2 are higher than alpha at stress level 3. Revisiting the research on alpha, we found that some researchers suggest that alpha can be related to inhibition of task-irrelevant information processing [62]. This explains that at stress level 1 and/or 2 the brain is more effective in suppressing irrelevant function than at stress level 3. Moreover, high alpha power was reported during creative idea generation [63] and creative individuals showed higher alpha power than less creative individuals [64]. Therefore, it is possible that at stress levels 1 and 2, the designers are likely to be more creative than at stress level 3.Looking at the data in Figs. 22–24, we see that some subjects have mental effort at stress level 2 higher than at stress level 1 and 3 whereas others have mental effort decreasing as stress level increases. This can be explained that designers perceive the workload (design problem) differently and they have different motivations. These differences will put designers in different sections of the inverse U curve as illustrated in Fig. 26, which may be the cause of discrepancy in the result. For example, subject 1 thinks the problem was very easy to solve. He reasons that we can just use a big airplane and transform it into a house (his detailed design is shown in Fig. 28Appendix). His EEG data shows that the energy of his brain at stress level 2 is the highest. He falls into the middle part of the U curve. In contrast, subject 2 finds it hard to solve the problem of a flying mechanism for the house because he thinks he lacks the knowledge (as shown in his design in Fig. 29Appendix). We found that the energy of his brain is highest at stress level 1 and lowest at stress level 3. So, he falls into the right part of the U curve.Table 5summarizes the comparison results between stress levels in each channel and each band. Fig. 25 shows the average of theta, alpha and beta energy across subjects. Maximum theta is found at the frontal lobe, maximum alpha is found at the right central and the right parietal lobe, and maximum beta is found at the right temporal lobe.In this paper, we proposed a new method to study a designer’s mental stress and mental effort during the conceptual design process. These are one of the first steps in establishing a theoretical model of design, which is critical to help make informed decisions in developing robust next generation CAD systems [2]. For instance, if the relationship between mental stress and mental effort during the design process follows the inverse U curve, the workflow and interfaces of computer aided conceptual design tools should be built in a way that they do not add unnecessary mental stress and do not reduce mental stress unnecessarily.To summarize, data of seven subjects were analyzed and presented. Each subject was asked to work on a design problem chosen by the experimenter. The design process was segmented based on design activities. Mental stress was quantified by LF/HF ratio and mental effort was measured by EEG energy. Mental stress and mental effort were computed for each design segment. The result of data analysis shows that:•During the design process, the designers were under low and medium stress (because there are a large number of segments associated with low/medium stress and the time spent at stress level 3 is significantly lower than the time spent at stress level 1 and at stress level 2).Designers spent little time at high stress level (because the average time per segment at stress levels 1 and 2 is significantly higher than at stress level 3).Mental effort at low and medium stress levels is stronger than the mental effort at high stress level (because theta and beta energy are significantly higher at stress levels 1 and 2 than at stress level 3).Mental effort is related to creativity. The more effort a subject put into designing the greater the possibility of him/her generating a creative solution.There exists an inverse U curve between mental stress and mental effort.The inverse U curve relationship between mental stress and mental effort is independent of design task.Physiological parameters reflect mental effort.During the experiment, the phenomena observed are due to design activities and design thinking.Measurement of mental stress and mental effort are independent (i.e. HRV reflects mental stress and does not reflect mental effort).If subjects focused on unnecessary/irrelevant tasks (such as spelling and grammar check), effort does not reflect creativity.The relation between mental stress and mental effort might be more complicated than the inverse U curve.There may exist different types of relationship between mental stress and mental effort for different design tasks and different kinds of design types (redesign vs. configuration design), for different individual personalities (extroverts vs. introverts), or for different individual backgrounds (experts vs. novices).Physiological parameters (such as body movement, eye blink frequency) may reflect mental stress but not mental effort.Subjects can occasionally have non-design thinking which is not observable.Mental stress and mental effort can influence the same physiological signal (i.e. HRV can reflect both mental stress and mental effort).In the future, we need to identify conditions under which the above assumptions are true so that we can design reasonable controls into the experiment. We have upgraded our EEG system to 64 channels with active electrodes. The new system will increase the quality of EEG signal and will also enable us to conduct source localization.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
