@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Modeling of transcatheter aortic valve replacement: Patient specific vs general approaches based on finite element analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The modeling of calcium deposits and leaflets will improve the FEA of the TAVR.Neither patient specific nor generalized approach has clear advantage over the other.Generalized approach is more cost effective way of FEA-based TAVR modeling.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Aortic root,Finite element analysis,Transcatheter heart valves,Calcification,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundThere are two main methods used for transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) FEA modeling for medical devices development: patient specific and general approaches. Advantages and disadvantages of both approaches have never been compared in a single study.MethodHere we propose a bioinformatic algorithm to evaluate the accuracy of patient specific and generalized FEA approaches with regards to proximity configuration of the implanted stent reconstructed by computed tomography. In addition, in this study we also assessed the impact of the level of detail on FEA accuracy in the patient specific approach.ResultsOur results demonstrate that in certain cases, the generalized approach can ensure the same accuracy as the patient specific approach. Therefore, considering high cost effectiveness of the generalized approach, we identify it as more feasible in the context of TAVR. Furthermore, we suggest that high level of detail can improve the reproducibility of modeling results in the patient specific approach.ConclusionsOur findings may help medical engineers to better understand the peculiarities of both approaches and therefore make the right decision when choosing a particular approach for computer modeling. Future studies are required to validate our observations.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In developed countries, the dramatic increase in average life expectancy during the last century have resulted in a surge in the incidence of aortic stenosis (AS), a valvular heart disease which is common in elderly people [1]. According to recent statistical analysis, AS affects approximately 3% of population over 75 years of age [2]. One third of patients with AS are not candidates for surgical valve replacement due to severe comorbidities that increase the risk of perioperative mortality [3]. For this group of patients, transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) is a suitable and minimally invasive alternative, demonstrating impressive clinical and economic effectiveness over the past decade [4,5]. However, the existing transcatheter prostheses are largely inferior to the classical surgical prostheses in terms of durability, reliability and risks of complications [6]. Much effort is being put in the development of TAVR prostheses with better design, as it has paramount importance for their performance.Contemporary methods of mathematical and computer modeling, in particular, finite element analysis (FEA), are widely used in the development of medical devices, enabling to perform the in-depth analysis of the organ-implant interaction [7,8]. Currently, there are two essentially different FEA-based approaches for TAVR modeling. The first approach, generalized, implies the use of either an averaged aortic root (AR) geometry obtained from measurements performed in large groups of patients [9], or generic models with a simplified geometry, but complex structure [10]. Although this approach does not enable to reproduce a highly detailed geometry of the system as well as extreme cases of pathological anatomy, it potentially has a significant advantage in performance, and can be used for modeling complex systems; for example, the Heart Living Project, where finite element analysis is employed to simulate the behavior of cardiomyocytes [10].Another methodology that has become very popular in the last few years is the patient specific approach, which is based on computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) aided de novo 3D reconstruction of the AR and leaflet apparatus models of a single patient [11]. Although this method is more labor-intensive and time consuming, it provides good accuracy and takes into account potential calcium deposits within the AR. However, it is still unclear what level of detail is necessary and sufficient for TAVR modeling, as more details require much more time spent on prosthesis development.Advantages and disadvantages of both approaches have never been compared in a single study and it is therefore imperative to identify what method is more preferable for TAVR modeling in terms of time cost and quality. In this study, we developed a bioinformatic approach to compare the accuracy of generalized and patient specific FEA approaches for TAVR modeling. In addition, we examined how the level of detail for patient specific FEA modeling affected the results of implantation modeling. Our data demonstrate that patient specific FEA model of the AR has no advances over the generalized AR model reconstructed on the basis of clinical data from 137 patients. Having performed the analysis of the level of detail for FEA modeling, we identify that modeling results are more affected by variants of the description of the AR material rather than the presence of additional elements, such as leaflets or calcium deposits.A 72-year-old female was admitted to the Research Institute for Complex Issues of Cardiovascular Diseases with stage 3 arterial hypertension and aortic valve calcification. Preoperative echocardiography showed severe left ventricular hypertrophy and normal contractility of the left ventricle. The CoreValve (Medtronic, USA) transcatheter aortic valve bioprosthesis (29mm) was implanted using the transfemoral delivery catheter system under direct image-guidance (Fig. 1d–h).Upon deployment, a control angiogram was performed to confirm the absence of regurgitation, violation of atrioventricular conduction, or compromise of coronary blood flow (Fig. 1i). No clinical complications were reported. After surgery, the patient underwent the repeated coronal CT imaging without contrast (Fig. 1j–l). The study was performed in compliance with the Declaration of Helsinki, and had been approved by the local ethical committeeFEA modeling of the CoreValve bioprosthesis (Fig. 1a) was made by using the experimental microcomputed tomography scanner. The following settings were used for scanning after adjustment for size and X-ray density of the bioprosthesis: voltage 200kV, current 2.7mA, copper filter thickness 0.5mm, exposure 1s, angular step 0.4°, number of projections 900, voxel size 64.4μm.Based on CT imaging (Fig. 1b), the model of the CoreValve bioprosthesis was reconstructed using the finite element mesh of 17,070 C3D8 elements (Fig. 1c). Material properties of a superelastic nickel–titanium alloy Nitinol were applied to the resulting finite element mesh in accordance with Aurichio׳s model [12,13]. We failed to reconstruct the model of the leaflet apparatus due to a large difference in the X-ray density of the bioprosthesis and the leaflet apparatus.We previously described an approach for the development of the computer-based 3D model of the aortic root (AR) [9]. Briefly, computed tomography (CT) was performed to measure AR elements of the patient. The analysis was performed using the Siemens Sensation SOMATOM 64CT scanner (Siemens, Germany). Scan direction was craniocaudal, and the following CT characteristics were set: field of view 200mm; pitch 0.7mm; tube voltage 120kV; electrocardiogram sync 1mm; and section thickness 1mm. The contrast agent Ultravist at iodine concentration of 370mg/mL was used for intravenous injection at a dose rate of 1–1.5mL/kg of body weight. 3D reconstruction of the sections was performed using the Amira software (FEI, Germany). The use of grayscale gradient coloration spectrum allowed us to visualize the aortic wall as well as calcium deposits.On the basis of CT imaging, we reconstructed 3D models of the AR and leaflets utilizing the UGS NX 8.0 design software (Siemens, Germany). The finite element mesh was generated using the ABAQUS/CAE software (Dassault Systems, France) with 56,912 C3D8 elements for the AR and 2877 S4 elements for the leaflet apparatus (Fig. 2a–d). The modeling of calcium deposits was directly performed in the Amira software using the tetrahedral mesh of 7316 C3D4 elements based on the X-ray density of calcium (Fig. 2e).The resulting patient specific model was compared to a generalized FEA model of the AR described by our group previously [10]. Briefly, this AR model has a simplified geometry and was reconstructed in the same way on the basis of echocardiography measurements of 117 patients and coronary CT imaging of 20 patients with and without aortic valvular disease (Fig. 2f–l). The resulting model consisted of 60′426 C3D8 elements.The modeling of implantation was performed using 5 patient specific models (psa132, psa221, psa212, psa222, and psa232) with different level of detail (Table 1) and a generalized model (ga000) from our previous study [9].The modeling of TAVI implantation was performed in two steps. The bioprosthesis was first loaded into the delivery catheter system by radial displacement of the catheter (Fig. 1m). At the second stage, the bioprosthesis was released by shifting the catheter along its longitudinal axis (Fig. 1n and o). The model of the catheter was reconstructed using the finite element mesh of 5000 M3D4 elements.After interaction between the bioprosthesis and the AR, an artificial viscoelastic damping component was introduced to stabilize dynamic components of the system. The energetic contribution of this damping component did not exceed 0.8% of the total system energy. For the modeling of all elements of the system, the paired softened contact was used («penalty», coefficient of friction µ=0.2 [17]). There was no friction or mutual penetration (the «hard» contact) during the catheter–frame interaction. For the experiments with the leaflets, the leaflets model was connected to the aorta via geometric grids with rigidly predetermined distance between nodes (the «tie» contact). To prevent mutual penetration of frame finite elements, the «self» contact was used.Second-order polynomial nonlinear model based on the previous study was used for modeling the AR (Table 2[14]). Nitinol description (Auricchio model) of the stent was used according to the ABAQUS UMAT subroutine [13]. Linear models were used to model the calcium deposits and leaflet apparatus (E=10MPa) [16] as well as calcified aortic annulus (E=22.6MPa) [15].In order to compare the results of implantation modeling with post TAVR CT images of the implanted bioprosthesis, we developed a bioinformatic algorithm using the MATLAB R2014a software (The MathWorks, USA). In this algorithm, 11 orthogonal slices of the stent were made in accordance with either CT imaging or FEA modeling results (Fig. 3b), which was previously described in [18] For each slice, CT- and FEA-derived arrays of points that correspond to the center of the beam were overlaid in a cylindrical coordinate system in order to identify the error of modeling (Fig. 3a). The algorithm performed a search for the central axis and then calculated a provisional error minimization for sections׳ rotation in relation to each other. Then, the computer program identified the minimum distance between the corresponding points and calculated the modeling error in each of the 11 slices (δsum), or the sum of deviations for the entire model (Σδsum). In addition, FEA dataset was approximated to the ellipse (in accordance with the canonical equation of the ellipse), followed by the calculation of minor and major elliptical radii, the eccentricity of the ellipse, and the area of the ellipse. The source code of the algorithm is provided in Supplementary material 1.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The patient specific approach has been proposed as a more accurate way of TAVR modeling. Intuitively, modeling additional geometric elements such as calcium deposits and leaflet apparatus must improve the fidelity of TAVR modeling. In this study we show that patient specific approach requires a substantial degree of subject specificity. Nonetheless, we also show that with regards to certain parameters, for example, modeling error and area of ellipse, the generalized approach can be as effective as patient specific approach. However, further studies involving larger sample size for patient specific model are needed to confirm our observations.None.