@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Automation and optimisation of Family Mould Cavity and Runner Layout Design (FMCRLD) using genetic algorithms and mould layout design grammars

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The nature of family mould layout design is highly combinatorial and generative.Family mould layout design using Genetic Algorithms and Mould Layout Design Grammars is proposed.New fitness functions for family mould layout design optimisation are proposed.Group-oriented Mould Layout Design Grammar-based genetic operators and chromosome are proposed.We successfully automate and optimise family mould layout design by computer.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Evolutionary design,Genetic algorithms,Mould layout design grammars,Design automation and optimisation,Family mould cavity and runner layout design,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Family Mould Cavity Runner Layout Design (FMCRLD) is the most demanding and critical task in the early Conceptual Mould Layout Design (CMLD) phase. Traditional experience-dependent manual FCMRLD workflow causes long design lead time, non-optimum designs and human errors. However, no previous research can support FMCRLD automation and optimisation. The nature of FMCRLD is non-repetitive and generative. The complexity of FMCRLD optimisation involves solving a complex two-level combinatorial layout design optimisation problem. Inspired by the theory of evolutionary design in nature “Survival of the Fittest” and the biological genotype–phenotype mapping process of the generation of form in living systems, this research first proposes an innovative evolutionary FMCRLD approach using Genetic Algorithms (GA) and Mould Layout Design Grammars (MLDG) that can automate and optimise such generative and complex FMCRLD with its explorative and generative design process embodied in a stochastic evolutionary search. Based on this approach, an Intelligent Conceptual Mould Layout Design System (ICMLDS) prototype has been developed. The ICMLDS is a powerful intelligent design system as well as an interactive design-training system that can encourage and accelerate mould designers’ design alternative exploration, exploitation and optimisation for better design in less time. This research innovates the traditional manual FMCRLD workflow to eliminate costly human errors and boost the less-experienced mould designer’s ability and productivity in performing FCMRLD during the CMLD phase.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Cold runner family moulds are widely used in some industries, such as toys and domestic products, because family moulds can offer an efficient and economical way to produce dissimilar plastic parts of the same plastic material and colour for small-to-medium production volume. Plastic parts of different shapes and sizes of the same plastic material can be produced in one shot by a “Family Mould”.In family mould design, Family Mould Cavity and Runner Layout Design (FMCRLD) is the most critical task that significantly affects the cost and performance of a family mould because it determines many key design and cost factors such as filling balance performance, runner cost, mould insert cost, mould base cost and so forth  [1]. Each family mould is custom-made and unique. Different family moulds must be newly designed to meet different design requirements and constraints. The complexity of FMCRLD involves a large number of combinations of various cavity layout and associated runner layout design alternatives and design considerations  [1]. In practice, it is virtually impossible for mould designers to try out all possible design alternatives manually to find the best trade-off solution between mould performance and cost. Existing human-dependent manual FMCRLD methods and the shortage of experienced mould designers cause long design lead time, non-optimum designs and costly human errors  [1]. A computer-based design tool to assist less experienced mould designers in performing FMCRLD is urgently needed. This paper focuses on developing a computational approach to automate and optimise FMCRLD which aims to improve mould designers’ ability and productivity during the Conceptual Mould Layout Design (CMLD) phase.The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. A literature review focused on FMCRLD-related research is provided in the next section. The evolutionary FMCRLD approach is presented in Section  3. The implementation of the proposed approach is described in Section  4. Finally, discussion and conclusions are given in Sections  5 and 6 respectively.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Inspired by the theory of evolutionary design in nature “Survival of the Fittest” and the biological genotype–phenotype mapping process of the generation of form in living systems, this research first proposes the innovative evolutionary design approach for FMCRLD automation and optimisation using GA and MLDG. This nature-inspired evolutionary FMCRLD approach aims to automate and optimise such generative and complex FMCRLD with its explorative and generative design process embodied in a stochastic evolutionary search. The hybrid MLDG-based chromosome can encode complex and generative FCMRLD with minimum redundancy. The specially designed group-oriented MLDG-based genetic operators enable the GA to reproduce stronger offspring that can inherit meaningful features from both parents and introduce new species into the population without violation of design constraints and disruption of the useful parts of the chromosome. With regard to the fitness evaluation, the flow path balance performance measurement(Pf)and runner diameter balance performance measurement(Pr)can quantify the filling balance performance of FMCRLD without using computer-intensive Moldflow analysis. Based on this innovative evolutionary FCMRLD approach, the ICMLDS prototype seamlessly embedded within the advanced commercial MCAD system has been successfully developed and implemented in the supporting company. The ICMLDS prototype is validated by a team of the supporting company’s experienced mould designers and Moldflow analysis engineers through case studies. The results show that the ICMLDS prototype can eliminate costly human errors and boost mould designer’s ability and productivity in performing FCMRLD during the CMLD phase. The evolutionary design, rapid design visualisation and instant design feedback capabilities of the ICMLDS prototype enable less-experienced mould designers to learn the art of family mould design by exploring more what-if design scenarios in less time. The ICMLDS prototype has been proven to be a powerful intelligent design system as well as an interactive design-training system that can encourage and accelerate mould designers’ design alternative exploration, exploitation and optimisation for better design in less time. This research innovates the existing old-fashioned manual FMCRLD workflow with the innovative evolutionary FMCRLD approach to streamline the mould development workflow starting from the early CMLD phase to the later detail design phase and downstream manufacturing phase. In the future, the ICMLDS prototype can be further improved and developed to support hot runner pin-point gate design and overcome the fitness evaluation and GA optimisation issues. Most importantly, this research demonstrates the power of the evolutionary design approach using GA combined with SA in automating and optimising combinatorial and generative FMCRLD. This research also provides a deeper insight into the art of evolutionary design and explores a new direction for research of complex combinatorial and generative layout design automation and optimisation.