@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Fluid structure interaction analysis reveals facial nerve palsy caused by vertebral-posterior inferior cerebellar artery aneurysm

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A rare case of aneurysm causing facial nerve palsy without hemifacial spasm.FSI analysis is useful for evaluating the motion of aneurysmal walls.The point of maximal mesh displacement contributes to the majority of nerve symptoms.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Fluid structure interaction analysis,Cranial nerve palsy,Cerebral aneurysm,Vertebral artery,Facial nerve,Coil embolization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Cranial nerve palsy caused by aneurysmal compression has not been fully evaluated. The main causes of symptoms are considered to be direct mechanical compression and aneurysm pulsations. Recent studies indicate that nerve dysfunction is mainly induced by pulsation rather than by direct compression, and successful cases of endovascular surgery have been reported. We describe a patient with an unruptured vertebral artery-posterior inferior cerebellar artery (VA-PICA) aneurysm compressing the facial nerve at the root exit zone (REZ). The patient presented with peripheral facial nerve palsy but not hemifacial spasm and was successfully treated by coil embolization. To investigate the mechanisms underlying peripheral facial nerve palsy, fluid structure interaction (FSI) analysis can approximate displacement and the magnitude of aneurysmal wall motion due to hemodynamic forces. In our case, maximum mesh displacement was observed at the aneurysmal wall attached to the facial nerve inside the pons rather than the REZ, which explains the clinical manifestation of facial nerve palsy in the absence of hemifacial spasm. This preliminary report demonstrates the utility of FSI analysis for investigating cranial nerve neuropathy.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Cranial nerve palsy caused by aneurysmal compression is considered to result from direct compression and aneurysm pulsations against the nerve. Recent studies indicate that nerve dysfunction is mainly induced by pulsation rather than direct compression, and successful endovascular surgeries have been reported [1–3]. Improvement of neuropathy is considered to result from reduced intra-aneurysmal flow, which in turn attenuates pulsation. Even though aneurysm size is not reduced after coil embolization, symptom resolution is observed [1]. Flow diverters have recently been used to treat symptomatic unruptured aneurysms [4]; therefore, it has been proposed that symptomatic improvement may be related to hemodynamic changes inside the offending aneurysm. However, the correlation between cranial nerve palsy and aneurysmal pulsations has not been fully elucidated.While there are relatively few reports of hemifacial spasm due to neurovascular conflicts caused by cerebral aneurysm [5–7], facial nerve palsy in these cases is even more rare. We treated a patient with an unruptured vertebral artery-posterior inferior cerebellar artery (VA-PICA) aneurysm that contacted the facial nerve at its root exit zone (REZ). The patient presented with peripheral facial nerve palsy without hemifacial spasm and was successfully treated with coil embolization. To further investigate the cause of nerve palsy, we carried out fluid structure interaction (FSI) analysis, which allowed us to assess aneurysm wall motion magnitude by calculating the total mesh displacement [8–10]. We hypothesize that the location most affected by aneurysm pulsation was at the point of maximum total mesh displacement, and this may have caused the observed nerve dysfunction. Using FSI, we attempted to determine if stimulation of the elastic aneurysmal wall coupled with its pulsation was a cause of cranial nerve palsy in this patient. Our findings highlight the clinical usefulness of FSI analysis in investigating cerebral aneurysm pulsation as a potential cause of cranial nerve palsy.A 59-year-old female was admitted to our hospital with sudden onset left-side peripheral facial nerve palsy (House-Brackmann grade III) without other neurological deficits. She had no medical history and was taking no medications. We initially suspected Bell׳s palsy; however, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an unruptured VA-PICA aneurysm 8-mm in diameter wedged in the left side of the pons at the facial nerve REZ (Fig. 1a and b). A small bleb was also found on three-dimensional rotational angiography (3-DRA; (Fig. 1c and d). Considering the aneurysm׳s location, it was clear that it caused the patient’s palsy. Furthermore, the sudden symptom onset indicated impending rupture, and immediate surgical treatment was considered. Given the aneurysm׳s shape and location, both clipping and coiling were viable treatment options. After explaining the situation to the patient, she selected coil embolization. The procedure was performed under general anesthesia 3 days after symptom onset. A series of bare coils were placed in the aneurysm, and total occlusion was achieved without any perioperative complications (Fig. 2). Her facial weakness had gradually resolved 1 week after the procedure, and she was fully recovered after 1 month. A follow-up MRI showed no evidence of aneurysm recanalization.To investigate the mechanism underlying the patient’s palsy, we generated fusion image reconstructions from 3-DRA and constructive image in steady state magnetic resonance imaging (MRI CISS) and visualized the anatomical position of the VA-PICA aneurysm and facial nerve using Amira software (FEI/VSG-division, Bordeaux, France). For analysis, the digital imaging for communication in medicine (DICOM) format for 3DRA was used, and blood vessels were extracted using Real Intage software (Cybernet System, Tokyo, Japan), allowing us to export data for meshing using ICEM CFD 15.0 software (ANSYS, Inc., Canonsburg, PA, USA) in the stereolithography (STL) file format. Using the triangulated surface from STL file as a base, a computational volumetric mesh was constructed. The mesh mainly comprised tetrahedrons with seven layers of prism elements near the wall surface to increase the analytic precision of the boundary layer. The maximum Reynolds number of aneurysm model was based on the inlet diameter and ranged between 300 and 600; thus, the flow was treated as laminar. Overall, the blood properties were assumed to comprise incompressible, laminar, and Newtonian flow with a constant density of 1100kg/m3 and a constant dynamic viscosity of 0.0036Pas. A pulsatile mass flow and pressure waveform from a flow-rate waveforms study by Ford et al. [11] were imposed for 1.80s at the inlet and outlet, respectively, and the pressure outlet range was approximately 80–130mmHg (Fig. 3). No-slip boundary conditions were applied at the arterial and aneurysmal walls. The Navier–Stokes equations were used to simulate blood flow on the computational mesh.Using ANSYS Mechanical software, we performed the Newton–Raphson algorithm for structural analysis of the aneurysm. The governing equation for the structural domain was the momentum conservation equation. The mesh type used was structural shell, and the aneurysmal walls were modeled as an isotropic, incompressible, and linearly elastic solid with a density of 1100kg/m3, Poisson׳s ratio of 0.49, and a thickness of 0.38mm [10,12–14]. The experimental results of aneurysm elasticity studies have shown that the elastic modulus is as high as 300MPa compared to 1MPa for a normal artery [14]. The elastic modulus of 5.0MPa was chosen based on these experimental results and values used in similar FSI studies [12–14].The numerical simulations for fluid and structural analysis were performed using ANSYS CFX and ANSYS Mechanical software, respectively. The coupling of FSI simulation was performed using ANSYS Workbench 15.0 as a fully coupled two-way FSI and solved iteratively within each time step until the specified residual of 10−5 (RMS) and 10−3 were reached for ANSYS CFX and ANSYS Mechanical, respectively. The initial values were obtained from a steady-state solution based on the initial flow condition of cardiac cycle.In terms of the boundary conditions on the FSI interfaces, the displacements of the fluid and solid domain must be compatible and tractions at these boundaries must be at equilibrium. No external boundary condition of pressure was applied in this study. A two-way fully coupled FSI was used where the pressure exerted by blood flow to the walls in the fluid domain and wall deformation owing to hemodynamic pressure in the solid domain were exchanged iteratively. A uniform coupled time step of 0.005s was used. The fluid meshes were composed by 732,531 tetrahedral elements and 402,222 nodes, and the structural meshes were 2399 shell elements and 2423 nodes. These meshes were sufficient for computational convergence. Within one-time step during the FSI simulation, the forces acting on the body are interpolated from the converged solution provided by the fluid solver. After interpolating the forces from the fluid mesh to the surface mesh of the structure, a converged solution of the structural dynamics will be attained under the effect of the acting forces. The response of the structure to the emerging load represents a displacement of the structural grid nodes, namely the wall displacement. The displacements at the boundary between structure and fluid are interpolated to the fluid mesh which leads to its deformation. This step closes one inner loop of the simulation and, these steps are repeated until the changes in the flow forces and the structural displacements fall below the convergence criterion. The loop of simulation and the convergence criterion of ANSYS Multi-field Solver Process are referred to in Appendix.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
