@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Prediction of hot regions in protein–protein interaction by combining density-based incremental clustering with feature-based classification

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Proposed method significantly improves the prediction performance for hot regions.We combine density-based incremental clustering with feature-based classification.Feature selection is used to get the best features for classification.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Hot region,Clustering,Feature-based classification,Protein–protein interaction,Density-based,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Discovering hot regions in protein–protein interaction is important for drug and protein design, while experimental identification of hot regions is a time-consuming and labor-intensive effort; thus, the development of predictive models can be very helpful. In hot region prediction research, some models are based on structure information, and others are based on a protein interaction network. However, the prediction accuracy of these methods can still be improved. In this paper, a new method is proposed for hot region prediction, which combines density-based incremental clustering with feature-based classification. The method uses density-based incremental clustering to obtain rough hot regions, and uses feature-based classification to remove the non-hot spot residues from the rough hot regions. Experimental results show that the proposed method significantly improves the prediction performance of hot regions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Protein functions can be expressed by protein–protein interactions which are very useful to understand the origination of diseases, but the principles that govern the interaction of two proteins and the general properties of their interaction interfaces remain unknown, resulting in difficulties when predicting interface regions. Hot spots [1–6] of protein–protein interactions play important roles in the functions and stability of protein complexes. Instead of being distributed along the protein interfaces homogeneously, hot spot residues are clustered within tightly packed regions [3,5,7,8], which are called hot regions. These are more important than hot spots in maintaining the stability of protein complexes and exerting the molecular mechanism of biological functions.In the past, many attempts have been made to predict hot regions. The research group [3,6,8–14] in Koc University, Turkey, made contributions to the prediction of hot regions. Keskin developed an algorithm [3] to cluster hot spots into hot regions after studying the organization and contribution of structurally conserved hot spot residues. Tuncbag proposed a method [13] which combined the conservation of residues, accessible surface area and pair potential for prediction of hot regions. In [12,14] they predicted hot regions by the rule in [3] and the method of predicting hot spots in [8], then built a database called Hot Region [11]. But this method requires the structure of the protein, and is therefore limited by the available protein structures. In 2007, Hsu [15] presented a pattern-mining approach for the identification of hot regions in protein–protein interactions. The proposed method aimed to demonstrate that the important residues associated with the interface of protein–protein interactions may be discovered by sequential pattern-mining automatically. In [16], Pons studied a network-based method and used small-world residue networks to predict protein-binding areas. Although the proposed method has potential applications for protein docking as a complement to energy-based approaches, it shows limitations in many cases with certain topological features, like spherical or very large proteins. In [17], Nan proposed a method to predict hot regions based on complex network and community detection. By revising false positive and false negative during the detection process, the proposed method can improve the reliability in the recognition of hot regions. However, the prediction accuracy needs further improvement.In this paper, we propose a method called Density-based Incremental Clustering with Feature-based Classification (DICFC), which can predict hot regions in protein–protein interactions by combining density-based incremental clustering with feature-based classification. DICFC first forms the primary clusters by applying the density-based incremental clustering method to remove outliers, and then forms final hot regions, where a feature-based classification method is presented to remove the non-hot spot residues in the clustering results. In order to get the best features for classification, a feature selection method is studied. Experimental results show that the proposed method significantly improves the prediction performance for hot regions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we propose a method called DICFC, which predicts hot regions by combining density-based incremental clustering with feature-based classification. The first step uses the density-based incremental clustering method to obtain rough hot regions and the second step uses feature-based classification to remove the non-hot spot residues from the clusters obtained by the first step. By removing outliers when clustering, the experimental results show that the proposed method significantly improves the performance of hot regions prediction.Feature-based classification, as an important and efficient way to predict hot spots, may not be the most efficient method to use for hot region prediction. Our research shows that we have already completed most of the predictions by discovering a large part of the hot region clusters using the density-based incremental cluster before feature classification. Although we go on to use feature classification to further improve the prediction accuracy, compared with feature classification, the density-based incremental clustering plays a more important role in hot region prediction. Importing density-based incremental clustering will greatly improve the prediction accuracy of hot regions.We declare that we have no financial and personal relationships with other people or organizations that could inappropriately influence our work, there is no professional or other personal interest of any nature or kind in any product, service and/or company that could be construed as influencing the position presented in, or the review of, the manuscript entitled “Prediction of hot regions in protein–protein interaction by combining density-based incremental clustering with feature-based classification”.