@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Analysis of shared miRNAs of different species using ensemble CCA and genetic distance

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We analyze miRNA precursor sequences of several species.We examine changes of common miRNAs among species under different classes.Genetic relationship of species can be analyzed by miRNA sequences.CCA/ECCA can identify the genetic relationships among species.RI for CCA/ECCA has high correlation with genetic distance of species.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Canonical correlation analysis,Ensemble methods,miRNA sequence analysis,Multivariate statistics,Genetic distance,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
MicroRNA is a type of single stranded RNA molecule and has an important role for gene expression. Although there have been a number of computational methodologies in bioinformatics research for miRNA classification and target prediction tasks, analysis of shared miRNAs among different species has not yet been addressed. In this article, we analyzed miRNAs that have the same name and function but have different sequences and belong to different (but closely related) species which are constructed from the online miRBase database. We used sequence-driven features and performed the standard and the ensemble versions of Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA). However, due to its sensitivity to noise and outliers, we extended it using an ensemble approach. Using linear combinations of dimer features, the proposed Ensemble CCA (ECCA) method has identified higher test-set-correlations than CCA. Moreover, our analysis reveals that the Redundancy Index of ECCA applied to a pair of species has correlation with their genetic distance.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
MicroRNA (miRNA) is a type of single stranded RNA molecule that is approximately 21–23 nucleotides long and responsible from the arrangement of gene expressions [1–6]. miRNAs are non-coding RNAs, i.e. they are coded by genes that are not translated into proteins but is transcribed by DNA [7]. Primer transcripts known as pri-miRNAs are processed and first transformed into pre-miRNA hairpin loop and then functional miRNA. Researchers have reported in humans that miRNAs regulate many fundamental cellular functions, therefore the abnormal levels of miRNA levels in cells is linked to the development of cancer [8,9]. The effect of miRNAs as oncogenes or tumor suppressors during tumor development stages has also been addressed [10,11]. Therefore, a working knowledge of miRNAs is very important for early detection and treatment of cancer and may be associated with several other diseases [12].In the literature, most of the machine learning studies dealing with miRNAs addresses the identification of miRNA target predictions and mRNA target sequences by using classification techniques such as Naive Bayes or Support Vector Machines (SVMs). Malik et al. [13] used Naive Bayes classifier to predict miRNA target predictions. As input to Naive Bayes classifier, they proposed to use features extracted from both the seed and ‘out seed’ sequences and the duplex structures. A big amount of mature miRNA and a collection of several confirmed miRNA targets were used to generate the positive and negative classes. They concluded that the seed segment is the most important factor in target selection. Thus, because out-seed segment has an important role in the target interaction for miRNAs, both seed and out-seed regions of the miRNA sequence are included in their feature set. Chenghai [14] aimed to classify real pre-miRNA by feeding the combination of sequence and structure information of stem loops extracted from hairpin sequences as input to SVMs. In [15], a cancer classification method that aims to detect some abnormal miRNA expression patterns was proposed. They used a mutual information based method to evaluate the subsets of miRNAs. In another study [16], a classification method based on pre-miRNAs was proposed for the predicton of human miRNA gene. The main idea of this approach is to identify pre-miRNAs among hairpin structure of the human genome. The dataset contains ncRNA and pseudo hairpins as one class and human pre-miRNA sequences and non-redundant sequences folded into hairpin secondary structure as the other. Several sequence and folding features have been used to discriminate these classes by an SVM classifier. To improve the accuracy of these studies, ensemble learning, a recently popular technique that combines multiple models to finally obtain a robust model, has also been recently used in miRNA classification tasks [17]. As an application of Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) to miRNAs, the study in [18] looks for the phylogenetic dependence between the investigations of biological species. Another approach has used CCA for both univariate and multivariate gene-based tests of association [19].Although a large number of machine learning methods have been effectively used for analyzing miRNA sequence features for classification and target prediction tasks, the analysis of shared miRNAs among species has not yet been addressed in the literature. Moreover, instead of using the classical CCA, to avoid its shortcomings, we used our proposed ensemble CCA method [20]. Traditionally, sequence based features such as Minimum Free Energy (MFE), individual base frequencies, individual dimer frequencies, or percent GC content, %(G+C), can all express some correlation between common miRNAs of different species; however, in this paper we show that CCA and ECCA can better identify maximally correlated weighted/linear combinations of these sequence features.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we firstly describe the miRNAs dataset used for our analyses, and then give a brief review of classical CCA and our proposed Ensemble CCA method. We present the simulation results in Section 3. Finally, we conclude with a discussion of our results in Section 4.Shared miRNAs have the same name and function but have different sequences and belong to different (but closely related) species. miRNA precursors used in the analysis belong to different species (15 in total) were derived from mirBase which is a searchable database for all published miRNA sequences and occurrence [21–24]. Each entry of sequence database represents hairpin portion of miRNAs with information on the location and sequences of the pre-miRNA and mature miRNA. We first analyze shared miRNA precursors among the species (seeTable 1). We chose some species pairs that have a descent number of shared miRNAs (>90). Along with the species that are siblings in the biological tree, we included closely related non-sibling species pairs as well.The number of shared miRNAs between the analyzed species pairs demonstrates that species pairs with sibling relationship have more common miRNAs than the others (seeTable 2).For instance, when let-7a-1 miRNA precursor sequences of Equus caballus and Canis familiaris species are aligned (seeFig. 1), it is seen that shared miRNAs have similar sequences but not exactly the same. Hence, the nature and extent of relations between them need exploration.•Let Pidenotes Jukes–Cantor genetic distance between miRNAi of two species; Common miRNA Distance(CMD) is defined asCMD=∑i=1nPinLet N1 is the number of miRNAs for the first species and N2 is the number of miRNAs for the second species among species pairs.Given a species pair, Let N denotes the number of shared miRNA {miRNA1…. miRNAN} and Pi denotes Jukes–Cantor genetic distance between miRNAi of the two species.Let A is the set of miRNAs for the first species and B is the set of miRNAs for the second species among species pair, then Jaccard Index(JI) is as follows:JI=|A∩B||A∪B|=NN1+N2−NThe following algorithm is used to obtain correlation between Common miRNA Distance which we call CMD and Redundancy Index(RI).Input: miRNAi sequences of set A and miRNAi sequences of set B, then, FA is the feature extracted from set A and FB is the feature extracted from set B.Output: Correlation between CMD and RI1.Set i=1while i≤N dosequences{1,1}=miRNAi of set Asequences{2,1}=miRNAi of set BPi=seqpdist(sequences)stopGet CMDObtain CCA on FA and FBSet n=1while n≤dimObtain RI for canonical cross loadingstopThe aim of Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) method is to explore the relations between two different but related views of the same underlying semantics [20]. It is used to detect the maximum correlation between linear combinations of the two views. Suppose that X and Y are two such views:X=[x1x2…xN]∈Rm×nY=[y1y2…yN]∈Rn×NThe aim of CCA is to maximize the correlation between the linear combinationswxTXandwyTY:(1)ρ=maxwx,wycorr(wxTX,wyTY)=maxwx,wycov(wxTX,wyTY)σwxTXσwyTYwhere a superscript T denotes transpose, cov denotes the covariance, andσwxTXis the standard deviation ofwxTX. The above optimization problem of CCA is reduced to(2)CxyCyy−1Cyxwx=δ2Cxxwxusing the Lagrangian relaxation method which is an eigenvalue problem of the formAx=δBx. Here,CxxandCyyare within-set covariance matrices andCxy=CyxTis between-set covariance matrix. The canonical vectors,wxandwy, are obtained using the eigenvectors corresponding to the largest eigenvalues ofCxx−1CxyCyy−1CyxandCyy−1CyxCxx−1Cxy. The projections of X and Y onto these canonical vectors, i.e.wxTXandwyTY, are called canonical variables (covariates).The proposed ensemble CCA approach is based on combining weak subsample correlations to obtain a strong reliable correlation. As CCA [25–27] has some generalization problems due to the use of sensitive sample covariance matrices in its formulation especially when the dataset dimensionality is high with respect to the number of samples, we apply our recently proposed Ensemble Canonical Correlation Analysis (ECCA) method [28] to explore the relations between shared miRNAs among different species. The aim of ECCA is combining multiple CCA applications on several subsamples of the given dataset.In ECCA algorithm, the original training sets of views are resampled to produceXi⁎andYi⁎subsample pairs of X and datasets. Subsequently, CCA is used to extract the covariate set of each subsample pairs. The next task that needs to be addressed is combining the covariate sets of subsample pairs in order to obtain the final covariate set. However, these matrices cannot be combined horizontally or vertically into a covariate set matrix due to the sample and covariate correspondence problems. Therefore, the covariates sets extracted from the subsamples of the ensemble must be combined in a more sophisticated matrix which does not suffer from sample and covariate correspondence problems. Thus, in our previous study [28], we proposed to use a sophisticated matrix called covariate correspondence matrix to combine the covariate sets of subsample pairs. In simple terms, each column of the covariate correspondence matrix is constituted by projecting all the subsamples onto the set of canonical vectors which has been extracted between the subsample pair that corresponds to that column.In this CCA-based analysis, we have used miRNAs that have the same name and function but have different sequences and belong to different (but closely related) species. That is, miRNAs of one species forms one set of variables and the miRNAs of the other forms the second as seen inFig. 2.As an example, Canis familiaris and Equus caballus are two species that have totally 323 and 341 miRNAs respectively, however, only 222 of them are common. Thus, rather than finding what makes miRNAs of two species different, we try to find what makes them similar. With the function of measuring the linear relations between two multidimensional sequence features and its originality of its application to miRNA research, CCA is a statistical tool that fits well with the goals of this study. The individual base frequencies, individual dimer frequencies, percent GC content, and features like Minimum Free Energy (MFE) can all express some correlation between common miRNAs of different species; however, CCA can identify the maximally correlated weighted/linear combinations of these frequencies [29]. Since CCA identifies weighted combinations of base frequency features, it is possible to go beyond measuring GC content (G+C) of one species versus GC content of the other. That is, CCA discovers a formula for maximally correlated features, e.g. (2G+3C) feature of one species versus (A+4T) feature of the other might give better correlations.We show that the ensemble CCA approach discovers correlated functions that generalize better than those found by CCA. We showed that the possibility of analyzing genetic distance by using CCA and ensemble CCA approaches and are not contented with simply correlations, thus, we used redundancy index in order to ensure the robustness of the CCA and ensemble CCA correlations. For the numerical simulations, all pairs with high number of common (and also dissimilar) miRNAs have been chosen to be used in this study. Thereby, species pairs having under 90 common miRNAs are not used so that some example can be spared for the test set. Only a small portion of common miRNAs (randomly selected 40 of them) were used for training the CCA/ECCA methods and the correlations were validated on the rest of the (hold-out) examples in the miRNA datasets (as shown in Table 2).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
