@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
WHATIF: An open-source desktop application for extraction and management of the incidental findings from next-generation sequencing variant data

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
WHATIF is self-explanatory and accesses the most updated variation information.WHATIF offers user-friendly interface and efficient ways to investigate variation.WHATIF׳s design and implementation is highly flexible and allows for customization.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Genomics,Internet,Sequencing,Software,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundIdentification and evaluation of incidental findings in patients following whole exome (WGS) or whole genome sequencing (WGS) is challenging for both practicing physicians and researchers. The American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) recently recommended a list of reportable incidental genetic findings. However, no informatics tools are currently available to support evaluation of incidental findings in next-generation sequencing data.MethodsThe Wisconsin Hierarchical Analysis Tool for Incidental Findings (WHATIF), was developed as a stand-alone Windows-based desktop executable, to support the interactive analysis of incidental findings in the context of the ACMG recommendations. WHATIF integrates the European Bioinformatics Institute Variant Effect Predictor (VEP) tool for biological interpretation and the National Center for Biotechnology Information ClinVar tool for clinical interpretation.ResultsAn open-source desktop program was created to annotate incidental findings and present the results with a user-friendly interface. Further, a meaningful index (WHATIF Index) was devised for each gene to facilitate ranking of the relative importance of the variants and estimate the potential workload associated with further evaluation of the variants. Our WHATIF application is available at: http://tinyurl.com/WHATIF-SOFTWAREConclusionsThe WHATIF application offers a user-friendly interface and allows users to investigate the extracted variant information efficiently and intuitively while always accessing the up to date information on variants via application programming interfaces (API) connections. WHATIF׳s highly flexible design and straightforward implementation aids users in customizing the source code to meet their own special needs.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Whole-exome sequencing (WES) and whole-genome sequencing (WGS) technologies are being rapidly implemented and integrated into clinical research and practice [3–8]. Both WGS and WES predictably contribute a broad range of incidental findings (IFs) [2]. According to the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG), IFs are defined as secondary findings, not related to the primary indication for ordering the sequencing, but potentially of clinical importance to the patient and ordering physician [1]. As a guideline to clinicians and researchers confronted with evaluating IFs from genomic sequencing data, the ACMG recently recommended the reporting of 56 genes and 64 disorders [1,2]. At the time there are no informatics tools available to facilitate this process.The Wisconsin Hierarchical Analysis Tool for Incidental Findings (WHATIF) was developed to support annotation of all ACMG IF genes included in the Variant Call Format (VCF) file and the hierarchical browsing of the results from human organism studies. The variants are annotated using the Variant Effect Predictor (VEP) for biological interpretation (http://useast.ensembl.org/info/docs/tools/vep/index.html). VEP [9] determines the biological consequences of the variant and reports the Sorting Intolerant From Tolerant (SIFT) [10] and PolyPhen [11] scores. Simultaneously, the variants are annotated using the ClinVar Variation Reporter (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/variation/tools/reporter) for clinical interpretation [12], which provides relevant clinical phenotypes and supporting evidence. In contrast to other tools that annotate all variants for an individual VCF, such as snpEff [13] and ANNOVAR [14], the WHATIF application specifically targets, the ACMG-reportable IF variants. Also unlike the command line-based tools such as snpEff and ANNOVAR, the WHATIF application provides a user friendly interface which allows users to define and select the exact information they wish to investigate. In addition, the users can add their own comments and rational based on the patient׳s clinical information, while browsing the variants and supporting evidence.Our contributions are twofold. First, we created an open-source desktop program to annotate IFs and to present the results with a user-friendly interface. Source code has been provided which encompasses the entire process, beginning with the initial steps of preprocessing the raw VCF file through to the variant browser function for researchers wish to make their own customizations to the WHATIF application. Second, we devised a meaningful index (WHATIF Index) for each gene to facilitate ranking of the relative importance of the variants and estimate the potential workload associated with further evaluation of the variants.The WHATIF software uses a two-stage process. First, variants within the gene lists are extracted from the VCF file (blue boxes inFig. 1). Second, VEP and ClinVar are queried and the results returned from both databases are summarized hierarchically at both gene and variant levels (Orange boxes in Fig. 1). Thereafter, the user may investigate the annotated results using the WHATIF variant browser (green boxes in Fig. 1). The process of how WHATIF is operationalized is shown in Fig. 1.In this step, the program extracts variants corresponding to the ACMG-reportable IF genes using a VCF file generated by a WGS or WES study. As shown inFig. 2, the last number in the column of ‘index’ (detailed further in Section 3) shows the number of variants for each gene to be submitted to the VEP and ClinVar databases. The results are stored and used as the input for the next step.For each variant extracted from Section 2.1, WHATIF performs the analysis by submitting queries using VEP application programming interfaces (API) for biological interpretation and ClinVar API for clinical interpretation. For each variant, all relevant records for both biological and clinical interpretation are processed by the software and summarized in tabular form at both the gene-disease level and variant level.Representative results are presented hierarchically in an interactive format in three sortable tables, gene-disease table, variant level table and variant detail table. We introduced the concept of a three-component WHATIF index to help users to balance and sort out the following three concerns: clinically relevant variants with pathogenic functions, biologically important variants with biological functions, and all variants that might or might not functionally relevant due to the limitation of the current knowledge base. Fig. 2 shows the gene-disease level summary table in which WHATIF reports a high level summary of genes with the associated diseases, the number of variants characterized by clinical and biological functions and total variants extracted from VCF file. For each IF gene-disease pair, a link from MedGen website (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/medgen) is provided for clinical and genetic details for the specific combination.Fig. 3 shows the variant level summary table in which WHATIF reports the gene associated with the variant, location of the variant, reference, alternative alleles, and zygosity. Users are able to sort the columns of this table. This allows the user to prioritize the list according to their preference with the default option being to display of all the variant(s) with clinical and biological functions at the top of the table. Further, the search function is also provided in this table to allow the user to search and filter by chromosome and location of variant. On selecting a row in this table, the user is directed to the variant detail screen (Fig. 4). The variant details screen contains four sections: the variant properties, clinical transcripts, biological transcripts from VEP and ClinVar and notes. Given space constraints, the number of data elements displayed is limited. However, users are able to display additional data elements through the use of the filters buttons. Users may display all the fields returned by both web services by adding or removing items in the filters sections for both clinical (ClinVar) and biological (VEP) results. WHATIF also allows the user to add notes concerning each variant by selecting the section for notes. When note(s) are added, a symbol is created in front of the variant, as shown in Fig. 3. When note(s) are saved, it can be retrieved the next time the user opens the same project. The column of notes has a clip board symbol. Sorting is also enabled for this table so that user could directly check out all the variants with notes.To demonstrate application of WHATIF, we analyzed four VCF files of WGS data. These samples have been analyzed and reported and are available for research purposes from the 1000 Genomes Project [15]. The link is ftp://ftp.1000genomes.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/ftp/technical/working/20120316_phase1_integrated_release_version2/.A summary of the number of variants extracted from the VCF files, number of records and significant variants identified from both ClinVar and VEP are reported inTable 1. The VFC file used for our figures is sample NA19776. Variant counts for each gene and the corresponding WHATIF index (column labeled ‘index’) for both VEP and ClinVar APIs are summarized in Fig. 2.The construct of the WHATIF Index is displayed as a string with three numbers separated by colons, where the first number is the count of variants with significant clinical records returned by ClinVar. In this context, clinical significance is defined by the ClinVar clinical significance categories of Pathogenic, Likely pathogenic, Histocompatibility, and Drug Response. The second number represents the count of variants with significant biological records returned by VEP. ‘Significance’ in this context evaluates biological consequences in the context ofTable 2.The third number represents the total number of variants submitted for the gene. For example, the genes SDHD, SCN5A, TSC1 in Fig. 2 shows 1 significant variant from ClinVar, 2, 2 and 7 significant variants from VEP and a total of 23, 161 and 34 variants, respectively. Whereas the WHATIF Index was designed to identify the most significant genes without requiring user review of all the variant level data, the user retains the option to select a gene, and review all of the variant level data (Fig. 3.). For example, by selecting a specific variant of interest listed in Fig. 3, further details associated with the selected variant are displayed in Fig. 4. Through the addition of notes or the application of filters, the user is provided various options for customizing how the relevant information is displayed.Our WHATIF application in its current form will offer clinicians as well as researchers the opportunity to perform analyses of single nucleotide variations (SNVs) using individual VCFs from next-generation sequencing (NGS) on their desktop computer. The graphical and user friendly interface will help users extract and navigate massive amounts of data while efficiently supporting user annotations. Maintenance of the software and the associated databases is minimal since our software utilizes API calls to retrieve data from both the European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI) and National Center for Biotechnology (NCBI) in real time. The WHATIF Index summarizes information for both clinical and biological relevant variants requiring further investigation or confirmation. Search function will be included in the next release of the WHATIF software.There are two common types of variations identified during a NGS experiment: SNVs and insertions/deletions (INDELs). Several studies have demonstrated high rates of inconsistency in INDEL calling applying various popular bioinformatics tools compared to the SNVs calling ([16,17]). Both SNVs and INDELs have shown clinically meaningful and important functions. Due to the inconsistency of the calling algorithms, WHATIF is currently limited to the interpretation of SNVs. Future versions will seek to incorporate the capacity to analyze INDELs and other genetic variations. This will occur when the results of generating INDELs are more reliable. We utilized the APIs of VEP and ClinVar to annotate the VCF file. By using APIs we can ensure the WHATIF application will always display the latest data from the EBI and the NCBI. Concurrent with the preparation of this manuscript, a group from Stanford University reported release of a software called PATH-SCAN [18]. PATH-SCAN is a command line-based python software package for annotating the input variant files using ClinVar and ACMG gene list. This software requires users to have intermediate computer skills and knowledge of how to install a python based application to download all the necessary databases in order to perform analyses. Further, PATH-SCAN does not provide an interactive graphical interface and user-friendly navigation of the retrieved information nor is it clear whether functionality is provided for user annotation. An additional drawback of using pre-downloaded databases is the requirement for frequent checking and updating to keep information current and accurate. Another group from Spain also came up with a web-based interactive tool for whole-exome sequencing studies called BiERapp [19]. This web-based tool will allow user to upload a VCF and provides multiple levels of filtering using, allele frequencies, gene regions, segregation etc. to prioritize the variants. The primary purpose of BiERapp is to search for de novo mutation of disease-gene pairs rather than incidental findings. To use BiERapp, users are required to upload their VCF file to the computation server which might limit the usage of clinical samples, and to have an extensive genetic background in order to setup the filters for screening. Further, users are limited in their ability to customize the program to extract or display information that is relevant to their practice. In addition BiERapp does not store the user׳s files on the server, requiring users to upload the VCF file every single time they wish to analyze the data.The open-source nature of WHATIF enables continuously improvement by the broad scientific and clinical genetics community. Examples of customizations include changing the gene list from the ACMG IF genes to any preferred gene list and the addition of additional supplemental information from the input VCF file such as read depth and the number of reads from both forward and reverse directions. For those users who utilize Mac/Linux/Unix-based systems rather than Windows- based systems, use of Virualbox (Oracle VM Virtualbox, www.virtualbox.org) is recommended to establish a windows virtual machine to support installation and use of the WHATIF application. Users will still need a Windows license when using a virtual machine. For those users analyzing sequencing data from Complete Genomics platform, the variant file (.tsv) can be easily transformed into a VCF file using their free available package: cgatools (Complete Genomics, http://cgatools.sourceforge.net/).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
