@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A human-phantom coupling experiment and a dispersive simulation model for investigating the variation of dielectric properties of biological tissues

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The effect of tissue dispersion was studied using current and voltage stimulations.A novel method was proposed to systematically change the dispersion of the tissues.Current needs to be increased to generate activation under decreased impedance.Voltage needs to be decreased to generate activation under decreased impedance.Optimal pulse duration also depends on the pulse stimulation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Electrical stimulation,Simulation model,Human-equivalent phantom,Dielectric properties,Motor threshold,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Variation of the dielectric properties of tissues could happen due to aging, moisture of the skin, muscle denervation, and variation of blood flow by temperature. Several studies used burst-modulated alternating stimulation to improve activation and comfort by reducing tissue impedance as a possible mechanism to generate muscle activation with less energy. The study of the effect of dielectric properties of biological tissues in nerve activation presents a fundamental problem, which is the difficulty of systematically changing the morphological factors and dielectric properties of the subjects under study. We tackle this problem by using a simulation and an experimental study. The experimental study is a novel method that combines a fat tissue-equivalent phantom, with known and adjustable dielectric properties, with the human thigh. In this way, the dispersion of the tissue under study could be modified to observe its effects systematically in muscle activation. We observed that, to generate a given amount of muscle or nerve activation under conditions of decreased impedance, the magnitude of the current needs to be increased while the magnitude of the voltage needs to be decreased.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Simulation of electrical stimulation is required to adequately represent physiological, stimulation, and anatomical factors. Variation of the dielectric properties of the tissues (physiological factors) can happen under natural processes, like aging [1], or under natural conditions, such as moisture in the skin [2]. Muscle conductivity can be changed after acute denervation injury [3], and temperature can increase or decrease blood flow, which directly affects the impedance of the body [4]. Several experimental studies compared different stimulation schemes (stimulation factors), such as pulse stimulation (PS) and burst-modulated alternating stimulation (BMAS), to investigate which elicits greater muscle torque while keeping discomfort low and whether modulations in frequency facilitate current transmission deeper into the muscle. However, contradictory results have been reported regarding whether PS or BMAS produces more force while maintaining comfort [5–10]. As tissue׳s conductivity changes according to the pulse duration of the stimulation waveform, the effect of the tissue׳s conductivity variation may explain the outcomes of the experimental studies mentioned. In addition, in a previous study, we evaluated different morphologies to investigate their limitations and advantages for model implementation [11].The study of the effect of the dielectric properties of biological tissues in nerve activation presents a fundamental problem, which is the difficulty of systematically changing the dielectric properties of the subjects under study and controlling tissue thickness variability, especially fat thickness. This can be tackled by simulations or experimental studies.Simulation studies can be used to investigate the effect of the conductivity variation on the extracellular medium and neuronal excitation. Livshitz et al. [12,13] presented a model with three tissue layers to study the current density distribution through the tissues and force production; however, that study did not consider nerve model or muscle conductivity variation or anatomical characteristics.In our previous simulation study [14], we investigated the effect of the conductivity of the tissues in nerve activation by implementing a non-dispersive 3D multi-layer (skin, fat, muscle, and nerve) model of the thigh during current stimulation. The result showed that the variation of the skin conductivity did not modify muscle recruitment (without considering the effect of the electrode׳s moisture or perspiration), and an increment of fat׳s conductivity decreased the recruitment for current stimulation. We also presented a novel method that combined a fat-equivalent phantom, with known and adjustable dielectric properties, coupled with a human thigh [15]. In this way, the dispersion of the tissue under study could be modified to systematically observe its effects in muscle activation.In this study, we investigated the effect of tissue conductivity in a larger number of subjects using current- and voltage-controlled stimulations. An improved model is used to account for the effect of a larger range variation of the dielectrically dispersive properties of the tissues.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The present study shows that the effect of the dielectric tissue variation behavior on muscle activation differs between voltage and current stimulation. The dispersive model simulation and the novel human-phantom coupling experiment showed that current stimulation needs a larger stimulation magnitude to generate muscle activity for lower impedance, which contradicts the studies that claimed that lower impedance increases the voltage transmission to the muscle. Voltage stimulation needs a lower activation threshold for lower impedance; however, the simulation also showed that a larger increment of the dispersive dielectric properties of the tissues can increase its MT. Considering only the effect of pulse duration under the same dispersive tissues using PS stimulation, a long pulse has a larger voltage output during current stimulation, and a shorter pulse has a higher voltage at the muscle during voltage stimulation, from the point of view of the impedance variation.None declared.