@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Proposition, identification, and experimental evaluation of an inverse dynamic neuromusculoskeletal model for the human finger

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose an inverse dynamic neuromusculosketal model for the middle finger during motion.The optimization problem for estimating the model unknowns is complex.We propose a multistep robust estimation procedure to solve this problem.We test it by simulation and propose an attempt to experimentally evaluate the proposed model.The proposed model should be useful for rehabilitation applications.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Neuromusculoskeletal model,Biomechanics,Neural activation,Muscle activation,Muscle force,sEMG,Optimization,Inverse estimation,Human middle finger,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
PurposeThe purpose of this study is to develop an inverse dynamic model of the human middle finger in order to identify the muscle activation, muscle force, and neural activation of the muscles involved during motion. Its originality comes from the coupling of biomechanical and physiological models and the proposition of a dedicated optimization procedure and cost function for identifying the model unknowns.MethodsThree sub-models work in interaction: the first is the biomechanical model, primarily consisting of the dynamic equations of the middle finger system; the second is the muscle model, which helps to identify the muscle force from muscle activation and dynamic deformation for six involved muscles. The third model allows one to link muscle activation to neural intent from the Central Nervous System (CNS). This modeling procedure leads to a complex analytical nonlinear system identified using multi-step energy minimization procedure and a specific cost function.ResultsNumerical simulations with different articulation velocities are presented and discussed. Then, experimental evaluation of the proposed model is performed following a protocol combining electromyography and motion capture during a hand opening–closing paradigm. After comparison, several results from the simulation and experiments were found to be in accordance. The difficulty in evaluating such complex dynamic models is also demonstrated.ConclusionsDespite the model simplifications, the obtained preliminary results are promising. Indeed, the proposed model, once correctly validated in future works, should be a relevant tool to simulate and predict deficiencies of the middle finger system for rehabilitation purposes.α1,α2andα3are the flexion angles of DIP joint, PIP joint; and MCP joint respectively (Fig. 2)represents the angular velocitiesrepresents the angular accelerationsMext1,Mext2andMext3are the external moment applied on the system constituted by the phalanx P4; P4 and P3; and P4, P3 and P2 respectively (Fig. 2).muscle activation of muscle i.neural activation of muscle imuscle deformation of muscle i.muscle deformation velocity of muscle i.muscle force of muscle i.post-processed EMG.distal interphalangeal joint.proximal interphalangeal joint.metacarpophalangeal joint.flexor digitorum superficialis muscle.flexor digitorum profundus muscle.extensor digitorum communis muscle.lumbricalis muscle.dorsal interossei muscle located on the radial side of the finger.dorsal interossei muscle.force distribution coefficient of muscle i or muscular bound i.weight of phalanxpi

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Physics-based models have proved their efficiency in modeling human motion and its interaction with the environment [1,2]. They have been usefully used in biomechanics, allowing clinical human motion analysis. Similar models are dominant in robotics and computer graphics [3], since they allow plausible animation and simulation of human-like motion. Furthermore, the importance of such dynamic physical models increases in the field of humanoid robotics, which has matured with faster, more accurate, and more mechanically complex robots. Henceforth, research has begun to expand beyond the usual robotics framework towards an examination of life sciences, for the purpose of better imitating natural motion [3]. The computational modeling approach gives us a systematic way to understand the working principles of the motion genesis. It is important to note that the major interest for generative modeling comes from the interactive relationship between modeling and understanding.Many recent studies present the biomechanical model of the human hand, particularly in motion, with anisotonic and anisometric muscle contractions [4–6]. In fact, some of these recent works propose 3D inverse dynamic models of the human finger, such as the one developed by Sancho-Bru et al. [4] for estimating the muscle forces responsible for free index finger motions. In another recent study, the same mathematical dynamic model is used but for hand motion modeling [3,5–7]. This system is studied in a static condition by considering only the linear mechanical equations. Vigouroux [8] also worked on biomechanical modeling of the human hand; the objective of his model was to deduce the muscle forces from movement using a non-linear equations system. Buchanan et al. [9] proposed a neuromusculoskeletal dynamic modeling for the upper limb. The objective of his forward model was to estimate the muscle forces from neural activations (extracted from surface EMG signals) in order to pilot a virtual arm. Shao et al. [10] presented a musculoskeletal model to estimate muscle forces using the joint׳s kinematic and sEMG data. Paclet et al. [11] focused their research efforts on the study of the biomechanics of the upper limb tendon transfers; however, this work is limited to the deduction of muscle forces as force generators [12].Identifying forces, activations and deformations in the hand muscles and joints when fingers move is an important theme in biomechanics due to the fact that finger motions representing 54% of all human motor capacities [6]. Estimating these variables has applications in many fields such as medicine, ergonomics, prevention, rehabilitation [13,14] and sports performance evaluation [15]. This functional knowledge can help to prevent the appearance of pathologies by improving the ergonomics of work tools and preventing the risk of injury associated with movements or sports techniques.However, most of the proposed models focus on mechanistic concepts which do not consider the neural activation patterns and motion intents of the Central Nervous System (CNS). With the need to develop an artificial organ to replace the finger or a surgical rehabilitation in the case of partial impairment, the conception of an inverse dynamic model of the finger neuromusculoskeletal system becomes necessary to understanding the functional behavior of such complex physiological systems.The main objective of this paper is to propose a dynamic inverse model linking middle finger kinematics to the estimation of muscle forces, muscle activations, and neural activations of six muscles: the three extrinsic muscles (EDP,EDC, and FDS) and three intrinsic muscles (LU, RI, and UI) involved in middle finger motion. For this purpose, a specific nonlinear multistep optimization procedure is applied using a specific energy minimization cost function. After, for illustration purposes, some simulations are launched and an attempt to experimentally evaluate these simulations is realized. Practically, the estimated neural activation curves, estimated using sEMG recording techniques, are compared to those estimated from the proposed model and tuned using motion capture data. Finally, the obtained results and both model and experimental protocol limitations are discussed.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
