@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A study of the sink effect by blood vessels in radiofrequency ablation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The impact of blood vessel in radiofrequency ablation (RFA) therapy.Guideline to assess maximum temperature and lesion volume during RFA.Initial treatment planning in thermal therapy.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Radiofrequency ablation,Blood vessel,Lesion volume,Finite difference,Pennes bioheat equation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The objective of the current work was to study the sink effect in radiofrequency ablation (RFA) caused by a blood vessel located close to an electrode in a two-compartment numerical model, consisting of a spherical tumor embedded in healthy liver tissue. Several blood vessels of different sizes were studied at different distances from the electrode. It was found that when a straight blood vessel, cylindrical in shape, is located parallel to the electrode, the minimum distance for a drop of only 10% in the isothermal treatment volume above 50°C, compared to the model without the blood vessel, varies from 4.49mm (for a vessel of 2mm in diameter) to 20.02mm (for a vessel 20mm in diameter). The results can be used as a guideline to clinical practitioners, in order to quickly assess the potential impact of existing blood vessels on the resulting treatment volume.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Several studies consider the impact of blood vessels in thermal therapies, which affect the uniformity, as well as the maximum temperature rise in the treatment volume [1–8]. The blood flow plays a different and significant role in the adaptive optimization of the treatment procedure compared to thermal diffusion in solid tissues [9]. These studies focus mainly on hyperthermia treatment and have shown that heating strategies near large vessels in perfused tissues depend on the model of microvascular heat transfer [1]. They, therefore, propose ways to achieve uniform heating, by reducing the sink effect caused by blood flow [2]. In this way, they attempt to improve temperature homogeneity in the tumor, either by including a large margin of normal tissue around it or by increasing the core temperature [6].In this work we used a two-compartment model, in which a blood vessel was inserted in the model consisting of a background tissue and a spherical tumor, in order to determine the sink effect caused by the blood vessel and provide a practical and fast guideline in the clinical practice of radiofrequency ablation (RFA).Two models were studied (Fig. 1), one with and another without a blood vessel in it. The computational domain consisted of a cubic region with an edge of 12cm simulating healthy tissue. A spherical tumor of 2cm in diameter was embedded into this homogeneous domain. An electrode with an active part of 2cm (equal to the tumor diameter) was inserted into the tumor. The active part was set at a voltage of 20V for all simulations. The background tissue considered was assigned the properties of healthy human liver. As mentioned above, a straight blood vessel, cylindrical in shape and variable in diameter, was assumed in the second model spanning from one side of the cubic computational domain to the other (i.e., with a length of 12cm). Its orientation within the tissue was parallel to the electrode, which reflects the worst-case scenario for thermal energy abduction and, consequently, for the heated tissue volume.The finite difference method (FDM), implemented with in-house developed Matlab (Mathworks Inc., Natick, MA) code, was used as a numerical technique to solve the electrothermal problem with appropriate boundary conditions [10]. The grid step was set at 0.05cm in the plane normal to the electrode and 0.10cm for the z axis, along the electrode. The values of electrical and thermal properties used in the model are presented inTable 1. The boundaries of the computational domain were set at a Dirichlet condition with a potential value of 0V (simulating the return electrode) for the electrostatic and a temperature of 37°C for the thermal problem. Homogeneous Neumann boundary conditions (electrical and thermal insulation) were assumed for the inactive part of the electrode. At the active part of the electrode, a Dirichlet condition for the electric potential was chosen, but thermal insulation was still applied. The selection of thermal insulation along the whole electrode in the computational domain implies that no heat conduction along it was allowed, resulting in an overestimation of the temperature rise in the tissue. Moreover, this condition implies that the electrode studied was not water cooled.The values for healthy liver tissue liver and blood vessel were taken from [11], while tumor electrical properties were taken from [12], as obtained from experimentally measured values of clinical studies. With the exception of the blood perfusion coefficient, which was obtained by a scaling of normal liver perfusion to reported tissue and tumor values [13], the same thermal properties were used for tumor and healthy liver tissue. It should be pointed out here that the tissue properties used in the model correspond to the clinical case of a primary tumor inside normal (not cirrhotic) liver. The blood vessel assumed was generic (either vein or artery), with a perfusion rate corresponding to the value given in [11], which can be considered as a worst case approach for vessels in the liver.A quasi-static approximation can be used to solve the electromagnetic problem, because, at the frequency range of 450–550kHz, the wavelength of the electromagnetic field is several orders of magnitude larger than the size of the active electrode. The electric field distribution was calculated by solving the generalized Laplace equation, where displacement currents can be omitted, which is true for most human tissues at the frequencies used in RFA [10]:(1)∇×(σ∇V)=0whereσis the electrical conductivity (S/m), and V is the electric potential (Volts). In the current we assumed thatσis independent of temperature. The electric field intensity is the gradient of the electric potential(2)E=−∇Vand the specific absorption rate (SAR) is given, then, by(3)SAR=σE22ρThe temperature was calculated by using a modified version of the Pennes bioheat equation [14],(4)ρc∂T∂t=∇×(k∇T)+ρSAR−ρbcbωb(T−Tb)+Qmwhereρis the tissue density,cis the specific heat capacity of tissue,kis the thermal conductivity,ρbis the density of blood,cbis the specific heat capacity of blood,ωbis the perfusion coefficient of blood at temperatureTbandQmis the metabolic heat generation term; we assumed that the latter term was negligible compared to the radiofrequency energy deposited in the tissues and was, therefore, ignored. The therapy time was set to 15min. At the boundaries of the computational domain a Dirichlet boundary condition was assumed at 37°C, whereas the electrode was modeled as an adiabatic boundary.The worst case of ineffective heating of the treatment volume was considered in this work. Therefore, the blood vessel and the electrode were placed parallel in order to induce the maximum abduction of heating. Six diameters of blood vessels were studied at six different distances from the electrode. Specifically the considered vessel diameters were 2, 3, 4, 6, 10 and 20mm and the respective distances were 2, 5, 7.5, 10, 15 and 20mm. Furthermore, for the case of 20mm vessel size an extra distance of 25mm was studied. In eight out of the 37 simulations, the whole cross section of the blood vessel in the plane normal to the middle of the active electrode lay within the tumor, in ten out of 37 cases it was partly inside the tumor and in the rest 19 cases the blood vessel was outside of the tumor. The treatment parameters used to characterize treatment efficiency were the maximum temperature achieved within the computational volume along with the normalized treatment volume; the normalization was performed against the corresponding treatment volume in the absence of the blood vessel. The normalized treatment volume was calculated for three different temperatures, i.e., 42°C (conventional temperature for tissue hyperthermia), as well as 50°C and 60°C (temperatures considered in RFA treatment). The treatment volume for 42°C overestimates the destruction in RFA, but it was used for comparison reasons only with respect to another thermal therapy modality. A 10% drop in treatment volume is considered as the acceptable impact of a blood vessel on the treatment volume. The percentage decrease of normalized treatment volume is indicated as shrinkage ratio (SR).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The objective of the current work was to study the worst case sink effect in radiofrequency ablation (RFA) caused by a blood vessel which is placed close to an electrode in a two-compartment theoretical model and to provide a fast guideline in clinical RFA therapy. It was found that blood vessels affects significant the maximum temperature achieved within the volume as the drop reaches 21.23% for the worst case of a large blood vessel (20mm in diameter) very close to the electrode (2mm).Moreover for all cases of blood vessel diameters from 2mm to 20mm, the minimum distance for an acceptable drop of 10% in treatment volume above 50°C compared to a model without a blood vessel, varies from 4.49mm (for a vessel of 2mm in diameter) to 20.02mm (for a vessel 20mm in diameter). These results along with that of isothermals treatment volumes of 42°C and 60°C, can be used as a guideline to clinical practitioners, in order to quickly assess the potential impact of existing blood vessels in the proximity of the treatment volume.The authors do not report any conflict of interest.