@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Reliable detection and separation of components for solid objects defined with scalar fields

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A technique for find the number of disjoint components for a model defined implicitly.Various methods for the separation of components for these models.An adaptive spatial continuation for the fast and reliable enumeration.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Component analysis,Scalar fields,Implicit surfaces,Component detection,Component separation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The detection of the number of disjoint components is a well-known procedure for surface objects. However, this problem has not been solved for solid models defined with scalar fields in the so-called implicit form. In this paper, we present a technique which allows for detection of the number of disjoint components with a predefined tolerance for an object defined with a single scalar function. The core of the technique is a reliable continuation of the spatial enumeration based on the interval methods. We also present several methods for separation of components using set-theoretic operations for further handling these components individually in a solid modelling system dealing with objects defined with scalar fields.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Modern development of CAD/CAM shows the shift from the representation of the objects by its boundary to volumetric representations. This allows users to consider internal structure of the object as well as to define volumetric attributes and properties of the objects in the way closer to the real-life heterogeneous object representation. One of the useful ways to represent the real-life volume objects is using scalar fields. This means that for any point in space a predicate (function) is defined allowing to distinguish points inside the object, outside the object and on the surface of the object. In additional, it gives a measure of some algebraic distance from the given point to the object surface. Such a scalar field is usually considered as a definition of the object geometry in the implicit form.Scalar fields allow for performing operations on the objects that are very hard to achieve using traditional methods operating with surfaces (Boundary Representation or BRep), such as blending within a certain area or shape metamorphosis with arbitrary changes in topology. On a contrary, some problems that have been already solved for BRep models are yet to be solved for the geometry defined with scalar fields. One of these questions is topological analysis, i.e., detection of the holes, disjoint components and other features for the geometry defined with a scalar field. In this paper, we focus on the analysis of disjoint components, as it is an open issue in modelling with scalar fields. This question is becoming more important with the rapid development of digital fabrication and 3D printing hardware. It is clear that in case of wrongly modelled object the model can break into pieces during the fabrication process and in some extreme cases even break the 3D printing hardware itself.Traditionally models defined in the implicit form were analysed only if the defining function (scalar field) was simple enough and easy to analyse. In this work, however, we are not restricting the defining function and only assume that the model is bounded and we know the box which encloses the point set belonging to the interior and the surface of the object. In practice, where we are taking into account practical modelling systems that deal with the implicit form, such as BlobTree  [1] or HyperFun  [2], it can be seen that the defining function can be very complex and far from polynomial.To date, an analytical solution for topological analysis for the general case has not been found. However, a numerical solution can be found, but it should be reliable, meaning the result should be exact within the given precision. In this paper, we present a technique allowing for detecting the number of disjoint components in the model represented in the implicit form and methods to separate the detected disjoint components. The detection and separation operations result in a continuous and smooth scalar field for each component. These operations are designed such that they can be directly used in a modelling system dealing with the objects represented in the implicit form.The main contributions of this paper are the following:1.For a solid model defined with a scalar field, we propose a technique for identifying the number of disjoint components with the pre-defined tolerance without setting any severe restrictions to the tolerance.Various methods for the separation of components are presented.An adaptive spatial continuation is presented for the fast and yet efficient reliable enumeration.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
