@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Automated measurement of parameters related to the deformities of lower limbs based on x-rays images

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A CAD system was developed for assessment of the deformities of lower extremities.Measurements of the quantities related to the deformities are fully automatic.Measurements are based on detection of characteristic points, axes and tangents.There is a very good correlation between manual and automated measurements.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Active appearance model,X-rays,Computer assisted diagnosis,Lower-limb,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Measurement of the deformation of the lower limbs in the current standard full-limb X-rays images presents significant challenges to radiologists and orthopedists. The precision of these measurements is deteriorated because of inexact positioning of the leg during image acquisition, problems with selecting reliable anatomical landmarks in projective X-ray images, and inevitable errors of manual measurements. The influence of the random errors resulting from the last two factors on the precision of the measurement can be reduced if an automated measurement method is used instead of a manual one. In the paper a framework for an automated measurement of various metric and angular quantities used in the description of the lower extremity deformation in full-limb frontal X-ray images is described. The results of automated measurements are compared with manual measurements. These results demonstrate that an automated method can be a valuable alternative to the manual measurements.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The anatomy of the lower limb joints as well as the anatomy of the tibia and femur diaphyses is ideally suited to the mechanical functions of the lower limb. Under physiological conditions angles formed by planes tangent to joint surfaces and some specific anatomical and mechanical axes fall into well defined standard ranges [1]. At the same time the lengths of bones within the left and right limbs are expected to be equal. Whenever these conditions are not met, a deformity of a lower extremity is reported which is defined as deviation of the physiological axes of the extremity from their normal positions.Accurate measurement of the deformation of the lower limbs presents significant challenges to radiologists and orthopedists [2]. It is essential in selecting and designing implants, planning osteotomy cut or fracture management [3–5]. Deformations in lower extremity – if not corrected – alter the length, rotation, and alignment of long bones, resulting in the translation of knee from its ideal position what finally leads to impairments in the function of the entire lower limb.The deformations of lower extremity can develop in coronal, sagittal or transverse planes. They can be classified into three categories: angular, torsional, and bowing. Angular deformities (varus–valgus deviations), which are the most frequent leg deformities, occur in the coronal plane. For angularly deformed lower extremity its mechanical axis passes at some significant distance from the center of the knee joint. Measurements of some specific angles between planes tangent to joint surfaces and anatomical and mechanical axes of either long bones or entire leg is then necessary to differentiate between e.g. femoral or tibial causes of the deformity. It is also essential for correct planning of an appropriate orthopedic treatment.Currently, full-limb X-rays made in standing position are considered the gold standard imaging method used to quantify the deformities of the lower extremities [6]. Compared to computed tomography (CT), full-limb films offer a cheaper option of reproducible measurement of the mechanical axis of the whole lower extremity [7]. Another advantage of the full-limb X-rays over CT is that the latter is made in supine position what can potentially lead to errors in the estimation of lower extremity angles, differences in the position of hip, knee or ankle joints etc., which may be difficult to correct. Moreover, the X-rays dose received by a patient during X-rays examination is much smaller than during CT scan. Unfortunately, while there is a consensus about the set of quantities which should be measured to assess the deformities [1], the full-limb film measurement procedures are not well standardized [8–11]. The precision of these measurements is deteriorated because of inexact positioning of the leg during image acquisition, problems with selecting reliable anatomical landmarks in projective X-rays images, inevitable errors of manual measurements etc.Clearly, these limitations can be overcome and random measurement errors can be reduced to some extent if an automated method for assessment of the deformities is used instead of a manual measurements. In particular, based on some predefined image features anatomical landmarks can be automatically selected to determine planes and axes of interest. Then, the landmarks can be determined consistently in the dataset of all analyzed images, enforcing reliable comparison of the results, more accurate quantitative diagnosis and better estimation of the effects of therapy. The problem of standardization can be brought to the problem of selecting appropriate features specifying landmarks necessary to determine the angles and lengths of interest. Obviously, for an automated method the problem of intra- and inter-reader variability is not existent and thus consistent results will be reported for any single image. Because the manual assessment of the deformities is time-consuming as it involves measurement of multiple quantities, it would be also desirable that the automated analysis shortens the time required for the evaluation of the image data.Motivated by these arguments, we developed an automated method for measurement of various metric and angular quantities used in the description of the lower extremity deformation in full-limb frontal X-ray images. The results of automated measurements are compared with manual measurements. These results demonstrate that an automated method can be a valuable alternative for the manual measurements.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
