@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Systems pharmacology-based approach for dissecting the addition and subtraction theory of traditional Chinese medicine: An example using Xiao-Chaihu-Decoction and Da-Chaihu-Decoction

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Candidate compounds, targets and interaction network involved in XCHD and DCHD.“Fundamental formula” is mainly responsible for basic therapeutic effects.“Additive herbs” exhibit reinforced function to the foundational formula.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Systems pharmacology,Addition and subtraction theory,Da chaihu decoction,Xiao chaihu decoction,Traditional Chinese medicine,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundAddition and subtraction theory (AST), a basic theory of herb combination in traditional Chinese medicine (TCM), is often used to add or subtract the “fundamental formulae” to generate more targeted prescriptions. This theory plays a core role in individualized medicine and compound compatibility of TCM. However, the mechanisms underlying AST have largely remained elusive.MethodsAn integrated platform of systems pharmacology was proposed for revealing how the oral administration, drug half-life, and target interactions affect the pharmacological functions of herbal medicines. This platform was further applied on two classical prescriptions, i.e., Xiao Chaihu decoction (XCHD) and Da Chaihu decoction (DCHD) to dissect the addition and subtraction theory (AST).ResultsWe uncovered the candidate compounds, key molecular targets and interaction network involved in XCHD and DCHD, and summarized its pharmacological characters and therapeutic indications. The results show that the “fundamental formula” is responsible for the major therapeutic effects, whereas the “additive herbs” synergistically enhance the treatment outcomes by targeting the same or complementary proteins between the foundational and additive herbs.ConclusionThis work has established a novel method to comprehensively understand the mechanism of AST, which would be beneficial for the TCM recipe optimization as well as the production of new herbal formula with desirable therapeutic effects.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) is a comprehensive medicinal system that has been used for maintaining health for thousands of years. Several basic theories, with high applicability, have been established in TCM, which include Sovereign-Minister-Assistant-Envoy (Jun-Chen-Zuo-Shi in Chinese), pharmacological synergy, syndrome differentiation, as well as addition and subtraction theory (AST) [1]. By using the emerging new methods, systems biology and/or network pharmacology, the mystery of some TCM theories have been investigated, such as Jun-Chen-Zuo-Shi [2–5], pharmacological synergy [6–8], syndrome differentiation [9]. However, little is focused on dissecting the underlying mechanisms of the herbal addition and subtraction theory.The addition and subtraction theory, briefly, adding or removing one or more herbal medicines or dosage from an original “foundational formula”, and thus modifying it into another new formula. This fundamental theory plays a core role in individualized medicine, which examines the relationship between personality traits and susceptibility to pathology or drug response [10]. Here, we select two typical formulae, i.e., Xiao Chaihu Decoction (XCHD, Minor Radix bupleuri Decoction) and Da Chaihu Decoction (DCHD, Major Radix bupleuri Decoction) to illuminate the potential mechanisms of AST. The XCHD is composed of seven herbs including Radix bupleuri (RB., Chaihu), Radix scutellariae (RS., Huangqin), Rhizoma pinelliae (RP., Banxia), Rhizoma zingiberis recens (RZR., Shengjiang), Fructus jujubae (FJ., Dazao), Licorice (L., Gancao) and Panax ginseng (PG., Renshen). While, the DCHD is derived from XCHD, which subtracts P. ginseng and Licorice, simultaneously, adds Fructus aurantii immaturus (FAI., Zhishi) and Paeonia lactiflora (PL., Shaoyao). Specifically, the five common herbs of the two prescriptions are termed as “foundational formula” or “foundational herbs” (RB., RS., RP., RZR., FJ.), with the other two herbs as “additive herbs” (L., and PG. in XCHD; FAI., and PL. in DCHD).In clinic, XCHD is responsible for “shao-yang zheng”, yet, DCHD is adopted for syndrome accompanied with “shao-yang and yang-ming zheng”. XCHD is effective on reliving fever, treating respiratory diseases with mild syndromes, while DCHD is mainly applied to treat acute or chronic digestive diseases. Although the two prescriptions have gained great success in clinical applications for thousands of years, the underlying molecular mechanisms involved in the two formulae and their combination rule are still mysterious.Recently, systems pharmacology, as a new emerging filed featured with multi-disciplines and mutli-techniques, has made a significant contribution to TCM pharmacological researches [11–13]. This approach combines pharmacokinetics evaluation and drug–target network analysis to obtain a global understanding of the multiple mechanisms of drug actions [12]. Because of its non-reductive (allowing researchers to analyze multiple components at once rather than studying a single compound in isolation) and holistic characteristics, systems pharmacology is particularly applicable to meet the demand of TCM research [4,12,14].To get a deep understanding of AST, firstly, all the ingredients from herbs were explored to build a compound database, subsequently, the oral bioavailability and drug half-life were calculated to screen out the potential active compounds, finally, the potential targets were predicted. The acquired pharmacological data were further integrated into drug–target and target–disease network, highlighting the mechanisms involved in the herb functions and the addition and subtraction theory. The systems pharmacology approach framework for the present work is shown inFig. 1.All ingredients of the two formulae (9 herbs) were manually collected and have been uploaded to the database TCMSP: Traditional Chinese Medicines for Systems Pharmacology Database and Analysis Platform (http://sm.nwsuaf.edu.cn/lsp/tcmsp.php) [15]. TCMSP has integrated herb information, ingredient pharmacokinetic parameters, targets, and diseases. Taken together, 1341 molecules were obtained, of which 288 in Chaihu, 190 in Renshen, 126 in Dazao, 154 in Shaoyao, 280 in Gancao, 116 in Banxia, 58 in Huangqin, 64 in Shengjiang and 65 in Zhishi.For orally administered drugs, oral bioavailability (OB) is undoubtedly one of the most important pharmacokinetic parameters because it indicates the capability of a given compound delivering to the systemic circulation. Due to the difficulties in obtaining OB values by experimental methods, especially for the herbal active components, in silico OB prediction is undoubtedly the best choice to exclude the compounds that are not likely to be drugs. In this work, the OB values were calculated by a robust in-house tool OBioavail1.1 [4]. Molecules with OB≥30% were retained as candidate bioactive compounds for further analysis. Besides, glycosides in medicinal herbs are usually metabolized to liberate aglycone by intestinal bacteria [16], thus the metabolites were also taken into account. The threshold used here is for (1) extracting information from the herbs as much as possible with the least number of components; (2) reasonably explaining the obtaining model by the reported pharmacological data.Drug half-life (t1/2), is beyond doubt one of the most important properties as it evaluates the timescale over which the compound may elicit therapeutic [17]. Fortunately, we have recently developed an in silico PreDHL model to calculate the drug half-life by a stepwise forward selection method [18]. This model is supported by 169 drugs with known half-life values, which were deposited in the DrugBank database [19]. The optimal model is as following:(1)Y(t1/2)=13.310(±2.202)+[13.376(±2.273)×nArCO]+[7.092(±0.937)×H7m]+[0.053(±0.007)×D/Dr09]+[19.377(±4.052)×N-070]−[7.598(±2.283)×C-033]−[347.423(±104.591)×JGI6]+[32.752(±8.522)×nRC=N]−[0.100(±0.030)×Mor02e]R2=0.65,Q2=0.62,F=27.272,SEE=8.127,Ntraining=126,Ntest=43where R2 is the basis of conventional correlation coefficient, Q2 is the external-validated correlation coefficient, F is the mean square ratio, SEE is the standard error for estimating the training set, Ntraining and Ntest are the number of compounds in the training set and test set, respectively. The parameters are the number of carboxylic acids (aromatic, nArCO), H autocorrelation of lag 7/weighted by atomic masses (H7m), distance/detour ring index of order 9 (D/Dr09), Ar–NH–Al (N-070), R-CH..X (C-033), mean topological charge index of order 6 (JGI6), number of imines (aliphatic, nRC=N), and 3D-MoRSE-signal 02/weighted by atomic Sanderson electronegativities (Mor02e) which are also included in the optimal model.In order to investigate differences in molecular properties and structural features among candidate compounds, complementary compounds (total chemicals in all herbs excluding candidate compounds), the compounds in OBioavail1.1 model, and drugs in DrugBank, six representative drug-related physicochemical properties including molecular weight (MW), octanol–water partition coefficient (AlogP), hydrogen bond donors/acceptors (nHDon and nHAcc), number of rotatable bonds (RBN), and topological polar surface area (TPSA) were calculated. These parameters describe the properties of druglikeness, and are crucial for orally bioavailable chemicals and can reflect the basic characteristics of a molecule. Meanwhile, the distribution histogram of the physicochemical properties was carried out considering all six of the above mentioned descriptors, and Wilcoxon rank sum test was employed to analyze the differences of variables in the property spaces.The potential target prediction for the candidate compounds were performed based on the systematic drug targeting tool (SysDT) developed in our previous work [13], which efficiently integrated the chemical, genomic and pharmacological information for drug targeting on a large scale by both random forest (RF) and support vector machine (SVM) methods. This model shows an impressive performance of prediction for drug–target interaction, with a concordance of 86%, a sensitivity of 80% and a specificity of 93%. Here, the targets with predicted probability larger than 0.7 for RF and 0.8 for SVM were considered as potential targets of the query compounds.To systematically understand the therapeutic and synergic mechanisms of the multi-component herbal medicines, the predicted active ingredients and corresponding targets were analyzed by two kinds of visualized networks: (1) drug–target network, in which all active ingredients are linked to their targets; (2) target–disease network, where the potential targets are linked to related diseases. The targets–diseases were retrieved from TTD (Therapeutic Targets Database) and PharmGKB. In these networks, compounds, targets and diseases are represented as nodes, while the edges indicate interaction or relatedness.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
