@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Geometric modelling of drawbeads using vertical section sweeping

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Full three-dimensional geometric model of drawbeads in automotive draw dies.A vertical section sweeping process for the geometric model of drawbeads.Fully automated and robust procedure for the modelling of drawbeads.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Swept surface,Drawbeads,Sheet metal forming,Automotive die design,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a swept surface for the geometric model of drawbeads mounted on curved surfaces. Vertical section sweeping is used for the swept surface. The section curves are the cross sections of the drawbeads and the shapes of the section curves are variable. Also, the section planes are normal to the projection of the drawbead curve along the die opening direction. This paper presents a scheme for computing the variable vertical section curves and the smooth endings for the swept surface of a drawbead. The geometric model presented has a no-undercut shape in the die opening direction and easily represents the smooth ending at ends of drawbeads.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Drawbeads are rib-like projections mounted on binder surfaces that restrict and control the material flow in the sheet metal forming process  [1]. As shown in Fig. 1, drawbeads force the sheet metal to bend and unbend before entering the die cavity. This action creates a restraining force on the sheet metal, which causes the material to enter the die cavity at both a reduced rate and a reduced volume. Most restraining forces of the drawbeads are related to the geometry of the drawbeads  [2]. This paper presents a modelling process for the geometry of the drawbeads in automotive draw dies.The exact shape of the drawbeads has been seldom used in the die design process due to the small radii. Shapes with small radii require a large amount of computing resources and a long computing time in the metal forming simulation, which is a major step of the die design process. Several abstract models have been used in the die design process instead of a full three-dimensional geometric model of the drawbeads. Abstract models are not adequate for downstream processes such as machining and making the draw die. In order to complete the die design process, engineers reproduce drawbeads as three-dimensional geometric models. Also, in the metal forming simulation, engineers have started using the three-dimensional geometric model of a drawbead as computing power has increased. The exact three-dimensional geometry of drawbeads can be used in all processes of die engineering, such as design, forming simulation, and machining.Even though recent commercial CAD systems provide geometric functions for the modelling of drawbeads on curved surfaces, the functions are not sufficient in practical applications. For example, the drawbead function in Siemens NX seems like a packaged tool which automatically executes the several basic functions of NX along a predefined procedure. The packaged tool follows a manual procedure of die engineers but it is not a tolerant approach for an automated tool. The approach implemented in Siemens NX is an offsetting approach which is described in the next section. Engineers in die engineering for stamping large automotive body panels have spent significant amounts of time modelling the drawbeads. Many studies have been conducted on the geometric design and modelling for draw dies, and some of these have developed automated design systems for drawing dies  [3–6]. However, very few researchers have investigated the geometric modelling of drawbeads, but the restraining forces based on the drawbead geometries have been evaluated  [2,7–9].This paper presents a modelling process for the full three-dimensional geometry of drawbeads mounted on curved surfaces in automotive draw dies. The proposed modelling process generates a three-dimensional surface using the sweeping section curves along the drawbead curve. The three-dimensional surface is a swept surface. Modelling the centre curve for a drawbead is outside the issues in this paper and this paper assumes the curve is given. In automotive die industries the drawbead curve is initially created by die engineers’ knowhow and it is refined by metal forming simulations. The next section provides a review of the geometric models for drawbeads. In Section  3, the swept surfaces and modelling processes for the drawbead geometry are presented. The remaining sections contain the implementation of the proposed modelling process, results, discussion, and conclusion.Three types of geometric model for drawbeads are used in die design engineering: the equivalent model, the sectional model, and the three-dimensional model, as shown in Fig. 2. The three-dimensional shapes of drawbeads have seldom been used in the die design process due to their small radii. Shapes with small radii require a large number of elements and a long computing time in the metal forming simulations. Therefore, the equivalent model of the drawbead has been developed and used in the iterative design process  [10,11]. The equivalent model, called the line bead, replaces the three-dimensional shape of a drawbead with a curve (or region) and an explicit value (or function) of the restraining force. Generally, the curve is located on binder surfaces and follows the centre of the drawbead. The curve is referred to as a bead curve or a drawbead curve. The equivalent model represents neither the shape nor the size of a drawbead; however, it represents the location of the drawbead and the restraining force that is created by the drawbead.The sectional model represents a cross section perpendicular to the drawbead and the location of the drawbead as shown in Fig. 2(b). The location is represented by a curve along which the drawbead is mounted on binder surfaces. The three-dimensional shape of a drawbead can be conceived using the cross section and curve. Even though the sectional model does not include an explicit value for the restraining force, the force can be determined through analyses and experiments. The sectional model is good for computing and testing the restraining force based on the mechanics. Numerous strain analyses have been performed using the sectional models. Most strain analyses assume that the material flow direction is perpendicular to the drawbead and the drawbead is mounted on a plane. The two-dimensional strain model works well for investigating the drawbead behaviour  [12].The equivalent model and sectional model do not provide the final three-dimensional geometry of the drawbeads, even though the geometry can be assumed. The three-dimensional model of a drawbead provides the exact three-dimensional geometry as shown in Fig. 2(c). In the machining and making processes of the draw die, the precise three-dimensional geometry of the drawbead is required. Also, in the design process, the three-dimensional geometric model of the drawbead has been used as a result of the higher computing power available.The geometric models described previously have geometrical advantages and disadvantages. Computationally, the equivalent model is simple and light but it only specifies the location on which the drawbead is mounted. Thus, the drawbead described using an equivalent model is easily created and modified, but it does not provide a real shape. The sectional model is also simple and light. In addition, the final shape can be conceived using the sectional model. However it does not specify the precise three-dimensional shape. The shapes that can be conceived are all different in detail, whereas the three-dimensional model defines the precise shape. However, it is a heavier model than the others and requires greater computing resources. Nevertheless, the precise shape of the model can be used in accurate computing and machining. If powerful computing resources are available, the three-dimensional model can be used in all die engineering processes, such as the design, forming simulation, and machining.The three-dimensional model of a drawbead can be created in several ways. The typical approaches are the offsetting and surface creation approaches. In the offsetting approach, engineers offset the binder surfaces by the height of the drawbead and trim the offset surfaces using the boundary curves of the drawbead as shown in Fig. 3. Offsetting complicated surfaces is not an easy operation in geometric modelling, but offsetting binder surfaces is not as difficult because the binder surfaces are smooth and the offset distance is small. In order to create the boundary curves, engineers offset the drawbead curves in a plane perpendicular to the die opening direction and then project the offset curves onto the offset surfaces along the die opening direction. The curve offset distance is half of the width of the drawbead. After trimming the offset surfaces, the sidewall surfaces are created and the rounds are also created.The offsetting approach does not create an undercut shape in the die opening direction and it maintains the height and width of the drawbead constant. However, this approach is only applicable to rectangular beads and there is no easy method of creating the ending shapes, as shown in Fig. 4. A critical deficiency of this approach is that the top face of the drawbead is not a ruled surface, because the face is created by offsetting the binder surfaces. Another disadvantage of this approach is that it is not appropriate for the automated procedure, because the operation of surface offset is not sufficiently robust. When the binder surfaces are not very smooth, the offset operation often fails. The parameterization of the offset surface is often not natural and the unnatural parameterization makes the blending operation difficult.In the surface creation approach for drawbead modelling, engineers use very general and various surface modelling techniques. This approach is applicable to any drawbead shape, thus a standard surface modelling process for the three-dimensional drawbeads does not exist. The quality of the final shapes in this approach is uneven, and it is dependent on the surface modelling techniques and engineers’ skill. According to the modelling techniques, the surfaces could have undercuts and the height or width of the surfaces could be varied.The generation of a swept surface is a useful modelling technique in the surface creation approach for three-dimensional drawbead modelling. A swept surface is generated by sweeping a curve along a trajectory curve. The centre curve of the drawbead becomes the trajectory curve of the swept surface, and the cross section curve of the drawbead becomes the sweeping curve of the swept surface. Using the sweeping curve and trajectory curve, the creation of a swept surface is a well-known technique. All commercial CAD systems have a swept surface modelling function.There are some requirements for the three-dimensional model of a drawbead. The three-dimensional geometry of the drawbead should be consistent and the section curves on normal planes should be the same as the shape of the sectional model. The drawbead design is an iterative process and the die engineers control the restraining force by changing the location, shape, and size of the drawbead. When the die engineers change the location of the drawbead, the same geometry of the drawbead should be created at the new location. When the die engineers change the shape and size of the drawbead, the section curve of the three-dimensional drawbead should be changed to the same shape of the conceptual drawbead model. A consistent and accurate three-dimensional drawbead model helps to reduce iterations of the die engineering process.Fig. 5presents two parametric space curves:g(u)ands(v). A swept surface is the surface generated by sweeping curves(v)along curveg(u). Mathematically, the sweeping is described as a series of transformations. For each timetin the domain of curveg(u), curves(v)is moved to the pointg(t), with possible rotation and scaling. Therefore, astchanges from 0 to 1, the transformed curves(v)sweeps out a surface. The resulting swept surfacer(u,v)is expressed as follows:(1)r(u,v)=TFM(u)s(v),whereTFM(∗)is the transformation matrix at the pointg(∗), and it moves and transforms the curves(v).TFM(∗)is referred to as a sweeping rule. Typical sweeping rules are translational sweeping, normal sweeping (or spined sweeping), and rotational sweeping. The moving curves(v)is called a profile curve and the guiding curveg(u)is called a guide curve. If the profile curve is two-dimensional and defined on a plane, the moving curves(v)is called a section curve and the plane is called a section plane. In Fig. 5, vectorHandVdefine the section plane. In the above surface, when the sweeping ruleTFM(∗)is translational, the swept surface is called a translational swept surface. When theTFM(∗)translates and rotates the section plane normal to the guide curve, the swept surface is called a normal swept surface   [13,14].Given multiple section curves, the swept surface is described as a blending of the section curves. The shape of the section curve changes as it is swept along the guide curve. The surface is expressed as follows:(2)r(u,v)=BLEND[TFM(u)si(v),i=1,…,n],whereBLEND(∗)is a blending function andnis the number of section curves. The above surface is the most general form of the swept surface. Most commercial CAD systems provide functionality for swept surface modelling.Because die sets should be open and closed, undercut shapes are not allowed in the die opening direction. The undercut shapes of geometric models are removed in the downstream processes of die engineering such as CNC milling. In this case, the final drawbead differs to the designed drawbead and the final geometry is unpredictable. For the geometric model of a drawbead, vertical section sweeping does not create undercut shapes in the die opening direction. In vertical section sweeping, the section planes are vertical. That is, the section planes are parallel to the die opening direction as shown in Fig. 6. If there is no undercut in the section curves, the sweeping of the curves does not create undercut shapes in the die opening direction.The vertical swept surface generated by the vertical section sweeping is also expressed using the general form of the swept surface as in Eq. (2). In the vertical swept surface, the sweeping ruleTFM(∗)keeps the section curves vertical and also preserves the sections to be normal to the projection of the guide curve. For the geometric modelling drawbeads as a vertical swept surface, the key is computing the section curves to generate the swept surface.A section curve is defined on a section plane at a pointpon a drawbead curve. The section plane is defined by two axes: the vertical and horizontal axes. The vertical axis of the plane is the die opening direction. The horizontal vectorHis defined by the cross product of the die opening vector and the tangent vector of the drawbead curve, i.e.(3)H=(T×U)/|T×U|,whereTis the tangent at pointpandUis a unit vector for the die opening direction.A section curve on a section plane is defined using four points:b1,b2,s1, ands2, as shown in Fig. 7. Boundary pointsb1andb2of the section curve are generated using the projections onto the binder surfaces. Therefore, pointsb1andb2are computed as follows:(4)b1=project(p−w/2H|U),(5)b2=project(p+w/2H|U),wherewis the width of a drawbead, and theproject(∗|D)operator projects a point onto the binder surfaces along the vectorD.Shoulder pointss1ands2are computed by shifting up the base pointsb1andb2along the vertical vectorU. Because the section plane is not normal to the drawbead curve, the shifting length is greater than the height of the drawbead. Therefore,(6)s1=b1+kU,(7)s2=b2+kU,wherekis the shifting length, which is defined as:(8)k=h/U⋅N,wherehis the height of a drawbead andNis the unit surface normal vector atp. Because the scalar product provides the cosine value of two vectors,kis greater thanhand it compensates the drawbead height on the curved surfaces. Finally, four pointsb1,b2,s1, ands2are obtained, and these represent a section curve on the vertical section plane at a point of a drawbead curve.In a swept surface modelling for a drawbead, smooth ending is generated by modifying the guide curve. If a guide curveg(t)is represented as a natural parameter, the modified guide curveq(t)is defined as,(9)q(t)=g(t)−d(l−t)U,0≤t<l,g(t)−d(t−e+l)U,e−l<t≤e,g(t),o/w,wherelis the ending length,eis the total length of the curveg(t), andd(m)is a function that represents a drop down length as shown in Fig. 8, i.e.(10)d(m)=r−r2−m2,whereris the radius of an ending arc and is determined by the ending length and height. It is important to note that the ending height is greater than the height of the drawbead. As shown in Fig. 8, the Pythagorean Theorem leads to the radius of an ending arc as follows:(11)r={l2+(h+a)2}/2(h+a),wherelis the ending length,his the height of a drawbead, andais an allowance for the ending height. These values are all given.The created swept surfaces are mounted or combined on the binder surfaces; Boolean operations, which are well established operations in geometric modelling, are used to combine these  [15]. For the male beads, a Boolean union is used, and for the female beads, a Boolean subtraction is used. When the model of binder surfaces is not a solid body but a surface model, the surfaces of the male beads are only mounted on the binder surfaces. For the female beads, the binder surfaces are trimmed by the boundary of the drawbead surfaces, and then the boundaries are combined.The last step of the geometric modelling for a drawbead is rounding the edges. For male beads, the shoulder edges are rounded using the shoulder radius as shown in Fig. 1. For female beads, the edges that combine binder surfaces and drawbead surfaces are rounded using the exit radius. Rounding is also a well-established operation in geometric modelling and the rounding features that exist in CAD systems can be used. Because rounding is the last step of the geometric modelling, the value of the rounding radius can be modified easily in the existing CAD systems. Engineers can easily control the restraining force of the metal flow by changing the rounding radius.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
