@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Detection of bladder metabolic artifacts in 18F-FDG PET imaging

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel method for detecting bladder metabolic artifacts in 18F-FDG PET images.A k-means clustering method combining both multimodal PET-CT data and spatial information.The method was tested on 52 PET/CT images of cervical cancer patients.The method suppresses most of the bladder artifacts while preserving tumor uptake.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Image processing,PET/CT,Bladder artifact,Cervical cancer,Radiotherapy,Nuclear medicine,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Positron emission tomography using 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG-PET) is a widely used imaging modality in oncology. It enables significant functional information to be included in analyses of anatomical data provided by other image modalities. Although PET offers high sensitivity in detecting suspected malignant metabolism, 18F-FDG uptake is not tumor-specific and can also be fixed in surrounding healthy tissue, which may consequently be mistaken as cancerous. PET analyses may be particularly hampered in pelvic-located cancers by the bladder׳s physiological uptake potentially obliterating the tumor uptake. In this paper, we propose a novel method for detecting 18F-FDG bladder artifacts based on a multi-feature double-step classification approach. Using two manually defined seeds (tumor and bladder), the method consists of a semi-automated double-step clustering strategy that simultaneously takes into consideration standard uptake values (SUV) on PET, Hounsfield values on computed tomography (CT), and the distance to the seeds. This method was performed on 52 PET/CT images from patients treated for locally advanced cervical cancer. Manual delineations of the bladder on CT images were used in order to evaluate bladder uptake detection capability. Tumor preservation was evaluated using a manual segmentation of the tumor, with a threshold of 42% of the maximal uptake within the tumor. Robustness was assessed by randomly selecting different initial seeds. The classification averages were0.94±0.09for sensitivity,0.98±0.01specificity, and0.98±0.01accuracy. These results suggest that this method is able to detect most 18F-FDG bladder metabolism artifacts while preserving tumor uptake, and could thus be used as a pre-processing step for further non-parasitized PET analyses.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the last few decades, positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) has been increasingly employed in cancer management, enabling the simultaneous assessment of tumor metabolic and morphological characteristics [1,2]. Of the different techniques, 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) PET imaging is now widely used to improve target delineation accuracy [3], diagnostic accuracy [4,5] as well as early outcome prediction in forms of cancer [6–9] that require accurate delimitation and precise quantification of tumor metabolism. PET imaging techniques׳ weak points are low spatial resolution, partial volume effect, low contrast, and high noise features. Also, despite PET being highly sensitive for detecting malignant metabolism, FDG uptake is not specific to tumor activity. 18F-FDG fixation can be observed both in healthy tissue and benign diseases like inflammation, which can thereby be mistaken for cancer [10].Today, numerous methodologies for 18F-FDG PET segmentation have been proposed in the scientific literature using region-growing thresholds, edge detection, clustering, stochastic models, and deformable models, among other approaches [11–14]. However, despite the accuracy achievable with these recent methodologies, most are based solely on the PET data, leading to the possibility of including non-tumor 18F-FDG uptake in the resulting segmentations.When particularly considering cancers located in the pelvic region, PET analyses may be especially hampered by physiological uptake in the bladder, which could be a confounder for tumor uptake [15]. Due to the bladder׳s natural flow mechanics of filling and emptying, 18F-FDG uptake can vary, thereby generating a similar PET signal for the bladder to that of a tumor. Fig. 1presents three cases of locally advanced cervical tumors with continuum uptake within the bladder.To avoid 18F-FDG bladder hyperfixation, patients are invited to empty their bladder before commencing 18FDG PET/CT scanning [16]. In rare cases, urinary catheters can be used to ensure that the bladder is empty for the PET acquisition. Nevertheless, urinary catheter positioning is known to be difficult and carries a non-negligible risk of increased irradiation damage [17].Bladder uptake may also be suppressed by using expert manual bladder CT delineation. However, manual delineations are known to be laborious, subjective and inter-observer dependant [11].Current clinical practice involves manually positioning a 3D-box encompassing the lesion to avoid adjacent structures [18–21]. Nevertheless, the 3D-box needs to be large enough to contain the entire tumor metabolism but also as small as possible to reduce high signals damaging neighboring tissues. Evidently, these procedures involve inter- and intra-user variability and can include voxel artifacts depending on the proximity and shape of the bladder.To the best of our knowledge, no other automatic or semi-automatic method for detecting metabolism artifacts with the aim of improving and simplifying pelvic PET analysis have previously been proposed. In this paper we present a semi-automatic method for detecting 18F-FDG bladder artifacts using a double-step clustering approach that simultaneously exploits multimodal PET-CT data and a priori spatial information. The k-means algorithm was used to ensure an unsupervised clustering and low computational cost. As bladder uptake is not systematically found in these procedures, our detection method could be considered a pre-processing step for PET imaging in order to enable further non-parasitized tumor quantification. From this point of view, the issue we wish to address herein is how to distinguish the bladder signal while preserving the information arising from the tumor uptake. This methodology was applied to real clinical data from a standardized clinical protocol where bladder uptake was observed in several cases.The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 introduces the overall framework of the study; Section 2.2 exposes each step of the proposed methodology, followed by validation based on the clinical data; Section 3 presents the results; Section 4 presents our discussion and conclusions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
