@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Breast mass classification on mammograms using radial local ternary patterns

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
RLTP takes into account the pattern orientation with respect to the lesion center.RLTP is useful for differentiating the circumscribed and spiculated margins.RLTP is superior to the RI-LBP for breast lesion classification.The proposed feature is segmentation free and robust to image rotation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Local binary patterns,Local ternary patterns,Texture feature,Breast masses,Mammograms,Classification,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstractfx1

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Breast cancer is the most frequent cancer and constitute more than 20% of all but skin cancers in women worldwide [1]. Early detection is the key to reduce the number of cancer deaths and to improve patients׳ quality of lives. Mammography is considered an effective screening method for women with normal risk [2–4]. It is not easy, however, to read a large number of mammograms accurately and consistently in a limited time. It is known that about 30% of cancers are missed on mammograms and the reported positive biopsy rates range from 12% to 46% [5–9]. Even in multimodality reading, it is important to assess images of each modality independently and thoroughly. Studies have suggested that the computer-aided detection and diagnosis (CAD) can contribute to accurate diagnosis of mammograms [10–15].Computerized detection of microcalcifications on mammograms has very high accuracy. On the other hand, computerized classification of malignant and benign lesions still has some room for improvement. A number of studies investigating computerized methods for differentiating between malignant and benign masses have been proposed [16,17]. Tan et al. [18], in their recent study, investigated a variety of different types of image features for classification of breast masses on mammograms. They found that the features related to mass shape, isodensity, and presence of fat were most frequently selected by their feature selection algorithm in a tenfold cross validation scheme. The reliability of these features depends on the accurate determination of mass contours. They also discussed the difficulty of accurate determination of spiculation features due to tissue overlap.We have been investigating the similar-image retrieval method for assisting the radiologists׳ classification of breast lesions on mammograms [19–23]. Our proposed similarity measures coupled with machine learning method correlate well with the radiologists׳ subjective similarity for breast lesions, and the potential utility of the reference images was indicated by the observer studies. For determination of similarity of breast masses, the shape irregularity and margin characteristic features were found to be useful, suggesting the importance of mass outlines which were manually determined in our studies.In clinical practice, it is not practical to obtain precise outlines of masses owing to busy routine work. In addition, manual outlines provided by different users would vary. Such a “personalized” system may be suitable for an image retrieval system, wherein preferred reference images that a particular user consider similar are selected. However, for a system providing the likelihood of malignancy of lesions, it is undesirable. Automatic segmentation of masses can provide consistent outputs but is not easy when tissues overlap with masses. Therefore, the objective of this study is to propose a method that does not require precise outlines of masses.Recently several groups have proposed mass classification methods based on wavelets and texture features obtained from regions of interest (ROIs) or small patches [24–30]. Tan et al. proposed a computerized scheme to classify mammographic cases into cancer or benign cases on the basis of image features obtained from whole breast regions of four-view mammograms [24]. A large number of image features, including pixel value statistical features, cumulative projection histogram features, and textural features based on gray level run length and gray level co-occurrence matrix (GLCM), were considered. Although the classification accuracy in terms of the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) was not very high, they concluded that such a scheme could become a supplemental system by potentially providing information different from the conventional lesion-based schemes. Eltoukhy et al. compared methods based on wavelet and curvelet transforms for classification of malignant, benign and normal ROIs [25]. Using the 100 largest coefficients from each of 4 decomposition levels as a feature vector, they obtained a high classification accuracy with a relatively small dataset with mixed abnormalities including masses, microcalcifications, architectural distortions, and asymmetries. do Nascimento et al. investigated mass classification methods using discrete wavelet transform (DWT) combined with different classifiers [26]. A large number of wavelet coefficients obtained from each decomposition level was reduced by the singular value decomposition to constitute a feature vector. They obtained a high classification performance using a polynomial classifier compared with the support vector machine, decision tree, and k-nearest neighbor classifiers.Ergin et al. proposed a 3-class classification method, i.e., classification of normal, benign, and malignant cases, based on DWT and statistical features [27]. DWT was first applied, and features were extracted from the subbands using the histogram of oriented gradients, dense scale invariant feature transform, and local configuration pattern, which is local binary pattern (LBP) [28] combined with variance. Lahmiri et al. proposed a hybrid method combining DWT and Gabor filter for classification of medical images including breast cancer and normal mammograms [29]. Gabor filters with 4 directions and 3 scales were applied to the high frequency component of the wavelet transformed image, and the entropy and uniformity statistics were used as the feature vector. Reyad et al. also investigated different ROI-based features, including statistical, LBP, and multi-resolution analysis features, for classification of cancer and normal mammograms [30].Chakraborty et al. proposed an angle co-occurrence matrices (ACM), which is a combination of Sobel filter and GLCM, for classification of benign and malignant masses [31,32]. ACM is derived using gradient magnitude and orientation to describe edge patterns. Their method, however, requires the mass segmentation, and ACM was computed in margin area using rubber-band straightening transform [33]. Other groups have also used LBP for false positive reduction in computerized mass detection [34,35]. The results from these studies indicate that the edge characteristics represented by the various features are useful in classification of mammograms. In some of these studies, edge orientation was not considered. For example, in [25], the largest coefficients were selected regardless of the pixel location, and in [27,35] rotation invariant features were employed. Other studies showed that the classification accuracy was decreased by use of rotation invariant features [30], and edge orientation is an important characteristic for lesion classification [31,32].One of the major characteristics of malignant masses is spiculation. While benign masses have round or oval shapes with clear margin, malignant masses with spicula have jagged edges. Therefore, for the classification of benign and malignant lesions, edge orientation with respect to the center of a mass is important. In our preliminary study [36], we proposed a radial local ternary pattern (RLTP) and tested its potential utility with a small dataset. In that study, small sub ROIs (patches) were selected at characteristic points (close by mass outlines) for determination of RLTP, and the effect of different parameters and its superiority to regular LBP and local ternary pattern [37] were not investigated. In this study, we examined the usefulness of RLTP, performed extensive experiments to study the effect of different parameters, and compared with GLCM and DWT-based features for classification of benign and malignant masses on mammograms. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The image database is described in Section 2. The feature extraction and classification methods are described in Section 3. The experimental results and discussion are presented in Sections 4 and 5, respectively, and Section 6 concludes the paper.Digital mammograms were obtained from Nagoya Medical Center, Nagoya, Japan, using one of the following systems: phase contrast mammography (PCM) system (Mermaid or Pureview, Konica Minolta Holdings, Inc.), direct conversion digital mammography system (Amulet, Fujifilm Corporation), and computed radiography (CR) systems (Mammomat 3000, Siemens, with C-Plate, Konica Minolta, or Profect, Fujifilm). The pixel sizes of the original images are 25μm (PCM), 43.72μm (C-Plate), and 50μm (Amulet and Profect), and the grayscales are 10 bits (Profect), 12 bits (PCM and C-Plate), and 14 bits (Amulet). The study was approved by the institutional review board.We employed the dataset used in the previous study [23]. For that study, mammograms with a history of biopsies were consecutively collected, and benign cases with follow-up ultrasound examinations were added from the same period. The total number of cases was 512, including the findings of microcalcifications and distortion. Images were retrospectively reviewed by radiologists, and square ROIs were obtained for mass lesions. The original radiologic and pathologic reports were available if needed. ROIs were extracted from both craniocaudal and mediolateral oblique views if the entire lesion was visible. In the previous study, masses with 9 pathologic types were used [23]. The database consists of 376 ROIs, including 195 benign and 181 malignant masses. The malignant cases were confirmed by biopsy or surgery, and benign cases were confirmed through biopsy or follow-ups by mammography and ultrasonography. For image analysis, the pixel size and grayscale of ROIs were unified to 50μm and 10 bits, respectively, by linear interpolation. The size of the ROIs varied from 168×168 to 1888×1888 pixels.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
