@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Clinic expert information extraction based on domain model and block importance model

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Clinic expert information provides references for residents who need hospital care.A domain model was defined to identify Web Query Interfaces.A virtual cluster was established for improving the performance of the domain model.A block importance model was proposed to filter noisy information in a Web page.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Information extraction,Clinic expert information,Domain model,Block importance model,SVM,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
To extract expert clinic information from the Deep Web, there are two challenges to face. The first one is to make a judgment on forms. A novel method based on a domain model, which is a tree structure constructed by the attributes of query interfaces is proposed. With this model, query interfaces can be classified to a domain and filled in with domain keywords. Another challenge is to extract information from response Web pages indexed by query interfaces. To filter the noisy information on a Web page, a block importance model is proposed, both content and spatial features are taken into account in this model. The experimental results indicate that the domain model yields a precision 4.89% higher than that of the rule-based method, whereas the block importance model yields an F1 measure 10.5% higher than that of the XPath method.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Many patients need to choose a suitable doctor when they need medical care, but there is not enough information or data to help them make a right choice. Nowadays, most hospital portals display information of their clinic experts, such as professional title, department, specialty and clinic time. If the expert information from all hospital portals of one or more cities are collected and integrated into databases of electronic health records (EHRs), it will provide great convenience for community residents who need hospital care. However, most of this information, hidden behind the Web, is not directly shown on Web pages. This information is known as the Deep Web [1,2]. Therefore, this paper focuses on the crawling of the Deep Web.The only way to retrieve information from the Deep Web is through Web Query Interfaces (WQIs).Fig. 1 depicts this process. On Web pages, WQIs always appear as HTML forms that allow accessing Hidden-Web databases [3]. Two problems generally need to be dealt with when extracting information from the Deep Web. The first one is the identification of Web sites containing WQIs, and the second is to extract useful information from response pages searched by WQIs. In Cope et al., the authors put forward some rules to identify WQIs [4]. For example, they state that a HTML form is considered as a WQI if it contains some text input controls (<input type=text>) and attribute-words. Unfortunately, this method needs further improvements because it cannot distinguish search engines from WQIs. For the information extraction problem, it is critical to filter noisy information such as navigation information, advertisement information, version information, etc. Yan Fu et al. adopted a series of rules called XPath to distinguish useful content blocks from noisy clutters [5]. This method was tested in five different Web sites and resulted in average integrality of 92% and average accuracy of 83.2%. However, this method has a basic precondition that the Web pages should have a common layout. Therefore, this method does not have general applicability.There are three main contributions in this paper:−A domain model is defined to identify WQIs. The model can identify the domain to which an unknown interface belongs, and provide domain keywords to fill in WQIs.In order to improve the performance of the domain model, a virtual MapReduce cluster based on VMware ESX2.0 and Hapood version 0.18.0 is established. This cluster provides a parallel computing environment.A block importance model is proposed to filter noisy blocks on a Web page. Both content and spatial features are taken into account in this model.Although our paper focuses on a clinic domain, it also can be generalizable to other domains. For example, vocabularies such as “From”, “To”, “Departing time”, “Returning time”, etc. are usually used to depict the attributes of air ticket query interfaces. Obviously, these attributes are convergent through clustering, therefore, a domain model can be established for extracting air ticket information. In addition, this model also can be used in the book domain, job domain, automobile domain, etc.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A novel method is proposed in this paper for the extraction of clinic expert information from hospital portals. The method consists of a domain model and a block importance model. First, the domain model is used for identifying whether a form is a WQI. The experimental result shows that the model has a precision 4.89% higher than that of the rule-based method. Then the block importance model is adopted for noises filtering of a web page. The experimental result indicates that the model has an F1 measure 10.5% higher than that of XPath method.With the effectiveness of the proposed method demonstrated, our future work is to integrate clinic expert information into the databases of EHRs in order to bring convenience to community residents.We claim there is no conflict of interest regarding our manuscript entitled “Clinic expert information extraction based on domain model and block importance model”.