@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Virtual screening for the identification of novel inhibitors of Mycobacterium tuberculosis cell wall synthesis: Inhibitors targeting RmlB and RmlC

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
3D structure of Mycobacterium tuberculosis RmlB (mtRmlB) was built by homology modeling.Pharmacophore models of RmlB inhibitors and RmlC inhibitors were built based on the ligand–receptor complexes.A hybrid virtual screening approach based on drug-likeness prediction, pharmacophore and molecular docking was performed for retrieving novel inhibitors targeting RmlB and RmlC simultaneously.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
RmlB,RmlC,ADMET properties,Pharmacophore model,Molecular docking,Virtual screening,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstractA virtual screening workflow has been established for retrieving novel inhibitors targeting RmlB and RmlC simultaneously.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Tuberculosis (TB) is a chronic infectious disease caused by the pathogen Mycobacterium tuberculosis. In 2012, an estimated 8.6 million people developed TB, and 1.3 million infected patients died of the disease [1]. A major concern is the rise of drug-resistant TB. Thus far, no solid data on the extent of the spread of drug-resistant TB is available [1]. TB remains a disease with an enormous impact on public health worldwide. The cell wall of M. tuberculosis plays an important role in the ability of mycobacteria to survive in a hostile environment [2]. The approved anti-TB drugs, isoniazid [3,4] and ethambutol [5], target the mycobacterial cell wall; and in recent years, great progress for treatment of drug resistant TB has been made by targeting the cell wall of M. tuberculosis[6–12]. Thus, the cell wall is a valid target for anti-mycobacterials. The cell wall of M. tuberculosis is composed of three layers: an innermost peptidoglycan layer, an outermost mycolic acid layer, and a connecting arabinogalactan polysaccharide layer [13]. An l-rhamnosyl residue plays an important role in connecting the arabinogalactan layer and the peptidoglycan layer [14]. The synthesis of rhamnose has been shown to be essential for mycobacterial cell growth [15], indicating that rhamnose synthetic enzymes are potential drug targets.Due to the potential therapeutic values against TB, the discovery inhibitors targeting the synthesis of rhamnose has increasingly attracted much attention in the past decade. Different inhibitors with novel scaffolds have been reported by several groups [16–19]. In spite of the great progress in developing inhibitors against rhamnose synthesis, no compound has yet entered clinical trials for treating both drug-susceptible TB and the increasingly common drug-resistant strains. Therefore, discovering more potent inhibitors against the synthesis of rhamnose, particularly those with novel chemical scaffolds, is still needed and important, and may provide more lead candidates for anti-TB drug development. In this work, we report a virtual screening (VS) study aiming to identify novel inhibitors simultaneously targeting RmlB and RmlC, which are essential enzymes in the synthesis of dTDP-l-rhamnose [20]. All drug-like compounds with good absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion, and toxicity (ADMET) properties were identified from original in silico databases by using Lipinski’s rule of five [21] and ADMET prediction. Two pharmacophore models, namely HypoB and HypoC, were built. HypoB was developed on the basis of the three-dimensional (3D) structure of RmlB–dTDP–d-glucose, which was built by homology modeling, while HypoC was established on the basis of the crystal structure of RmlC–dTDP-rhamnose. All drug-like compounds that simultaneously mapped both pharmacophore models were subjected to a docking study to identify novel compounds possessing potent inhibitory activity against RmlB and RmlC. Only compounds, that had high scores and showed good interactions with the residues in the active sites of RmlB and RmlC simultaneously, were selected. In this way, 20 compounds with good ADMET properties were carefully selected and shifted to the in vitro activity test. To the best of our knowledge, these results represent the first VS effort that aims to discover inhibitors targeting RmlB and RmlC simultaneously.Lipinski’s rule of five and ADMET prediction were used to filter drug-like compounds from the original commercially available databases “Diversity Libraries” (129 087 compounds; Life Chemicals Inc., Burlington, Canada). Compounds that passed the filters had a higher probability of good oral bioavailability. All compounds in the databases were minimized to the closest local minimum based on the Charmm force field in the Discovery Studio 3.1 program package (Accelrys Inc., San Diego, CA, USA). Compounds that passed the Lipinski’s rule of five were furgher assessed for ADMET properties prediction. ADMET studies were performed by using the ADMET predictor module within the Discovery Studio 3.1. ADMET descriptors, including aqueous solubility, blood–brain barrier penetration (BBB), cytochrome P450 (CYP450) 2D6 inhibition, hepatotoxicity, human intestinal absorption (HIA), and plasma-protein binding (PPB) were estimated for compounds that passed the Lipinski’s rule of five.Since the crystal structure of M. tuberculosis RmlB (mtRmlB) is not available for the moment, we thus first built the structure of mtRmlB–dTDP-d-glucose by homology modeling. The amino acid sequence of the mtRmlB was obtained from UniProtKB (ID: O06329). In order to obtain the optimal template for homology modeling, a sequence similarity search was carried out using NCBI-BLAST server to screen against the Protein Data Bank (PDB) database. The crystal structure of RmlB–dTDP-d-glucose from Streptococcus suis (PDB code: 1KER) was chosen as the template [22], as its similarity with mtRmlB is greater than 75%. The sequence of mtRmlB was aligned to the template sequence by using the alignment method in the “Sequence Analysis” module of Discovery Studio 3.1, and the “Build Homology Models” module was used to generate mtRmlB–dTDP-d-glucose coordinates. The coordinates of ligands that form complexes with the protein in the crystal structure (PDB code: 1KER) were copied during the homology modeling. The model with the lowest probability density functions (PDF) total energy was selected and subjected to energy minimization by using the conjugated gradient method with 20000 step interations, until the maximum the derivative became less than 0.01kJ/(molÅ).The “Feature Mapping” protocol in the Discovery Studio 3.1 was employed for pharmacophore modeling. The pharmacophore model of RmlC inhibitors in this study was developed based on the crystal structure of the RmlC–dTDP-rhamnose complex obtained from RCSB PDB (PDB code: 2IXC) [23], while the pharmacophore model of RmlB inhibitors was established based on the 3D structure of the RmlB–dTDP-d-glucose complex developed using homology modeling.The established pharmacophore models were employed as 3D structural queries to screen the commercially available chemical databases “Diversity Libraries” including 129 087 compounds, using the “Search 3D Database” protocol in Discovery Studio 3.1. All queries were performed using the best search method, and all mapped conformations were saved. Only those compounds that mapped at least half number of pharmacophore features were chosen.All the docking studies were performed by GOLD 4.0 [24], which adopts the genetic algorithm to dock flexible ligands into protein binding sites. The 3D structures of RmlC–dTDP–rhamnose (PDB code: 2IXC) determined by crystallized and RmlB–dTDP-d-glucose built by homology modeling were used in the docking study. All water molecules were removed, and hydrogen atoms were added to the protein by using Discovery Studio 3.1. The Charmm force field was assigned. The binding site was defined as a sphere containing the residues that stay within 9Å from the ligand, which is large enough to cover the ligand binding region at the active site. The scoring functions and docking parameters were optimized in advance by docking the ligands complexed with the proteins back to the active site of their receptors. We adjusted the docking parameters and scoring functions until the docked structures were as close as possible to their original crystallized structures (Fig. S1); the root mean square deviation (RMSD) values between the docked and crystallized conformations for the dTDP-rhamnose and the dTDP-d-glucose were both lower than 1.5Å. Except that the genetic algorithm (GA) parameter was set to “GOLD Default”, the finally optimized docking parameters for RmlC were kept the same as their default settings; the ASP fitness function was selected. The finally optimized docking parameters for RmlB are as the same as the parameters used in the docking study for RmlC, except that the Goldscore fitness function was used.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study, a hybrid VS method including drug-likeness prediction, pharmacophore modeling and molecular docking was applied to identify inhibitors targeting RmlB and RmlC simultaneously. We first developed pharmacophore models of RmlB and RmlC inhibitors, which had both common chemical features and target-specific chemical features. The common chemical features include ring aromatic features and hydrogen acceptor features locat in the PDR region. There are also partially common features, i.e., the neg_ionizable features, in the PR region. The target-specific chemical features corresponding to RmlB inhibitors and RmlC inhibitors mainly locate in their corresponding HR region. The results of the mappings of the pharmacophore models, HypoB and HypoC, onto the receptor–ligand complexes indicate that the models can correctly reflect the interactions between ligands and their receptors. In addition, HypoC shows a yield rate of 78.95%, a hit rate of 13.39% and an enrichment factor of 28.64 in the test set method. These two models were then used to screen drug-like compounds with good ADMET properties for the identification of potential new inhibitors of M. tuberculosis cell wall synthesis. Then, a molecular docking method was used to further filter the screened compounds. Finally, 20 potential active compounds showing good ADMET properties and interactions with the active sites of the receptors were carefully selected from the final hits and have been purchased to complete the follow-up activity test.We certify that there is no conflict of interest with any financial organization regarding the material discussed in the manuscript.