@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A user-operated test of suprathreshold acuity in noise for adult hearing screening: The SUN (SPEECH UNDERSTANDING IN NOISE) test

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The development of adult hearing screening methods is a key technological challenge.Adults frequently have difficulties in speech communication, particularly in noise.The speech understanding in noise (SUN) is a supra-threshold acuity in noise test.The SUN test can be implemented on a stand-alone, portable, easy-to-use device.The SUN test may be viable for adult screening in clinical and nonclinical settings.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Adult hearing screening (AHS),Adults,Elderly,Speech-in-noise,Speech recognition,Speech understanding,Suprathreshold acuity in noise,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A novel, user-operated test of suprathreshold acuity in noise for use in adult hearing screening (AHS) was developed.The Speech Understanding in Noise test (SUN) is a speech-in-noise test that makes use of a list of vowel–consonant–vowel (VCV) stimuli in background noise presented in a three-alternative forced choice (3AFC) paradigm by means of a touch sensitive screen. The test is automated, easy-to-use, and provides self-explanatory results (i.e., ‘no hearing difficulties’, or ‘a hearing check would be advisable’, or ‘a hearing check is recommended’). The test was developed from its building blocks (VCVs and speech-shaped noise) through two main steps: (i) development of the test list through equalization of the intelligibility of test stimuli across the set and (ii) optimization of the test results through maximization of the test sensitivity and specificity. The test had 82.9% sensitivity and 85.9% specificity compared to conventional pure-tone screening, and 83.8% sensitivity and 83.9% specificity to identify individuals with disabling hearing impairment. Results obtained so far showed that the test could be easily performed by adults and older adults in less than one minute per ear and that its results were not influenced by ambient noise (up to 65dBA), suggesting that the test might be a viable method for AHS in clinical as well as non-clinical settings.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The development of reliable and quick techniques for adult hearing screening (AHS) is a key technological challenge nowadays. Hearing loss is a common health problem in adults and older adults. The World Health Organization reported it as the first among the 20 leading causes of moderate-to-severe disability in the adult population in 2011 [1]. The demand for viable methods and systems for AHS is growing rapidly as well as the need for readily accessible AHS programs [2,3]. Screening is particularly important because people with age-related hearing loss typically get used to the slow progression of their impairment and seek help very late (or do not seek help at all) with negative repercussions on speech communication, cognitive decline, and quality of life [4–8].As in the past decades the implementation of newborn hearing screening (NHS) programs was boosted by the availability of portable, easy-to-use equipment providing automated pass/fail decisions in a few minutes, similar dedicated systems might likewise help the initiation and spread of AHS programs in the near future. Nevertheless, methods used in NHS and AHS are substantially different as the former rely upon objective measures (e.g., otoacoustic emissions and evoked potentials [9,10]) whereas the latter make use of subjective measures (typically, threshold detection of tones, suprathreshold speech recognition, or self-administered questionnaires [11–13]) to identify people with hearing problems and refer them for further audiological evaluation. Increasing evidence is showing that measures of hearing handicap and hearing disability may be better than measures of hearing impairment to identify individuals with hearing problems that could benefit from intervention. This is because some individuals with hearing impairment may not perceive any hearing disability and, vice versa, others with minimal or no hearing impairment may report considerable disability [14,15]. For example, recent studies showed that measures of self-perceived activity limitation are very important determinants in aural rehabilitation and can predict key outcome measures (i.e., help seeking, hearing aid uptake, use, and satisfaction) better than threshold measurements [16,17]. Similarly, as one of the most common complaints of older adults with impaired hearing is just the inability to understand speech in noise [18,19], it is agreed that speech-in-noise tests, which are supra-threshold measures of hearing acuity, may be able to reflect the real-life communication performance more accurately than conventional threshold measures of hearing sensitivity (detection of pure-tones) [20,21].Recently, we have developed a fully automated, user-operated test of suprathreshold acuity in noise for AHS: the speech understanding in noise (SUN) test. Prior papers [22–26] documented the main results obtained with the test in a population of more than 6000 subjects in a variety of test protocols and settings (including unchecked background noise). This paper presents in detail the development of this user-operated speech-in-noise screening test through the description of design criteria (Section 2.1), building blocks (Section 2.2), and test development (Section 2.3). The test is currently available in different languages (e.g., English, French, German, Italian, and Brazilian Portuguese) and is currently being developed in novel versions (e.g., Spanish and Mandarin Chinese). As the test was originally developed in the Italian version, only data relevant to this language will be shown here.Specific design criteria were set to make the test viable to be used for AHS and implemented on a stand-alone, portable, easy-to-use device. A core set of relevant attributes were identified for the test, i.e.: (i) reliable as an AHS method; (ii) easy to be performed by the largest possible population; (iii) self-explanatory and convincing; and (iv) short in duration.As the test had to be reliable as an AHS method, it was conceived as a speech-in-noise consonant recognition test. This was because:−Adults and older adults typically experience hearing difficulties just with speech recognition in noise, particularly with fast transients and consonants [18,19,27,28].Speech-in-noise tests are particularly promising for AHS (see, e.g., recently developed speech-in-noise tests for remote, at-home self-screening by telephone or internet [29–31]).Speech-in-noise tests, differently than pure-tone threshold measures, are particularly viable for use in noisy environments such as in typical AHS settings (e.g., hospital wards, waiting rooms, pharmacies, outdoor places, or special rooms in the workplace) because their results are largely independent from ambient conditions [13,21]. This was also true for the SUN test as results in 899 participants tested in high ambient noise (up to 65dBA) in nonclinical settings (e.g., supermarkets, drugstores, outdoor sites, and in some “Universities of the Third Age”) showed that the test outcomes were not influenced by the noise level in the test room [22,24].As the test had to be easy to be performed by the largest possible population, it was based on a simple task, i.e.: multiple-choice recognition of short meaningless stimuli. More specifically, meaningless vowel–consonant–vowel (VCV) stimuli (e.g., asa, apa,…) were used, in a three-alternative forced-choice (3AFC) task with ‘maximal opposition’ alternatives (i.e. with the two ‘wrong’ alternatives differing from the spoken stimulus in all the relevant features: voicing, manner, and place of articulation – such as, e.g.: ata, ava, ama). This choice was supported by a number of reasons:−Tests based on meaningless VCVs have good test–retest reliability and precision [21,32] and can be successfully used when highly accurate measures of speech recognition abilities are needed [33,34]. This was also true for the SUN test as Spearman׳s rank order correlation between test and retest scores was 0.82 and the within-subject repeatability, as measured by the within-subjects standard deviation on replications, was 0.79 (i.e. lower than 1 score point) with no significant learning effect in repeated measures [22].Tests based on meaningless VCVs can be more easily adapted to different languages than tests based on complex stimuli (e.g., words with meaning or sentences).Tests based on meaningless VCVs in a multiple-choice task are largely independent on subjects׳ literacy and education [21,35] and, also, can be performed by non-native listeners who have at least a rough familiarity with spoken and written language in the host country. This is particularly relevant in AHS campaigns because, typically, no prior assessment or selection of subjects is done and, as a significant number of non-native listeners are expected, tests based on words with meaning or sentences might be biased due to limited word understanding and poor vocabulary.Multiple-choice tests can be easily implemented in a user-operated, automated procedure by using, for example, a touch sensitive screen interface to display the alternatives and record the subjects’ responses.User-operated, automated tests based on a small set of alternatives (e.g., three in the SUN test) and simplified interactions (i.e., multiple-choice recognition) are particularly useful to limit anxiety and concern in the tested subjects, as well as the involvement of cognitive functions [36,37] such as short-term memory or reading speed, which are known to influence speech recognition, particularly in older adults [7,27,28].As the test had to be self-explanatory and convincing, the test outcomes are given as a clear, easy-to-remember outcome, i.e. as the combination of:−The test score, i.e., the number of stimuli correctly identified in the test out of the total number of stimuli delivered (e.g., 10 out of 12). This provides the subject with direct feedback on the number of correct and wrong responses, making him/her more conscious of possible difficulties experienced while performing the test.A screening outcome, i.e. a ‘traffic-light’ color: green, yellow, or red to indicate that the test results are within, slightly below, or well below the normal range, respectively.A short statement associated with the different outcomes, i.e.: ‘no hearing difficulties’ (green light), ‘a hearing check would be advisable’ (yellow light) or ‘a hearing check is recommended’ (red light).As the test had to be short in duration, it was conceived as a short list of stimuli with pre-determined levels of noise to check quickly whether the subject׳s speech recognition performance is within, below, or well below the normal hearing range. The exact number of stimuli may vary in the different languages. Typically, 12–18 stimuli are used across the different languages, and test duration is below 1min per ear, including in very old subjects (mean test time=40s, s.d.=10s; range=27–114s [22]). It is worth noting that short test duration is important to test a large number of subjects in a short time in AHS applications and, also, to limit possible related unwanted effects, such as concerns, anxiety, or decrease in subjects׳ arousal state.The building blocks of the test are: (i) speech stimuli (VCVs) and (ii) background noise. The set of VCVs is language specific as only consonants relevant to the specific language are included. For example, 14 VCVs were recorded for the Italian version (aba, ada, aga, afa, aka, ala, ama, ana, apa, ara, asa, ata, ava, aza). Of the 16 consonants in the Italian alphabet, two (i.e., h and q) were not used because h does not correspond to any phoneme, and q overlaps with k, which is used much more frequently in the Italian language.VCV utterances were single exemplars recorded by a professional, native-Italian, male speaker who was instructed to pronounce the VCVs with no prosodic accent, with the stress on the first vowel and with constant pitch across the list. Stimuli were recorded in a professional recording studio using a Neumann TLM 103 microphone, a SSL S4000 64-channels mixer, Motu HD 192A/D converters (44.1kHz, 16bit) and GENELEC 1025A control room monitor, with the speaker standing in a sound-treated room. The level of VCV recordings was digitally equalized across the set to meet the ‘Equal speech level’ requirement as set in the ISO 8253-3:1996(E) Standard for Speech Audiometry [38].The background noise in the SUN test is a steady speech-shaped noise, i.e. a wide-band noise generated by filtering a steady-state unmodulated white noise with the reference long term average speech spectrum for the relevant language [39,40].The development of the test from its building blocks includes two main steps, i.e.: (i) development of the test list through equalization of the intelligibility of test stimuli across the set and (ii) optimization of the test results through maximization of the test sensitivity and specificity.The intelligibility of stimuli across the list was equalized by setting the ‘presentation SNR’ (signal-to-noise ratio) for each VCV at or above the reception threshold (RT), which is defined as the SNR where the psychometric curve reaches 79.4% correct responses in a 3AFC task [41]. The RTs were estimated from the psychometric curves of VCVs. The psychometric curves were measured in a group of normal hearing subjects as a function of the SNR. For example, the SNR was varied, in 2dB steps, from −12dB to +6dB SNR in the Italian language, corresponding to chance performance and 100% recognition, respectively [42–44]. VCVs that exhibit psychometric curves with slope higher than 30%/2dB were not included in the test list because, as suggested by Strasburger [45], they could lead to unreliable estimates of speech recognition and unstable test results.To measure the psychometric curves, the output level of VCVs was fixed above 100% correct responses in normal hearing subjects (e.g., 60dB HL [46]) and the output level of noise was varied to set the desired SNR (e.g., from 72dB HL to 54dB HL for the Italian version). Noise onset and offset were 500ms before and 100ms after the VCV onset and offset, respectively (see, e.g., [47]). Stimuli were presented monaurally through headphones. At each SNR, VCVs were presented twice. The overall test sequence (i.e., 14 VCVs×10 SNRs×2 repetitions) was completely randomized across SNRs and across VCVs. To familiarize participants with the test stimuli and procedure, VCVs were also presented before the test sequence at a comfortable presentation SNR, above 100% recognition (e.g., +8dB [42–44]).The psychometric curves were measured in a group of 50 young adults (24 males, 26 females; age range 21-25 years; mean 23 years, s.d. 1 year), otologically normal as in the ISO 7029:2000 Standard [48] (pure-tone thresholds ≤10dB HL in the range 0.125-8kHz). Subjects were tested only in one ear (the ear with better hearing thresholds). Testing was carried out in low ambient noise as in the ISO 8253-1:1989 Standard for Pure Tone Audiometry [49], with subjects seating in a sound attenuating booth (PRO 30, Puma Srl, Settimo Milanese, Italy).The SUN test results had to be optimized both monaurally and binaurally to target the highest agreement with the reference criteria for pure-tone screening. On a monaural basis, two cut-off thresholds were defined (T1 and T2) to classify the test scores in the three different categories (‘no hearing difficulties’, score≥T1; ‘a hearing check would be advisable’, T2<score<T1; and ‘a hearing check is recommended’, score≤T2). The cut-off threshold scores T1 and T2 were systematically varied and the test results were compared to the outcomes of pure tone screening, as defined by the following classes:−Class I (pure-tone hearing thresholds ≤40dB HL at 1, 2, and 4kHz), i.e. ears that would pass a pure-tone screening at a level of 40dB.Class II (pure-tone hearing thresholds >40dB HL at 4kHz and≤40dB HL at 1 and 2kHz), i.e. ears that might either fail or pass a pure-tone screening at 40dB, depending if the frequency 4kHz is included or not in the pass/refer criterion, respectively [50,51].Class III (pure-tone hearing thresholds >40dB HL at 1 or 2kHz), i.e. ears that would fail a pure-tone screening, irrespective of the criterion for high-frequency hearing thresholds [50–52].On a binaural basis, the test results in the two ears were combined and all the possible pass/fail criteria were analyzed, from the tightest (criterion A) where a ‘pass’ outcome requires ‘no listening difficulties’ (green light) in both ears to the loosest (criterion F) where a ‘fail’ outcome requires ‘a hearing check is recommended’ (red light) in both ears (see inset table in Fig. 3). Two reference pure-tone benchmarks were considered, i.e.: the Ventry and Weinstein [51] criterion for pure-tone screening (pure-tone hearing thresholds>40dB HL at 1 and 2kHz monaurally or at either frequency binaurally) and the World Health Organization (WHO) [53] criterion for disabling hearing impairment (hearing threshold level, averaged over 0.5, 1, 2, and 4kHz, >40dB HL in the better ear; hearing aids are usually recommended).Testing was carried out in a population of 150 adults and older adults (67 males, 83 females; age range 40–89 years; mean 65 years; s.d. 9 years) with varying degrees of hearing impairment, also including normal hearing. 136 subjects were tested in both ears whereas 14 subjects, who had a hearing aid, were tested only in the unaided ear, for a total of 286 ears tested.A PC connected to the RCA analog input of a clinical audiometer (Amplaid 177+ with TDH49 headphones) was used to deliver the stimuli. The PC was equipped with RME HDSP9632 soundcard (24bit resolution, sampling frequency 44.1kHz) compliant with the EN 60645-2:1997 Standard for equipment for speech audiometry [54]. The soundcard output was calibrated by using a 1kHz tone as in the ‘Equal speech level’ requirement in the ISO 8253-1:1996 Standard for speech audiometry [38].A touch sensitive screen (resistive LCD Viper 10.4″, resolution 800×600 pixels, brightness 350cd/m2, contrast ratio 250:1) was used to display the written alternatives, record the subjects׳ responses, and display the test score. The actual size of the complete three-letter VCVs displayed on the screen was 6cm (width)×3cm (height). An ad hoc software and user interface were implemented in MATLAB (R2007b, v. 7.5.0.342, MathWorks™) to perform experiments. Testing was carried out in a quiet room as in the ISO 8253-1:1989 Standard for Pure Tone Audiometry [49].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper presented the development of the SUN test, a user-operated speech-in-noise screening test for AHS, developed according to a core set of design criteria, i.e.: (i) reliable as an AHS method; (ii) easy to be performed by the largest possible population; (iii) self-explanatory and convincing; and (iv) short in duration. This paper showed that, starting from the language-specific ‘building blocks’ (i.e., test stimuli and noise), the test could be developed through two general steps: (i) development of the test list through equalization of the intelligibility of test stimuli across the set and (ii) optimization of the test results through maximization of the test sensitivity and specificity. The development steps here shown are general and, as such, they could be used to develop similar speech-in-noise screening tests in different languages. Some minor modifications may be introduced to account for some peculiar characteristic of the different languages. For example, VC or CV stimuli could be used in some languages in place of VCVs, if relevant to the language structure and use. Results obtained so far showed that the test could identify people with hearing impairment with good sensitivity and specificity (around 83–86%) and that, due to short test time, high test-retest repeatability, reliability in high ambient noise, it shows promise as a tool for AHS in clinical and non-clinical settings. Such a test could be easily implemented in a portable, stand-alone system that might also, for example, incorporate additional screening methods (e.g., automatic pure-tone audiometry, other speech-in-noise tests, or screening questionnaires). Future studies would be essential to define the necessary specifications and requirements for such a system for the implementation of different measures on the same platform and, also, to assess the feasibility of an integrated, multiple-test device for use in AHS in different test settings.