@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Integrative epigenetic profiling analysis identifies DNA methylation changes associated with chronic alcohol consumption

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
●We presented a longitudinal study on alcohol use disorder in Taiwanese aborigines.●Genome-wide methylation profiles uncovered genes affected by alcohol misuse.●Bioinformatics analysis revealed the pathways affected by chronic alcohol exposure.●Some of these genes and pathways have been implicated in alcohol-related diseases.●We provided additional support for the role methylation plays in alcohol damage.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Alcoholism,Epigenetic profiling,DNA methylation,Longitudinal study,Taiwanese aboriginals,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Alcoholism has always been a major public health concern in Taiwan, especially in the aboriginal communities. Emerging evidence supports the association between DNA methylation and alcoholism, though very few studies have examined the effect of chronic alcohol consumption on the epignome. Since 1986, we have been following up on the mental health conditions of four major aboriginal peoples of Taiwan. The 993 aboriginal people who underwent the phase 1 (1986) clinical interviews were followed up through phase 2 (1990–1992), and phase 3 (2003–2009). Selected individuals for the current study included 10 males from the phase 1 normal cohort who remained normal at phase 2 and became dependent on alcohol by phase 3 and 10 control subjects who have not had any drinking problems throughout the study. We profiled the DNA methylation changes in the blood samples collected at phases 2 and 3. Enrichment analyses have identified several biological processes related to immune system responses and aging in the control group. In contrast, differentially methylated genes in the case group were mostly associated with susceptibility to infections, as well as pathways related to muscular contraction and neural degeneration. The methylation levels of six genes were found to correlate with alcohol consumption. These include genes involved in neurogenesis (NPDC1) and inflammation (HERC5), as well as alcoholism-associated genes ADCY9, CKM, and PHOX2A. Given the limited sample size, our approach uncovered genes and disease pathways associated with chronic alcohol consumption at the epigenetic level. The results offer a preliminary methylome map that enhances our understanding of alcohol-induced damages and offers new targets for alcohol injury research.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
It is well-established that multiple genetic and environmental factors determine an individual’s predisposition to alcohol use disorder (AUD) [1–3]. For the development of alcohol dependence, approximately 40 to 60% of the variance is attributable to variations in the genotype [4,5]. As dependence develops only following repeated use, the neurobiological changes that arise in response to repeated alcohol exposure are the key factors interplaying between the genotype and the environment [6].Alcohol exposure is known to cause aberrant DNA methylation, the severity of which can be aggravated by alcohol consumption [7–9]. There is emerging evidence supporting the involvement of DNA methylation in alcoholism. For example, alpha synuclein, a gene associated with dopaminergic neurotransmission, showed promoter DNA hypermethylation in the peripheral mononuclear cells of patients with alcohol dependence [10]. In fact, DNA methylation is suggested to play an important role in AUD. Altered DNA methylation has been found in the promoters of the atrial natriuretic peptide, vasopressin, and N-methyl-d-aspartate 2b receptor subtype genes in patients undergoing alcohol withdrawal [11–13]. As well, hypermethylation of the dopamine transporter gene has been associated with alcohol dependence [13]. Methylation of the CpG sites in the promoter region of the polypeptide pro-opiomelanocortin was also found to be different between alcohol-dependent and healthy controls, linking this gene to craving [14]. These studies indicate that the complex spectrum of AUD may be partially attributable to alterations in the epigenetic regulation of multiple genes.A genome-wide approach holds the promise of providing a global scope and uncovering the different molecular players underlying the association between DNA methylation changes and alcoholism. In a recent array-based study comparing the DNA methylation profiles between alcohol dependent and non-alcoholic controls in African Americans and European Americans, several genes linked with craving, alcohol addiction, and alcohol-induced damages, were found to be differentially methylated between the cases and controls [15]. Comparison of the methylomes between alcohol dependent cases and healthy controls in a Chinese male population also revealed DNA methylation differences in genes associated with the development of alcohol dependence [16]. These differential methylation patterns were population-specific, implicating that the predisposition to AUD may result from a complex interplay of inherent genetic variation and epigenetic modifications.Recently, an investigation on the DNA methylation mechanisms underlying the effects of short-term alcohol uncovered widespread changes in the methylome of human peripheral blood mononuclear cells [17]. However, the changes in DNA methylation on a genome-wide scale after chronic alcohol intake have not been fully examined yet. Here, we present a preliminary assessment of alterations in DNA methylation associated with long-term alcohol consumption among subjects from a longitudinal study of AUD in the Taiwan Aboriginal Study Project (TASP) [18]. TASP began in 1986 (N=993) with four major Taiwanese aboriginal groups (Ami, Atayal, Paiwan, and Bunun). In the phase 1 cross-sectional survey (1986–1988), high lifetime prevalence rates of DSM-III-R AUD were found among the four groups, ranging from 44.5% to 54.5% [19]. In the phase 2 follow-up conducted four years later (1990–1992), the age-standardized annual incidence rates of AUD among the four groups were found to range from 2.8 to 4.9% [20]. A phase 3 16-year follow-up was conducted in 2003–2009. The blood samples collected at phases 2 and 3 with 12 years in between presented a great opportunity to examine the effect of alcohol drinking on DNA methylation among incidence cases of AUD during the period. Here, we report an integrative bioinformatics approach for the analysis of genome-wide DNA methylation changes associated with chronic alcohol consumption, offering a preliminary methylome map that helps enhance our understanding of alcohol-induced damages.All procedures were reviewed and approved by the Institutional Review Board of Academia Sinica, Taiwan, and written informed consents were obtained from all participants. For those who had reduced ability to consent, the carers or guardians gave written informed consent on behalf of these participants. Our analysis was based on a subset of participants. Because existing evidence suggests that DNA methylation may be gender specific [21,22], this study only focused on male cohort subjects as a preliminary investigation into the association between DNA methylation and alcohol drinking.Several criteria were considered for the selection of cases. Since DNA preparation was performed at phases 2 and 3, study subjects must have DNA samples available from both phases. The amount and the quality of these samples must meet the requirements for array analysis as well. Also, to study the effect of alcohol on methylation patterns, we chose AUD cases with no lifetime drinking problem at phase 2, but developed AUD after phase 2 and were diagnosed alcohol dependence according to DSM-IV at phase 3. Moreover, these subjects must have been heavy drinkers (≥80g of alcohol intake/day) at phase 3 when their blood samples were collected. All subjects from the male cohort fulfilling these criteria have been included (N=10). Each case was age-matched with one male control (±3 years) who had never been found to have lifetime DSM-IV alcohol dependence or alcohol-related conditions throughout the three phases of investigations. The blood samples were drawn solely for the purpose of DNA isolation. Clinical examinations were not performed on the blood samples. However, none of the participants reported any family history of inherited diseases, nor were any of the participants affected by immune-related diseases such as hepatitis or infectious diseases like tuberculosis or influenza at the time of blood collection.For each individual, 10ml of blood was drawn at phases 2 and 3. Blood samples were collected into BD Vacutainer® SST™ blood collection tubes (Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA). DNA extraction was performed using the Gentra Puregene Blood Kit (QIAGEN, Valencia, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. DNA quality and quantity were determined on a NanoDrop ND-1000 spectrophotometer (NanoDrop Techonologies, Wilmington, DE, USA). DNA integrity was evaluated by agarose gel electrophoresis. Each sample (500ng) underwent bisulfite conversion using the EZ DNA methylation kit from Zymo Research (Orange, CA, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions with modifications recommended by Illumina (San Diego, CA, USA). To confirm that bisulfite conversion was successful, quality control PCR reactions were performed for each sample using the primers and protocol described by Thirlwell et al. [23]. Bisulfite converted DNA samples were then subjected to methylation profiling on the Infinium® HumanMethylation27 BeadChips (Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA, USA) according to Illumina’s instructions at Genetech Biotech in Taipei, Taiwan. Each locus was interrogated by a specific probe linked to a methylated (M) and unmethylated (U) bead type. Fluorescent intensities of the M and U beads were used to calculate the methylation status of a specific CpG site, following the formula: β=M/((M+U)+100).Comparisons of variables such as age, alcohol consumption, smoking and betel nut use were performed using the Mann–Whitney test in SPSS v18.0 (Somers, NY, USA). For methylation comparison, data were background normalized in Illumina’s BeadStudio (San Diego, CA, USA) and exported for additional analysis using GeneSpring® (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). Our analysis was based on genes corresponding to CpG sites (or probes) that were methylated or unmethylated. Average beta values for the CpG sites in the case and control groups were calculated. In our data, there were genes with two or more sites showing similar results. These duplicate records were removed so that the same genes were not counted twice.Differential methylation between phases 2 and 3 in the case and control was analyzed using Wilcoxon paired sample test. Differential methylation at a particular CpG site was considered to be significant if p<0.01. Neither the case nor the control group was genotyped for the CpG sites. Since it was possible that genotype may affect methylation, we limited our focus on methylation differences that have occurred within each individual from phase 2 to phase 3, and not between the case and control groups. However, significantly differentially methylated genes (or CpG sites) in the control group were used to filter out potential aging-related changes in the case group. The remaining differentially methylated genes were then analyzed for correlation with alcohol consumption using Spearman’s correlation test.Gene set enrichment analysis was performed to evaluate the most important biological processes, molecular functions, and networks. We utilized Panther version 9.0 (release date Jan 20, 2014) [24,25] to find enriched Gene Ontology (GO) terms, and WikiPathways [26] to uncover pathways over-represented by differentially methylated genes between the control and case group. To identify potential protein interaction modules from these differentially methylated genes, we cross-validated the protein interaction network results with WebGestalt [27,28] using a significance threshold of Benjamini–Hochberg (B–H) adjusted p<0.05 and STRING 9.1 [29], with a confidence level of 0.70 based on co-expression and experimental evidence. The WebGestalt disease function was also employed to identify potential disease categories associated with the differentially methylated genes in the control and case groups.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
