@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Topology optimization with meshless density variable approximations and BESO method

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An improved meshless density variable approximation BESO method is founded.The essential boundary condition is enforced by using the CSRBF.The Shepard function is used to create a dual-level density approximation. Numerical instabilities can be improved.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Topology optimization,Nodal density variables,BESO method,Shepard function,Numerical instabilities,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
An improved meshless density variable approximation is incorporated into the BESO method for topology optimization of continuum structures in this paper. The essential boundary condition is enforced by using the compactly supported radial basis function (CSRBF). The Shepard function is used to create a physically meaningful dual-level density approximation. Numerical examples show that the proposed method is feasible and fidelity for the topology optimization of continuum structures. The common numerical instabilities of the BESO method do not exist in the final results.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The ultimate goal of topology optimization of continuum structures is to find the best structural layout or material distribution of a structure to fulfill its function in an optimal manner while at the same time satisfying various structural behavior constraints in the earlier design stage of structures  [1,2]. Up to now, topology optimization of continuum structures has seen a rapid development. Various topology description models are now available in practice over the two decades. The most widely popular ones can be broadly classified into two types. The first type can be regarded as material distribution models  [3–5]. And the other type is boundary description models, including the implicit topology description function-based method and the level set-based method  [6–10].Two popular approaches based on material distribution models are the homogenization method (and its variant, such as the SIMP, the Solid Isotropic Microstructure with Penalization, method) and the ESO (BESO) method  [11,12]. In the homogenization method, the optimal topology of a structure is transformed to a size optimization problem with the geometry parameters describing the microstructure of materials as design variables. In order to enhance the efficiency of topology optimization, the so-called SIMP method was proposed as an alternative to the homogenization method for the solution of topology optimization problems. An isotropic material model is employed in the SIMP method with power law penalization of the elastic constants. And the element densities are to be optimized during the optimization period. The ESO method, evolutionary structural optimization method, is based on an empirical concept that a structure evolves towards an optimum by slowly removing inefficient material. And the ESO methods introduce finite changes in a design on the basis of certain heuristic criteria, which may not be based on sensitivities. To achieve maximization of the stiffness of the structure, stress criterion was adopted in the ESO method with elemental strain energy criterion. Bi-directional evolutionary optimization (BESO) method, as an extension of ESO method, allows for efficient material to be added to the structure at the same time as the inefficient one to be removed. That means new elements can be added in the locations next to those elements with highest stresses in the BESO method. The ESO (BESO) method has got rather general achievement due to its conceptual simplicity and efficient implementation. These methods have been dealt with a wide variety of engineering applications and have been also extended to the multi-material fields  [13].It is worth noting that element-wise design variables are conventionally used to formulate both of the two kinds of approaches. It means that the FEM method is used to interpolate the displacement fields as well as material distribution inside the design domain simultaneously. The material properties are assumed constant within each element. Although using element-based design variables seems natural in the formulation of optimal material distribution problems, it still presents some difficulties  [14]. We have divided the common numerical problems appearing in topology optimization into three categories: (i) Checkerboards refer to the phenomenon of regions of alternatively solid and void elements ordered in a checkerboard like fashion. (ii) Mesh dependence refers to the appearances of not obtaining qualitatively the same outcome for different mesh-size or discretizations. (iii) Local minima refer to the problems of yielding different results to the same discretized problem when choosing different algorithmic parameters. It seems to be related to the use of elemental design variables. The problems arise from the discrete(0,1)variables used for the topology description and are closely related to over-stiffness of lower-order finite elements. Even employing higher-order finite elements or non-conforming finite elements cannot fully overcome these numerical difficulties. The sensitivity filter technique, the smoothing algorithm using the surrounding elements’ reference factors and perimeter control are usually employed for compressing the numerical difficulties in the ESO (BESO) method. Other numerical techniques, including the nonconforming finite element method  [15], the mixed finite element approach  [16] and the upper-bound constraint approach  [17] etc. have also been developed. Moreover, topology optimization using elemental density variables actually create zigzag boundary curves. Another restriction of such methods is that the resolution of optimal products essentially depends on the average mesh grid size in each part of the design domain.For the aforementioned numerical difficulties to be pressed, many attempts have emerged several alternative methods for topology optimization of structures based on nodal design variables of finite elements. For example, a so-called CAMD (continuous approximation of material distribution) model is incorporated into the homogenization topology optimization method  [18]. And later on, this approach was also extended for topology synthesis of piezoelectric micro-tools  [19]. A Q4/Q4 implementation of the SIMP method is proposed to avoid checkerboard patterns effectively  [20]. A Shepard function interpolation combined with higher-order elements is used to preserve the physical meaning of density variables for topology optimization of structures  [21]. But during the optimization process, the so-called “islanding” phenomenon, a side-effect, was introduced, especially when coarse meshes are used.Recently, meshless methods have also been applied in a few topology optimization studies. The meshless method is relatively simple. And it can provide sufficient solution accuracies and numerical stabilities for certain classes of problems without requiring the need for remaining mesh connectivity. More than 10 different meshless methods have been introduced in a number of relative literatures, and each method has particular characteristics to meet for a specific kind of problems  [22]. Anything in existence has the dual characters. It is hard to enforce essential boundary conditions in meshless method, not as straightforward as in mesh based methods. Obviously, unsatisfying Kronecker delta property is a deficiency of meshless method. In the past years, meshless methods have received great popularity in a range of areas, including topology optimization of structures. For instances, the meshless methods have been extended to topology optimization problems, so as to develop a type of meshless topology optimization methods  [23–26]. Particularly, the well-studied element free Galerkin method (EFG)  [27] has been incorporated in topology optimization problems for a range of applications, including structures  [24–26], and compliant mechanisms and actuators  [23]. The implicit topology description function method is integrated into the Reproducing Kernel Particle Method and presents a new implementation of topology optimization of continua  [28], and so on.In this paper, an alternative BESO method based on meshless density variable approximations is employed to suppress the common numerical problems and islanding phenomenon because they can better predict the stiffness with layering material distribution. It is better than the traditional application to advanced mechanics issues. Finally, several examples widely used in the topology optimization design are presented. And all numerical examples show that the proposed method is high fidelity and efficient for the topology optimization of continuum structure.A density variable approximation is employed to construct optimal model based on the Shepard function method in this study. And the model is used to represent the density-stiffness dependency between nodal densities and material properties with a set of nodes  [29,30]. Actually, the Shepard function method is used to deal with multivariate interpolations of scattered data. As a prerequisite, the Shepard interpolation method is first introduced in this section. Supposefi,i=1,…,n, denote a set ofnnon-negative data values at the relative sampling pointsxi=(Xi,Yi,Zi), withXi,Yi,Zidefine theith point location in a Cartesian coordinate system. The scheme is explicitly defined as follows(1)F(x)=∑i=1nφ(xi)fiwhere the normalized interpolation functionψ(x)can be formulated as(2)φi(x)=Di(x)∑j=1nDj(x)(3)Di(x)=1disi2(x)(4)disi(x)=|x−xi|2withi=1,…,nanddisidenotes the Euclidean distance between the pointsxandxi. Obviously, the interpolation functionφipossesses three basic properties: the non-negative and range-bounded properties(0≤φi(x)≤1), and a normality (unity) property(∑i=1nφi(x)=1). The normality condition is used to ensure consistency of the discrete form of the approximation  [24]. In the Shepard function, the weight functionDi(x)can take many formations provided that they satisfy the above-mentioned three basic conditions. This provides flexibility in selecting a number of different weighting functions to deal with different approximants. Besides the widely used inverse distance weighting function, the exponential, cubic spline, quartic spline functions, and CSRBF can also be utilized as the weight function.It is easy to implement such kind of interpolation scheme in both two dimensional and three dimensional spaces straightforward.(5)mini{fi}≤F(x)≤maxi{fi}.It is worthwhile to note that the interpolation values at any points have upper bound and lower bound between minimum and maximum values of the sampling dataset. This characteristic is crucial for using the material density interpolation in topology optimization. That means the relative density is a[0,1]bounded quantity and any value not falling within this range is physically meaningless.The compactly supported radial basis function (CSRBF), as one of the most popular radial symmetrically functions, can canter at a particular point with compact support. It can be used to any dimensions independent of the geometry of the knots better than conventional polynomial interpolation or the piecewise polynomials. The CSRBF has been applied to the topology optimization of structures  [25,26]. This research will take advantage of Wendland’s CSRBF  [25,31] to interpolate shape function in meshless approximation as follows(6)Φ=(1−r(x,y))6(35r(x,y)2+18r(x,y)+3).In this study, the CSRBF weight function with high order continuity is used, and the first-order derivatives of the weight function, which are continuous over the entire domain, can be easily obtained via the chain rule of differentiation. It is easy to deduce the first order derivatives ofΦas follows(7)∂Φ∂x=∂Φ∂r∂r∂x=(1−r(x,y))5(−280r(x,y)2−56r(x,y))∂r∂x∂Φ∂x=∂Φ∂r∂r∂y=(1−r(x,y))5(−280r(x,y)2−56r(x,y))∂r∂ywhereris the support radius in2−DEuclidean space, whose formulation is(8)r=DdisDsize=(x−xi)2+(y−yi)2Dsizeand the derivatives ofrare expressed as(9)∂r∂xi=1Dsize(x−xi)(x−xi)2+(y−yi)2∂r∂yi=1Dsize(y−yi)(x−xi)2+(y−yi)2whereDdisis the distance function, and it can be measured as the distance of the current sample knot(x,y)to knot(xi,yi).Dsizeis the compact support size, and it can be used to search for sufficient knots located in the neighborhood of the current knot. The criterion of choosing a proper compact support size for CSRBF is to make a trade-off between nonsingularity of the interpolation and a modest computational cost.Considering the CSRBF, the interpolation functionuh(x)=u(x)can be approximated by centrally positioning these CSRBFs at their prespecified knots over the design domain as(10)uh(x)=ΦT(x)α(x)=∑i=1nϕi(x)αi(x)wherei=1,…,nand the vector function CSRBF is yielded as(11)Φ(x)=[ϕ1(x),ϕ2(x),…,ϕn(x)]T∈ℜnandα(x)is a vector containing the expansion coefficients serving as the design variables(12)α(x)=[α1(x),α2(x),…,αn(x)]T∈ℜn.Thus, the coefficientαcan be defined as(13)α=A−1uwhereu=[u1,u2,…,un]T. According to CSRBF, the matrixAcan be defined as(14)A=[ΦT(x1)ΦT(x2)⋯ΦT(xn)]=[ϕ1(x1)ϕ2(x1)⋯ϕn(x1)ϕ1(x2)ϕ2(x2)⋯ϕn(x2)⋯⋯⋯⋯ϕ1(xn)ϕ2(xn)⋯ϕn(xn)].In terms of Eqs. (10) and (13), the CSRBF approximations can be defined as(15)uh(x)=ΦT(x)(A−1u)=N(x)u.As a result, the meshless shape function is defined as(16)N(x)=ΦTA−1.In this study, the spatial derivatives of the shape function in2−Dproblems can be defined as(17)∂N∂xi=∂ΦT∂xA−1=[∂ϕ1∂xi,…,∂ϕn∂xi]A−1∂N∂yi=∂ΦT∂yA−1=[∂ϕ1∂yi,…,∂ϕn∂yi]A−1with(18)∂ϕ∂xi=∂ϕ∂r∂r∂xi∂ϕ∂yi=∂ϕ∂r∂r∂yi.In the special meshless approximation, each node is associated with a weight function of compact support. And it is used to generate a set of sparse discrete equations. And the corresponding values are required to be nonzero only inside the domain of influence of nodei. As a prerequisite, it is easy to generate higher continuous approximations from lower order polynomial basis. Desirable continuity of the approximation inherits from its weight function of high continuity.In meshless method, the approximation is built from nodes only. And it is applied to eliminate part of the difficulties associated with reliance on a mesh to construct the approximation. The major advantages of meshless method are expressed as follows: (i) in meshless method, possessing non-local interpolation character, (ii) theh-adaptivity is simpler to incorporate that in mesh-based method, (iii) characteristics of no mesh alignment sensitivity, (iv) the moving discontinuous problems, such as crack propagation, shear bands and phase transformation, can be treated conveniently, (v) large deformation can be dealt with more robustly and (vi) it is easy to create higher-order continuous shape functions. In recent years, numerous different meshless methods have been developed and achieved significant progress. Especially, the EFG  [27] method has been successfully applied to large variety of mechanics problems because of its good numerical accuracy and stability.A linear elastic2−Dstructure is considered for the sake of simplicity in this paper. LetΩandΓbe the design domain and the design boundary, respectively. The governing equation is defined as(19)σij,j+pi=0inΩσijnj−τi¯=0onΓτui=ui¯onΓuwherepiis the body force,σijis the stress tensor,τiandτi¯denote the boundary traction vector and prescribed boundary traction on the Neumann boundaryΓτ, respectively.ui¯is the prescribed displacement on the admissible Dirichlet boundaryΓu, andnjis the component of the unit normal vector toΩ.The variational form equilibrium equation is given as(20)∫Ωδui(σij,j+pi)dΩ−∫Γτ(σijnj−τi¯)dΓ=0where the test function is defined as variational termδu(x)∈H1of the displacement field,u(x)∈H1is the trial function. To get the discrete equations, the weak form corresponding to the equilibrium equation can be further explicitly expressed as(21)∫Ω(−δεijσij+δuipi)dΩ−∫Γτ(δuiτi¯)dΓ=0.The prescribed density of CSRBF knots can be scattered in the design domain with appropriately sized compact supports. Then, the CSRBF can be applied to span a space with desirable completeness. Considering the shape functionN(x)incorporating intoδu, anduyields the approximations as follows(22)uh(x)=N(x)uIδuh(x)=N(x)δuIwhereuIT=[u1,u2,…,un]is the vector of nodal values (i.e. displacement),I=1,…,nis the number of nodes in the design domain.In accordance with the trial functions and test functions, the discrete equations can be defined as a system of linear algebraic equations in matrix form based on the constitutive relationshipσij=Dijklεkl(23)KU=Fwhere(24)K=∫ΩBTDBdΩF=∫ΩNTpdΩ+∫ΓτNTτ¯dΓB=[B1,B2,…,Bn]Bi=[Ni,x00Ni,yNi,yNi,x]i=1,2,…,n.Here, the practical material property, at field nodes, is denoted by using the material elasticity matrixD.Bis the geometric displacement–strain matrix,Kis the system stiffness matrix. It is worth noticing that the meshless shape function satisfies the Kronecker delta criteriaNI(xJ)=δIJ. According to the above derivation, it is easy to obtain the Kronecker delta property. For more details about the meshless method, please refer to  [24]. It means that the essential boundary conditions can be enforced straightforward without extra techniques, compared with the MLS shape functions. This is one of the most prominent characteristics of the present interpolation method.In this section, we focus on a nodal density-based approximation scheme via the Shepard function, based on the concept of elemental BESO model. BESO is attractive to designers because of its implementation ease, conceptual simplicity and computational efficiency. And so far, there is no publicly reported research focusing on this field. As a result, the main motivation of this study is to propose new meshless density variable approximations and BESO method for topology optimization of continuum structures. The fundamental requirement for the BESO-based topology optimization is that density variables are non-negative and range-bounded. The present BESO model is instructed as a dual-level approximant by using the Shepard function method. Then the scheme is employed to represent the density-stiffness dependency between nodal densities and material properties in terms of a set of nodes. First, the Shepard function method is applied as a nonlocal approximant of nodal densities with enhanced smoothness. And then, the Shepard function is applied to interpolate the point-wise densities of computational points inside the design domain.It is easy to see that the Shepard functionφi(x)possesses the non-negative, range-bounded properties, and a normality (unity) property. Originally, the Shepard function is defined as a global interpolation. In this study, the density is approximated at any node in terms of the nodal density variables within a compactly supported influence domain and used to improve the computational efficiency while keeping reasonable approximation accuracy.(25)ρ(x)=∑i=1Neφi(xi)ρi=∑i=1Ne(ϕi(xi)∑j−1Neϕj(xi)ρi).Here, within the influence domain of the nodexi, any nodal density variableρ(x)can be yielded by searching the total number of ambient nodal variablesρi.ρ(x)is the density at the concerned node.Neis the number of nodal design variables inside the influence domain of the weight function. The nodal density approximant satisfies the properties of non-negative and range-bounded. The derivatives ofρ(x)with respect toρisatisfy∂ρ(x)/∂ρi≥0. It is crucial to ensure the monotonic behaviors and apply the type of gradient-based algorithms. In this way, the Shepard method can ensure a physically meaningful interpolation scheme to create a point-wise density field for the numerical implementation of topology optimization of continuum structures.Initially, the solid element is completely removed from the design domain could result in theoretical difficulties in the BESO topology optimization method. It appears to be rather irrational. Therefore, a sequential element rejection and admission (SERA) method is incorporated into the BESO method with the Shepard method. The void material is replaced by a soft material with a very low density. So the above density approximant is included in the problem formulation naturally. It is rather than in the post-processing procedure and is used as a heuristic filtering scheme to enhance the smoothness of nodal densities. It is noted that the problem formulation may be functionally similar to the filtering or projection methods. With the density field approximant, the material interpolation scheme at the nodexican be expressed by(26)E(xi)=ρp(xi)E0=(∑i=1NeΦi(xi)ρi)pE0whereE0denotes Young’s modulus for solid material.In numerical implementation procedure, a regular background mesh is used only for numerical simplicity. It should be noted that the meshless Galerkin method is not limited to a uniform grid of nodes. In the regular background cell structure for Gauss quadrature, each cell has 4×4=16 quadrature (computational) points and used to ensure the accuracy of the numerical integration, as well as a more detailed geometric description. In the following section, the system matrix can be derived in two steps as shown in Fig. 1. The first step is to loop over all the cells of the background mesh based on field nodes, and the second step is to evaluate all the Gauss quadrature points inside each cell as shown in Fig. 2.For the aforementioned, the point-wise densityρ(γii,χjj)at any computational Gauss point can be calculated based on nodal density field, has already been yielded with the enhanced smoothness in the first step, as follows(27)ρ(γii,χjj)=∑I=1neφI(γii,χjj)ρ(xI)whereI=1,…,neis the total nodal density variable quantity located inside the local influence domain of the computational point,ρ(xI)is the reevaluated nodal densities within the influential domain. Based on these, the two-step procedure density approximant is finally defined as(28)ρ(γii,χjj)=∑I=1ne{φI(γii,χjj)(∑J=1NeΦ(xJ)ρJ)}.Especially, the system stiffness matrix, with 4×4 Gauss quadrature, can be further defined by(29)K=∑ii=14∑jj=14{BT(γii,χjj)(ρp(γii,χjj)D0)B(γii,χjj)|J(γii,χjj)|ωiiωjj}.Finally, the system stiffness matrix, based on the two-step procedure, can be defined as(30)K=∑ii=14∑jj=14{BT(N(γii,χjj))[(∑I=1neφI(γii,χjj)(∑J=1NeΦJ(γii,χjj)ρJ))pD0×B(N(γii,χjj))|J(γii,χjj)|ωiiωjj]}whereφiandφjrefer to the Shepard functions at the two steps, respectively.D0is the elasticity matrix of the full solid material property at Gauss quadrature points,Jis the Jacobin determinant,ωis the weighting factor.Bis the strain–displacement matrix, which is the function of meshless shape functionN. It should be noted that the same support sizes do not mean the same numbers of field nodes involved in the supportsNeandne. Once the stiffness matrix of the structure is obtained, the nodal displacement vector over the design domain can be obtained straightforwardly.In this study, suppose thatNedesign variable pointsρe(e=1,…,Ne)are considered in the design domain, the optimization problem can be clearly defined as follows(31)Minimize:C=12uTKuSubjectto:V0−∑e=1NeVeρe=0ρe=ρminor1.It is worth noting thatC=12uTKuis the mean compliance rather than the compliance,C=uTKuused in the current ESO (BESO) method.uis the displacement field.V0is the prescribed volume. In this research,ρmin=0.001is used as the minimal value for the nodal density variables to avoid numerical difficulties associated singularity of the stiffness matrix.Considering design variables far exceeds that of structural performance functions, the adjoint sensitivity method (ASM) is appropriate to the design sensitivity analysis of the proposed topology optimization problem. In terms of the following adjoint equation, adjoint variable vectorλcan be obtained as(32)(Kλ)T=∂C(u(x))∂u.Lettingxis the design variable, the design sensitivity is defined as(33)dC(u(x))dxi=∂C(u(x))∂u∂u∂xi=λT(12K(x)∂u(x)∂xi).Differentiating both sides of the equilibrium equation with respect to the design variablesx, we can yield the following equation as(34)K(x)∂u(x)∂xi+∂K(x)∂xiu(x)=0wherei=1,…,Ne. Substituting Eq. (34) into Eq. (32) can get the sensitivity expression as(35)dC(u(x))dxi=λ(−12∂K(x)∂xiu(x))the nodal density variablesρeare defined as design variables in the proposed method. Therefore, the design sensitivity of the objective function with respect to the design variables can be obtained as(36)∂C(ρe)dρe=−12uT∂K∂ρeuwhere(37)∂K∂ρe=∑ii=14∑jj=14{BT(γii,χjj)p(ρp−1(γii,χjj)D0)B(γii,χjj)|J(γii,χjj)|ωiiωjj}.After getting the design sensitivities, any efficient gradient-based optimization algorithms can be used to optimize the design problems, such as the BESO method.Because of using discrete design variables in the BESO method in this study, it should be noted that only two bound materials are allowed in the design. Therefore, the relative sensitivities for both solid and soft materials can be expressed as(38)αe={12uT∂K∂ρeuρe=10ρe=ρminwhereαeis named as the sensitivity number for theeth nodal density variables. This equation indicates that the sensitivity values of solid materials and soft materials are different. The values are equal to the strain energy and zero, respectively. On the basis of the above material interpolation approach, Young’s modulus of soft materials becomes zero aspreaching infinity. Due to the above reasons, the soft materials are equivalent to be completely removed from the design domain.Considering the computing of the sensitivity numbers based on the different status of elements (1 orρmin), the BESO algorithm is hard to convergence. It attributes to the inaccurate assessment of sensitivity numbers especially for adding materials (originally void) which are not involved in the finite element analysis. Therefore, averaging the sensitivity number with its historical information is an effective technique and is applied to overcome the drawback. It can be defined as(39)ᾱe=12(ᾱe,j+ᾱe,j−1)wherejis the iteration number. Then letᾱe,j=ᾱj, thus the modified sensitivity number considers the sensitivity information in the previous iterations.The nodal strain energy densities of all nodal variables should be equal in the BESO method. This notes that the nodal variables with lower strain energy density should haveρedecreased. On the opposite side, the nodal variables with higher strain energy density should haveρeincreased. Hence, the optimality criteria can be defined as: nodal strain energy densities of solid materials are always higher than those of soft materials. Therefore, the update scheme can be described as that the nodal design variablesρeby transforming fromρminto 1 for materials with highest sensitivity numbers, and, on the contrary, from 1 toρminfor materials with lowest sensitivity numbers. During the optimization progress, the threshold of sensitivity number can be easily determined by the target volume for the next iteration and relative ranking of sensitivity numbers. A flowchart of the proposed BESO method is displayed in Fig. 3.In this section, two typical examples are used in the area of topology optimization for structural mean compliance and applied to demonstrate the feasibility and potentials of the presented approach in this paper. For the sake of numerical simplicity, an artificial material model is adopted in all examples. The material properties are defined as: Young’s moduli areE0=1andE=0.001for full-solid region and weak material to fill the void area, respectively. Poisson’s ratio isnu=0.3for all materials inside the design domain. The penalty factor isp=3for the dual levels. In the initial design, a set of uniform density variables(ρ=1)are defined and distributed over the scattered meshless nodes. During topology optimization procedure, it could flexible define the units for the artificial material model, but all the units remain unchanged during the design. The Shepard function is incorporated into the mathematical formulation of the topology optimization problem naturally, and no filtering schemes are included to compress numerical instabilities. The regular background cell structure is used to integrate the Galerkin weak form. In each cell, 4×4 Gauss quadrature is used to evaluate the stiffness matrix of the Galerkin global weak form, and the influence domain is three times the size of virtual cell.To demonstrate the proposed method, a well-known L-beam design problem is considered in the first example. The geometrical dimension of the design domain with a length and width ratio ofL:His equal to 1:1, as shown in Fig. 4. The left side of the domain is fixed as the Dirichlet boundary. The upper side is treated as a nonhomogeneous Neumann boundary. A downward force(F=1)applied in the middle of the upper border. The objective function is to minimize the mean compliance, and the constraint is to limit the maximum material usage less than 50%. The numerical cases are discretized with 81×81 nodes. The evolutionary ratio is set to beER=2%.After 43 iterative steps, the final topology optimization result is yielded. The structural mean compliance isC=36.3630. Fig. 5shows the corresponding plots of the topologies at different design stages (e.g.v=initial, 0.9, 0.8, 0.7, 0.6 and final). The initial guess does not need to be assumed with extra holes at suitable locations as shown in Fig. 4. It can easily implement the derivative algorithm without extra complex auxiliary techniques. However, predicting appropriate location of holes for a new design problem is a difficult task. Fig. 5(b)–(e) show the plots at different iteration stages. There are distinct topology contours with smooth design boundaries of solid or void interfaces. Fig. 5(f) displays the ultimate result. The final design outcome is similar to that of the well known method in relative literature.The convergent curves corresponding to the mean compliance and volume fraction are given in Fig. 6. It clearly shows that the mean compliance increases initially, with occasionally abrupt jumps (due to breaking up of some bars), as the total volume fraction gradually decreases. Then, it is convergent to an almost constant value after 34 iterations the objective volume is achieved. The final structure is convergent to a stable topology after 43 iterations.In order to show numerical instabilities of the proposed method, additional three different field node distribution refinements are displayed in Fig. 7(a)–(c). The different field node distributions are discretized with 61×61 nodes, 81×81 nodes and 101×101 nodes, respectively. To some extent, this is a heuristic filtering scheme, the Shepard function is incorporated into the BESO method, and is used to enhance the smoothness of nodal densities rather than in the post-processing procedure. The results perform that the same topological designs can be obtained with respect to different node refinements. It indicates that the proposed method is mesh-independent. No islanding phenomenon occurred in the resulting designs. Boundaries related to different designs are sufficiently smooth to provide clear and distinct material interface, which will benefit the subsequent manufacturing stage.In order to verify the developed meshless density variable BESO method, the above problem using the same material properties is resolved by the SIMP method with penalty factorp=3, 80×80 meshes and filter radiusrmin=2. Fig. 7(d) displays the final topology. It is easy to see that the layout is similar to the above BESO topology in Fig. 7(a)–(c) except that there are “grey” phenomena which denote intermediate density material. The mean compliance is 37.8406. It is higher than the BESO topology. This difference may be attributed to the over-estimated strain energy of the intermediate density elements in the SIMP topology.A MBB case shown in Fig. 8is selected as a test example because it involves a series of bars broken during the evolution process of the BESO topology optimization. The beam length and width size ratio isL:H=6:1. A vertical force(F=1)is applied at the center point of the lower side. The bottom right corner is supported as a roller and the bottom left corner is a fixed support. The allowed material usage is limited to 50% and the objective function is to minimize the mean compliance. The design domain is discretized with 181×31 field nodes and evolutionary ratio ofER=2%is used to implement the example, respectively.After 51 iterations, the optimal solution is obtained and the corresponding structural mean compliance isC=47.1536. The different design stages (e.g.v=initial, 0.9, 0.8, 0.7, 0.6 and final) of the corresponding distributions are determined and displayed in Fig. 9. Fig. 9(a) shows the initial layout distribution, with uniform density variables(ρ=1), for the whole design domain. In Fig. 9(b)–(e), the corresponding optimization procedure is shown one after another. The eventual optimal result is displayed in Fig. 9(f). No different of distribution can be found between in the proposed method and in the traditional methods. It can be seen that the density fields contain only two conditions in the BESO method, namelyρ=1.0for the solid material andρ=0.001for the weak material. Naturally, the intermediate densities phenomenon can be avoided absolutely. The designs are demonstrated with smooth and distinct interface.Evolution histories of the mean compliance and the volume fraction are shown in Fig. 10. It notes that the first 36 iterations are used to suppress the volume back to satisfy the constraint. The mean compliance increases and the volume fraction decreases simultaneously. Because of breaking up of some bars, the history of mean compliance appears abrupt jump phenomenon occasionally. Then the subsequent iterations are consumed for further shape variations. And it is used to gradually modify the distribution of the material inside the design domain until the optimal criteria are satisfied. The overall iterative history can be classified into two partitions. The first part is used to yield a coarse topology layout of the material distribution, and the second part is applied to modify the specified structural performance around local regions.In Fig. 11(a)–(c), three different field node distributions are discretized with 121×21 nodes, 181×31 nodes and 241×41 nodes, respectively. From the aforementioned optimal results, it can be discovered that all the numerical cases can lead to similar topologies. The results also show that a finer discretization may generate a precise structure, but more consumption is required for convergence. It is obvious that a finer discretization with field nodes is more capable of capturing the details of the structure, in particular for local regions with complex shapes and topologies.As a verification of the structural optimization algorithm developed here, the above problem, with penalty factorp=3, 180×30 meshes and filter radiusrmin=2, is reconsidered by the SIMP method. Fig. 11(d) displays the final topology with the same material properties. The final result is similar to the above BESO topology in Fig. 11(a)–(c) except that there are “grey” phenomena which denote intermediate density material. The mean compliance is 50.1154, which is higher than the BESO topology. This difference may be attributed to the over-estimated strain energy of the intermediate density elements in the SIMP topology.In this study, islanding phenomenon is prevented in final optimal results. Topology designs are similar to the widely reported results in relative literature. It can be concluded that the proposed method can effectively eliminate numerical instabilities in topology optimization of continuum structures.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This study proposes an improved meshless BESO method for topology optimization of continuum structures. In this method, the Shepard function is not only employed to interpolate a point-wise density field, but also applied to create a nodal density field approximant with enhanced continuity. In order to enforce the essential boundary conditions, the CSRBF is used to construct the shape function of the meshless Galerkin method. Numerical examples show that the present method can effectively suppress the traditional numerical instabilities, such as checkerboards, mesh dependence, local minima and islanding phenomena.