@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An investigation of molecular dynamics simulation and molecular docking: Interaction of citrus flavonoids and bovine β-lactoglobulin in focus

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The interaction of citrus flavonoids and BLG was studied computationally.Flavonoids bind in the calyx of BLG by hydrophobic, H-bond and π–π interactions.There was not any conformational change as for BLG–flavonoid complexes.The ligand binding site remains rigid during the simulation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Citrus flavonoids,Bovine β-lactoglobulin,Binding affinity,Molecular docking,Molecular dynamics simulation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Citrus flavonoids are natural compounds with important health benefits. The study of their interaction with a transport protein, such as bovine β-lactoglobulin (BLG), at the atomic level could be a valuable factor to control their transport to biological sites. In the present study, molecular docking and molecular dynamics simulation methods were used to investigate the interaction of hesperetin, naringenin, nobiletin and tangeretin as citrus flavonoids and BLG as transport protein. The molecular docking results revealed that these flavonoids bind in the internal cavity of BLG and the BLG affinity for binding the flavonoids follows naringenin>hesperetin>tangeretin>nobiletin. The docking results also indicated that the BLG–flavonoid complexes are stabilized through hydrophobic interactions, hydrogen bond interactions and π–π stacking interactions. The analysis of molecular dynamics (MD) simulation trajectories showed that the root mean square deviation (RMSD) of various systems reaches equilibrium and fluctuates around the mean value at various times. Time evolution of the radius of gyration, total solvent accessible surface of the protein and the second structure of protein showed as well that BLG and BLG–flavonoid complexes were stable around 2500ps, and there was not any conformational change as for BLG–flavonoid complexes. Further, the profiles of atomic fluctuations indicated the rigidity of the ligand binding site during the simulation.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Citrus fruits have a determining role in human health. Due to the delicious flavors and healthy benefits of these fruits, they play a major role in human diet. Their flavonoids are actually among the main components of these fruits. Flavonoids have the same skeleton but have different classifications that are generated upon the modifications of the nucleus of these compounds. Flavonoids display antioxidant [1,2] and anti-carcinogenic activity [3–5]. They are mainly detected in human serum and urine. It is thus clear that the study of bioactivity of flavonoids is essential to achieve a full biological significance. Below is a description of citrus flavonoid:Naringenin (Fig. 1a) is the predominant flavonoid in grapefruit. Its antioxidant activity on angiotensin II-treated VSMCs and its role in cell growth have been investigated previously [6,7].Hesperetin (Fig. 1b) is another citrus flavonoid specifically found in peel. It has a protective role against lead-induced damage in rats and cardiac remodeling induced by pressure overload [8,9].Nobiletin (Fig. 1c), isolated from citrus peels, like in tangerine. Nobiletin has anti-inflammatory effects and inhibits cartilage degradation [10,11].Tangeretin (Fig. 1d) is found in tangerine and other citrus peels, inhibits agonist-induced integrin, αIIbβ3 inside-out and outside-in signaling, intracellular calcium mobilization, and granule secretion [12]. The results of Chong et al. suggest that tangeretin can be appropriate for chemosensitization of cancerous cells which lack the ability of DSB-repair [13].The delivery of flavonoids and their metabolites are poorly understood. The interaction of these flavonoids and a transport protein such as bovine β-lactoglobulin (BLG) could be a valuable factor to control their transport to biological sites.Lipocalins are small proteins with the ability to bind and transfer small hydrophobic ligands [14,15]. The core structure of these proteins consists of an eight stranded antiparallel β-barrel that defines an internal cavity for binding the ligands. Bovine β-lactoglobulin (BLG) is the major whey protein, with several genetic variants [16,17]. It consists of 162 amino acids with about 18.4kDa of molecular weight [18]. The high affinity of BLG to hydrophobic ligands such as steroids, fatty acids, retinoids, vitamin D, and cholesterol, has been verified [19–21].Unfortunately, the clinical application of flavonoids is limited due to their poor water solubility and low bioavailability caused by their hydrophobic ring structure. Besides, an important physicochemical property of BLG is its ability to bind in-vitro several physiologically relevant ligands. Therefore, BLG can serve as a potential transport and depot protein, especially for poor water-soluble molecules. Bohin et al. [22] have confirmed the efficacy of milk proteins as carriers for flavonoids. Also, finding novel bioactive ligand molecules of BLG is of biotechnological and pharmacological importance. This contributes to deeper understanding of molecular recognition properties of this lipocalin. However, BLG exhibits significant resistance against both gastric and simulated duodenal digestions. Therefore, it seems a proper nominee for the safe delivery and protection of pH sensitive drugs in stomach. Moreover, the high stability of BLG at acidic condition guarantee the low delivery of hydrophobic ligands in acidic condition of stomach.We have previously studied the interaction of three polyphenol flavonoids (quercetin, quercitrin and rutin) and BLG [23]. In the present study, however, we examined the interaction and protein conformation of BLG with hesperetin, naringenin, tangeretin and nobiletin, using molecular docking and molecular dynamics simulation studies. Finding new biologically active ligands to bind BLG is very important, and not only can contribute to the better understanding of the molecular properties of this protein, but also might pave the way for future studies about the transport of drugs to biological sites.All of the docked conformations of flavonoid–BLG complexes were generated through using ArgusLab 4.0.1 molecular docking program [24]. Comparison of the results of ArgusLab and Genetic Optimization for Ligand Docking (GOLD) showed a little difference in their docking accuracies [24–26]. Also, the accuracy of ArgusLab was checked by redocking the dodecyl sulfate to BLG. After docking the dodecyl sulfate back into BLG, the RMSD value between docked dodecyl sulfate and reference dodecyl sulfate was 2.4Å and the interactions between docked dodecyl sulfate and BLG were similar to those of original modes, suggesting that ArgusLab is suitable for docking of ligands to BLG.The known crystal structure of BLG (PDB ID: 3NPO) was taken from the RSCB protein data bank (www.rcsb.org) and was prepared in pH=7.5. The R-value of this file was 0.216, a sufficient capacity for further studies. The water molecules in the used pdb file are not structural; thus, the ArgusLab suite was used to remove them. Actually, Becke three-parameter Lee–Yang–Parr (B3LYP) hybrid density functional theory with the basis set of 6–31g** was employed to optimize the flavonoids structures, using the GAMESS quantum chemistry software (USA) [27]. The blind docking approach was used and the whole protein was taken as a potential binding site. Also, Ascore scoring method in ArgusLab using high precision, 0.4Å grid resolution, and maximum 200 candidate poses were employed for docking calculations. During all docking process, the structure of BLG kept rigid and all the torsional bonds of ligands were set free (flexible docking). Ascore scoring function ranked the docked conformations on the basis of their free binding energy. The lowest free binding energy conformation of each flavonoid–BLG complex was left for further studies.The lowest free binding energy conformation of each complex was considered as the initial conformation for the MD studies. All MD studies were carried out using GROMACS 4.5.5 (University of Groningen, Netherlands) package [28,29] and GROMOS96 43a1 force field [30,31]. The Dundee PRODRG2.5 server was used to generate the topology parameters of flavonoid [32]. The partial atomic charges of flavonoids were calculated using GAMESS quantum chemistry software (USA) [27] at the level of HF/6–31g**. The complex was located in the cubic box with the periodic boundary conditions. The box volume was 294.14nm3 (6.6504×6.6504×6.6504nm3) and the minimum distance between protein surface and the box was 1.0nm. The box filled with extended simple point charge (SPC), water molecules [33], and the solvated systems were neutralized by adding 8 sodium ions (Na+). Energy minimization was done through using the steepest descent method for 8ps. Then, the system was equilibrated for 40ps at the temperature of 300K. Finally, a 10ns MD simulation was carried out at 1bar and 300K. Berendsen thermostat [34] at 300K, the particle mesh Ewald (PME) method [35,36] for long range electrostatics, and a 7Å cut off for van der Walls interactions and Coulomb interactions were used. The equation of motions was integrated by the leap-frog algorithm with the 2fs time step. The atomic coordinates were recorded to the trajectory file every 0.5ps for later analysis. Finally, an all-bond constrain was used to keep the ligand from drifting in MD.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
