@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A comparative analysis of DBSCAN, K-means, and quadratic variation algorithms for automatic identification of swallows from swallowing accelerometry signals

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Three swallowing segmentation algorithms were compared.The new DBSCAN algorithm can be used to segment swallowing vibrations.The DBSCAN algorithm is outright superior to the k-means algorithm.The DBSCAN algorithm has similar sensitivity to the quadratic variation algorithm.The DBSCAN algorithm is the fastest and most easily applied to general data.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cervical auscultation,Swallowing accelerometry,Novelty detection,Dysphagia,Segmentation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Background: Cervical auscultation with high resolution sensors is currently under consideration as a method of automatically screening for specific swallowing abnormalities. To be clinically useful without human involvement, any devices based on cervical auscultation should be able to detect specified swallowing events in an automatic manner.Methods: In this paper, we comparatively analyze the density-based spatial clustering of applications with noise algorithm (DBSCAN), a k-means based algorithm, and an algorithm based on quadratic variation as methods of differentiating periods of swallowing activity from periods of time without swallows. These algorithms utilized swallowing vibration data exclusively and compared the results to a gold standard measure of swallowing duration. Data was collected from 23 subjects that were actively suffering from swallowing difficulties.Results: Comparing the performance of the DBSCAN algorithm with a proven segmentation algorithm that utilizes k-means clustering demonstrated that the DBSCAN algorithm had a higher sensitivity and correctly segmented more swallows. Comparing its performance with a threshold-based algorithm that utilized the quadratic variation of the signal showed that the DBSCAN algorithm offered no direct increase in performance. However, it offered several other benefits including a faster run time and more consistent performance between patients. All algorithms showed noticeable differentiation from the endpoints provided by a videofluoroscopy examination as well as reduced sensitivity.Conclusions: In summary, we showed that the DBSCAN algorithm is a viable method for detecting the occurrence of a swallowing event using cervical auscultation signals, but significant work must be done to improve its performance before it can be implemented in an unsupervised manner.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Dysphagia is a general term that is used to refer to a number of swallowing disorders and impairments [1]. Often a co-morbid disorder alongside neurological impairments, stroke in particular, it is estimated that well over 500,000 Americans are affected by dysphagia every year [1–3]. There are several different methods used to identify the physiologic characteristics of swallowing disorders, but the most widely utilized gold standard diagnostic imaging examination is the videofluoroscopic swallow study (VFSS) [1,4]. For this test, a patient is asked to swallow various foods and liquids that contain a radiopaque contrast agent while observed by a trained examiner [5,6]. This examiner analyzes the kinematic x-ray data for biomechanical errors and subsequent misdirection of swallowed material [5,6]. The examiner, typically a specially trained Speech Language Pathologist, can determine whether or not the patient exhibits pathologically abnormal swallowing, can identify the likely cause and nature of those problems, and can assess the efficacy of interventions designed to mitigate the physiologic abnormalities observed [6]. Their judgment is based on the pattern of bolus propulsion, timing of the opening and closure of various valves in the oropharyngeal mechanism, and the range and speed of motion of the anatomical structures of the throat [6–8]. These dynamics are all generators of the flow of the bolus through the oropharyngeal structures and into the digestive system [6–8]. While this test is widely used and is considered the gold standard for the assessment of swallowing function, it is reliant on using a small amount of potentially harmful ionizing radiation, requires that the patient be able to actively participate during the exam, and assumes that the patient can travel to the location of the x-ray instrumentation. These requirements all serve as potential obstacles to implementing proper healthcare in a timely manner, especially in settings in which videofluoroscopy is unavailable [6,9–15]. However, screening to accurately predict which patients need a full diagnostic imaging evaluation remains a relatively crude and somewhat subjective process [16]. As a result, improved and more accurate methods of screening for dysphagia are widely sought-after [17].While several non-instrumented screening procedures have been adopted in medical centers worldwide, efforts to develop improved dysphagia screening methods with both high sensitivity and specificity are currently in development. One such instrumented method, cervical auscultation augmented with accelerometry, aims to provide vibratory data reflecting specific kinematic events within the oropharyngeal mechanism [18,19]. For traditional cervical auscultation for dysphagia screening, a device that can record sounds is placed on the patient׳s throat while they swallow [20,21]. An examiner then listens to these sounds and makes subjective inferences about the patient׳s swallowing function [20,21]. In the past this has typically involved the use of a stethoscope, with the examiner subjectively attempting to judge the flow of swallowed material and biomechanical performance of the throat by listening to the generated sounds. Unfortunately, the ability of a clinician to identify discrete impairments and make an accurate assessment from this raw information has been shown to have very poor inter-judge agreement and validity [20–22]. An alternative method that has been investigated involves using an accelerometer to record the data and then analyzing the data digitally. The ability to precisely filter the data and calculate specific signal features, including those that the human auditory system cannot detect or analyze from the perceived acoustic signal alone, could potentially provide a more accurate and reliable assessment when compared to the bedside stethoscope method [23]. By removing this subjective component from cervical auscultation based screening it could be possible to produce a viable automated screening tool for dysphagia that will more accurately identify patients who are at elevated risk for adverse events and should undergo testing such as VFSS.If an automatic swallowing screening tool is to be developed, one important issue that must be addressed is the ability to automatically identify the beginning and end of a swallow in the acoustic/vibratory data stream using only the cervical auscultation data itself. Swallowing vibrations are highly variable since they are produced by a physiological process that is subject to many different, uncontrollable variables. Something relatively minor such as the bolus consistency can change the cervical auscultation signal while a less than perfect connection between the device and the patient׳s skin can introduce fairly high amplitude artifacts [19]. As such, the resulting data set is not always “well behaved” and can be skewed in the feature space or contain a large number of outliers. This is especially true when looking at the data recorded from a single patient, as such signals will contain a relatively small number of data points from a statistical perspective. This can result in a less than ideal grouping of the data and a loss of both accuracy and precision when segmenting.There have been several attempts to segment swallowing vibrations into ‘swallowing’ and ‘non-swallowing’ segments, but results have been mixed as the field is still in its early stages. One method that has received significant attention is the neural network technique. The signal is windowed and then multiple time-varying features are calculated before being fed into the neural network [24–27]. After sufficient training this network should be able to differentiate between periods of time where swallowing activity is present or absent based on the values of the inputs [24–27]. However, it is very computationally intensive and researchers are still debating what features are valid inputs to use for the purposes of segmentation [24–27]. More computationally simple techniques have also been utilized, such as thresholding the time domain signal, but their accuracy has been questionable [28–30,24,31]. With this technique, an amplitude threshold is declared and any part of the signal that lies above that value is considered to be a part of a swallow [28–30,24]. This technique has also been modified slightly to threshold, not the signal itself, but various time-varying features with variable levels of accuracy [28–30,24,31–34]. The quadratic variation algorithm is one notably successful example [35]. Based on the magnitude of the amplitude changes between successive points, the algorithm calculates the volatility and curvature of the time domain signal [35]. Since the presence of a swallow causes a notable increase in signal activity and a subsequent large increase in the value of both of these features, swallows can be located by thresholding both feature values and taking the intersection of the sets [35]. While this method has a high sensitivity, it over-identifies the presences of swallowing events because it is unable to differentiate periods of activity corresponding to swallows and periods of high activity corresponding to coughs or other signal artifacts [35].A third technique which strikes a balance between computation requirements and accuracy and has been used to automatically segment swallowing vibrations successfully is the k-means clustering technique [36,37,18,19]. Like with other techniques, the signal is windowed and several time-varying features are calculated [38]. Unlike other techniques, however, these points are then mapped onto a feature space and grouped into two or more randomly chosen clusters [38]. Through iterative methods the k-means algorithm attempts to group together points with similar feature values by minimizing the distance between the location of a cluster׳s centroid and all of its members [38]. If the chosen features change in value based on whether or not the patient is swallowing, then it is at least theoretically possible to divide swallowing vibration data into swallowing and non-swallowing segments [38,37,36]. However, there are some issues with this clustering technique that can cause problems when segmenting swallowing signals. Its sensitivity to outliers and non-spherically shaped clusters can be problematic when analyzing physiological data, as such a data set is unlikely to be well behaved. This could cause the swallowing signals to be segmented incorrectly or with reduced precision. Furthermore, the non-deterministic nature of the algorithm offers unique challenges if the algorithm is to be implemented without active human oversight.For this project, our goal was to comparatively analyze existing k-means and quadratic variation algorithms along with a new DBSCAN-based algorithm in the context of swallowing vibration signals. Specifically, we sought to investigate the accuracy of each algorithm by evaluating their abilities to correctly detect swallowing segments that were obtained by human analysis of videofluoroscopic imaging data. By using a data set that consists of patients that have been diagnosed with swallowing disorders we hope to better understand how these methods perform in their intended role. We also hope to be able to characterize the benefits and drawbacks inherent to each method. We hypothesized that the DBSCAN algorithm would segment our data more accurately and reliably than other segmentation methods. Its density-based sorting technique is better suited to physiological data than the k-means technique while being more applicable to an unknown data set than the quadratic variation thresholding methodology.The density-based spatial clustering of applications with noise algorithm, usually abbreviated as DBSCAN, is a recently developed alternative method for clustering data sets [39]. Unlike other clustering algorithms that require many parameters, such as the number of clusters in the set, to be known and defined before computation, the DBSCAN algorithm has only two input parameters: the minimum size of a cluster and the maximum distance between points in a cluster [39]. The algorithm operates by cycling through all points in the data set and calculating the number of neighbors each point has, which is defined as the number of other points that are within the minimum distance of the original point [39]. Any data point that has fewer neighbors than the minimum cluster size parameter is declared to be a noise point that is not associated with any cluster [39]. However, a point that has at least as many neighbors as the minimum cluster size is declared to be the start of a new cluster [39]. The neighbors of the starting point are added to this cluster as are the neighbors of those points provided that they meet the minimum cluster size requirements [39]. The cluster continues to grow in this manner until no more points can be added and the algorithm proceeds to search for the start of a new cluster among the unsorted points [39].The DBSCAN algorithm has clear computational similarities to centroid-based clustering techniques such as the k-means clustering method. However, the DBSCAN algorithm utilizes the density of the data points in the feature space to identify clusters rather than the location of the centroids, which provides a few advantages. First, this density-based approach allows for superior identification and separation of clusters that are of different sizes and shapes when compared to centroid-based methods [39,40]. In particular, the DBSCAN algorithm is known for being able to correctly separate convex-shaped data clusters in situations where centroid-based clustering performs very poorly. Second, this algorithm is able to sort data points into a separate ‘noise’ cluster if a given point is too dissimilar to the rest of the data set [39,40]. Rather than forcing every point to belong to a cluster to some degree like other clustering algorithms the DBSCAN algorithm can exclude points from being part of any cluster, which reduces the effects of outliers on its classification performance. Lastly, this algorithm is deterministic [39,40]. Some clustering techniques, such as k-means clustering, randomly select the initial locations of the cluster centroids in the feature space which can cause the algorithm to find a local rather than absolute minimum of its cost function. Since there is no randomness inherent in the DBSCAN algorithm it does not carry a similar risk when implemented in an unsupervised manner.Data was collected by using a tri-axial accelerometer (ADXL 327, Analog Devices, Norwood, Massachusetts). The two main output signals from the accelerometer were bandpass filtered from 0.1 to 3000Hz with ten times amplification by an analog filter (model P55, Grass Technologies, Warwick, Rhode Island) before being sent into a National Instruments 6210 DAQ and recorded in a custom Labview application (National Instruments, Austin, Texas). A sampling rate of 20kHz was used to ensure there would be no aliasing of the signal. Previous studies have shown that this setup is adequate to detect swallowing activity [18,30,19,41]. This data set was also digitally processed by the same custom program in Matlab (Mathworks, Natick, MA) that was used in [18]. The only modification was the addition of the Robust Algorithm for Pitch Tracking (RAPT, [42]), which was used to identify and remove some patient vocalizations from the signal and reduce the number of false positives generated by the sorting algorithms [43]. Images output by the fluoroscopy instrumentation (Ultimax system, Toshiba, Tustin, CA) which was operated concurrently with the accelerometer were input to a video capture card (AccuStream Express HD, Foresight Imaging, Chelmsford, MA) and recorded with a custom LabView program (National Instruments, Austin, Texas).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
