@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Quantitative measurements in capsule endoscopy

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Image processing may shorten video capsule reading and free physicians׳ time.Wireless measurement of esophageal pH detects acid gastro-esophageal reflux.Pressure, pH and temperature are measured by a wireless motility capsule.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Video capsule endoscopy,Automated detection,Scores,Wireless motility capsule,pH,Pressure,Image analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This review summarizes several approaches for quantitative measurement in capsule endoscopy. Video capsule endoscopy (VCE) typically provides wireless imaging of small bowel. Currently, a variety of quantitative measurements are implemented in commercially available hardware/software. The majority is proprietary and hence undisclosed algorithms. Measurement of amount of luminal contamination allows calculating scores from whole VCE studies. Other scores express the severity of small bowel lesions in Crohn׳s disease or the degree of villous atrophy in celiac disease. Image processing with numerous algorithms of textural and color feature extraction is further in the research focuses for automated image analysis. These tools aim to select single images with relevant lesions as blood, ulcers, polyps and tumors or to omit images showing only luminal contamination. Analysis of motility pattern, size measurement and determination of capsule localization are additional topics.Non-visual wireless capsules transmitting data acquired with specific sensors from the gastrointestinal (GI) tract are available for clinical routine. This includes pH measurement in the esophagus for the diagnosis of acid gastro-esophageal reflux. A wireless motility capsule provides GI motility analysis on the basis of pH, pressure, and temperature measurement. Electromagnetically tracking of another motility capsule allows visualization of motility. However, measurement of substances by GI capsules is of great interest but still at an early stage of development.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Video capsule endoscopy (VCE) has revolutionized imaging of the small bowel. Its exponential clinical use, together with that of the device-assisted enteroscopy, advanced sonographic and other imaging techniques, has led to the accumulation of a broad base of evidence.Nowadays, the real black box for the majority of clinicians is the computer software used to generate and present capsule videos by selecting relevant images, deriving information from the original images as well as modifying them. The algorithms described in relevant information technology (IT) publications are hardly understandable by medics. To complicate matters further, the majority of proprietary algorithms remain undisclosed. Moreover, many of these approaches have been developed on the basis of few selected video sequences and proof of robustness is often lacking [1]. Nevertheless, several promising approaches for computer based automated image analysis have been developed based on multiple extraction methods, modifiers, and classifiers allowing quantitative measurements and machine learning [2].VCE has further been transformed from small bowel visualization tool to a panenteric one able to examine esophagus, stomach and colon. Furthermore, non-visual capsules allow measurement of pH, pressure, and temperature. Relevant clinical indications are mainly gastro-esophageal reflux disease and gut motility disorders. Capsules capable of measuring substances in the GI tract are under development.This review summarizes different approaches for quantitative measurements in capsule endoscopy. The first part focuses on quantitative scores derived from entire wireless capsule endoscopy videos. Such scores are aiming to characterize the cleanliness of the bowel lumen, the severity of small bowel inflammation in Crohn׳s disease (CD) and the amount of villous atrophy in celiac disease (CeD).In the second part measurements during processing of capsule endoscopy images are summarized. By abstracting textural and color features from single images, classifiers can be measured and algorithms may help to facilitate cumbersome reading of VCE. Algorithms described aim to omit uninformative obscured images or to select relevant images showing lesions like tumor, polyp, ulcer or blood. Furthermore, size measurement, localization of the capsule with the gastrointestinal (GI) tract and motility studies are discussed.The third part describes non-imaging, wireless capsules with sensors for direct measurements. These capsules include Bravo pH capsule for diagnosis of acid gastro-esophageal reflux, a wireless motility capsule providing combined information of pH, pressure and temperature for diagnosis of gastroparesis, small bowel dysmotility, and delayed colonic transit in constipation, as well as electromagnetic 3 dimensional (3D) capsule tracking system. Approaches for direct measurement of substances in GI tract are finally addressed.Luminal cleanliness remains a prerequisite for reliable diagnosis with VCE; capsules have no rinsing or suction capability as in flexible endoscopy. Documentation of the cleanliness is an important factor for assessment of reliability of a VCE diagnosis. Overall, subjective assessment uses a qualitative four-point scale (excellent, good, poor, fair) or a simplified two-point scale (adequate, inadequate) for standardized description [3]. A quantitative Index (QI), based on investigators׳ visual perception, applies a score for optimal cleanliness with a maximum of 10. Items used are brightness, percentage of visualized mucosa, and presence of bubbles, fluid, and debris. A strong correlation (p<0.001) with a 4- or 2-grades visual scale was found, but no correlation with diagnostic yield [4].Van Weyenberg et al. suggested a method for objective computerized analysis of luminal cleanliness at VCE [5]. The investigators used the color bar of the Rapid software (Medtronic, Dublin, Ireland), displaying mean color of capsule images over time (Fig. 1) by cropping images into a photo editing program. Intensity ratio of red color (thought to represent mucosa) and green color (presumably representing debris) was used to calculate a Computed Assessment of Cleansing (CAC) score. In small bowel segments with adequate cleansing the CAC Score was 6.4 vs. 5.0 in segments with inadequate cleansing (first reader, p<0.001) and 6.3 vs. 4.0 (second reader, p<0.005), respectively. Furthermore, good correlation with the subjective QI was demonstrated [5]. Using the CAC score in colon capsule endoscopy (CCE) was feasible as well. A mean score of 5.9 was calculated for segment with excellent cleanliness and of 2.3 for segments judged as poorly clean, resulting in a good inter class correlation coefficient of 0.715 (p<0.0001) [6].CD is a chronic inflammatory bowel disease often affecting the small bowel. Lesions detectable by VCE are edema, hyperemia, aphthae, ulcers and stenosis. Besides clinical parameters endoscopic scores aim to reproducibly measure disease activity.The simplest way to assess the severity of small bowel inflammation by VCE is to count the number of ulcers in the small bowel. Historically, an arbitrary cut off of three or more ulcers has been used as being suggestive of CD in a compatible clinical setting [7].A Lewis Score (LS) has been developed to provide a common language to quantify small bowel inflammatory changes visualized by VCE. Based on an initial overall endoscopic impression of severity, several factors have been weighted [8]. Presence of ulcers is weighted by number (single: 3; few: 5; multiple: 10). Ulcers and edema are both weighted by extent of affected segments (short: 8; long: 12; whole: 20), circular extent(<14:9;14−12:12;>12:18), distribution (single: 1; patchy: 12; diffuse: 17). Luminal stenosis is weighted by number (single: 14; multiple: 20), ulceration (no: 2; yes: 20), and traversibility (yes: 7; no: 10). The final Lewis Score is the sum of the maximum tertile score plus the stenosis score. Calculation and visual display of the tertiles in the time bar is provided by the Rapid software, based on manual entry of start and end point of the small bowel. The score can be calculated from a toggle bar of the selection menu (Fig. 2).A cut off for normal score has been set at <135. Values between >135 and <790 are suggested to correlate with mild inflammation and >790 with severe disease. These cut-off levels had been derived from overall assessment of severity in the entire video with a ‘significant overlap’ [8]. In 30 patients with suspected or established diagnosis of CD and inflammatory lesions, LS correlated well with fecal calprotectin (FC) concentration (surrogate gold standard marker for mucosal inflammation) at inclusion (p=0.003) and at follow-up VCE after 9 month (p<0.001). C-reactive protein (CRP) correlated only at the initial VCE investigation with the LS (p=0.006), but not at follow-up. Symptoms, assessed by the Harvey–Bradshaw index showed no correlation with the LS [9] (Table 1).Another study found a correlation between LS and FC in the group with low FC levels (<100μg/g), but not in the groups with higher values [10]. Correlation between FC levels and the LS for quantification of VCE findings was not better, if a blue light filter was used instead of white light for LS calculation of the Score [11]. Comparison of systemic (CRP) or intestinal (FC) inflammatory markers showed no significant correlation with degree of inflammation at VCE assessed by the LS in 187 patients with established CD [12]. Furthermore, in another study it was found that in multivariate analysis, the only positive predictor for FC was the higher tertile ulcer subscore (only with descriptors of ulcer size and number) of LS [13].The Capsule Endoscopy Crohn׳s Disease Activity Index (CECDAI or Niv Score) is calculated on the basis of three sub-scores (inflammation, extent and stenosis) and separately assessed for proximal and distal small bowel [14]. The inflammatory subscore (normal: 0; mild to moderate edema/hyperemia/denudation: 1; severe edema/hyperemia/denudation: 2; bleeding, exudate, aphthae, erosion, small ulcer [<0.5cm]: 3; moderate ulcer [0.5–2cm], pseudopolyp: 4; large [>2cm] ulcer: 5). A second subscore with weights for the extent of the lesions (focal: 1; patchy: 2; diffuse: 3) is multiplied with the first subscore. The third subscore (single stenosis: 1; multiple stenoses: 2; capsule retention: 3) is added before the final score is presented. This calculation is done separately for the proximal and the distal small bowel with the sum of both sub-scores forming the complete CECDAI score. In a multicentre validation, inter observer agreement between different study centers was good (kappa 0.66; p< 0.001).Cut off levels of the LS between normal and mild-to-moderate disease (135) severe disease (790) correspond to a CECDAI score of 3.8 and 5.8, respectively [10]. However, there was neither a correlation between this CECDAI and the Inflammatory Bowel Disease Quality of Life Questionnaire or the Crohn׳s Disease Activity Index nor any of their components [15], nor with FC levels [10].CeD is an autoimmune disorder with intolerance to gluten contained in wheat and other cereals in patients with a genetic predisposition. Clinical symptoms are present only in a part of affected persons and include diarrhea, weight loss, or malnutrition and growth retardation in children.Villous atrophy, the characteristic endoscopic feature of CeD is diagnosed by histology but may be also visualized by VCE. However, assessment by physicians is subjective, especially when grading to partial, subtotal and total villous atrophy – corresponding to histological grades Marsh IIIa to IIIc. Crypt hyperplasia (Marsh II) is not assessable by standard VCE. Ciaccio et al. have developed algorithms for objective assessment of villous atrophy by extracting and computerized processing of textural features from VCE images. VCE videos from patients with CeD showed a greater texture and brightness variation than those obtained from controls (p<0.05). Automatic processing of images could reduce them to their skeletal structure revealing lines that correspond to mucosal fissures. The total length of these lines was measured and converted into a so called L score which differed significantly between videos from CeD patients with Marsh grades (II–IIIc) and controls. Mean L values were 49.1, 50.0, 64.7, and 72.4mm for Marsh grades II, IIIa, IIIb, and IIIc, respectively. Similar findings were seen when the same methods were applied to standard endoscopic images vs. VCE [16]. A significantly longer period of brightness in videos from celiac patients (p<0.001) might be correlated to a reduced small bowel motility in CeD [17]. Parameters for reduced intestinal wall motion as the position of the lumen center in x, y coordinate system and the variation of lumen center width were also helpful to discriminate VCE videos of CeD patients from controls [18].Evaluation of VCE study is very time consuming and requires a high degree of attention, especially if lesions are visible only on single or few images and in case of luminal content obscuring the mucosa. Hence, software algorithms are highly appreciated that are capable of eliminating images without visible mucosa and automatically identifying relevant lesions as blood, angiectasia, ulcer, polyp, and tumor in order to shorten reading time.Multiple studies have looked to identify informative frames or to refuse irrelevant images, to identify landmarks, motility patterns, bleeding regions, and lesions as ulcers, polyps and tumors in VCE. Multiple extraction methods have been studied and different classifiers have been used based on texture, edge, wrinkles, geometry, shape, color features, brightness, contrast or a combination of multiple features (Table 2). Several studies compared classifiers to select the most effective ones. Additionally, machine-learning systems may be applied to improve software results. Support Vector Machine (SVM) Classifier aims to place a best fitting vector into a coordinate system for highest discrimination between classifiers. In artificial neuronal networks (ANN) information is entered via several input nodes (perceptrons) that are connected to a layer of artificial neurons (‘calculation nodes’). The final output node delivers a quantitative or qualitative result. This unidirectional single layer neuronal network can be extended with additional layers of neurons (Multilayer perceptron neuronal network, MLP) that may even be connected retrograde. Learning is basically provided by modifying the weights for the inputs and connections. In a recent landmark review by Iakovidis et al. [19], the software approaches are explained in further detail.Clearing CE videos from images showing only luminal content may reduce reading times. Speeded-up robust feature (SURF) detector [20] and local color histogram has been used to identify debris and a Gauss Laguerre Transform (GLT) based multiresolution norm-1 energy feature to exclude images with bubbles [21,22]. Mean shift algorithm, block matching algorithm were applied to measure visibility of lumen and coherent motility [23]. Determination of typical red/green/blue (RGB) hue values for mucosa, content and lesions were useful in selecting relevant images and reducing reading time [24].The most frequent indication for VCE is obscure bleeding. Hence, by identifying blood or lesions with small amounts of blood as tumors, angiectasias or ulcers, physicians might be directly guided to relevant findings by appropriate algorithms. To select images showing blood, several color features as color histograms, scalable color, color wavelet features, chrominance moments, filter bank have been applied in experimental settings (Table 2). Earlier studies found only limited sensitivity of 56% for lesions with bleeding potential when using a commercially available ‘Suspected blood indicator (SBI)’ (Fig. 3) [25]. In a retrospective clinical setting, the SBI had a 100% sensitivity for detection of active bleeding. However, specificity was as low as 13% [26]. Measurements in an in vitro model demonstrated a higher sensitivity of the SBI at lower capsule speeds of 0.5cm/s vs. 1 or 2cm/s [27]. However, as capsule speed cannot be influenced in a routine setting, higher image acquisition rates might be able to compensate. Although a better specificity is desirable, major concern is the high rate of missed lesions in the absence of frank bleeding. A more recent method exploits information on color to detect salient pixels [28]. Color features seem to be more discriminative for bleeding spots than textural features [19].Small bowel ulcers are most frequently caused by CD. Image processing first aims to detect ulcers with high accuracy and second to classify severity of endoscopic disease but is not able to provide a differential diagnosis. Textural features as lacunarity analysis, homogeneous texture descriptor and color features (dominant color descriptor, Bidimensional Ensemble Empirical Mode Decomposition (BEEMD)), as well as salient texture and color feature based locality-constrained linear coding have demonstrated a high accuracy (>90%) [29–31]. Additionally, the categorical severity of CD lesions could be classified with >90% precision [29]. Generalized pair-wise symmetric learning was helpful in matching CD lesions in order to identify repeated visualization of one lesion [32]. In the discrimination of ulcers, the green channel provided the highest accuracy of 95%, when compared to blue and red channel [31]. Feature fusion of local binary pattern in a bag-of-words model improved accuracy from 84% to 90% when compared to single feature [33]. However, when applying saliency extraction to videos instead of images the accuracy of ulcer detection decreased from 96% to 77% [34] again demonstrating the demand for proof of robustness of image processing methods.Albeit rare, small bowel tumors are important to be diagnosed early. However, false positive diagnosis may lead to unnecessary extra investigation and/or treatment. A simple index for assessing soft protruding lesions in VCE (SPICE) was suggested to differentiate between harmless bulges from submucosal small bowel tumors with normal overlying mucosa based on 4 simple items (well-defined boundary with the surrounding mucosa, height larger than diameter, visible lumen next to the lesion and the image lasting longer than 10min) [35]. Small bowel tumors were automatically detected with an accuracy of 92% by extracting textural and color features uniform local binary pattern and wavelet transform [36]. Furthermore, 3D representation software [37] was shown to lead to image enhancement for a significant proportion of vascular, but less so for inflammatory and protruding lesions. Its application on the differential diagnosis of small-bowel masses from submucosal bulges in VCE [37] does not improve the performance of expert VCE readers, although it significantly increases the performance of novices in distinguishing masses from bulging [38]. Hue Saturation Value (HSV) Color features were useful for automated tumor identification from VCE videos with a sensibility of 98% specificity of 97% [39].Polyp detection is important especially at CCE applied in the screening for polyps and cancer. In VCE, polyps infrequently account for bleeding. However, polyposis syndromes such as familial adenomatous polyposis and Peutz–Jeghers poyposis are major indications for VCE. MEPG-7 region-based shape descriptor Zernike moments were able to identify small bowel polyps with a 90% accuracy, outperforming angular radial transform [40]. Further approaches to identify small bowel polyps applied edge, textural and color features as decision fusion strategy with boosted classifier with similar accuracy [41].Measurement of polyp protrusion from PillCam COLON2 capsule images was used for automated polyp detection. 80% of polyps in an initial feasibility testing had p values (calculated from deviation of curvature from mean) >500. Polyps>1cm had p value of 2000; ulcer, diverticulum, bubbles and debris had p value<500 [42]. Further geometrical features like the radius of the best fit ball, ellipses of inertia, mid-pass filtering and segmentation were used to detect polyps in CCE videos with similar sensitivity [43]. Using geometrical and color features with Histograms of Oriented Gradients (HOG) sensitivity of 80% for detection of colon polyps at CCE could be achieved. However, the rate of false positive results increased up to 40% with increasing sensitivity [44]. As CCE is predominately focused on polyp detection further improvement is desirable.Size estimation of a detected lesion by video capsule endoscopy is important information for the consecutive clinical management. However, endoscopic size estimation is subjective and has a significant interobserver variance [45,46]. The size of a lesion can be compared with the entire viewing field of the capsule when close to the optical dome. Other aids are size of the lumen, number and thickness of adjacent folds or size of surrounding villi. However, varying distances, motility of the GI tract wall, and lesions often only visible partially jeopardize any accuracy in size estimation. Size estimation in VCE has been shown to have a high interobserver variance and requires a high level of training [45]. Consequently, capsule endoscopy standard terminology (CEST) uses only the attribute values small, medium, and large for the term size in the description of small intestinal lesions [47].However, with the advent of CCE, there is a need to differentiate between significant colonic neoplasia, requiring consecutive colonoscopy with polypectomy, and insignificant polyps only needing surveillance. Polyps of 5mm or less detected at CCE were considered in the comparative studies to colonoscopy as insignificant, polyps of 10mm as suggestive of advanced adenoma [48].For PillCam COLON2 with the actual Rapid v8 software a polyp size estimation (PSE) tool has been implemented which includes an algorithm for size correction depending on the distance of the polyp from the optical dome of the capsule (Fig. 4a). Although this PSE tool is not specifically designed and validated for the small bowel, it can be applied ‘off label’ if a colon capsule is used to investigate the small bowel (Fig. 4b). A rather simple method to calibrate size measurements in the small bowel is the ingestion of pellets together with the video capsule [49] or to ‘calibrate’ the capsule image by recording a millimeter paper before ingestion (Fig. 4c and d).Accurately localizing a lesion detected by VCE is important to guide further endoscopic or surgical therapy. The simplest localization method is to define the organ the capsule is actually in. This is typically done by landmarking the first images of the stomach, duodenum and cecum. Thus, gastric transit time (GTT) and small bowel transit time (SBTT) can be easily measured. In the fasted state, 87 healthy volunteers had a capsule GTT of 39±43min and a SBTT of 236±82min. Longer SBTT were found in volunteers and patients>40 years (p 0.008) when compared with those <40 years [50]. Transit times may further be influenced by previous lavage or flexible endoscopy, concomitant medication, and presence of inflammatory or stenotic lesions.Colonic transit time (CTT) is typically not measured by endoscopic capsules, as small-bowel VCE does not visualize the entire colon. Furthermore, during CCE physiologic motility is drastically modified by the preceding lavage and addition of a booster solution to propel the capsule from the cecum to the rectum. For measurement of CTT under physiologic conditions the wireless motility capsule (WMC) is recommended (see below).Measurement of classifiers as scalable color, homogenous texture and compressed domain color descriptors has been shown to be useful in automated segmentation of a video for these organs [51,52]. Rapid v8 software already provides suggestions for relevant landmarks. An automated small bowel detection mode is further implemented in the interactive DR3 data recorder to alert for ingestion of a boost and to send a signal to the capsule switching image acquisition to a higher, adaptive frame rate. Sensitivity for correct detection of small bowel with a mean delay of 3.5min was 98.3% [53].Measurement of motion displacement and color similarity classifiers were used to automatically adjust replay speed of the video for time saving [54]. Registration of image similarity is also shown in the Rapid progress bar as an inverse surrogate marker for velocity. Furthermore, this feature can modify the calculated precentage of small bowel transit instead of simply assuming a linear velocity (Fig. 5). Even remote control of PillCam SB3 or COLON2 frame rate per seccan be provided in real time by the DR3 data recorder according to similarity of received images. In an experimental ex vivo porcine model the traveled way in the small bowel was measured directly by miniature wheels attched to a capsule together with a stabilising spring [55,56].Different sensor arrays attached to the patient׳s skin in a standardized manner or in a belt can be used to quantitatively measure minimal differences in strength or transmission time of each signal. According to these differences the actual position of the capsule can be calculated and presented as continuous trace by the capsule software in a 2-dimensional (2D) or 3-dimensional (3D) fashion (Fig. 6). An early study on the 2D localization (Pillcam / Rapid) found an accuracy of 6cm compared with radiographs [57]. A recent trial comparing 3D capsule localization (EndoCapsule S10; Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) with serial radiographs in 30 volunteers showed concordance with differences in the 3 axis of only 2.00+1.64cm (x), 2.64+2.39cm (y), and 2.51+1.83cm (z) [58].Dysmotility of the small bowel with abnormal contractions may be a possible reason for abdominal complaints and discomfort. Quantitative measurement of contraction patterns might be useful in sub-classification or differentiation from irritable bowel syndrome (IBS).Edge direction histograms, edge extraction, similarity elimination [59;60], anisotropic filter and descriptors of wrinkle skeletons have been analyzed from video capsule images for detection of small bowel contractions [61].Another approach is to analyze motility patterns from changes in endoscopic images obtained from a wireless video capsule endoscope. Software algorithms have been developed for post-processing studies [62]. Based on measurement of color similarity and motion displacement, the pace of movement of the capsule relative to the small bowel was measured. Accordingly, the display speed of the capsule video was influenced with a delay between single frames between 30 and 150ms/frame [54]. A graphic illustration of measured image similarity is implemented in the Rapid software (Fig. 5). Similar algorithms are additionally used to provide a modified calculated percentage of small bowel traversed for each image, assuming a rapid change in images is correlated to a higher propulsive speed.Measurement of contractile patterns and activity as phasic luminal closures or dysmotility features as non-contractile patterns, tunnel pattern, static sequences and static turbid images were significantly altered in patients with bowel dysfunction. All but 1 patient with pathologic manometry had abnormal motility patterns in VCE image analysis. Even in 11/17 patients dysmotility patterns were observed in spite of normal manometry, while all healthy subjects had normal patterns [63]. Descriptors of contractility (radial wrinkles and luminal occlusions), non-contractile patterns (open tunnel and smooth wall) showed abnormal values in 29% of 80 patients with functional bowel disease (either hypo- or hypermotility), while 97% of controls had normal motility patterns in VCE image analysis [64].Furthermore, significant reversible reduction of contractile activity was measured by analysis of VCE images in 14 healthy volunteers during experimental glucagon bolus and infusion for 1h (p<0.05). Luminal closures were reduced from 4.2+0.9 to 0.2+0.1 per min and endoluminal motion was reduced from (82+9 vs. 21+10% of static images). Images with radial wrinkles were less frequent (0.4+0.1 vs. 3.4+1.2%) [65].Motion displacement and color similarity has been applied to adapt the replay speed of the video. By playing the video faster in case of similar consecutive images 10% of reading time could be saved [54]. Creating fusion images by epitomized summarization the number of images could even be reduced to less than 10% [66]. Reading times with a fusion mode in Rapid software were significantly shorter (49 vs. 35min; p<0.05) in a prospective randomised double reading without missing more findings compared with standard mode [67].A ‘Quick view’ mode is routinely available in the Rapid Software, selecting presumably informative images from the video [68]. Reading time with this Quick view could be reduced to 11.6min. In both reading modes 7 findings were missed, 4 of 7 lesions were not presented by the Quick view software [69]. Similarly, the ‘Express Select’ mode included in the Olympus EndoCapsule system only missed one lesion (present in one image) out of 40 [70]. Hence, these modules show algorithms being very fare advanced and robust, but not yet reliable enough to be used as sole diagnostic tool in clinical practice. Nevertheless, physicians may be guided directly to relevant findings.Acid gastro-esophageal reflux (GER) through an incompetent lower esophageal sphincter is the cause of heartburn and reflux esophagitis. Longstanding reflux may lead to intestinal metaplasia, so called Barrett esophagus, with potential for development to adenocarcinoma. Documentation or exclusion of GER may be useful in the differential diagnosis of cardiac chest pain, laryngitis and obstructive lung disease. The Bravo capsule (Medtronic, Dublin, Ireland) is endoscopically attached to the distal esophagus (Fig. 7a). Approximately 5cm above the esophago-gastric junction the pH profile is measured quantitatively and transmitted wirelessly (Fig. 7b), additionally avoiding distress from transnasal catheter. From the pH profile, number and duration of acid reflux episodes (defined as pH<4) are calculated. By time code, these episodes can be correlated with symptoms. The percentage of time with pH<4h can be measured. Similar results are obtained with a composite (DeMeester) score based on percentage of pH<4 (total, upright, supine) number of reflux episodes (total, and <5min) and duration of reflux [71]. Wireless Bravo capsule allows recording for 2 days. 40% (of 310 patients) had pH values suggestive of acid gastro-esophageal reflux on both days, while 19% had discrepant findings on both days. Pathologic pH scores were found in 55% during the second day only in this subgroup [72]. Thus extension of pH measurement to 2 days using a wireless capsule instead of catheter may identify more patients with acid reflux, probably those with less severe disease.Data on intestinal pH are sparse but the advent of swallowable wireless capsules with pH sensors allows more detailed research.A pH capsule has been developed measuring pH and intermittently transmitting endoscopic images to identify endoscopic landmarks. Mean pH in the small bowel was 7.61 (range 7.2–8.1, median 7.55). A significant rise in pH from duodenum to ileum has been demonstrated (p<0.0001) [73].Measurement of pH together with pressure and temperature throughout the entire GI tract is enabled by a swallowable Wireless Motility Capsule (WMC) (SmartPill, Medtronic, Dublin, Ireland) (Fig. 8a) that transmits data via radiofrequency over 5 days to an external recorder under physiological conditions. Identifying the change in pH makes it possible to objectively measure gastric and small bowel transit time. While gastric pH is normally very low, a rise in pH demonstrates the passage of the capsule into the duodenum (Fig. 8b). In this section conditions influencing intestinal pH are described while transit time determination based on pH measurements with the WMC is discussed in Section 4.2.1. WMC showed a steady rise in pH from 5.608+0.491 in the first small intestinal quartile over 6.200+0.328 in the second vs. 6.679+0.316 in the third quartile respectively to 6.884+0.200 in the last small intestinal portion of 10 healthy volunteers [74]. There was no significant difference in 9 patients with IBS.Measurement of the time from passage of the WMC through the pylorus (as indicated by sudden rise in pH) until further steady rise reached a pH of 5.5 and 6, respectively was suggested as surrogate parameter for buffer capacity in the duodenum. One clinical aspect of this buffer capacity is its necessity to allow pancreatic enzyme replacement drugs to be released from the ingested pharmaceutical capsules in patients, e.g. in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF). A sustained pH of 5.5 was reached in patients with CF after 17.7min vs. 6.8min in controls (p<0.001) and a pH of 6 after 42.2min in patients vs. 12.6min in controls, respectively (p<0.001) [75].Proton pump inhibitors lead to a rise in gastric pH>0.5 in all 20 healthy subjects compared to 50 controls. PPI did not have a significant impact on upper gastrointestinal transit and motility but were associated with a lower pH in the distal three quartiles of the small bowel than in controls (p<0.005) [76].WMC has been validated for the assessment of gastrointestinal transit together with a standard meal. Transit times are measured by a combination of parameters. Primarily, a rapid increase of pH demonstrates entry of the capsule to the duodenum. After a steady discrete rise of pH during passage of the small bowel, a sudden drop signalizes the beginning of colon. A drop in temperature is associated with excretion of the capsule. The normal range for transit time includes the following: Gastric emptying time (GET) (2–5h), SBTT (2–6h), CTT (10–59h) and whole gut transit time (WGTT) (10–73h) [77]. A moderate variation (coefficient of variation 12%) of GET was observed in a small trial performing consecutive measurements with WMC in 6 dogs [78].A total of 35/46 (76%) of the IBS patients had prolonged GET. Constipation-predominant disease was associated with prolonged gut transit times. The mean hours+SD for colonic transit time in the constipation group was 71.7+61.1 (n=13) compared with 22.5+14.9 (n=14) for diarrhea-predominant and 26.4+21.5 (n=20) for mixed clinical subtype (p=0.001) [79].Significantly longer SBTT were measured by WMC in 10 patients with decompensated liver cirrhosis as compared with 10 compensated cirrhotic patients (6.17 vs. 3.56h, p=0.036). SBTT correlated significantly (r=0.77, p=0.0003) with severity of cirrhosis as assessed by Child–Pugh score [80]. SBTT was also significantly longer in patients with cystic fibrosis [75].Additionally to diagnosis of gastroparesis, WMC can provide important information about bowel transit. A significantly longer WGTT was found in patients with gastroparesis of different etiology (p<0.0001), but only in those with diabetic gastroparesis, colon transit was prolonged compared to healthy controls (p=0.0054) [81]. Another study showed that WMC modified therapy in 67% of 83 patients with either suspected gastric, intestinal or colonic motility disorder. Symptoms in patients with either isolated or generalized prolonged transit did not differ significantly [82], suggesting WMC as a useful tool in specifying different types of motility disorders.8 critically ill patients showed a delayed gastric transit at WMC study when compared to 87 healthy volunteers (median 13.9h vs. 6.6h, respectively, p<0.001) as well as prolonged SBTT (6.7 vs. 3.8h, p=0.01) and WGTT of 10 days vs. 1.2 days (p<0.001) [83]. 43 patients were tested with gastric emptying scintigraphy (GES) and WMC. 51% had abnormal GES. At WMC 70% had either pathologic gastric emptying (60%) or abnormal antro-duodenal pressure (47%) or both. This resulted in a diagnostic gain of 19% (p=0.04) when compared with GES [84].CTT is measured based on the parameters of sudden pH drop as landmark for capsule entrance into the colon and fall in temperature after excretion of the capsule. Capsule passage through the ileo-cecal valve could be successfully correlated with catheter based scintigraphy in 9/13 subjects. In these nine subjects, a drop in pH from 7.6+0.05 to 6.1+0.1 was observed after a median of 7.5min (1–16min) after passage through the ileo-cecal valve as determined by localization of the capsule by double radiolabelling. 51Cr labeling of the capsule and 111In scintigraphic luminal labeling through an perorally placed 3m long catheter reaching to the distal ileum correlated the drop in pH either to the cecum (n=5), ascending colon (n=2) or the transition from cecum to ascending colon (n=2) [85].CTT, as determined by WMC and radiographic progress of radiopaque marker (ROM) showed a good correlation. As cut off for delayed colonic transit more than 67h were set for the ROM and 59h for the WMC test. CTT and WGTT had a good correlation with transit time measurement using ROM (r=0.707; p<0.001). For the diagnosis of constipation agreement between both tests was found in 87% [86]. In a study with patients older than 65 years, transit times as measured by WMC were all slower in 39 constipated subjects compared to 11 healthy subjects CTT (p=<0.0001), WGTT (p=<0.001) and GET (p=<0.04). ROM colonic transit was also slower (p=<0.007) in constipated subjects. Device agreement for slow colonic transit was 88% with a good correlation between WMC and ROM (CTT r=0.718, p=0.0001, and WGTT r=0.693, p=0.0001) [87].Quantitative measurement of transit times has also been used for assessment of dietary intervention. In a small crossover controlled trial 10 healthy volunteers consumed 9g of wheat bran or an equal volume, low-fiber control for 3 days. CTT decreased by 10.8+6.6h (p=0.006) and WGTT decreased by 8.9+5.4h (p=0.02) after the consumption of high fiber diet [88].The minimally invasive, radiation-free Motility Tracking System-1 (MTS-1; Motilis, Lausanne, Switzerland) has been introduced for description/measurement of gastrointestinal motility in adults. MTS-1 is reliable for determination of gastric transit and small intestinal transit time. The electromagnetic 3-D-Transit system or MST2 (MotilisMedica SA, Lausanne, Switzerland) monitors motility and transit time of the colon. In a recent study, no systematic differences between MTS-1 and capsule endoscopy were found when assessing gastric transit (median difference 1min; range: 0–6min) and small intestinal transit time (median difference 0.5min; range: 0–52min) [89]. In another study, 19 children could swallow the MST-1. Characteristic contraction patterns were identified for the stomach (three per minute), small intestine (9–11 per minute), and colon (4–5 per minute). Median total gastrointestinal transit time was 37.7 (range 9.5-95.8) h, median gastric emptying time was 37 (range 2–142) min, median small intestinal transit time was 302 (range 164 to >454) min, and median colorectal transit time was 38.1 (range 5.6–90.0) h [90].Disturbed gastrointestinal motility may be caused by decreased number or reduced pressure of contractions or a combination. Either gastroparesis with vomiting, intestinal dysmotility with pseudo-obstruction or delayed colonic transit leading to constipation can result, or even a combination of those. Although pressure measurement by wireless capsule cannot demonstrate unsynchronized contractions due to presence of one sensor only, quantification of number and altitude of contractions can be useful in identifying single or combined GI motility disorders.In the small bowel, median values for contractions (Ct) were 144.5 and for motility index (MI=ln(Ct×sum amplitudes+1))=12.78 in healthy persons and Ct=93, MI=12.12 in gastroparetic patients [91]. In patients with prolonged SBTT reduced contractility was observed in the proximal small bowel as measured by mean pressure of contractions (p=0.003), mean AUC (p=0.025), and MI (p<0.001), compared with healthy persons [92].Significant differences were also observed between healthy and gastroparetic subjects regarding Ct with 72/h vs. 47/h (p<0.05) and MI with 11.83 vs. 11.12 (p<0.05), respectively [91]. Mean gastric contraction force decreased from median (range) 11 (8–20) to 3 (1–10) mmHg (p<0.01) and gastric motility index decreased from 0.63 (0–1.58) to 0 (0–0.31; p=0.01) during anesthesia in dogs, returning to normal within 12–15h. Mean small bowel contraction force decreased for 2h from 34 (24–37) to 3 (0.9–17) mmHg (p<0.02) and motility index decreased from 3.75 (1–4.56) to 0 (0–1.53; p=0.02) without significant changes in the frequency of contractions [93].The highest pressure measured with the wireless motility capsule during the last 4min before capsule passage to the cecum has been defined as the ileo-cecal junction pressures (IJP) serving as a surrogate parameter for the pressure of the ileo-cecal valve. Transition of the WMC from terminal ileum to the cecum was identified by the parallel registration of the typical sudden drop in pH. In a small retrospective comparison, the IJP was significantly lower in patients with a pathologic lactulose breath test suggestive of small bowel bacterial overgrowth than in those with a normal breath test (45.1mmHg vs. 79.9, respectively; p<0.0001) [94]. This finding needs further confirmation but may be a pathophysiologic approach related to a reduced barrier function against bacterial ascending from colon to the small bowel in bacterial overgrowth.In vitro experiments were carried out in a porcine model to investigate the resistant force of the small intestine using 15 specially designed capsule prototypes and analyzed the effect of the capsule dimension and moving speed. Segments of porcine small intestine were employed as a conservative model for the human intestine. When the capsules under experiment were moving at a speed of 0.5mm/s, a resistant force of 20–100mN were measured for the capsule diameter in the range of 8–13mm. The force increased with moving speed [95]. The axial force of a catheter with a so called migrating motor complex force sensor simulating force on a capsule was measured in an in vivo porcine model with 1.04Ncm−1 in a 16min interval [96]. The mean tack strength between ex vivo porcine mucosa and capsule materials was 0.198+0.070mJcm−2, while mean peel strength was measured with 0.055+0.016 mJcm-2[97]. These data may be used as base for future development of new capsule surface materials, especially in the development of robotic capsules.The WMC provides wireless, continuous quantitative measurement of temperature throughout the entire GI tract. Technical specification allows measurement of temperature in a range from 25 to 49°C [98]. Although there is some visible variation in temperature over the recording time, this parameter is being used to determine excretion of the capsule by a rapid fall in temperature, rather than stimulating investigations on potential pathophysiological alterations.Lab-in-a-pill technology has been described for measurement of pH and temperature in the GI tract [99] as well as for measurement of conductivity and dissolved oxygen [100]. Wireless transmission in vitro from a capsule containing a hemoglobin detector has been reported. Hemoglobin could be detected in 90% of experiments when concentrations were adjusted from 6 to 1800μg hemoglobin/ml of gastric juice [101]. In an ex-vivo murine model adenoma could be detected by higher expression of Cathepsin-B activated near infra-red fluorescent (NIRF) probes in adenomas than in inflammatory lesions using a modified capsule endoscope [102]. In future quantitative measurement of expression of molecular targets in the GI tract by capsule endoscopy is an attractive perspective, for instance in the search of premalignant lesions [103].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
