@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Functionally heterogeneous porous scaffold design for tissue engineering

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Functionally gradient porous scaffolds are designed for tissue engineering.An optimum deposition angle has been determined for multi-functional regions.The proposed methodology designs scaffolds with gradient porosity.Provides more control over the desired porosity level.The designed heterogeneous scaffolds are fabricated with a bio-additive process.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Functionally gradient porous structures,Scaffold architecture,Deposition direction,Tissue engineering,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Porous scaffolds with interconnected and continuous pores have recently been considered as one of the most successful tissue engineering strategies. In the literature, it has been concluded that properly interconnected and continuous pores with their spatial distribution could contribute to perform diverse mechanical, biological and chemical functions of a scaffold. Thus, there has been a need for reproducible and fabricatable scaffold design with controllable and functional gradient porosity. Improvements in Additive Manufacturing (AM) processes for tissue engineering and their design methodologies have enabled the development of controlled and interconnected scaffold structures. However homogeneous scaffolds with uniform porosity do not capture the intricate spatial internal micro architecture of the replaced tissue and thus are not capable of capturing the design. In this work, a novel heterogeneous scaffold modeling is proposed for layered-based additive manufacturing processes. First, layers are generated along the optimum build direction considering the heterogeneous micro structure of tissue. Each layer is divided into functional regions based on the spatial homogeneity factor. An area weight based method is developed to generate the spatial porosity function that determines the deposition pattern for the desired gradient porosity. To design a multi-functional scaffold, an optimum deposition angle is determined at each layer by minimizing the heterogeneity along the deposition path. The proposed methodology is implemented and illustrative examples are also provided. The effective porosity is compared between the proposed design and the conventional uniform porous scaffold design. Sample designed structures have also been fabricated with a novel micro-nozzle biomaterial deposition system. The result has shown that the proposed methodology generates scaffolds with functionally gradient porosity.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Reconstructing or repairing tissues with porous structures or scaffolds to restore its mechanical, biological and chemical functions is one of the major tissue engineering strategies. The intended use of such porous structures is to stimulate the tissue regeneration processes while minimally upsetting the delicate equilibrium of the local environment and the patient’s biology. Even though biocompatibility of such structures is crucial, but the structure itself must facilitate to some significant  [1–4] but conflicting  [5,6] functions such as the structural integrity, cell migration, proliferation, waste removal, and vascularization.These criteria could be achieved by designing the scaffold with factors such as pore size, total porosity, pore shape and pore interconnectivity  [7,8]. Clearly, fulfilling all of these criteria by a natural or synthesized scaffold design is yet to be achieved  [5]. Considering the micro architecture, type, and size of the damaged tissue that are differentiated by age and mobility of patients, the demand for individualized scaffold structure is imminent.Bone tissue has a varied arrangement of its micro architecture in concert to perform diverse mechanical, biological and chemical functions. The bone’s micro structure varies considerably making the bone architecture highly anisotropic in nature  [9]. Researchers  [10] have invested in the scaffold design concept via inversing the morphological structure to achieve the desired and choreographed multi-functionality. Bone tissue can be considered as a hierarchical material whose mechanical properties can vary considerably and does not depend upon its density alone  [11]. Anisotropic mechanical properties of bone, caused by the difference in the micro structure, have been reported in  [12]. Both cortical and cancellous bone segments have different structural forms with distinct characteristics. Moreover, within cancellous bone there exists a complex relationship  [13] between trabecular density and its structural mechanical integrity which makes the bone spatially heterogeneous. Thus, achieving the optimum scaffold design by only copying the bone morphology may not capture the regional heterogeneity in bone’s spatial extrinsic and intrinsic properties. Such a complex design requires significant amount of computational resources and might become limited in terms of the fabrication.Bone structures adapt its strength via remodeling  [14] in response to the anisotropic load distribution along multiple directions. This physiological multi-axial load transfer phenomenon through the bone supports its spatial and regional heterogeneous structural properties  [15,16]. But such imminent factors are not considered in most of design considerations and simplified through ‘homogeneous/average property’ methods to determine the overall structural properties. Thus, designing the scaffold with homogenization of property and/or material distribution might not be the proper functional representation.Another scaffold design approach considers a biodegradable structure for which the degradation of the scaffold material and new tissue formation is expected to occur simultaneously  [17]. However, a scaffold matrix capable to remain viable from its implantation to the end of the healing phase and finally fully absorbed is yet to be achieved. Toward development of an ideal carrier system for bone tissue engineering, researchers are mainly aiming at material types and properties, their processing conditions and biological compatibility  [18,19]. Even though the internal architecture of the implant or structure may have significant influence on the cellular microenvironment, few researches have focused on the design of internal architecture of the porous structure and even fewer have tried to optimize its geometry. Moreover, the desired choreographed multi-functionality of such a structure may only be achieved with optimally designed carriers that may deliver growth factors spatially  [6,17]. Thus, the need for a reproducible and fabricatable structure design with controllable gradient porosity is obvious but possibly limited by design and fabrication methods [5,20,21].Lal and Sun  [22] proposed the microsphere-packed scaffold modeling technique where the porosity is stochastically distributed throughout the structure. The achievable porosity range can be controlled with the size and number of microspheres and their packing conditions. In their other work  [23], a heuristic based porous structure modeling has been developed using the constructive solid geometry (CSG) based approach and combining the Boolean function in a stochastic manner. Porous objects with a nested cellular structure have been proposed in the literature [24,25] which may introduce the gradient porosity along the architecture with the function based  [26] geometry and topology variation  [27]. A functionally graded scaffold (FGS)  [28–31] modeling technique has been proposed to replicate the stiffness gradient and porosity of the native tissue with a concentric unit cell selected from their pre-defined library. Pandithevan and Saravana Kumar  [32] proposed space-filling fractal curves to control the porosity in the scaffold. A three dimensional porous structure modeling technique has been proposed with layer based 2D Voronoi tessellation  [33] which ensures the interconnected pore networks. In another work  [34], geometric modeling of functionally graded material (FGM) has been presented with graded micro structures. The gradient porosity in the FGM has been achieved with stochastically distributed voronoi cells. Holdstein et al.  [35] proposed a reverse engineering technique to generate the porous bone structure model with the volumetric texture synthesis method. The method captures the stochastic and porous nature of the bone micro structure into the reconstructed scaffold model. The approaches for modeling of porosity with stochastic processes could generate uncontrollable porosity. Limited control in spatial porosity may be achievable for some methods, but this may sacrifice the true 3D porous characteristics as the interconnectivity and continuity among pores become uncertain. Moreover, the gradient porosity in these works has been achieved either arbitrarily or with axisymmetric uniform region discretization, which might not represent the appropriate functional and regional heterogeneity, and their fabrication could be difficult.Traditional scaffold fabrication processes are mainly driven by chemical processes. With these techniques, it is often difficult to produce functional structures with pre-defined morphology. Moreover controllable uniformity, repeatability and/or distribution of material and internal architecture are extremely difficult to achieve in such techniques. Micro-fabrication and bio-additive systems have become an attractive tool for developing tissue-engineering scaffolds because of the improved spatial resolutions  [7,36]. Especially the development of Additive Manufacturing (AM) techniques and the improvement in biomaterial’s properties by synergy provides the leverage of using AM techniques to fabricate controlled and interconnected porous structures. As a result, AM techniques are considered to be a viable alternative for achieving extensive and detailed control over the scaffold architecture. A number of researchers have successfully used various AM techniques along with a wide range of biomaterials to fabricate the scaffolds. A comprehensive review on AM can be found in the literature  [37–39]. Some of the fabricated scaffold structures with AM processes are homogeneous in nature and with uniform porosity. However, homogeneous structures do not capture the intricate spatial extrinsic and intrinsic properties presented in tissue’s internal architecture and are not capable of capturing the design  [5,40]. In recent work  [25,26], functionally gradient scaffolds are successfully fabricated with the Selective Laser Sintering (SLS) process. In this paper, the developed methodologies could be used by any bio-additive process. However, the presented methods are most suitable for bio-deposition based processes where a continuous filament of heterogeneous biomaterial needs to be deposited continuously. These bio-deposition based processes require a continuous path planning during the formation of the micro-porous structures.From the above discussion, it is clear that a true multi-functional scaffold structure design must perform the expected mechanical, biological and chemical functions. But such a design may not be achievable only by homogeneous scaffold structure with uniform porosity. Gradient porosity along the internal architecture could provide both the extrinsic and intrinsic properties. The optimally designed scaffold with such variational porosity could perform the diverse functionality expected by the scaffold  [20]. Thus, achieving controllable, continuous, and interconnected gradient porosity with reproducible and fabricatable design may lead a successful tissue engineering approach. In this work, a novel layer-based heterogeneous porous structure modeling is proposed to achieve the gradient porosity design. Firstly, an optimum build direction is identified to generate the layers considering the internal feature. An optimum filament deposition direction is determined for layers, which minimizes the contour heterogeneity considering the internal heterogeneous region and their locations. The internal region is discretized based on strips’ spatial homogeneity factor along the optimum deposition angle. Finally, an area weight based approach is used to generate the spatial porosity function for each strip. The generated function then determines the filament deposition location for the desired heterogeneous porosity. The proposed method generates a heterogeneous structure by achieving the controllable porosity to capture the functional and regional heterogeneity along the structure. The road map of our modeling and optimization methodology for filament deposition-path planning is shown as in Fig. 1.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section  2 presents the novel variational porous scaffold modeling with controllable porosity. In Section  2.1, we discussed the geometric model extraction for the defected bone segment. The effect of build direction is quantified in Section  2.2. Sections  2.3 and 2.4 describe the layer generation methodology along with the internal feature suitable for the AM technique. Section  2.5 describes the contour discretization and determination of the optimum deposition angle. Section  2.6 presents the spatial function for an optimum filament location to achieve desired porosity. The presented methodology is evaluated in Section  2.7. Section  3 describes the micro-nozzle based biomaterial deposition technique used for the fabrication. The proposed methodology is implemented along with fabricated samples have been shown in Section  4. And finally, we present the summary in Section  5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
