@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Computational studies on strain transmission from a collagen gel construct to a cell and its internal cytoskeletal filaments

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A tissue model having a cell with cytoskeletal filaments (CSKs) is developed.Mechanical interactions between tissue, cell and CSKs are examined.The type of a tissue deformation is reflected in the distribution of CSK strain.The distribution of CSK strain varies with the Young׳s modulus of the tissue.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Biomechanics,Tissue,Cell,Cytoskeleton,Strain transmission,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We developed a mechanical tissue model containing a cell with cytoskeletal filaments inside to investigate how tissue deformation is reflected in the deformation of a cell and its internal cytoskeletal filaments. Tissue that assumes a collagen gel construct was depicted as an isotropic linear elastic material, and the cell was modeled as an assembly of discrete elements including a cell membrane, nuclear envelope, and cytoskeletal filaments. Mechanical behaviors were calculated based on the minimum energy principle. The results demonstrated the effects of the type of tissue deformation on deformations of cytoskeletal filaments. The distribution of strains of cytoskeletal filaments was skewed toward compression when a tissue was stretched, toward stretch when the tissue was compressed, and almost normal when the tissue was sheared. The results also addressed the dependency of deformations of a cell and cytoskeletal filaments on the ratio of the Young’s modulus of a tissue to that of a cell. Upon tissue stretching, cell strain increased and the distribution of strains of cytoskeletal filaments broadened on both stretch and compression sides with an increase in the Young’s modulus ratio. This suggested that the manner of tissue deformation and the tissue/cell Young’s modulus ratio are reflected in the distribution pattern of strains of cytoskeletal filaments. The present model is valuable to understanding the mechanisms of cellular responses in a tissue.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A biological tissue is capable of changing its structure, characteristics, and functions in response to external mechanical stimuli. This change is called tissue remodeling and results from the responses of cells within tissues [1]. Past studies have demonstrated that tissues remodel differently according to the manner and strength of the applied mechanical loads [2,3]. By utilizing such functions of tissue remodeling, attempts have been made to construct engineered tissues. For example, Webb et al. [1] cultured human tracheal fibroblasts on a polyurethane scaffold with repeated stretching of the scaffold by a strain of 0.1 at a frequency of 0.25Hz. Reportedly, the construct cultured with stretching displayed greater elastic modulus than that cultured with no load. Garvin et al. [4] cultured avian flexor tendon cells within a collagen gel for eight days while applying a cyclic stretch of 1% at 1Hz for one hour per day. As a result, the tensile strength of the collagen gel construct cultured with the mechanical load was nearly three times greater than that cultured without load.Mechanical loads applied to a tissue cause deformations of resident cells. They are transmitted immediately to the inside of cells through cytoskeletal filaments that interact extensively and intimately with the cell membrane [5–7]. In response to changes in external mechanical environments, cytoskeletons reorganize themselves, which results in an alteration of the shape [8], orientation [9,10], stiffness [11], and viscoelastic properties [8] of the cells. The sensitivity of these cellular responses appears to depend on the angle of the applied deformation with respect to the orientation of bundles of actin filaments, one of the cytoskeletal elements [12]. It was also shown that cytoskeletal arrangements significantly affect the strains in the nucleus, given shear deformation to the tissue [13]. Taking account of those facts, we hypothesize that the cellular responses to mechanical stimuli emerge as the collective responses of cytoskeletal filaments.The understanding of basic characteristics of collective cytoskeletal responses with cell deformation is critical to gain mechanical insights into the mechanism of cellular responses. However, despite recent advances in imaging techniques, it is still difficult to visualize how the structure of cytoskeletons varies when the tissue having a cell inside is deforming. The experimental drawbacks emphasize on the necessity to develop a mechanical tissue model which enables the visualization of cytoskeletal behavior and the quantification of their mechanics during a tissue deformation. In the previous study, we developed a mechanical model of a tissue having a cell inside that consists of a cell membrane, nuclear envelope, and cytoskeletal filaments (CSKs) [14]. The results demonstrated that even if the same deformation was applied to a tissue that assumes a collagen gel construct, the degree of cellular and CSKs deformations appeared to differ depending on the initial orientation of CSKs. In order to gain further insight into the multi-scale physics involved in the hierarchical system of tissue, cell and cytoskeletons, we studied how the behaviors of CSKs inside a cell vary if the Young’s modulus ratio of a tissue to a cell and mechanical loads applied to a tissue change.We use a mechano-cell model, which is capable of expressing the deformation behavior of a cell during mechanical tests as a model of a cell within a tissue [14–18]. Details of the computational model have been described by Ujihara et al. [15]. Briefly, the model consists of three main components: a cell membrane (CM), a nuclear envelope (NE), and cytoskeletal filaments (CSKs), as depicted inFig. 1(a).The CM and NE are layers of lipids supported by cytoskeletal networks. The cytoskeletal networks are known to resist in-plane deformation such as stretching or compressing. Because both lipid bilayer and cytoskeletal networks have a finite thickness, they resist bending. Moreover, because the number of lipids on the CM and NE would not change drastically over a finite period of cell deformation, the lipid bilayer offers resistance to changes in membrane area. Thus, the mechanical nature of the CM and NE is expressed by a fluidic lipid bilayer and an elastic cytoskeletal network in a mutually complementary manner.To express these mechanical properties, we represented both the CM and NE as a spherical shell of spring networks. The spherical cell assumes the one at the onset of culture when it is just harvested in a gel. As shown in Fig. 1(a), the CM and NE were divided into small triangular meshes. Nodes were linked by a spring (spring constant, ks) that gives rise to resistance to stretching or compressing. Neighboring elements were connected with a bending spring (spring constant, kb) that resists bending of the CM and NE. The stretching energy, Wsand bending energy, Wbof the CM and NE are given by(1)Ws=12ks∑j=1Ns(Lj−L0j)2(2)Wb=12kb∑l=1NbLltan2(θl2)where Nsand Nbrepresent the number of springs for stretching and bending, respectively. L0jand Ljare the lengths of a spring for stretching in the natural state and after deformation, respectively, and θlis the contact angle between neighboring elements. To express the resistance to change in the surface area of the CM and NE, potential functions for the area were introduced. Both the resistance to change in the surface area of the whole membrane and that in an area of a local element were considered. The former corresponds to the situation where lipid molecules can move freely over the cytoskeletal network. The latter corresponds to the situation where the movement of lipid molecules is restricted to a local element. To account for the whole area change and local area change, we defined the potential functions WA(whole area change) and Wa(local area change); mathematically, they are given by(3)WA=12kA(A−A0A0)2A0(4)Wa=12ka∑e=1Nec(Ae−A0eA0e)2A0ewhere A and Aeare the areas of the whole membrane and each triangular mesh on the CM, respectively. Subscript 0 denotes the natural state, kAand kaare coefficients for the whole and local area constraints, respectively, and Necis the number of elements.Thus, the total elastic energies stored in the CM (k=CM) and NE (k=NE) is expressed as(5)Wk=Wsk+Wbk+WAk+Wak.In the present study, we assumed the situation where a cell is just seeded in collagen gel construct. Under this assumption, cytoskeletal filaments in the cell are not aligned in a particular direction. Based on this assumption, CSKs were randomly chosen without overlap from all possible candidates of CSKs that were created by connecting two nodes on the CM. Because cytoskeletal networks lie beneath the CM is modeled as a part of CM, CSKs that were made by connecting adjacent nodes were excluded. Based on Hooke’s law, a potential energy WCSKgenerated by shortening or lengthening all CSKs was modeled as(6)WCSK=12kCSK∑i=1NCSK(li−l0i)2where kCSKis the spring constant of the CSK, l0iand liare the length of CSKiat the natural state and after deformation, respectively, and NCSKis the total number of CSKs.Because the cytoplasm is present between the CM and NE, the NE is received forces by the movement of the cytoplasm in accordance with the deformation of the CM. Based on the consideration that the cytoplasm is composed mostly of a cytosol that has highly-fluidic nature, we modeled the physical interaction with the CM and NE via a cytoplasm as a potential function, Ψ with respect to the distance between them for the sake of simplicity. Mathematically, it is given by(7)Ψ=∑i=1NnCM∑j=1NnNEΨij(8)Ψij={kn{πyij2−tan(πyij2)}(−1≤yij≤0)0(0<yij)where Ψijis the interaction between node i on the CM and node j on the NE; NnCMand NnNEare the number of nodes on the CM and NE, respectively; knis a parameter used to express the interaction between the CM and NE; yij=(dij−δ)/δ, dijis the distance between node i on the CM and node j on the NE; and δ is the radius difference between the CM and NE in their natural state. Since a quasi-static deformation was assumed, viscous nature of the cytoplasm was not taken into account.A volume constraint was applied to determine the shapes of the CM and NE. Here, the volume constraint was imposed by a potential function, WVdefined as(9)WVj=12kVj(Vj−V0jV0j)2V0jwhere j denotes the CM (j=CM) and NE (j=NE), kVis the volume elasticity, V is volume, and subscript 0 denotes the natural state.In the present study, we assumed a tissue as a collagen gel construct. Although a tissue is essentially anisotropic due to the presence of collagen fibers, here we modeled it as a linear isotropic material in order to simplify the problem. This assumption corresponds to the onset of culture where a tissue is just a gel. The tissue geometry analyzed here is depicted in Fig. 1(b), where the upper half of the tissue has been removed to visualize the inside. The tissue was cubic with the length of each line, 2a, of 100μm. The tissue was hollowed spherically at its center to embed a cell. For further modeling, a Cartesian coordinate system (x, y, z) was instituted at the origin, with O defined at the center of the tissue. Three axes (x, y, z) were defined along the line connecting the origin O with the center of an edge face of the tissue (see Fig. 1(b)). The tissue model consists of solid finite elements. The tissue region was divided into first-order tetrahedral meshes such that nodal points and elements on the cell surface coincided with those on the tissue at their boundary. As a result, the nodal points at the boundary between cell and tissue had both natures of a cell and tissue. A strain energy density function at element i, Wit⁎is given by(10)Wit⁎=12σi:εiwhere σiis a Cauchy stress tensor and εiis a Green-Lagrange strain tensor of the element i. Green-Lagrange strain was introduced for considering geometrical nonlinearity. The total strain energy, Wtwas calculated simply by taking a summation of Wit⁎over all elements as(11)Wt=∑i=1NetWit⁎Viwhere Viis the volume of a tetrahedral element i and Netis the number of elements. Here, assuming that the tissue is an isotropic linear material, the Cauchy stress tensor is described by(12)σ=νEt(1+ν)(1−2ν)(trε)I+Et1+νεwhere Etis the Young’s modulus of the tissue, ν is a Poisson ratio, and I is a unit tensor. Further, the Green-Lagrange strain tensor is given by(13)ε=12{∂u∂r+(∂u∂r)T+∂u∂r(∂u∂r)T}where u=(ux, uy, uz) is a displacement vector, r=(rx, ry, rz) is a positional vector, and superscript T denotes the transpose of a vector.The deformation of a cell and a tissue was simulated by moving nodal points such that the sum of strain energies stored in a cell, Wc(=WCM+WNE+WCSK+Ψ+WVCM+WVNE), and that in a tissue, Wt, was minimized. A flowchart of the simulation is illustrated inFig. 2. After defining the initial geometry of a cell and a tissue, a boundary condition was specified, and strain energies Wcand Wt(defined in Sections 2.1 and 2.2) were calculated. According to the virtual work principle, forces exerting on node L are expressed by(14)FL=−∂∂rL(Wt+Wc)where rLis the positional vector of node L. The position of each nodal point with mass m is updated by solving Newton’s motion equation(15)mr¨L(t)+γṙL(t)=FL(t)where a dot means the time derivative, γ is an artificial viscosity. Note that, as shown in Eq. (14), nodes on the boundary between the cell and tissue undergo forces from both the cell and the tissue. Discretization of Eq. (15) by forward difference yields(16)mvL(t+Δt)−vL(t)Δt+γvL(t+Δt)=FL(t)where v is velocity vector,Δtis an increment of time. Rearranging Eq. (16) with respect tovL(t+Δt), it is described as(17)vL(t+Δt)=mvL(t)+FL(t)Δtm+γΔt.The position of node LrL(t+Δt)is thus calculated from(18)rL(t+Δt)=rL(t)+vL(t+Δt)·Δt.The geometry of the cell and tissue under the current boundary condition is determined using a quasi-static approach. In other words, Eq. (18) was solved repeatedly under the same boundary condition until a change in ratio of the total energy, W was sufficiently small. Convergence was assessed at every 1000 computational steps, n, and judged when W satisfied(19)|WN−1−WNWN|<eWwhere N is a number of convergence decision and eWis the threshold for the energy change.In our previous study [14], we investigate the strain transmission from a tissue to CSKs only when the tissue was uni-axial stretched. In the present work, to understand basic characteristics of collective CSKs responses with tissue deformation, three types of basic deformation, namely, uni-axial stretch, uni-axial compression, and pure shear, were applied to a tissue, as illustrated inFig. 3. Imagine a cubic object made of an incompressible elastic material with line length of 2a and the Cartesian coordinate system (x, y, z) defined at the center of the object with their axes being perpendicular to face the center of the cube. When the object is stretched by stretch ratio λzuniaxially in z direction, it is compressed in x and y directions due to the Poisson effect. Mathematically, stretch ratio λxand λyin x and y directions are expressed as(20)λx=λy=λz−1/2.Similarly, when the object is compressed in the z-axis by λz, stretch ratio λxand λyare expressed as Eq. (20) where the object deforms such that it is expanded in x and y directions. The uni-axial compression is equivalent to equi-biaxial stretch if frictions at compressive surfaces are neglected. Pure shear deformation is achieved by stretching the object by λzin the z direction while imposing constraints on y-displacements at y=−a and a to allow deformation only in the x direction. Stretch ratio of the object subjected to the pure shear deformation is therefore given by(21)λx=λz−1,λy=1which yields a principal shear deformation γ of(22)γ=λz−λz−1inside the object. The pure shear is also known by the names “constrained tension” [19]. Hereinafter, these deformations are simply referred to as stretch, compression and shear.In the actual simulations, stretch was applied to the tissue by moving nodes at z=a in the direction of positive z while fixing nodes at z=−a. For compression, nodes at z=a were moved in the direction of negative z while nodes at z=−a were fixed. In stretch and compression, nodes at z=−a and a were constrained in the z direction, but free in the x and y directions. Shear deformation was simulated by moving nodes at z=a in the direction of positive z, fixing those at z=−a. In addition, y-displacements of nodes at y=−a and a were constrained, and nodes at x=−a and a were moved in the x direction such that the tissue volume was constant.In the cell model, parameters are the same as the cell model with randomly-oriented CSK model in our previous study [14]. Nsand Nbwere both 966, NnCMand NnNEwere both 324, and Necwas 644. For the CM, m=1.0×10−9μg, ks=7.0×106μg/s2, kb=6.1×103μgμm/s2, kA=2.7×107μg/s2, ka=3.0×106μg/s2, kV=5.0×106μg/(μm/s2), and kn=8.0 ×106μgμm/s2. For the NE, the mass was set to be half that of the CM, while other parameters were twice those of the CM. The spring constant of the CSK kCSKwas set at 1.5×106μg/s2 and the CSKs were assumed to have a natural length when the cell was in its natural state.The method to determine each spring constants is described in the Ujihara et al. [15]. In brief, spring constants ks, kA, and kafor in-plane deformations of CM were adjusted such that the elastic energy stored in the cell model equaled to the one obtained when CM is modeled as a continuum during the simulation of a tensile test of a cell. kbwas determined such that the bending energy Wbcalculated from Eq. (2) at initial state of the cell equaled the bending energy WBanalytically calculated [20]. kVwas determined such that a cell incompressibility is assured during the simulation. knwas determined such that the load-deformation curves obtained by the simulation fit in a range of experimental data obtained tensile tests of single cells. Although kVand knwere not determined based on experimental data, we assured that they had little influence on the cell behavior. kCSKwas determined based on their elastic modulus of an actin bundle [21].The apparent Young’s modulus of a cell Ecis estimated from a numerical tensile test of a cell. A cell was stretched quasi-statically, as described in Ujihara et al. [15]. A linear regression analysis was performed for stress–strain data of the stretched cell in a strain range from 0 to 0.1 under the assumption that the intercept was zero. Ecis then estimated as the slope of the regression line. With the parameters described above, Ecwas 1kPa.The number of nodes (Nnt) and elements (Net) of a tissue were 3120 and 14,610, respectively. The virtual mass on the node m was 1.0×10−9μg, the artificial viscosity c was 1.0×103μg/s, the Poisson ratio ν was 0.45, and convergence criteria for the energy eWwas 1.0×10−6. In our previous study [14], the Young’s modulus of the tissue, Etwas set to 10kPa (Et/Ec=10). Here, to investigate effects of the Young’s modulus of the tissue on strain transmission, simulations were carried out by varying the ratio of Etto Ecfrom 0.1 to 20.To understand mechanical behaviors of cells and cytoskeletal filaments with tissue deformations, deformations of a tissue, cell, and CSK were assessed with the following parameters. The tissue strain, εtis defined as(23)εt=DD0−1where D0 and D are tissue length in the z direction before and after deformation, respectively. The cell strain, εcis calculated as(24)εc=dd0−1where d0 and d are cell diameter in the z direction before and after deformation, respectively. The strain transfer ratio (STR) [22] was evaluated by calculating the slope of the line obtained by linear regression analysis of the relationship between tissue strain εtand cell strain εc. Here, the linear regression analysis was performed for the data of 0<εt<0.2 under the assumption that the intercept was zero. Mechanically, a STR value greater than one means that the tissue strain is greater than the cell strain. A change ratio of STR against Et/Ecis defined as ΔSTR. The CSK strain εCSKis calculated as(25)εCSK=ll0−1where l0 and l are the length of a CSK before and after deformation, respectively. The number of CSKs that are stretched (0<εCSK) and compressed (εCSK<0) is counted as NsCSKand NcCSK. To investigate essential features of collective responses of cytoskeletal filaments following tissue deformation, the existence probability P of CSK strain was calculated by counting the number of CSKs having a specified strain at intervals of 0.003 between −0.15 and 0.15, and dividing this by the total number of CSKs, NCSK.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
