@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
High-quality quadratic curve fitting for scanned data of styling design

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a method for fitting aG2quadratic B-spline curve to planar styling design data.G2continuity is attained by using a non-uniform knot vector of the B-spline curve.High-quality curves have been obtained from noisy styling design data.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Quadratic B-spline curve,Non-uniform knot vector,G,2,continuity,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We propose a new method for fitting a high-quality planar curve to styling design data by using a curvature continuous (G2) quadratic B-spline curve. In order to attainG2continuity of the B-spline curve, we use a non-uniform knot vector, which also enables the curve to be composed of fewer segments as compared to a uniform curve. In our method, control points and the knot vector of the B-spline curve are calculated separately; therefore, we can avoid solving a complicated nonlinear optimization problem. By conducting experiments, we demonstrate that high-quality curves can be generated from both artificial noisy data and real-world scanned data.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the design of free-form shapes, typically in automotive styling design, the following two requirements are essential. First, the curves fitted to input data should be aesthetic as well as be close to the data within a specified tolerance. Aesthetics is very important for a variety of curve design applications, and studies on aesthetic curves have been rapidly developed in recent years  [1,2]. Aesthetics is generally represented by the monotonicity of curvature  [3] because a subtle change in curvature affects the quality of a curve, and it is extremely difficult to control such changes  [4]. Second, low-degree curves are preferable to higher-degree curves or other complex expressions, so long as the design objective is attained by connecting low-degree curves such as Bézier and B-spline curves  [5].A planar curve is the most fundamental free-form shape, and the quality is highly desired. As a typical example, planar curves appear in surface modeling for scanned clay models of cars (Fig. 1). When a curve is properly given, the surface generated by sweeping it can ensure high-quality of the shape. Fig. 2shows an example of section curves created by CAD experts along with their curvature profiles. The curvature profile indicates the normal directions of a curve by the scaled magnitude of curvature or its radius.In practice, CAD experts struggle with the following two aspects of creating high-quality curves that satisfy the requirements mentioned above without undesirable curvature extrema: (i) finding the minimal number of features such as locations of curvature extrema (curve segmentation), and (ii) creating aesthetic curves for each segment so as to represent a totally smooth shape for each part. Here, we notice that CAD experts often create curves with no inflection point (non-vanishing curvature). In fact, we can observe that each part shown in Fig. 2 has a curvature of constant sign. If such a point exists in the data and should be represented, CAD experts split the input data at that point and create their respective curves.It is difficult to deal with the problems mentioned above by using curves of degree 2, mainly because such curves are incapable of representing free-form shapes owing to insufficient degrees of freedom. In fact, existing commercial software tools provide a functionality for generating Class A curves of degree 3 or higher. However, quadratic curves offer several advantages such as monotonicity of curvature and robustness of fitting to noisy data. Therefore, in this paper, we address the issue of fitting a quadratic planar curve withG2continuity to styling design data.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We have presented a method for fitting quadratic curves to styling design objects. Based on experiments conducted using several types of data, we have reached the following conclusions:•by using a non-uniform knot vector, our method can generate a planarG2quadratic B-spline curve;the quality of the generated curve is nearly similar to that of the curve created by CAD experts (high-quality) except for the limitations mentioned above and the existence of slope discontinuity in the curvature;our algorithm is simple and easy to implement.In the case of slope discontinuity,•log-curvature fairing can make the curve smooth within a small error.Further experimental investigation is required to analyze the practical effectiveness of our method. Moreover, the generation of surfaces for styling design requires high-quality spatial curves and section curves. Hence, in the future, we plan to extend this study to the generation of spatial curves and high-quality surfaces.