@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Curvature tensor computation by piecewise surface interpolation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Closed form Taubin integral for smooth or piecewise smooth surfaces.An improved local surface interpolation scheme for triangular meshes.Novel method for accurate curvature tensor estimation of triangle meshes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Triangular meshes,Curvature tensor,Taubin integral,Piecewise surface interpolation,Closed form formula,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Principal curvatures (or equivalently mean and Gaussian curvatures) and principal directions are fundamental differential invariants in differential geometry. They are often referred to as the tensor of curvature and can be used to characterize the local shape of a surface. In CAD and computer graphics, curvatures are frequently used for shape processing  [1], segmentation  [2] and surface interrogation  [3,4], and principal direction vectors are essential quantities for surface remeshing  [5], non-photorealistic rendering  [6,7] or texture mapping  [8]. In computer vision and medical image analysis, these differential invariants are extensively used for recognition, registration, and free-form shape analysis  [9,10]. Mathematically, the tensor of curvature is defined for twice differentiable surfaces. In practice geometric data are often available as polygonal (typically triangular) meshes. Therefore when we discuss the curvatures on triangular meshes, we mean the curvatures of smooth surfaces that the meshes represent. Since in general we do not have the analytic representation of the underlying smooth surfaces, the true surface curvature information cannot be computed directly. In this paper, we present a novel method for accurately estimating the tensor of curvature of a subjacent, unknown, smooth surface from a triangular mesh.Many methods have been developed for estimating curvatures or curvature tensors on triangular meshes accurately or robustly. See for example Refs.  [11,12,9,13,14] and references therein. When both principal curvatures and principal directions are estimated, the known techniques can roughly be classified into three categories.(1) The first category estimates principal curvatures and principal directions by first estimating normal curvatures along a few sampled curves or directions  [15–18]. By using Euler’s theorem and Meusnier’s theorem, a set of equations describing the relation between the principal curvatures and the pre-estimated normal curvatures is built. Then the principal curvatures and directions can be found by solving the equations using a least squares approach. The advantage of approaches of this category is efficiency and simplicity. However, the estimation accuracy is usually not very high and depends heavily on the sampling frequency, mesh resolution and mesh accuracy. The approaches may also suffer from robustness problems due to insufficient sampling rates.(2) The second category is known as local surface fitting methods. The methods compute a simple analytical surface that locally approximates the mesh around a vertex and the principal curvatures and directions can then be computed by applying classic differential geometry methods to the obtained analytical surface[19–22]. Usually, 1, 2, or even 3-ring neighborhood of the mesh at a vertex is chosen as the local region and a lower order polynomial surface is typically used to fit to the points and/or normals of the chosen neighborhood. When the input data are accurate, local surface fitting often produces good estimation. However, surface fitting methods depend on which neighborhood to fit. This kind of method may suffer heavy computational cost or numerical stability problem because a linear system has to be solved for each vertex.(3) The third category is discrete methods. Discrete methods attempt to calculate the curvature tensor directly from the local region of a mesh. Rusinkiewicz  [23] proposed to compute curvature tensors using finite difference and least squares fitting. Cohen-Steiner and Morvan  [24] proposed to compute average curvature tensor based on normal cycle theory. Another famous approach in this category is Taubin’s integral method that computes the curvature tensor via eigen-analysis of a3×3symmetric matrix  [25]. The 3×3 symmetric matrix, which we call Taubin integral, is defined by an integral of a normal-curvature-weighted second order symmetric tangent tensor. Given a triangular mesh, the Taubin integral for each vertex is approximated by a weighted tensor sum over the neighborhood around the vertex. Some variants or extensions have also been proposed to compute the tensor matrix from the input data  [26–28]. In general, discrete methods are very efficient and somewhat robust. However, the accuracy of estimation is adversely affected by obtuse triangles in the mesh and valences other than four or six  [12].The performance of a particular curvature estimation method may be affected by many factors such as the presence of noise, valences of the mesh, mesh resolution, and normal vectors  [12,9]. Nevertheless, the most important concerns about a curvature tensor estimation algorithm are its accuracy, robustness and efficiency. While many techniques have been developed to improve the robustness of curvature tensor estimation against data noise  [23,29,30], they may generate inaccurate or blurred curvatures for graphics application. In other applications such as visualization of geometric details, edge detection, surface interrogation, etc., the accuracy of curvature tensor estimation plays an important role.Our work is inspired by Taubin’s integral method. Taubin’s method has a linear complexity, both in time and in space, as a function of the number of vertices of the mesh. All the computations are simple and direct with closed form expressions and the estimation results are reasonably accurate. However, it is noticed that in Taubin’s approach, the calculation of integral is discretized based on the vertex valence and approximated based on the geometry of a triangular mesh. Since the input triangular mesh is only a linear approximation of a subjacent, unknown, smooth surface, we believe that for a triangular mesh with normal vectors at vertices, each triangle can be replaced by a surface patch that can better approximate the underlying surface and the computation based on the appropriately chosen patch can yield more accurate curvature tensor estimation. This motivates us to estimate curvature tensors on triangular meshes by computing continuous Taubin integral and interpolating piecewise smooth surfaces to the meshes.The main contributions of the paper are as follows.•A closed form expression is derived for the Taubin integral at the joint point of a set of parametric surface patches that may not beG2continuous but only have a common tangent plane at the point. The closed form Taubin integral at any point in a single surface patch is also obtained.An explicit, local scheme is presented for constructing piecewise cubic triangular Bézier patches to interpolate vertices and vertex normals of a triangle mesh. The free coefficients for every Bézier patch are carefully estimated for achieving high accuracy estimation of curvature tensors at vertices.A weighted sum of Taubin integrals is proposed, which leads to a robust scheme for curvature tensor estimation on meshes with data noise, and a unified algorithm is proposed to estimate curvature tensors for triangular meshes with accurate or noisy data.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
