@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Digital modeling technology for full dental crown tooth preparation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new automatic digital modeling technology is proposed to design full dental crown tooth preparation.Margin line of the tooth preparation could be designed in advance.The implicit surface of a radial basis function was used to quickly and accurately construct the tooth preparation׳s occlusal surface.Our method can guarantee the design accuracy of the full crown tooth preparation (e.g. the shoulder width and the convergence).

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Digital modeling for tooth preparation,Margin line,Convergence angle,Parametric constraints,Implicit surface,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A dental defect is one of the most common oral diseases, and it often requires a full crown restoration. In this clinical operation, the dentist must manually prepare the affected tooth for the full crown so that it has a convergence angle between 4° and 10°, no undercuts, and uniform and even shoulder widths and depths using a high speed diamond bur in the patient׳s mouth within one hour, which is a difficult task that requires visual–manual operation. The quality of the tooth preparation has an important effect on the success rate of the subsequent prosthodontic treatment. This study involved research into digital modeling technology for full dental crown tooth preparation. First, the margin line of the tooth preparation was designed using a semi-automatic interactive process. Second, the inserting direction was automatically computed. Then, the characteristic parameters and the constraints on the tooth preparation were defined for the model. Next, the shoulder and axial surface of the tooth preparation were formed using parametric modeling. Finally, the implicit surface of a radial basis function was used to construct the tooth preparation׳s occlusal surface. The experimental results verified that the method of digital modeling for full crown preparation proposed in this study can quickly and accurately implement personalized designs of various parameters, such as the shoulder width and the convergence angle; it provides a digital design tool for full crown preparation.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A dental defect is one of the most common hard tooth tissue diseases in oral clinical practice [1]. Full dental crowns and other prosthodontic methods are often needed to reconstruct the anatomy of the affected tooth and the physiological function of chewing. Currently, this is the most widely used prosthodontic technology. The purpose of tooth preparation is to create a suitable three-dimensional restoration space for a full crown restoration made from a known material by applying the subtraction process to the affected tooth. The quality of the tooth preparation is significant for the functional esthetic effect of the reconstruction of the affected tooth and the long-term prognosis of the dental restoration.The morphology of a full crown tooth preparation must satisfy mechanical, biological, and esthetic requirements. First, a shape that promotes retention is conducive to soundness and durability when the prosthesis is subjected to the mechanical effects of the occlusion system. The total occlusal convergence (TOC) of the tooth preparation is an important retention indicator. Wilson et al. [2] reported that a TOC between 6° and 12° maximizes the tensile retention. After further study, Petal et al. [3] proposed an ideal convergence standard of between 4° and 10°. Second, the morphological design of the tooth preparation should minimize the ablation of healthy hard tissue in the remaining tooth, and the crown׳s anatomy should be as similar as possible to reduce the excessive exposure and loss of dentin and to avoid wear to the marrow and tooth fracture. The study of Emara et al. [4] showed that the morphology of a tooth preparation should match that of the crown as much as possible so that the tooth tissue can be removed evenly. Edelhoff et al. [5] proposed a system for classifying comprehensive designs of full dental crown tooth preparations, and the measurement system used in this study provided an accurate method for quantifying the removal of tooth structure for a fixed prosthodontic preparation. Third, the different morphology of the prepared tooth margin affects the stress distribution when the prosthesis is in place. The study of Kohorst et al. [6] showed that the load capacity of the tooth preparation is the key factor in the long-term clinical reliability of a prosthesis. Sandu et al. [7] performed a finite element analysis of the following five margin morphologies: shoulderless, chamfer, shoulder, sloped shoulder, and beveled shoulder. The results showed that the shoulder and beveled shoulder morphologies had superior biomechanical properties. The above-mentioned studies primarily focused on the evaluation and optimization of clinical manual preparation methods.Currently, the growing demand for high-quality dental restoration leads to more challenges for dentists using an on-site manual ablation technique to form the tooth preparation. These challenges are (1) High quality is required: the design of a prosthodontic preparation often requires the elimination of all undercuts on the axial surface so that it matches the convergence angle, opens the space for the prosthesis׳s restoration, and has a shape that promotes retention and resistance. (2) The operating space is small: the dentist must perform the operation in a small and semi-closed oral cavity with obstructions due to the soft tissue of the tongue, the lips, and the cheek muscles. (3) The operation is very difficult: the dentist is required to manually perform a large number of duplicated and laborious small-scale operations, and human visual bias may make the manual positioning difficult to control. Nuha et al. [8] analyzed the quality of 117 models prepared by senior dental students, and the results showed that the average convergence angle was 39.98° and the average buccal and lingual convergence angle was 44.1°, which deviated significantly from the ideal convergence angle of between 4° and 10° proposed by Petal et al. [3]. The above-mentioned problems result in difficulties in the operation for the dentists, which leads to the low accuracy and efficiency of the preparation and seriously affects the quality of the restoration with a fixed prostheses.As a result of the rapid development of digital technology in recent years, intraoral scanning technology is being introduced into clinical practice. Silvia et al. [9] thoroughly analyzed the basic principles of an intraoral scanning system and its advantages and limitations. Oliver et al. [10] investigated the accuracy of digital modeling with the four main types of intraoral scanners currently used, and the experimental results showed that the accuracies of the intraoral scanners at the margin and at internal gaps were clinically acceptable. The technology developed for direct intraoral measurement provides accurate data for digital tooth preparation. The technique of tooth preparation has also developed from a traditional grinding process to laser ablation. Krüger et al. [11] pioneered the use of a femtosecond laser for micro-cutting dentin and enamel, and the experimental results showed that this cutting method can not only enhance the structural strength of the tooth surface but also suppress the microcracks generated during the cutting process. Kraft et al. [12] used an ultrashort pulse laser to remove tartar from a root surface. Bello-Silva et al. [13] conducted precise cutting experiments on dental hard tissue using an ultrashort pulse laser to establish a relationship between the laser׳s parameters and its efficiency at removing dental hard tissue. The cutting technology of short pulse lasers used on dental tissue has gradually become more precise, which provides an important technical foundation for precise tooth cutting when digital technology is used for dental preparation. The development of these technologies will allow automatic digital tooth preparation technology to soon become a reality [14].Three-dimensional modeling technology for personalized tooth preparation is a key intermediate step in digitally preparing a full crown; the process proceeds from intraoral scanning to intraoral cutting. However, the literature on the use of digital modeling technology for tooth preparation is sparse. Yuan et al. [15] reported that based on the three-dimensional dental data they obtained, a number of industrial computer aided design (CAD) software packages were jointly used to complete one digital design for a full crown tooth preparation; implementing it with a low degree of automation was complex. Chu et al. [16] proposed a design method based on the human characteristics of a specific case. This method used a principal component analysis (PCA) of the object to describe the main semantic parameters of the body for the reconstruction. Because the reconstruction of the main components was simplified, the precision of the model designed decreased. Samuel et al. [17] proposed a personalized method of designing a model based on a parameter-driven curve that was able to design a model for personalized foot correction. Cheung et al. [18] combined finite element analysis and the Taguchi method in their analysis of the parametric design of a personalized foot orthosis to effectively reduce the pressure distribution on the foot. Wang [19] proposed a new feature-based design that first extracted semantic features to construct a characteristic skeleton curve, and then, a Gregory patch was used to fit the characteristic curve network to rapidly establish a personalized model controlled by the semantic features.This study proposed an intuitive, easy-to-operate, and feature parameterization-based approach to modeling tooth preparation. A dental preparation design system was developed to help dentists quickly personalize the morphological features of the tooth preparation for a patient, which can reduce the complexity of the tooth preparation process, improve its quality and efficiency, and provide an important technical foundation for the rapid development of automatic technology for oral preparation.All participants enrolled and the experimental procedures in this study are in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki (revised in Edinburgh 2000). All subjects signed an informed consent form to participate in a protocol that was approved by the Ethics Committee of Peking University School and Hospital of Stomatology, P.R. China (No. PKUSSIRB-201522044).The automatic modeling procedures for tooth preparation include the following: (1) The acquisition of three-dimensional data from the affected tooth׳s surface. The affected tooth was firstly filled with a dental materials that temporarily restored the occlusal surface׳s morphology. The recovery tooth was directly scanned using an intraoral three-dimensional scanner or a plaster model of the recovery tooth was scanned in vitro to obtain three-dimensional data. (2) The design of the margin line. Based on the principles behind preparation design, the feature line was rapidly extracted in the vicinity of the gingival margin to define the margin line of the subsequent tooth preparation. (3) The calculation of the inserting direction. In accordance with the position and morphology of the gingival line, the inserting direction of the tooth preparation was automatically extracted. (4) The modeling of the tooth preparation based on its morphology. In accordance with the design parameters desired for the tooth preparation (such as the shoulder width and the occlusal convergence angle), the morphology of the tooth preparation was modeled automatically (Fig. 1).The margin line is the outer boundary of a tooth preparation shoulder; it is often placed at or above the level of the gingival margin in posterior full crown restorations. Once three-dimensional data for the tooth crown have been obtained by scanning (as shown inFig. 2(a)), the characteristics of the gingival margin can be analyzed, and the curvature of the mesh surface can be estimated using local quadratic surface fitting with a local quadratic surface,g(u,v), such that(1)g(u,v)=au2+buv+cv2+eu+fv.The blue area in the gingival margin in Fig. 2(b) represents the distribution of the mean curvature points within the threshold range. Using the set of feature points near the gingival margin and the heuristic algorithm developed by Dai et al. [20] to identify the feature line, the gingival margin line can be automatically extracted by selecting three feature points near the gingival margin. The resulting gingival line can be used as the margin line for the subsequent parts of the design process.In the inserting direction, the prosthesis enters the tooth preparation with a minimal or nonexistent barrier along the axial surface. This direction is a standard reference point for the axial tilt in the design of a tooth preparation and plays an important role in improving the prosthesis׳s position. The inserting direction of a crown prosthesis is generally unique and parallel to the long axis of the tooth crown.1.The inserting direction when there is no rootData describing the three-dimensional surface of the reproduced plaster model were obtained using an optical scanner, and its crownMwas defined by extracting the margin line.Pcis the centroid of the crownM, the boundary point set of the crownMis{St,t=0,…,n}, and the initial positioning direction isDir⇀, as shown inFig. 3(a).(2)Dir⇀=1n∑t=0n(PC−St)⇀×(PC−St+1)⇀|(PC−St)⇀×(PC−St+1)⇀|The inserting direction can be fine-tuned using the interactive method shown in Fig. 3(b).(2)The inserting direction when there is a rootA model that includes the root of the affected tooth provides a more accurate reference for assessing the stress on the affected tooth, which is the mechanical basis for the inserting direction of the prosthesis. However, due to the different morphologies of the roots of incisors, premolars, and molars, determining the inserting direction can be challenging. First, CT and optical scanning were simultaneously performed on the affected tooth, then, a three-dimensional reconstruction of the tooth model was created; it is shown inFig. 4(a) and (b). Second, the model was registered using the multi-source data fusion method proposed by Xu et al. [21] and shown in Fig. 4(c) and (d). Then, the post-fusion tooth model was divided using the geodesic distance from the geodesic origin at the approximate center point of the tooth׳s occlusal surface. The geodesic distance was determined using the Dijkstra algorithm. The geodesic interval was divided into k equal parts after normalization. When k=7, the area of the model׳s surface was as shown in Fig. 4(e). The geometric center of each region was computed. Next, the inserting direction was fitted using the method of least squares. Users can fine-tune the inserting direction using the interaction based on the morphology of the root.To model the tooth preparation, it is necessary to consider the constraints on the important feature parameters, including the shoulder widthw; the shoulder angleβ; the occlusal convergence angle2α; and the occlusal preparation thicknessd. Because tooth morphology is complex, the surface is primarily modeled using a triangular mesh. Mature industry modeling based on parametric designs using spline surface technology is not sufficient for modeling the mesh surface; therefore, automated feature-based modeling using the parameters for the semantic characteristics of the tooth preparation has certain difficulties. Currently, after preliminary manual preparation by a dentist, the measurements of the tooth preparation are mainly statistical measurements of the parameters of its sampling sections. Using the idea of cross-sectional measurement as a reference, this study proposed a method that converts complex three-dimensional model based on multiple parametric constraints into a surface model with discrete constraints based on integrating the parametric section, which improve the degree of automation and robustness of the modeling process. A cross-section,Si, in the inserting direction,Dir⇀, is selected;{Ri}is defined as the set of boundary points of the extracted margin line described above,{Qi}is the set of boundary points of the shoulder margin line,{Pi}is the set of boundary points of the axial and occlusal surfaces,Oiis the projection ofRionto the inserting direction,C0iis a section of the curve describing the morphology of tooth crown, andCi(t)=(Pix(t),Piy(t))is the approximate offset curve. By solving Eqs. (2) and (3),{Qi}and{Pi}on each cross-section that has the feature parameters of the tooth preparation can be calculated as shown inFig. 5(a).(3){γ=β−α−90cosγ=(Oi−Ri⇀)⋅V2⇀|Oi−Ri⇀|⋅|V2⇀|Qi=Ri+(wcosγ)⋅V2⇀(4){Ci(t)=C0i(t)+d⋅N(t)⇀cosα=(Qi−Pi)⇀⋅Dir⇀|Qi−Pi⇀|⋅|Dir⇀|The shoulder and the axial surface of the tooth preparation are key points for positioning and fixing the prosthesis and important parts of the parametric construction of the tooth preparation. For the shoulder and the axial surface,QiandPiin sectionSican be calculated based on the constraints on the parameters, including the shoulder width, the shoulder angle, and the occlusal convergence angle, and the section set{Si}with an axial angle ofθican be generated using the set of boundary points,{Ri}. The set of points in the radial skeleton for the shoulder and the axial surface is{Ci}, andCi=Polyline(Ri,Qi,Pi), as shown in Fig. 5(b). The surface of the shoulder and the axial surface of the tooth preparation are(5)Surfaxis(θi,Ci)=⋃i=0nSweep(Ci,Ci+1),where∑i=1nθi=360. The surface of the shoulder and the axial surface of the tooth preparation are formed by discrete sweeping and accumulating segments in the circumferential direction.The tooth preparation׳s occlusal surface should not only be morphologically similar to the occlusal surface before the preparation but also have the characteristics of a surface with smooth fossae and cusps, which are conductive to eliminating concentrated stress and improving the stability during the positioning process. The initial occlusal surface of the tooth is defined asSurftop. To ensure uniformity in the design of the tooth preparation׳s occlusal surface, an offset distance,d, in the direction of the inner normal vector is necessary for designing the tooth preparation׳s occlusal surface,Surftop1. Because the occlusal surface includes numerous anatomical features, such as dental fossae and cusps, a great deal of self-intersection is inevitable when the surface mesh is generated directly based on the vertex in the direction of the inner normal vector, which will affect subsequent processing. In this study, a radial basis function (RBF) with implicit surfaces was used to construct the occlusal surface,Surftop1. First, the set of points inSurftopis defined as{Vi}, and the feature points are interpolated using the RBF with an implicit surface,(6)D=∑i=1nλiϕ(Vi)+C(Vi),whereDis a distance field function,λiis the weight of the radial basis function,ϕ(x)is the radial basis function, and generally,ϕ(x)=x3in three-dimensional spatial interpolation.C(x)is a primary-order polynomial that ensures the affine invariance of the final surface interpolated onto the given discrete constraint points. For any pointV={Vx,Vy,Vz},C(x)is defined as(7)C(V)=c0+c1Vx+c2Vy+c3Vz.This linear system, which must be solved, containsn+4unknowns (λiandp0,p1,p2,p3), and four additional orthogonal conditions are needed for its solution [17],(8)∑i=1nλi=∑i=1nλiVix=∑i=1nλiViy=∑i=1nλiViz=0.When Eqs. (7) and (8) are substituted into Eq. (6), the following matrix form results:(9)[APPT0][λC]=[D0],whereAij=ϕ(|Vi−Vj|)andP=[1V1x1V2xV1yV1zV2yV2z⋮⋮1Vnx⋮⋮VnyVnz].Eq. (9) can be solved for the coefficientλito construct the RBF׳s implicit surface. By combining the implicit surface with the inward offset distance,d, the occlusal surface,Surftop1, can be generated using the MC (marching cubes) algorithm.The set of boundary points,{Pi}, satisfies the constraints on the convergence angle and, based on the above calculation, can be used to construct boundary, and the interior surface,Surftop2∈Surftop1, of the occlusal surface area can be cut by the boundary. The number of boundary points inSurftop2after the division is generally not consistent with the number of axial surface׳s boundary points. Due to the concection requirement between the surfaceSurftop2and axial surface, the triangular facets within a distancelfrom theSurftop2border are deleted, and generally,l=0.5mm. Finally, the shoulder and the axial surface and the tooth preparation׳s occlusal surface are stitched to generate a complete surface for the tooth preparation.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
