@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Robust topology optimisation of bi-modulus structures

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Robust topology optimisation of bi-modulus material is developed.Multiple loading conditions are considered in simulation.Material replacement method is adopted for simplifying structural analysis.Sensitivity of robust compliance is derived.Optimal topology is found to be force-direction dependent when materials display bi-modulus behaviour.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Robust design,Topology optimisation,Bi-modulus,Multi-stiffness structures,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study proposes a robust topology optimisation method for the design of bi-modulus structures under uncertain multiple loading conditions (MLC). The objective of the design optimisation is to minimise the standard deviation of the weighted structural compliance. The gradient-based method is applied to perform a sensitivity analysis for the identification of optimal design variables. A material replacement method is used to overcome difficulty in the sensitivity analysis due to the stress-dependent behaviour of the original bi-modulus material. In the material replacement operation, two new isotropic materials are identified to replace the original bi-modulus material according to its two moduli. To reduce the side effects of the material replacement operation on the final design, the local stiffness is modified in terms of the stress state. Typical numerical examples are used to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method to the final design, including the load uncertainty on the optimal bi-modulus layout, as well as other factors, such as loading direction and the ratio between the two moduli of the bi-modulus material. The comparison between layouts of isotropic and bi-modulus materials also shows that the final bi-modulus material distribution is sensitive to loading directions in practical designs.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Topology optimisation is a powerful computational tool for the conceptual design stage of structural optimisation. Optimising the topology of a structure is highly challenging because it is required to automatically determine an optimal material layout in the design domain. Topology optimisation has undergone considerable development over the past two decades with a variety of applications  [1]. Topology optimisation can essentially be regarded as a numerical procedure to iteratively re-distribute a given amount of material to optimise a prescribed objective function under specific constraints in a reference domain subject to supports and loads. Thus far the typical topological optimisation methods include the ground structure-based method  [2], the homogenisation-based method  [3], the SIMP method (solid isotropic material with penalisation)  [4,5], the ESO (evolutionary structural optimisation) method  [6–8], and the level set method, which has emerged recently  [9–11].There are a number of uncertainties in the design of structures, including the operating environment, which can be modelled using various methods  [12] such as the reliability-based optimisation (RBO)  [13,14] and the robust design optimisation (RDO) methods  [15–17]. In engineering, variations as a result of uncertainties can lead to significant performance changes for the structural system. Thus, there is increasing demand to quantitatively consider the impact of uncertainties in the optimisation to ensure safety and to avoid the breakage and collapse of structural systems under extreme working conditions.In topology optimisation, uncertain variations of structural parameters, material properties and external loads will have considerable effects on optimised structural performance. The uncertain parameters are primarily taken into account in the optimisation to establish robust and reliability-based topological designs. There have been a large number of researchers who have focused their study on reliability-based topology optimisation problems. For instance, Kharmanda and Olhoff  [18] studied a reliability-based topology optimisation (RBTO) method to seek the optimal structural layout by satisfying probabilistic constraints, which considered the topology optimisation of continuum structures with stochastic distribution of the material elastic modulus, geometrical thickness and externally applied loads  [19]. Probabilistic reliability constraints were also considered in the topology optimisation of micro mechanical systems (e.g.,  [20–22]). Jung and Cho  [23] proposed a reliability-based method for the topology optimisation of geometrically nonlinear structures. Luo et al.  [24] proposed a non-probabilistic reliability topology optimisation method using ellipsoid convex models. Guest and Igusa  [25] proposed a structural topology optimisation method that considered uncertainty loads (both in the magnitude and location) and small uncertainty in the nodal location. Silva et al.  [26] investigated the reliability topology optimisation of structures under component and system reliabilities. Nguyen et al.  [27] presented a single-loop System Reliability-based Topology Optimisation method, accounting for the statistical dependence of multiple limit-states.Robustness has also recently been considered in topology optimisation problems. Kang and Luo  [28] provided a geometrically nonlinear structural topology optimisation with non-probabilistic reliability. Chen et al.  [29] investigated a level-set based robust topological shape optimisation method considering random field uncertainties in loading and material properties. Kogiso et al.  [30] discussed a robust topology optimisation method for compliant mechanisms under uncertain external loading. Seepersad et al.  [31] proposed a robust topology optimisation method for evaluating the impact of dimensional tolerances and topological imperfections. The imperfections deviate from the intended prismatic cellular structure and customised elastic material properties with local Taylor-series approximations. In addition to the reliability and robust topology optimisation, Luo et al.  [32] proposed an uncertain topology optimisation method for multi-stiffness structures using a fuzzy set theory to account for the uncertainty of the system.It can be observed that most current topology optimisation problems, especially topology designs under uncertain conditions, are based on isotropic material models, which are applicable in most cases for a wide range of practical designs. However, there exists a large family of structures with bi-modulus materials that are popular in many engineering designs, e.g., concrete, plastic, synthetic rubber, cast iron, etc. Such materials exhibit different behaviours along the same direction, i.e., the tension modulus is different from the compression module. For the design of bi-modulus structures, most conventional topology optimisation methods may not be computationally effective because the mechanical behaviour of bi-modulus materials is stress-dependent. Briefly, the principal directions of a bi-modulus material align with the local stress state; this means that they align with the principal directions of the stress tensor. For common orthotropic material, the material principal directions are fixed and the difference between the moduli occurs between different directions. Due to the nonlinearity of mechanical properties of bi-modulus structures  [33–35], iterative re-analysis of structures is required for accurately evaluating the stress field of bi-modulus structures, which will lead to several repetitions of numerical analysis to find the accurate displacement solutions before updating the design variables at every loop.There are only a very limited number of research studies concerned with topology optimisation of structures with bi-modulus materials  [36–41] or bi-strength materials  [42–45], and most of the previous investigations have not considered uncertainty in their designs  [7,8,36–45]. Although RDO has been widely studied in a border range of design applications  [16], it has not been applied to topology optimisation of bi-modulus structures due to the difficulty of sensitivity analysis for updating design variables via gradient-based approaches. Meanwhile, in a practical design, a structure is primarily subjected to multiple loading cases (MLC)  [32,46–48]. Hence, this study aims to present a new robust topology optimisation method for the design of bi-modulus structures under multiple uncertain loading cases and to investigate the effects of load directions on material layout.It is noted that there are two categories of methods of structure topology optimisation: the first is the stiffness design that aims to minimise the structural mean compliance subject to an overall volume constraint (e.g.,  [1,3,4,9–11,41]), and the second is the strength design that aims to minimise the weight of the structure subject to local stress constraints (e.g.,  [42–45,49,50]). These are two methodologies for topology optimisation of structures from two different aspects of structural stiffness and strength design philosophies. However, this research mainly focuses on topology optimisation problems in the context of structural stiffness design.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The effects of uncertainty are naturally a consideration for practical engineering design, especially for structures under uncertain multiple loading conditions. Based on material replacement operation, a sensitivity analysis for the topology optimisation of bi-modulus structures is implemented in this study. Numerical examples are given to discuss the effects of various parameters on the final material distributions. These parameters include force directions, weighting schemes of loads, standard deviations and the difference between two moduli of a bi-modulus material. From the numerical results, we can assert the following conclusions:(1) Under either deterministic loads or uncertain loads, the final layout of bi-modulus material is sensitive to force directions (i.e.,Fv.s.−F), which is compared to isotropic material layouts, which are not sensitive to force directions; (2) The values of the standard deviations of uncertain forces rather than the forces themselves influence the final material distributions; (3) The effects of the two moduli of a bi-modulus material on the final optimal design are clear. In the final structure, the amount of material that absorbs greater strain energy will be implemented as much as possible.