@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Tissue prolapse and stresses in stented coronary arteries: A computer model for multi-layer atherosclerotic plaque

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Tissue prolapse is studied computationally in stented coronary artery.Effects of plaque layers are revealed in the resulting tissue prolapse values.This can help in stent design and optimal choice of stent to prevent restenosis.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multi-layered plaque,Stenting,Restenosis,Atherosclerosis,Finite element simulations,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Among the many factors influencing the effectiveness of cardiovascular stents, tissue prolapse indicates the potential of a stent to cause restenosis. The deflection of the arterial wall between the struts of the stent and the tissue is known as a prolapse or draping. The prolapse is associated with injury and damage to the vessel wall due to the high stresses generated around the stent when it expands. The current study investigates the impact of stenosis severity and plaque morphology on prolapse in stented coronary arteries. A finite element method is applied for the stent, plaque, and artery set to quantify the tissue prolapse and the corresponding stresses in stenosed coronary arteries. The variable size of atherosclerotic plaques is considered. A plaque is modelled as a multi-layered medium with different thicknesses attached to the single layer of an arterial wall. The results reveal that the tissue prolapse is influenced by the degree of stenosis severity and the thickness of the plaque layers. Stresses are observed to be significantly different between the plaque layers and the arterial wall tissue. Higher stresses are concentrated in fibrosis layer of the plaque (the harder core), while lower stresses are observed in necrotic core (the softer core) and the arterial wall layer. Moreover, the morphology of the plaque regulates the magnitude and distribution of the stress. The fibrous cap between the necrotic core and the endothelium constitutes the most influential layer to alter the stresses. In addition, the thickness of the necrotic core and the stenosis severity affect the stresses. This study reveals that the morphology of atherosclerotic plaques needs to be considered a key parameter in designing coronary stents.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Coronary stents are tubular scaffolds used to restore blood flow in a stenosed artery. However, the incidence of restenosis is high in arteries and occurs when blockage reforms around the stent, usually in the form of a neointimal hyperplasia [1]. Though the incidence of instent restenosis is substantially reduced if drug-eluting stents are used. Several studies relate the neointimal formation to the vessel wall injury caused during the stenting procedure due to the high stresses generated around the stent when it expands [2–11]. The vessel wall undergoes radial compression toward the stent and creates a wall protrusion because of its elasticity [2,3]. This deflection of the tissue between the struts of the stent (called ‘tissue prolapse’ (TP)) has been used as a potential measure of the propensity of stent to cause restenosis [12]. The word prolapse refers to lumen loss due to the vessel wall protrusion. The association between TP and post-stented complications has been reported in several clinical studies [13–15]. On the other hand, Pericevic et al. [16] showed the importance of the plaque type in terms of the potential injury to a stented artery, which may have significant implications for in-stent restenosis. Moreover, TP is also linked to the morphology and composition of the plaque/wall tissue [17].High mechanical stresses in the thin fibrous cap during the expansion can cause rupture if they exceed the ultimate strength. The stress magnitude and distribution are determined based on the loading conditions, the plaque and vessel wall geometries, and the material properties of the plaque and vessel wall constituents [18–20].Computer modelling is widely accepted and used as a reliable approach to simulate experiments as realistically as possible. The finite element method puts forward a unique way to investigate the mechanical implications associated with the stenting procedure. Numerous computational studies have investigated the stent–artery interaction [7,12,16,21,22]. The majority of these studies have concentrated on stent design parameters. Prendergast et al. [12] carried out a finite element analysis of the prolapse in different cardiovascular stents and proposed a way to compare different stent designs and the likelihood of restenosis. They reported TP and arterial wall stresses simulated in only one repeated unit of each stent design. Capelli et al. [22] analysed the influence of different stent designs on the wall stresses and TP of the vessel wall within the stent units. However, how the presence of plaque may affect the risk of restenosis has not been investigated to date.The current study will investigate the effect of plaque morphology on wall deformation and stresses in stented coronary arteries. These characteristics are vital as they influence local haemodynamics and provoke the progression of in-stent restenosis [23]. Finite element simulations are performed to model the atherosclerotic plaque as a multi-layered structure.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This study introduces a computational model to identify the deformation of the multi-layered atherosclerotic arterial tissue, as well as the stress distribution in the post-stenting stage within a coronary artery. The finite element method is implemented to simulate 10 different morphologies of stented stenosed coronary arteries. The diseased artery includes a multi-layered plaque and AW incorporated within a single unit (closed area) of a fully expanded stent. This study reveals the important role of plaque morphology in the post-stenting stage of an atherosclerotic coronary artery.Plaques with a severe degree of stenosis and thinner FC layers present higher values of TP. The thickness of the NC layer affects the TP slightly. The stress analysis is consistent with the earlier finding that the severe stenosis yields higher arterial stresses [24]. The maximum amount of stress is observed in the FC layer, regardless of the severity of the plaque, the size of the NC and the thickness of the FC. This study reveals the large influence of the FC layer in the stress and deformation achieved in the post-stenting phase. The stress drastically drops in the NC layer, which is softer than its neighbouring layers. It is observed from the present simulations that stresses in all layers are regulated by changing the morphology of the plaque. The thickness of the FC layer has the highest impact on the magnitude and distribution of the stresses. Plaques with the thinnest FC significantly elevate the stress levels.The results of this study reveal that the morphological characteristics of atherosclerotic plaque affect the post-stenting events. This aspect needs to be considered in designing the stents to prevent post-stenting complications effectively.All five authors declare that they do not have any financial, professional or personal conflict of interests.