@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Fibrous structures: An integrative approach to design computation, simulation and fabrication for lightweight, glass and carbon fibre composite structures in architecture based on biomimetic design principles

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We designed and fabricated a full-scale architectural pavilion as a fibre-reinforced polymer monocoque.We developed three digital models to design, simulate, analyse and optimize geometric solutions.We transferred biomimetic principles into the fibre-reinforced polymer laminate design.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Biomimetics,Fibre-reinforced polymers,Lightweight,Computational design,Structural engineering,Robotic fabrication,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper the authors present research into an integrative computational design methodology for the design and robotic implementation of fibre-composite systems. The proposed approach is based on the concurrent and reciprocal integration of biological analysis, material design, structural analysis, and the constraints of robotic filament winding within a coherent computational design process. A particular focus is set on the development of specific tools and solvers for the generation, simulation and optimization of the fibre layout and their feedback into the global morphology of the system. The methodology demonstrates how fibre reinforced composites can be arranged and processed in order to meet the specific requirements of architectural design and building construction. This was further tested through the design and fabrication of a full-scale architectural prototype.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Since the 1950s, the introduction of synthetic composite materials has had a profound impact on a wide range of industries including automotive, aeronautics, sailing and sports. However, despite an initial phase of experimentation in the 1960s,  [1] composite materials still have not found wide applications in the architectural environment. In the contemporary context of computational design and digital fabrication, composites have again been recognized as offering unique architectural possibilities  [2], but most projects still remain on a speculative level  [3].In this paper the authors present a novel approach which integrates robotic filament winding, material-oriented computational design, and digital simulation resulting in an ultra-lightweight, self-supporting pavilion fabricated as a seamless, monocoque construction using fibre-reinforced polymers (FRP) (Fig. 1). This interdisciplinary project was conducted by architectural and engineering researchers of the Institute for Computational Design (ICD) and the Institute of Building Structures and Structural Design (ITKE) together with students of the faculty and in collaboration with biologists of the University of Tübingen. It investigates the possible interrelation between biomimetic design strategies and novel processes of robotic production for composite structures.In architectural history, pavilions have served as vehicles for developing future concepts of architecture through the employment of new materials, fabrication techniques and design strategies. The architectural pavilion, with its reduced demands in regard to program and permanence, provides a suitable context for exploring construction-oriented innovation. The research project presented here is based on the consideration of the following 5 points:(1)Biomimetic principles: Natural systems produce highly complex structures that integrate different functional properties on a global geometric and a local material level.Fibrous composite materials: In nature, most load-bearing structures are constructed from fibrous materials. The directionality of such anisotropic materials allows to specifically strengthen defined directions of stress while reducing the overall weight of the structure.Robotic fabrication: Numerical controlled fabrication processes enable the possibility to produce differentiated parts of constant quality. The additional freedom of multi-axis fabrication processes like robotic fabrication widens up the overall machinic morphospace  [4].Computational design: Integrating algorithmic logic into the design process to design architectural structures with a complex set of constraints.Time: The overall project development time including completion of the research pavilion was limited to one year.In the first part of the paper, the authors present the relevant aspects of the biological analysis, along with the structural and morphological principles of the chosen biological role model (Homarus americanus) that were later transferred into a high-performing material system. The geometric layout, chemical composition of fibre and matrix, mechanical anisotropy and material behaviour of the biological model’s exoskeleton (Fig. 2(a))–a high-performing natural fibre composite structure–form the basis for the development of a novel structural and tectonic system in architecture.The promise of a biomimetic design approach  [2] is that through the in-depth analysis of biological role models, some of the ingenuity, resilience, efficiency, and perceived gracefulness of natural structures can be transferred into a technological application. To the extent that not only the results of the natural evolutionary process offer a source of inspiration for applications in technology, but also the process itself has become a model for computational problem solving, optimization, and design exploration in the form of evolutionary algorithms  [5]. However, the abundance of morphological differentiation in nature (form, colour, materiality) can be seen as being in sharp contrast with the hitherto application of technology in the man-made environment. This contrast is summed-up in the following quote by biomimeticist J. Vincent  [6]: “in biology material is expensive, but shape is cheap (the opposite is true in the case of technology)”.The objectives of the investigation of morphology are to (1) identify biological principles that enable lightweight, materially efficient load-bearing structures; (2) the development and integration of these principles into a computational design process in combination with aspects of constructability and fabrication to enable a performative material system  [7]; and (3) the implementation and evaluation of the developed material system in a prototypical full-scale structure.The focus of the biomimetic aspects of the research presented in this paper is on the analysis of the exoskeletons of arthropods with respect to their properties as natural lightweight fibre composites and their potential to inform applications of FRP in architecture and design. The exoskeleton (cuticle) serves multiple functions to its organism, ranging from protection against predators, to gripping and grinding food, up to optical lenses in their eyes [8]. The functional versatility of exoskeletons as well as their materiality as lightweight mono-material natural fibre-composite shells exemplify some of the “deep principles” [9] of biomimetic design research: (1) hierarchy—a hierarchical structure on multiple levels spanning from the molecular level to the global morphology of the organism where each element consists of smaller substructures made of similar molecular components; (2) anisotropy—direction dependent material properties and behaviour in relation to a locally specific fibre layout responding to predominant force trajectories; (3) heterogeneity—natural constructions are characterized by a geometric and material differentiation of their elements and thereby allow for local functional adaptations in different areas of their structures; (4) multifunctionality—fibres simultaneously serving mechanical and physiological functions  [10].While these principles can be found in most natural constructions, they are in heavy contrast with the current practice in building construction and industrial production. Here assemblies most often consist of functionally discrete elements as opposed to the functional integration that can be observed in nature. Functional segmentation corresponds to material discontinuity with its implication of joints and mechanical stress peaks, which are common challenges in building construction, whereas most natural load-bearing systems are fibrous structures characterized by material continuity and a single continuously differentiated material make-up  [11].During the course of the biomimetic research–conducted in collaboration with biologists from the University of Tübingen–a variety of possible biological role models of the phylum of Arthropoda have been investigated. Specifically, the exoskeleton of the American lobster (Homarus americanus) became of particular interest for its differentiation in geometry and materiality (Fig. 3) and subsequently served as a role model for a bottom-up biomimetic transfer process in which a selection of morphological principles could be abstracted and transferred into a technical application in architecture.The exoskeleton (cuticle) of the American lobster (phylum: Arthropoda), is a natural fibre-based composite material that combines high mechanical strength with a high functional versatility at a minimum material effort. Its material make-up has been described extensively in the literature: according to Fabritius et al.  [8], the cuticle consists of a seven-tier hierarchy starting at the lowest level (I) on the molecular scale with the monomeric saccharide units that form the crystalline chitin polymer (II). Wrapped with proteins the chitin molecules form nano-fibrils (III), which are bundled into protein–chitin fibres (IV). On the fifth level of hierarchy chitin–protein fibres are organized in parallel into planar sheets (V) forming stacks in which the main fibre-direction of the sheets gradually rotates around the normal axis of the cuticle from one sheet to the next, thereby creating a twisted plywood structure (VI). This helicoidally arranged structure forms the three main layers (exo-, endocuticle, and membranous layer) of the cuticle (VII), each of which can vary in height (Fig. 4).Of particular interest for an application in the context of FRP are the coating of chitin (filament) with protein (sizing) of the nano-fibrils starting on level III, the bundling of filaments into the fibres (rovings) on level IV and their interaction with the protein matrix, the parallel arrangement of the chitin–protein fibres into sheets on level V, the helicoidal stacking of the sheets into a plywood-like structure (VI), and finally combinations of layers of different properties in the cuticle (composite) on level VII. Consequently, the resultant mechanical properties of the composite are a function of the compound behaviour of the plywood layers and their varying fibre orientations on the sheet-level. The multi-layered hierarchy of the lobster’s cuticle and its capacity to continuously vary thickness (stacking height) of its layers and fibre orientation of the sheets result not only in a seamless, lightweight, redundant, and resilient structure, but also offer a wide range of functional, material, and geometric properties within the same material system.Following the analysis of the biological role model, a so-called performance catalogue has been established which relates the relevant biological principles to technical and design principles of FRPs across six orders of magnitude (1×10−5–1×101  m) ranging from the material level described above to architectural and structural applications described below. Specifically, the following biomimetic principles were identified, abstracted and activated as drivers in the subsequent design and implementation stage:•Functional integration—ranges from optical lenses (transparency), and the soft membranes between the segments on one side of the spectrum, to the extremely tough pincer claws on the other side (adjustable stiffness). The shell not only serves load-bearing purposes (structure) and protection from predators but also represents the spatial separation between organism and its environment (enclosure).Heterogeneity—the gradient variation of material properties and geometry, where geometric differentiation is expressed in varying degrees of curvature, folds, and scale. The mechanical behaviour of the overall shell is a function of the interaction of material properties and geometry.Anisotropy—the cuticle varies its structural behaviour continuously between anisotropic and isotropic over the whole arthropod’s body, which allows the identification and abstraction of very pronounced arrangements: (1) for predicted loads in similar directions, unidirectional fibre arrangements align the material properties to achieve the best strength–weight ratio (found e.g. along the legs of arthropods) (Fig. 5(A)); (2) for wide areas with unpredicted forces that can occur in various directions, the cuticle consists of a characteristic helicoidal fibre arrangement (Fig. 5(B)). The finely tuned anisotropic material behaviour is determined by fibre orientation, stacking height, sequence of the layers, and fibre–matrix ratio. Because of the direction-dependent properties, geometry is directly affected by the material make-up and vice versa.Within the last few years, the state of the art in fibre technology has rapidly progressed. New materials and especially new computer-controlled fabrication techniques have been devised to produce specific products with consistent and reproducible quality. Depending on the field of application, the production quantity (batch size) and design of the product, different manufacturing techniques might show advantages and disadvantages. The following section attempts to give an overview (Table 1) on considered FRP fabrication techniques for the presented research project.The traditional manual hand layup requires a high degree of craftsmanship expertise. If carefully fabricated it provides consistent quality combined with the highest degree of flexibility in material and shape differentiation but at the cost of extensive labour. In most cases, woven fibre sheets are cut into shape and laid out manually on a carefully finished mould. Then again manually, resin gets equally applied on the fibres just until they show a fully saturated condition  [12]. Through this mainly manual process, very complex elements can be laid up by varying the type, size and directionality of the fibres. Since fabricating and finishing the mould usually consumes most of the cost and time resources, the moulds are designed to offer the potential of reuse for the production of several copies, and are therefore often stainless steel moulds the cost of which can be amortized only through large production batches.The pultrusion process is a widely used industrial process. It allows fabricating composite parts similarly to extrusion processes. Fibres get unrolled from a big spool, soaked in a resin bath and then pulled through a die with constant opening geometry to produce a semi-manufactured or semi-finished product with constant cross-section. The plate and profile shaped parts find their applications in a wide range of areas within the construction industry, since this straightforward process produces simple, universal parts with reliable quality and high fibre–matrix ratio  [12]. Due to its constant profiled die, it is very difficult to achieve differentiated shapes or fibre distribution within the pultruded profile using this technique. Therefore, design possibilities are highly constrained and do not allow to explore the full potential architectural freedom of a purely composite based pavilion.The automated fibre placement (AFP) method describes a particular process for robotic placement of fibres on a mould. Fibres, usually pre-impregnated fibres with resin (prepreg), are used in combination with a multi-axis industrial robot equipped with a specific placement effector to build up parts with differentiated materiality. Currently, this method only finds its application in high performance products in fields like aerospace or sailing sport products (fibre-reinforced racing sails)  [13].In the process of filament winding, long continuous composite fibres get transferred from a roll, through a resin bath, to an effector that coordinates the placement of the fibres. This relatively simple method for fabricating high performance composite parts is mainly used for rotational parts like composite pipes, electrical conduits, or tanks  [14]. It has been successfully applied in different fields ranging from mechanical to aerospace, and it has been proven to be highly efficient both in terms of cost and efficiency for the production of rotational symmetric components, like aeroplane fuselages. Although fairly flexible as regarding the possibilities of shape differentiation (Table 1), this fabrication method still requires to manually operate on the semi-finished components to take care of detail elements such as joints or openings. For instance, in aerospace the portholes are traditionally cut into the composite fuselage, an operation which obviously weakens the mechanical performance of the structure as it disrupts the fibre flow and continuity. On the other hand, the small surface of the openings compared to the overall body of the fuselage does not pose specific structural problems and has been proven to be more than satisfactory.In the light of the aforementioned manufacturing methods for fibre composites, it is clear that all methods require the production of a positive mould onto which the fibres should be placed. For this prototypical, architectural project, there was no necessity to fabricate several copies. Moreover, it was important to reduce the manual labour to a minimum to be able to achieve a design prototype on an architectural scale within the short time span of the project. Given these premises, the following question occurred: If no copies are intended, why fabricate a mould at a size and finishing level of a pavilion itself? To overcome these major drawbacks, a coreless winding process was developed for the production of the large scale prototype meant to test the potential and advantages of this innovative approach. This approach represents a novelty in the production of double-curved surfaces by winding. So far, the only method not requiring a winding core solely allows the manufacturing of pipes  [15]. The main feature consisted in the replacement of the positive, continuous mould with a discrete linear steel frame to hold the fibres in place during the laying process. The frame serves as temporary scaffolding onto which the resin soaked fibres are then tensioned, building step by step a shell structure consisting of individual fibre layers which achieve structural stiffness and bending resistance after the matrix (epoxy) has dried out and the tempering process taken place.The properties of FRP are determined as a combination of the individual components, the fibres and matrix, and fibre volume content of the laminate. A high variability of materials and their design freedom offer great opportunities to produce a novel design. The wide range of existing commercial material systems allows to chose a specific suitable material for the fabrication method, process flow and accordingly to the desired structural properties.In this project, the composite material is based on a three component epoxy system from the manufacturer Momentive, with EPIKOTE™ as resin system and EPIKURE™ as curing agent and catalyst. By a ratio of 0.5 ppw of the catalyst, a pot life, respectively a processing time, of 6 h and a sufficient viscosity of 12 h for an adequate flexibility before the matrix begins completely to harden could be assured. After completing all windings, the structure was heat treated for 10 h at 80 °C. As carbon fibre rovings, C30 with 3300tex from SGL and as glass fibres, the direct roving from Advantex with 4800tex was chosen.To determine the characteristics of strength and stiffness of the glass fibre laminate and carbon fibre laminate (see Table 2), according to DIN EN ISO 527-4, for each laminate 3 specimens were taken directly from the manufacturing process. Thereby, the material properties of the unidirectional layer could be determined and enabled the calculation in the simulation process of the differentiated stiffness behaviour in the structure, subsequently  [16]. Each test specimen was fitted with a strain gauge to determine the stiffness of the unidirectional layer and to prevent the slip of the clamping jaws (Fig. 6). The average value was reduced by a safety factor on the material side to cover the fluctuations of the production quality. The assessment took place in accordance to the design concept of the BÜV-Guideline (BÜV-Empfehlung) (Table 3).To successfully implement the design strategies of high-performing and materially efficient fibre-composites into a built architectural prototype, it is necessary to develop an integrated workflow which takes into account the interconnected defining parameters bridging between material science, structural engineering, architectural design and robotic fabrication. For the development of the project, three digital simulation models were constructed to generate and analyse design solutions. This integrated design process with its digital custom tools enables first defining a specific design morphospace through the implementation of specific boundaries and then navigating through the morphospace by exploring a variety of design variations. The digital design exploration was constantly enriched by empirical data through physical design and material experiments. The empirical work allowed validating the custom digital design, engineering and fabrication simulation models. The resulting non-linear, integrative design approach allowed to synchronously accommodate the reciprocal complex requirements. Here, the authors present a design methodology that stands in contrast to the more traditional design approach where the idea and geometry is determined a priori and engineering and material knowledge is subordinated.First, an abstracted, geometric representation model (GRM) was developed to explore the overall configuration and appearance of the pavilion to generate an approximated visual representation of the final result. For the GRM, associative non-uniform rationalb-spline (NURBS) surface geometry was used to construct the hyperbolic paraboloid (HP) geometry resulting from the different fibre arrangement patterns. The design’s geometry was reduced to five independent yet reciprocal connected influencing parameters:(1)Size; defines the overall scale of the pavilion.Syntax; the syntax of a winding pattern describes the logical sequence of which fibre needs to be positioned where.Rule curves of the frame; serve as a mould and form the only physical reference for the pavilion. Their shape highly influences the overall geometry and accordingly its overall appearance.Resolution of fibres; the parameter describes the density of the fibres and is defined by the number of teeth on the rule curves.Pattern sequence; while the syntax defines the logic of a single pattern, the winding sequence describes the overall order of patterns that form the pavilion.Second, an iterative winding simulation model (IWSM) was developed to simulate the winding sequence of a single syntax pattern and analyse the internal stresses. Through scripting and the development of custom digital interfaces, the straightforward exchange of key data between the simulation and design tools was achieved and served as a basis for a material-informed design process. The mechanical response of the glass fibre reinforced polymers (GFRP) and carbon fibre reinforced polymers (CFRP) is evaluated in the first place through the Finite Elements Method (FEM), providing the analyst a set of critical information for the assessment of the structural performance. The resulting data is later fed to scripted routines intended to increase the overall efficiency of the structure by optimizing local (material) and global (geometrical) parameters with the aim of incrementing the stiffness of the system. Taking into account design constraints, fabrication aspects and mechanical behaviour, the process is repeated until a satisfactory solution is met. The digital simulation of the fibre placement process complemented and extended the initial physical form finding methods by integrating the specific aspects of robotic fabrication into the digital design and fabrication planning process. The process of form-finding the final configuration of the system implied the simulation of the entire wrapping process to find the contact points between the already wrapped layers and the currently spun fibre in the first place, in order to update the global system with the new external loading and thus finding the newly achieved form (Fig. 7).The co-existence of both carbon fibres and glass fibres was not simply dictated by aesthetical reasons, but rather stemmed from structural and fabrication considerations. Concerning the production process, the developed coreless winding method posed non-trivial issues regarding the fibre placement. To achieve a consistent quality of the fibre reinforced layers, it is necessary to guarantee enough contact between the fibres, otherwise the different layers will mechanically act independently without forming a compact surface. In order to ensure the contact between the fibres and still take advantage of the coreless winding fabrication process, a first fibre layer was spun which served as a kind of “soft mould” onto which the successive fibres were later laid upon. To avoid excessive prestressing, the first layer was thus wrapped with glass fibres, which being less stiff than carbon fibres allowed for slightly bigger deformation of the “soft mould” and a consequent reduction of the pretension stress of the fibres.Third, the global material simulation model (GMSM) analyses various geometric parametric free-form surfaces generated by the GRM and allows to detect unsuitable parameter configurations.The simulation of FRP is very different from typical modelling and analysis techniques of conventional materials. Because of the characteristic anisotropic behaviour, the orientation of the finite elements plays a decisive role, as their orientation reflects the influence of the stiffness of the material. The stiffness is determined by the individual layers of the laminate and their orientations. Therefore, a geometrical coordinate system is necessary for each layer of the material. For the presented research pavilion, the complex fibre lay-up consisted out of more than 100000 coordinate systems. The complexity in geometry and material challenges the modelling of structures through a classical graphical user interface (GUI). For this purpose, complex parametric routines were programmed to enable generating the specific stiffness ratios. Thus, to optimize the shape and at the same time the material differentiation, an interface between computer aided design (CAD) software and FEM simulation software has been developed.The direct coupling of geometry and fibre-based materiality allows analysing the structure in an early design stage and optimizing the fibre lay-up thereby  [16,17]. In addition to the material design and analysis, it is also possible to combine a shape simulation with a combined appropriate material design. This makes it possible to go fast through different variations and by connecting optimization algorithms and objective functions to define the most efficient solution of geometry in interaction with the material design (Fig. 8).The differentiation between carbon fibres and glass fibres met specific structural requirements. As previously mentioned, carbon fibres have a much higher elastic modulus(165000–210000N/mm2)compared to glass fibres(15000–23000N/mm2), almost an order of magnitude higher compared to glass. This simple mechanical property is clearly reflected into the built prototype: Initially glass fibres are used to produce the initial surfaces on the simple linear framework. These surfaces then become the “embedded mould”. In the subsequent layers, the material is differentiated based on structural requirements: where the highest stress concentrations occur (e.g. support points, compression ring) the carbon layers are more pronounced, whilst areas of less mechanical strain are resolved by the use of glass fibre layers (e.g. surfaces serving mainly as spatial division). The specific use of these two materials had the purpose of making the prototype stiffer and less susceptible to external loads than it would have been if entirely made of glass fibre. Besides structural reasons and a remarkable aesthetical effect, the differentiation of the two materials also had a strong impact on the economy of the pavilion, carbon fibres being notoriously more expensive than glass fibres.A mould for an architectural full-sized structure shows a very specific set of parameters or constraints that vary depending on the global form and fabrication process. For the presented coreless winding process, the mould is required to withstand the structural loads and stresses of the forces that get applied through the rotational motion (acceleration and braking of the positioner) and compressive stress through iterative layering of fibres. Square sectioned steel beams were chosen to design and weld, a rigid, custom yet lightweight frame construction. The frame construction was designed to be fully modular for disassembly (Fig. 9(a)). This way, after the curing process of the resin, the composite monocoque pavilion can be released from any structural support. While the various layers of the FRP structure are continuously wound over the support frame, the structure is only minimally exposed to external loading beyond the tension forces exerted by each additional fibre layer. However, after the removal of the frame the load case changes completely to the one for which the system has been optimized, i.e. self-weight and lateral loads are now transferred through the laminate to the support points where the structure interfaces with the ground.A specific teeth pattern was designed to constrain the position of already placed fibres, preventing sliding. Resolution of teeth pattern not only results in density of fibres but also limits the total amount of fibres that can be placed in one single tooth. As material for the teeth, inexpensive wooden plywood was chosen, milled and covered with a separation wax, to prevent the fibres from being permanently glued against the frame elements (Fig. 9(b)).In the following section, the authors discuss how the above-mentioned aspects and parameters of materiality, geometry, and fabrication are implemented in a custom robotic filament winding process. As mentioned previously, one of the fundamental aspects of the research is integration: not only of disciplines, but also of function through geometry and materiality. This integrative approach is facilitated in the digital realm by the integration and re-use of data models (design, analysis, fabrication), custom data structures (description of the winding logic or syntax), and associative modelling methods, which aim at enabling an unrestricted flow of information between design and analysis and the control of the robot.Similar to woven products, where the yarn is organized in a rule based manner, such kind of setup allows describing and therefore exploring as well as reproducing specific individual patterns. In this study, the winding logic (syntax) determines the position and orientation of the fibres in the laminate and therefore it is responsible for the overall mechanical behaviour and the architectural and aesthetic qualities of the pavilion design. With respect to reciprocally connected architectural and structural performance criteria, the syntax was developed and adjusted in parallel to the definition of the other design parameters.In the first stage of the syntax development, functional architectural features, such as enclosing surfaces and openings, were explored in conjunction with various structural zones, e.g. the pressure ring in the roof surface and the anisotropic zones around supports (Fig. 10).Within the robotic filament winding testing phase, the details of the syntax were parametrically adjusted by controlling the density, overlap between fibres and amount of windings. The interaction between the fibres in different layers was a central concern throughout the whole process, because the quality of the bonding between the layers is a function of the pressure between the rovings. This pressure can be described by the fibre’s so-called virtual depth being the distance of a point on a fibre stretched between two anchor points and its projected point, normal to the surface already placed on the frame. The length of this normal vector describes the force acting on the surface  [18].The constraints of the winding order therefore can be summarized as follows: (a) to maintain a constant pressure between the fibre layers in order to achieve a consistent bond between the layers in the laminate; (b) to achieve a constant change of orientation in each layer, resulting in an anisotropic mechanical behaviour which, abstracted from the growth principle of the biological role model, leads to a functionally graded structure.Subsequently, the winding logic (syntax) serves as the interface not only for the structural evaluation and optimization, but also constitutes the point of departure for the integrated generation of the robotic tool paths, the simulation of the robotic kinematics, and the generation of the robot control code.One of the challenges, regarding the robotic control and fabrication, is the fact that the syntax which can be described by a polyline as a sequential connection of reference points, the geometry of the actual robotic tool path, and the geometry of the resultant fibre layers are not coincident or topologically the same. While the relation between the winding sequence and the resultant geometry of the fibres has to be solved analytically as an intersection of all existing fibres with the one to be placed approximating the physical interaction of the fibres  [16] (Fig. 7), the relation between the syntax polyline and the robotic tool path can be described parametrically as a sequence of target points which can be extrapolated from the syntax polyline. The parameters governing this extrapolation can be distinguished into scale-independent, such as the offset of the end-effector from the anchor points on the profiles depending on the geometry of the effector, and those that are scale-dependent: these include distance parameters for lead-in and lead-out points as the effector approaches the reference points on the profiles and intermediate points which are necessary for controlling the orientation of the effector. These are necessary to ensure that the groove of the roller at the tip of the effector remains aligned with the vector of pre-tension of the roving as the effector is travelling between the anchor points on the profiles (Fig. 11).Every target point constitutes in effect a target frame or coordinate system, including origin (target point) and axes defining the orientation of the effector at each point. In between the target frames, the orientation of the effector can be linearly interpolated. The importance of the scale of fabrication becomes evident at the point where fabrication moves from the development stage of robotically winding scaled models in the laboratory on to the construction stage on site. Robotically winding scaled prototypes in a controlled environment allowed for the development and testing of the workflow, syntax, robotic control, and interaction between individual rovings and layers. On the construction site, however, the parameters of the tool path design have to be adjusted in order to match the requirements of the full-scale setup. Before the winding process could start, the prefabricated steel frame was scanned using the robot by recording reference points, i.e. programming by demonstration  [19], on each rib which allowed to generate a precise digital model of the actual ribs’ geometry and location in the workspace by fitting a curve through the measured points. This model was then used to update the winding tool paths in relation to the actual physical setup. Finally, a series of dry runs were performed, which allowed to calibrate the tool path generation in relation to the full-scale setup (Fig. 12).In contrast to previous experiences with prefabrication  [20] where all the components are within the same order of magnitude and their size is independent of the overall scale of the proposal, the scale of this project becomes a defining feature of the tool path design. While in the case of prefabrication the set of parameters that govern tool path generation usually can remain constant within the same family of components, in this case they are dependent on the overall size of the project.The specific tool path, in turn, is the defining input parameter for the kinematic simulation of the movements of the 6-axis industrial robot arm, together with the physical size of the robot and the specific fabrication setup. For the purpose of realizing the full-scale research prototype, a dedicated fabrication plant was designed to house a robot arm on site, placed on a 2-m (6.5 ft) tall pedestal with a resulting span and height of the robotic workspace of approximately 4 m (13 ft). In this setup, the robot’s movements are coupled to a vertical positioner (turn table) that acts as a 7th external axis (Fig. 13).The purpose of the simulation of the custom robotic fabrication setup is to identify possible collisions, out-of-reach positions, singularities, etc. In effect, in a reciprocal relation between design and fabrication, the physical parameters of the robotic fabrication setup are the defining features of the design of the proposal itself: the extents of operability of the robots define the maximum dimensions of the prototype. In this case, the concept of morphospaces  [4] can be utilized to strategically identify the range of theoretical solutions that are within the realm of the particular robotic setup. In fact, recent advances in computer science make it now possible to simulate all possible states of hybrid systems, i.e. computer-controlled and interacting with the physical world  [21]. Systems for which it is impossible to manually test all possible circumstances that it might encounter—the goal is to formally verify that these are free of design flaws  [22]; a modified approach has the potential to not only identify the limits of a specific robotic fabrication setup but also to parse its theoretical morphospace with respect to specific performance criteria.The seven-axis fabrication setup described above necessitates the definition of not only tool position and orientation but also the orientation of the external axis. From a mathematical point of view, there are an unlimited number of solutions to reach a given point in space in a certain orientation with seven degrees of freedom resulting in an infinite combination of axis rotation values. In our setup, however, the robot’s movement is constrained to a vertical plane of operation, which passes through the centre of rotation of the turn table (Fig. 14). This allows the unambiguous definition of the rotation of the turntable and all the dependent axes using a custom inverse kinematics solver within a parametric real-time programming environment. Even though the robot code is generated “offline”, the interactive simulation of the robot kinematics provides the designer with immediate feedback regarding the robot’s posture, possible collisions, and reachability  [23].One of the main challenges of the integrative computational design approach was the integration of the simulation of material behaviour in conjunction with the virtual robot model and the simulation of the fabrication process. Further research will therefore be directed towards implementing robotic tool path generation and kinematics simulation in a physics based environment.This research was supported by the construction of a full-sized architectural prototype. The global pavilion shape follows a pentagonal symmetry offering three open entrance areas and two closed walls, adding asymmetry to the structure. This offered an open welcoming appearance while still defining a closed architectural space. (Fig. 15).The final design takes advantage of the different appearance and mechanical properties of glass and carbon fibre. While the transparent, more inexpensive and weaker glass fibre was placed to create an enclosed space, the dark carbon fibres are specifically placed to strengthen the overall system (Fig. 16).Specific steel elements are seamlessly integrated into the foot points of the fibre design, without any cuts or postproduction of the fibre material. These elements formed the removable connection between the pavilion and the podium below (Fig. 17).The four metre high pavilion spans over a distance of eight metres while requiring a shell thickness of only four millimetres. 60 km of glass and 30 km of carbon fibres were used. In combination with the epoxy resin, a total weight of only 320 kg results. The overall robotic machine time for fabricating the pavilion was measured to a total time of approximately 130 h production time (Table 3).The development of a fabrication process, a custom integrative design approach and physical prototype design also comes with challenges. For the custom filament winding process, a constant pretension of the fibres is essential, but in practice the complex influences like winding speed, current viscosity of the resin, amount of resin in the bath, the angles between bath, effector and structure made it challenging to maintain a constant pretension.Different pretension winded patterns affect the global form. The fibres constrict in different strengths which can lead to a partially bonded laminate. An additional challenge is the guaranteed constant degree of saturation of resin of the fibres. Influencing parameters of the saturation are winding speed, viscosity of resin, amount of resin within the bath as well as the surrounding temperature and relative humidity.For leaving the pavilion scale and focusing on developing the pavilion into a building system, many additional requirements need to be addressed. The global shape will have to be increased. Generating different spatial experiences, an internal separation of the space might be necessary but also might lead to drastical changes in the winding logic/sequence, frame design or fabrication setup.The size of a one-piece monocoque design comes with additional disadvantages concerning handling and transport of the temporary building. Therefore, future research might be organized into two main categories: (1) on-site fabrication with one or several moving robot units and (2) prefabrication of construction elements that will be assembled on site.In case of moving robot units on site, this approach enables exceeding the currently reached dimensional limitations while maintaining a one-piece monocoque design even on a dramatically bigger length scale.Prefabrication of assembly pieces can be addressed via either moving robot units or moving moulds. Also the segmentation of the design system into a finite number of transportable and storable parts raises interesting new challenges like for example the resulting interfaces or joints between the components. So far, the winding process does not allow an interweaving materiality. Additionally, weaving might enable an increase of the pavilion’s structural strength and reduces surface delamination due to the iterative constriction of the fibres.Additionally, the fast developing sensor technology might allow solving current fabrication challenges. Sensory technology like real-time tension sensing or optical control system in combination with real-time feedback loops could on-the-fly adjust fabrication parameters to achieve a higher degree of control.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, the authors presented an innovative design and fabrication process for ultra-lightweight structures in the context of the building industry. The fibrous morphology of a selected biological role model was transferred to fibre-reinforced polymer materials through a process of robotic filament winding of carbon and glass fibres. Custom, automated computational design tools and simulation methods have been developed to integrate design, analysis, and fabrication into one coherent computational design approach offering new design possibilities defined by material, fabrication and architectural parameters resulting in a full-scale architectural prototype.The study presents not only the methodology and fabrication process of the prototype but also indicates a shift towards a new type of architectural tectonics (Fig. 18). Instead of using commercial semi-finished construction material, the material composition was designed from the bottom up. Therefore, the global shape of the presented ultra-lightweight, integrative structure is derived as a result from the fabrication process of the anisotropic material system. Through the use of computational design, this methodology allows designing local materiality in relation to structural and architectural requirements while reducing the overall weight of the system.