@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Conformal bubbler cooling for molds by metal deposition process

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Mold design with conformal cooling have been developed.Simulations have been done to make mold hollow but strong enough for all forces.Manufacturability is tested using metal deposition technique.Temperature distributions are uniform over the mold surfaces from the tests.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Metal deposition process,Material deposition process,Layered manufacturing,Rapid prototyping,Rapid tooling,Conformal bubbler cooling channels,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Molds with conformal bubbler cooling channels have been developed in order to reduce the cycle time of the plastic injection process, which in turn has increased the production rate. In addition, part warpage can be greatly reduced in the injection process because the temperature distribution is uniform over the mold surfaces. Molds with conformal cooling designs, however, are still limited to computer simulations for generating the cooling channels or calculating the cooling rates [1–4]. This is mainly because there is “virtually” no fabrication technique that can effectively make the complicated conformal cooling channels. Even though metal deposition processes have the potential to create such complex mold shapes, most of the metal deposition processes are still in the developmental stage in laboratories. Molds formed by some of the metal deposition processes are not suitable for real industry use because the costs are still too expensive. This paper describes how to create a mold with conformal bubbler cooling tunnels through a metal deposition process that can actually be used in plastic injection industries. Experiments are conducted to confirm the normal temperature distribution over the mold surfaces.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Almost all moldmakers recognize that the heat removal process has a significant role in injection molding, both in the mold core and the mold cavity. Cooling for mold cavities is typically done by drilling “straight” cooling channels around the cavities. The cooling channel circuits are uniformly wrapped around the mold cavities as close as possible to the shapes of the parts.For a mold core, on the other hand, moldmakers simply drill a hole (or holes) into the bottom of a core and insert either a bubbler or baffle cooling tube (or tubes), as shown in Fig. 1, in order to remove as much of the excess heat as possible from the core, resulting in uneven heat distribution over the core surface. The excess heat in the core has to be lowered to a certain temperature before the part can be safely ejected. The uneven heat distribution causes mold stress and the potential for part warping. A poorly cooled core and a longer cooling time are both expensive and wasteful.Conformal cooling has been used for many years to get the cooling lines as close to the mold surface as possible [1–4]. Moving the cooling lines closer to the mold surface can reduce the cycle time and promote a more uniform cooling of the mold surface. Some moldmakers such as Innova, for example, built molds with conformal cooling by stacking slices of mold with cooling channels milled on each layer  [5]. The cooling system complexity, however, is physically limited by the conventional fabrication capability.Instead of plugging in the bubbler cooling tubes, cooling tunnels are added to the mold by keeping the mold wall thickness constant, as shown in Fig. 2. Web or ribs are added to the mold construction as well in order to withstand the forces or pressure on the mold surface and to prevent the deflection or displacement of the mold surface during the plastic injection cycle.Obviously, this mold configuration cannot be made by any conventional fabrication methods. Material deposition processes based on layered manufacturing techniques have proved to be an efficient approach to build complex molds directly from CAD models since its appearance in the mid 1980s. However, the non-metal layered manufacturing techniques such as SLA  [6], FDM  [7], and LOM  [8] are not able to handle this job even though these techniques can create green parts with complex cooling channels. It is not an easy task to convert the green parts into metal molds. On the other hand, metal deposition techniques such as SLS  [9,10], DMD  [11], LAMP  [12], and others, have the potential to fabricate these complex cooling tunnels inside the injection molds in order to improve the uniformity of cooling.Nowadays, the cooling system designed for molds is still simple, being based on the moldmakers’ experience and some simple formulas  [13–16]. Simulations for mold cooling have received more and more attention from researchers since the early 1980s when scientific analysis was introduced into the injection molding industries  [17]. Temperature distribution in the cooling stage is predicted by different proposed methods  [18–27]. The residual stress, shrinkage and warpage are predetermined by simulation algorithms  [28–35]. However, molds formed by current metal deposition processes are still not suitable for real industry uses.Similar to other metal deposition techniques, a MIG/MAG welding torch is attached onto a CNC machine in order to perform the additive process on the mold base as shown in Fig. 3. ER70S-6 wire (Ø1.2 mm) is used in this hybrid machine setup. After building up the mold configuration layer by layer, the mold surface is finished by milling, a subtractive process (Fig. 4)  [36–42]. However, the material removal process can be done layer by layer along with the additive process if the shape of the mold is more complex.The suggested ranges of parameters are shown in Fig. 5, cultivated from literature searches  [43]. A couple of steps based on the appearance of weld bead and the amount of weld splash, described in the following paragraphs, have been done in order to find an optimal set of parameters.Firstly, voltage is alternated while other parameters are fixed. (Current: 150 amperes; standoff distance: 10 mm; Travel Speed: 300 mm/min; Shielding Gas Flow Rate: 15 l/min) By minimizing weld splash, 19 V is found to be the best voltage, as shown in Fig. 6.Secondly, other parameters are fixed, as in the previous step, except the current. The voltage is also preset at 19 V. By varying the current, it is found that 100 amperes is the best match for the preset voltage based on the amount of weld splash, as shown in Fig. 7.Similar to the previous steps, it is found that the best standoff distance is 10 mm (Fig. 8), the best shielding gas flow rate is 15 l/min (Fig. 9), and the best travel speed is 300 mm/min (Figs. 10 and 11). After going through these steps, the amount of weld splash is significantly reduced.The size of the weld bead is determined by averaging the widths (w) and the heights (h) of the cross sections along the weld bead as shown in Fig. 12. With our optimal set of parameters, the width and the height of the weld bead are 6 and 3 mm, respectively.The stepover is determined by making 5 weld beads with lengths of 50 mm each. Weld beads are “D” mm apart from each other as shown in Fig. 13. The experiment shows that the stepover should be 3.5 mm in order to get a fairly smooth weld patch with no gap between consecutive weld beads.The optimal set of parameters has been tested to make a square weld patch using two patterns of deposition paths: offset (left) and zigzag (right) as shown in Fig. 14(a), (c) and (b), (d) respectively. Similar to the previous work  [44,45], it is found from the experiments that the perimeter of the offset patch is fairly smooth compared to that of the zigzag patch. The overall length deposition path for the offset patch, however, is much longer compared to that of the zigzag patch.Thirty-one specimens for each hardness, tensile, and bending tests (Fig. 15(b), 15(c), 15(d), respectively) have been cut from the thin wall structures built by our metal deposition process. The average hardness value obtained from the hardness tests of the samples is 19.16 in HRC scale with a 96% confidence interval. The specimens for tensile tests have been tested on a universal testing machine under the standard test ASTM E8-04 at (a) room temperature and (b) an operating temperature of 80 °C; the results are shown in Fig. 16by solid and dashed lines, respectively.Fig. 16 shows the stress–strain curves of the specimens at room temperature (solid line) and an operating temperature of 80 °c (dashed line). Young’s modulus, yield stress, and ultimate tensile strength shown in Table 1have also been determined from our simulations.Microstructural analysis reveals that the mold contained relatively small ferrite grains. Average grain size of 11.1±3.1 μm is observed in the deposition area, as shown in Fig. 17. The value observed in this study is very small compared to other studies. It has been reported that the average grain size in the heat affected zone of SS400 steel could be as large as 127 μm  [46]. Our results indicate that no excessive grain growth occurred during the deposition. This is attributed to the appropriate applied voltage and current, which consequently results in proper welding heat input  [47].Two sets of thirty-one specimens for bending tests have been tested on a universal testing machine under the standard test, ASTM E290-09, at room temperature and an operating temperature of 80 °C. Fig. 18shows that there is no cracking in either specimen samples. Our results indicate that proper welding input (current and voltage) has been applied to our deposition with 98% confidence.A 5 mm-thick polypropylene (PP) part design shown in Fig. 19has been imported into simulation software to figure out the injection pressure as well as the clamping force. Fill time has been set to 10 s.From the two graphs in Fig. 20obtained from the simulation, the maximum values for injection pressure and clamping force are 3.927 MPa and 43155.144 N, respectively.After that, a mold core is designed in SolidWorks software as shown in Fig. 21(a). Fig. 21(b) shows the coolant flow from the simulation software.The three loads including (a) Injection pressure of 3.927 MPa, (b) Clamping force of 43155.144N and (c) Mold temperature of 80 °C are applied to the mold core in the software, as shown in Fig. 22.The maximum displacement of 0.095 mm occurs at the mid-point between the edge of the mold core and the web shown in Fig. 23(a). Fig. 23(b) shows the point where the minimum safety factor occurs.CAD Mold core has been converted to an STL format file, as shown in Fig. 24(a), and then imported to our software to generate slices with the predetermined layer heights, as shown in Fig. 24(b). The cross sections, or slices, are then used to calculate the deposition paths, as well as the tool paths, for surface finishing.Once the deposition and finishing paths are created, the mold base is securely fixed onto our hybrid machine. The mold core is formed through the deposition process, layer by layer, as shown in Fig. 25.The baffle cooling channel is also fabricated for comparison with the bubbler cooling channel. This is not within the scope of this paper, however. But for the sake of completeness, the fabrication of a mold with baffle cooling channels is briefly described here in this section. Fig. 26shows the configuration of a core with a baffle cooling channel.Similar to the bubbler cooling design, a mold core is designed in SolidWorks software, as shown in Fig. 27(a). Fig. 27(b) shows the coolant flow from the simulation software.The maximum displacement of 0.098 mm occurs at the middle of mold surface shown in Fig. 28(a). Fig. 28(b) shows the point where the minimum safety factor of 16.7 occurs.Similar to the bubbler cooling mold design, the mold base is then securely fastened to the hybrid machine. The mold core with baffle cooling channel is then formed by the deposition process layer by layer, as shown in Fig. 29(a)–(c). Once the top surface has been covered, as shown in Fig. 29(d), mold surfaces are then finished by CNC machining.Setup has been assembled as shown in the diagram in Fig. 30in order to find the cooling rates on the different faces of the mold core. Five thermocouples are attached to different faces defined in Fig. 31: Front, top, left, right and back. For our setup, the room temperature and cooling water temperature are controlled at 27 °C and 30 °C, respectively. Water flowrate is fixed at 15 l/min.The test has been done by the following procedures:(1)Turn on the heater and set the temperature to 80 °C and wait until the temperature of the core is constant at 80 °C.Turn off the heater and clear out the heater from the setup.Turn on the pump in order to cool down the core.Jot down the temperatures at an increment of 1 s until the temperature of the core reaches 40 °C.Repeat the previous 4 steps 10 times for all faces.Figs. 32 and 33show that the surface temperature differences of the mold with bubbler cooling are relatively small compared to those of the mold with baffle cooling. The temperature differences among the surfaces of the mold with bubbler cooling, however, are still considerably different since there is only one single coolant inlet and one single coolant outlet.For the mold with bubbler cooling, it is obviously shown in Fig. 32 that the cooling rates of the left and the top surfaces are considerably better compared to those of the front, the back and the right surfaces. This is because the coolant outlet is connected to the coolant chamber underneath the left surface, which promotes the coolant flow rate from this chamber. The heat removing rate of the left surface is, thus, greater than those of the others. Also, the cooling rate of the top surface is relatively high because the coolant underneath the top surface is always new and fresh from the reservoir.For mold with baffle cooling, the heat removing rates of the top and the right surfaces are the best because the coolant underneath the top and the right surfaces is still fresh from the reservoir. (Fig. 28) The thickness of the wall on the right surface is, however, a bit thicker than that of the wall on the top surface, which confirms the temperature difference between these two walls. For this baffle cooling configuration, the temperature of the coolant in the left chamber is higher than that of the coolant in the right chamber. The cooling rates of the front and the back surfaces are significantly lower than those of the top and the right surfaces since half of their surfaces are on top of the left coolant chamber. Similarly, the heat-removing rate of the left surface is the lowest because the temperature of the coolant in the left chamber is higher than that of the coolant in the right chamber.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
