@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An analytical representation of conformal mapping for genus-zero implicit surfaces and its application to surface shape similarity assessment

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We develop an analytical representation of conformal mapping for implicit surfaces.An analytical conformal mapping describes a continuous one-to-one correspondence.Conformal mappings from complex surfaces to simple ones are effectively obtained.Conformal mappings between two similar complex surfaces are effectively obtained.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Implicit surface,Conformal mapping,Analytical representation,Shape similarity assessment,Surface matching,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper develops an analytical representation of conformal mapping for genus-zero implicit surfaces based on algebraic polynomial functions, and its application to surface shape similarity assessment. Generally, the conformal mapping often works as a tool of planar or spherical parameterization for triangle mesh surfaces. It is further exploited for implicit surface matching in this study. The method begins with discretizing one implicit surface by triangle mesh, where a discrete harmonic energy model related to both the mesh and the other implicit surface is established based on a polynomial-function mapping. Then both the zero-center constraint and the landmark constraints are added to the model to ensure the uniqueness of mapping result with the Möbius transformation. By searching optimal polynomial coefficients with the Lagrange–Newton method, the analytical representation of conformal mapping is obtained, which reveals all global and continuous one-to-one correspondent point pairs between two implicit surfaces. Finally, a shape similarity assessment index for (two) implicit surfaces is proposed through calculating the differences of all the shape index values among those corresponding points. The proposed analytical representation method of conformal mapping and the shape assessment index are both verified by the simulation cases for the closed genus-zero implicit surfaces. Experimental results show that the method is effective for genus-zero implicit surfaces, which will offer a new way for object retrieval and manufactured surface inspection.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Shape similarity assessment methods for spatial surfaces in different poses have been broadly investigated and applied in variousengineering fields, such as Computer-Aided Design/Computer-Aided Manufacture (CAD/CAM), computer graphics, robot vision, and pattern recognition. Currently, two major ways are taken to measure the similarity between surfaces. One way is using a distance after registration (localization, alignment or pose estimation), such as the Euclidean distance, the Minkowski distance, or the Haussdorff distance, between points on one surface and the corresponding closest points on the other. The other way is using the local or global correspondence algorithms, with which the geometric shape properties of surfaces are utilized directly to compare surfaces without fine registration. The similarity metric is usually established based on the geometric shape properties that are invariant and insensitive to rigid transformation.Implicit surface matching has been widely investigated in 3D object recognition, since implicit equations that describe implicit surfaces are able to elegantly represent complex closed surfaces and analytically calculate surface geometric properties. In general, surfaces are acquired in the format of point sets by some contact-type or optical measurement devices, such as the Coordinate Measurement Machines (CMM), laser tracker systems, and structured-light 3D scanners. The smooth representations of surfaces, such as NURBUS surfaces, have been intensively investigated in the fields such as CAD. Besides this parametric method, another popular smooth representation of surfaces is obtained by using least-square fitting methods, in which the point sets are adequately approximated by algebraic equations. One of the most popular least-square fitting approaches is to fit implicit polynomial (IP) surfaces to point sets  [1]. The IP surface is a surface represented by a zero set of a polynomial, which is one of the most available and valuable representations. Its representation ability is supported by smoothing noisy point sets, interpolating missing data, and depicting both open and closed surfaces. The geometric properties of the implicit surfaces can be effectively and accurately calculated in the procedures of surface alignment, surface recognition, etc. For instance, by using the implicit equation representation, it is convenient to determine the algebraic distance from a point to a surface and to check whether the point is on the surface or not. Numerous improvements of implicit polynomial fitting method are proposed, which make the surface representation more effective, robust, and accurate.Global one-to-one correspondence between implicit surfaces in dissimilar shapes can hardly be guaranteed by using existing rigid registration methods. Most researches on implicit surface matching are concentrated on the alignment or pose estimation based on algebraic equations, which are primarily suitable for the matching of surfaces in similar shapes. Different target distance functions result in different shape similarity metrics that are sensitive to rigid transformation, though optimal alignment of two surfaces in pose can provide a minimized distance for shape difference measurement. The surface registration is a distance-based optimization process, in which the correspondence relationship is described by the closest point pairs. With the registration methods, the similarity comparison between surfaces in dissimilar shapes can hardly be robustly performed. Global one-to-one correspondence is a key issue in surface matching, since it can be used for comparison between surfaces in similar shapes or dissimilar shapes.Global one-to-one correspondence between surfaces can be achieved by using the theory of conformal mapping  [2]. However, existing approaches on conformal mapping are mainly proposed for surfaces represented by triangle meshes. Few methods of conformal mapping are introduced in the implicit surface matching. Moreover, few analytical representation methods for conformal mapping have been proposed in the related work. For the implicit surfaces that are represented by algebraic equations, one-to-one correspondence between surfaces can be described in a continuous manner, and even can be expressed by analytical functions to reveal the intrinsic principle of the point-correspondence relationship between implicit surfaces.In this study, the conformal mapping is introduced to the implicit surface matching and an analytical model of conformal mapping is developed. Based on the conformal mapping, a shape similarity assessment index for implicit surfaces is established. By using existing triangulation methods for implicit surfaces, one of the two implicit surfaces is firstly discretized by a ‘well-shaped’ triangle mesh, for it is hard to determine conformal mapping directly between arbitrary-shape implicit surfaces. Then, one of the existing conformal mapping methods for mesh surfaces is exploited in the matching between the mesh and the implicit surface, where a polynomial-function mapping is constructed. The optimal polynomial-function mapping is approximately considered as the conformal mapping between the original two implicit surfaces. Finally, a shape similarity assessment index for implicit surfaces is established by calculating the differences between shape index values of all the corresponding points on the two surfaces.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Related research work on shape similarity comparison between general 3D objects is introduced in Section  2. Some preliminaries or mathematical backgrounds of our method are addressed in Section  3. An analytical representation method for conformal mapping between two implicit surfaces and a shape similarity assessment index are both proposed in Section  4. Cases of the determination of conformal mapping for closed genus-zero IP surfaces and some discussions are presented in Section  5. Conclusions are drawn in Section  6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
An analytical representation method of conformal mapping for genus-zero implicit surfaces is developed based on algebraic polynomial functions. Global and continuous one-to-one correspondence between two surfaces is described by the analytical conformal mapping functions. The effectiveness of the proposed method has been verified by the simulation cases for the closed genus-zero implicit surfaces. The main contribution of this work is the novel representation method of conformal mapping between two genus-zero implicit surfaces. Our method is suitable for the determination of conformal mapping from complex surfaces to some simple canonical surfaces besides the commonly-used sphere, and can also be applied to the determination of conformal mapping from a complex mesh to a complex implicit surface, in the case that the mesh is similar to the implicit surface. In the future, we will try to generalize our method to determine the analytical representation of conformal mapping for complex piecewise implicit surfaces or implicit surfaces of non-zero genus, and apply it to computer-aided inspection of manufactured surface.