@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Region based stellate features combined with variable selection using AdaBoost learning in mammographic computer-aided detection

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Region-based stellate features for spiculated mass classification are proposed.A novel approach for selecting an optimal set of feature variables is proposed.Proposed features outperform other mammographic spiculated mass features.Investigating contributions of subregions of ROIs to extract discriminant features.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Mammography,Spiculated masses,Region-based stellate features,Variable selection metric,AdaBoost,Computer-aided detection,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, a new method is developed for extracting so-called region-based stellate features to correctly differentiate spiculated malignant masses from normal tissues on mammograms. In the proposed method, a given region of interest (ROI) for feature extraction is divided into three individual subregions, namely core, inner, and outer parts. The proposed region-based stellate features are then extracted to encode the different and complementary stellate pattern information by computing the statistical characteristics for each of the three different subregions. To further maximize classification performance, a novel variable selection algorithm based on AdaBoost learning is incorporated for choosing an optimal subset of variables of region-based stellate features. In particular, we develop a new variable selection metric (criteria) that effectively determines variable importance (ranking) within the conventional AdaBoost framework. Extensive and comparative experiments have been performed on the popular benchmark mammogram database (DB). Results show that our region-based stellate features (extracted from automatically segmented ROIs) considerably outperform other state-of-the-art features developed for mammographic spiculated mass detection or classification. Our results also indicate that combining region-based stellate features with the proposed variable selection strategy has an impressive effect on improving spiculated mass classification and detection.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Currently, the most cost-effective method for early detection of breast cancers is screening mammography [1]. In screening mammography, breast mass is known to be one of the major signs of breast cancers [2]. Especially, breast masses with spiculated margins have a high likelihood of malignancy [2,3]. It has been reported that about 81% of spiculated masses are malignant [3]. Due to the high probability of malignancy, early detection and diagnosis of spiculated masses and architectural distortions may significantly improve the chance of survival for patients with breast cancer.There has been a limited but increasing amount of work on the development of computer-extracted features for the detection and classification of spiculated masses on mammograms for computer-aided detection (CAD). Kegelmeyer et al. [4] proposed an analysis of local oriented edges (ALOE) features that represent stellate patterns of mammographic masses. The features were used for detecting spiculated lesions. Karssemeijer et al. [5] proposed pixel-wise stellate features for the purpose of detecting malignant masses on mammograms. Mudigonda et al. [6] developed directional gradient strength and coefficient of variation of gradient strength. In [7,8], the authors proposed the fuzziness of mass margin, radial to tangential signature information, and spiculation measure based on relative gradient information. The authors in [9] proposed the so-called texture flow-field analysis based features for the purpose of false positive (FP) reduction. Wei et al. [10] used multi-resolution spatial gray level dependence (SGLD) texture features to characterize the pattern of spiculated masses on mammograms.While a few feature extraction methods have been suggested so far for automatic classification and detection of spiculated masses in mammography, developing effective and robust stellate features—providing acceptable classification performance—still remains a challenging and open question. In this paper, we present new feature extraction approach to correctly differentiate spiculated masses from normal tissue in mammographic CAD systems. Key technical contributions can be summarized in the following aspects:•One particularly important characteristic of mammographic spiculated masses is having stellate patterns that appear as a number of line structures reside in a padiation pattern [4,5]. In light of this fact, our proposed features, termed region-based stellate features, have been designed for well encoding the stellate pattern information of spiculated masses. To this end, when extracting the feature form a given region of interest (ROI), the ROI is divided into three individual subregions (namely, core, inner, and outer parts) based on a band of pixels surrounding the segmented mass object in the ROI. The statistical characteristics (e.g., mean and standard deviation) associated with stellate (or spiculated) pattern information are then separately extracted from three different subregions. Finally, we combine these complementary sources of information to form the so-called region-based stellate features—allowing for characterizing the stellate patterns of spiculated masses at a regional level.In this paper, we propose the use of AdaBoost learning [11] to select the best set of variables of region-based stellate features for maximizing the discrimination between spiculated masses and normal tissues. In particular, differing from the existing variable selection algorithms [12,13], the proposed variable selection method has been designed for the targeted classification applications in mammographic CAD systems. In detail, a novel variable selection criterion well suited for improving classification of spiculated masses in mammographic CAD is devised to optimally determine variable importance (ranking). To the best of our knowledge, combining the proposed region-based stellate features with variable selection underpinning AdaBoost is a new and novel approach for classifying and detecting spiculated masses in mammographic CAD systems and could have important implications in early detection and diagnosis of spiculated masses with high malignancy.Comparative and extensive experiments have been conducted to investigate the effectiveness of proposed region-based stellate features in conjunction with our proposed variable selection algorithm. The popular benchmark mammogram database (DB) “Digital Database for Screening Mammography (DDSM)” [14] was used in our experimentation. The results show that the proposed approach for extracting stellate patterns can achieve a high level of classification performance—in the presence of the errors caused by the inaccurate location of the boundaries of masses automatically segmented using computer algorithms (seeFig. 1)—that meets the requirement of real-life clinical applications. In addition, we validate the superiority of our proposed region-based stellate features by comparing other state-of-the-art features recently proposed for representing stellate patterns of mammographic masses. In addition, our results demonstrate that the performance (in terms of classification) can be impressively improved by combining our region-based stellate features with variable selection based on AdaBoost learning.This paper improves and extends preliminary work presented in [15]. In particular, this paper presents a new approach that combines our region-based stellate features with a novel variable selection algorithm. Further, we report integrated experimental results that are more extensive and rigorous in the following aspects: (1) the comparison of other state-of-the-art spiculated (stellate) features; (2) additional analysis using more classifier models; (3) systematic investigation on the effect of combining stellate patterns each computed from a particular mass subregion.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, ROI detection and segmentation method used in this study is briefly explained. Section 3 details the proposed region-based stellate feature extraction. In Section 4, the proposed variable selection algorithm on the basis of AdaBoost learning is outlined. In Section 5, we present the experimental results. In Section 6, we discuss issues related to the proposed method. The conclusion is drawn in Section 7.Note that a typical CAD system largely consists of three parts [9,16–19]: (1) automated detection and segmentation of mammographic lesions from a given mammogram, which generates ROIs; (2) automated feature extraction for generated ROIs; (3) automated classification of ROIs into true and false positives for a FP reduction purpose. Before explaining the extraction of our region-based stellate features, we briefly describe the ROI detection and segmentation method employed in this study.In our work, as recommended in [9,20–22] to perform a more realistic assessment of a classification process under the assumption that the incorrect segmentation results would affect the classification performance, the ROIs are automatically detected and segmented from each mammogram by using a fully automated segmentation method. For this purpose, one popular approach of using multi-level thresholding algorithm [9,18,23] is adopted for segmenting masses on mammograms. We chose this segmentation approach because it has been well-documented in previous publications that it can provide “successful” segmentation results. The segmentation algorithm used consists of the following three sequential steps: (1) construction of iso-contour map; (2) formation of inclusion tree; (3) computation of minimum nesting depth. The implementation details of each step have been described in the literature [23].Fig. 1 shows an example of segmented ROIs generated by segmentation algorithm used. Note that in Fig. 1, the red line is the successfully segmented mass contour with spiculated margins identified by the segmentation algorithm, and the blue line is the mass outline (as ground truth) marked by experienced radiologists. Note that the size of the ROI is chosen such that the computer-marked mass contour and a band of pixels surrounding a segmented object are included in the ROI (a detailed description of determining the width of the band is given in Section 3.1). The mass or normal tissue ROIs are then used as input for region-based stellate feature extraction to be discussed in the following section.The authors in [5] proposed pixel-wise stellate features to detect mass candidates in mammography. The proposed region-based stellate features are developed based on pixel-wise stellate features described in [5]. It should be noted, however, that our proposed region-based stellate features have been developed in a novel and quite different way for a ROI classification purpose. In particular, differing from the previous pixel-wise stellate features, key technical significance can be summarized in the following aspects:•The proposed region-based stellate feature extraction adopts statistical operations (e.g., average) to encode stellate patterns of malignant masses on mammograms more robust and stable, in the sense that the errors caused by the pixel-wise stellate feature extraction could be nullified by the statistical operations.Previously developed pixel-wise stellate features have one limitation in that they represent the stellate pattern information at a pixel-level only. On the other hand, our region-based stellate features are designed for characterizing the stellate pattern information at a regional level by independently extracting stellate features from different subregions of each ROI.In what follows, we explain in detail the method for extracting our region-based stellate features.Spiculated masses on mammograms are likely to infiltrate into surrounding tissues [2,3,5]. Hence, it may be difficult for automatic mass segmentation algorithms to generate a clear and accurate boundary between breast masses and surrounding tissues. In addition, key idea of developing our region-based stellate features is to characterize the stellate pattern information of the masses at a regional level. For these reasons, we constructed a band of pixels [9] along the boundary of the segmented object in the ROI. This allows for reliably extracting the stellate patterns (of malignant masses), which is not sensitive to the precise location of the detected boundaries of mass ROIs.Note that the regions that are segmented by the method described in Section 2 vary greatly in size and shape. To cope with this problem, we adaptively compute the width of the band based on the segmented region׳s size and shape in the same as proposed in [9]. Specifically, the diameter of the bounding circle enclosing a given segmented region is first obtained by calculating the maximum distance between any two points on its boundary. Next, the area of the segmented regionSrand the bounding circleScenclosing the region are calculated. The width of the band is then computed asWb=Rc(Sr/Sc),whereRcis the radius of the bounding circle. Note that the ratioSr/Scis a simple indicator of representing the narrowness and complexity of the segmented region. Finally, the band of pixels can be formed by applying morphological dilation operation [24] on the boundary of the segmented object. The bands of pixels extracted across the boundaries of the segmented regions are illustrated inFig. 2(b).Based on the band of pixels, a segmented ROI is divided into three individual subregions (as illustrated in Fig. 2(c)) to capture differences of stellate pattern information among three subregions: (1) core part that is assumed to be merely affected by the accuracy of the mass boundary; (2) inner part that is inside of the detected ROI region around the boundary; (3) outer part that is outside of the ROI region that surrounds the region. Rationale behind the effectiveness of such region partition is that within a given ROI, there may be several subregions containing different, complementary stellate pattern information. Fig. 1(a) and (b) shows examples of original mammogram image with the segmented ROI locations and the ribbons of pixels extracted from segmented ROIs.Malignant masses are generally surrounded by radiating pattern of linear spicules [5]. Based on this fact, if line orientation (determined by using gradient operators [5]) of a large number of pixels points toward a central region, it is reasonable to assume that the corresponding region is considered as suspicious tissue. In support of this assumption,Fig. 3(b) and (e) shows potential pixels of interest (POIs) on line-like structures (depicted as gray pixels) located by a multiscale line orientation estimation [5]. Among the POIs, pixels pointing toward a disk of radius r (i.e., a central region) centered at x (depicted as white pixels) are selected as in [5]. To this end, Fig. 3(c) and (f) depicts the angle histograms [25], where a bin represents the number of POIs (white pixels) that are directed toward a disk of radius r within a given angular range. Obviously, it can be observed in Fig. 3 that malignant spiculated mass has more pixels pointing toward a disk with radius r, compared to the number of pixels resulting from normal tissue ROI. Pixel-wise stellate features proposed in [5] are designed to represent the aforementioned characteristics of each pixel.At a given pixel x in a given ROI, the normalized number of POIs oriented toward x is defined as follows [5]:(1)f1(x)=nx−pNxNxp(1−p),whereNxis the total number of POIs within the range of distance[dmin,dmax]from x and these POIs have high gradients at the same time,nxis the total number of POIs with pointing toward a disk of radius r centered at x (see Fig. 3(a)), and p represents the mean probability that a POIs in the random map is pointing to the disk. Note that when estimatingnx, only neighborhood pixels on line-like structures are considered as POIs to reduce the effect of noise and focus on line-like patterns as in [5]. Also note that the values ofdminanddmaxare determined adaptively according to the intensity structure of the image. For further details on the parameter setting, please refer to [5].Another important property of spiculated masses is “the radial uniformity” of spiculated patterns. If spicules are found in many directions, the likelihood of the presence of stellate pattern is increased. Dividing regions around x into k bins of different directions, the number of pixels in each bin that are pointing towards the center is calculated. Then, the radial uniformity is quantified by [5]:(2)f2(x)=n+−k′/2k′/4,wherek′denotes the number of bins those are actually used,n+is the number of bins provided that number of POIs pointing toward x is larger than the median value calculated for random orientations.It should be noted that one key characteristic of malignant spiculated mass is the presence of line structures radiating from the center of mass in many directions. Based on this fact, it can be expected that statistical characteristics of pixel-wise stellate feature values are likely to be different, depending on the distances of tissue regions from the central location. To justify this argument, the probability densities for feature valuesf1andf2(defined in Eqs. (1) and (2), respectively) are present inFig. 4. It can be observed in Fig. 4 that as opposed to probability densities obtained for normal tissue ROIs, probability densities of pixel-wise stellate feature values computed using spiculated mass ROIs tend to be different, depending on individual subregions (i.e., core, inner, and outer parts) of a mass ROI. In particular, pixel-wise stellate features computed at the proximity of the central location (i.e., core or inner parts) of the spiculated mass tend to have larger values than those acquired at the boundary region (i.e., outer part). Furthermore, when comparing an outer part to core or inner parts in the same class (i.e., spiculated mass ROIs or normal tissue ROIs), probability densities of pixel-wise stellate feature values computed using spiculated mass ROIs are much different between subregions, while the probability densities between subregions are almost similar in normal tissue ROIs. This observation indicates that relative distributions of pixel-wise stellate feature values between subregions also have discriminant information of spiculated masses.In light of this observations, our proposed region-based stellate features are extracted by computing statistics of pixel-wise stellate features, with respect to three individual subregions.We now describe the way of extracting the proposed region-based stellate features. To separately extract statistical characteristic for three different subregions, mean values of pixel-wise stellate features for core, inner, and outer part regions (each denoted byRcore,Rinner,andRouter,respectively) are computed as follows:(3)mRk(j)=∑x∈Rkfj(x)|Rk|,forj=1,2,k∈{core,inner,outer},whereRkrepresents one of the three different local subregions obtained using the ribbon of pixels,fj(x)denotes the j-th pixel-wise stellate features computed using Eq. (1) for j=1, otherwise using Eq. (2), and|Rk|is the number of pixels included in theRk.It can be expected that the pixel-wise stellate feature values tend to be larger in the central region of spiculated mass. Hence, differences in feature values computed between three individual subregions for spiculated mass ROI are likely to be larger compared to those obtained from normal tissue. To exploit this as discrimination information, differences in mean values of pixel-wise stellate features computed within three different subregions are defined as follows:(4)DIFFk,l(j)=mRk(j)−mRl(j),forj=1,2,(k,l)={(core,inner),(core,outer),(inner,outer)}.In addition, mean values of pixel-wise stellate features (each computed for one of the three subregions of normal tissue ROI) are likely to be similar to each other, while those computed from spiculated masses have some deviation. To exploit this information, standard deviations of mean values of pixel-wise stellate features in three subregions are computed as follows:(5)σm(j)=(mRcore(j)−m¯(j))2+(mRinner(j)−m¯(j))2+(mRouter(j)−m¯(j))23.form¯(j)=(mRcore(j)+mRinner(j)+mRouter(j))/3,j=1,2.Further, standard deviations of pixel-wise stellate features for each subregion can be used as discrimination information for differentiating spiculated masses from normal tissues. As demonstrated in Fig. 3, normal tissues have a small number of stellate patterns and, at the same time, a larger portion of their pixel-wise stellate feature values may have small differences. For this reason, pixel-wise stellate features are expected to have small standard deviation for the case of normal tissues. Hence, the following standard deviations are used for discriminant features:(6)σRk(j)=∑xinRk(fj(x)−mRk(j))2|xinRk|,forj=1,2,k∈{core,inner,outer}.Table 1 summarized the proposed region-based stellate features and the intuition behind the contribution of each feature for the characterization of stellate patterns. Note that the proposed features defined in Eqs. (3) and (6) characterize the distributions of pixel-wise stellate features in each subregion separately, while another features in Eqs. (4) and (5) focus on the distributions between three subregions. Finally, different and complementary features (related to stellate pattern information)—computed using Eqs. (3)–(6)—are combined at feature level [26] by concatenating all available components in column order, yielding the proposed region-based stellate features. The purpose of using feature fusion method is to effectively facilitate a complementary effect between different statistical components related to stellate pattern information; this enables our region-based stellate features to provide different complementary information about the complex patterns of spiculated masses and, therefore, the components of region-based stellate feature vector are likely to be mutually compensational for improving malignant mass classification. The region-based stellate features for each ROI are applied to construct a classifier in the training stage, as well as the classification in the testing stage.For the classification, one straightforward way is to apply our region-based stellate features described in Section 3.2 to a classifier (such as Support Vector Machine (SVM)). However, our region-based stellate features could contain some redundant information, not allowing the maximization of classification performance. To cope with this issue, variable selection procedure is integrated with our proposed region-based stellate features. It is reasonable to assume that a successful selection method might improve classification performance and enhance robustness. In addition, the selection could be used as a tool for analyzing the importance of each variable in terms of classification performance. The proposed variable selection method is developed based on the adaptive boosting algorithm (AdaBoost) [11]. Although AdaBoost was originally proposed to improve classification performance by combining weak classifiers, in this study, we reformulate it to suit the purpose of variable selection problem at hand. Especially, we devise a novel variable selection criterion for selecting variables that achieve an optimal balance between training and validation errors in terms of improving classification of spiculated masses in the context of mammographic CAD framework at testing stage.The implementation steps of the proposed variable selection algorithm are described inFig. 5. The proposed variable selection is to choose P variables out of region-based stellate feature consisting of a total of NKvariablesF={v1,v2,…,vNK}.In Step 0 in Fig. 5, letTbe a training set composed of NTtraining instances (i.e., ROI images), each denoted byri(i=1…,NT)with a corresponding class labelℓi,whereℓi∈{0,1}.Also, letVbe a validation set consisting of R labeled ROI instances, which is organized for evaluating variable selection criterion andT∩V=ϕ(i.e., a set of ROI images which have not been used during the training phase). In Step 1, the values of an initial distributionD0(i)are set equally such thatD0(i)=1/NT,wherei=1,…,NT.In Step 2, we start with an empty feature subsetS0={φ}.At each iteration t, we have selected feature subsetStcontaining t variables. Given the remaining setF−St−1consisting ofNK−tcandidate variables, we have new candidate feature subsets for iterationtasCt,m=St−1∪{vm}for allvm∈F−St−1.In Step 2.(3), a corresponding weak classifierht,mis constructed using a training setTalong with each of the candidate feature subsetsCt,m.Among allNK−tcandidate feature subsetCt,m,the generalized classification performance ofCt,mis measured using our proposed variable selection criterionJ(⋅)[defined in Eq. (10)] to be discussed in the following subsection. We then choose the one that the corresponding selection criterion is higher than all other candidates, that is,J(Ct,m)>J(Ct,n)for allm≠nand is also higher than selection criterion value of the current feature subset such thatJ(Ct,m)>J(St). Note that if none of the candidates is better thanStwith respect to variable selection criterion, the algorithm stops andStis taken as the final feature subset to be used for classification. Otherwise, in Step 2.(10), to maintain a set of weights overT,distributionDt(i)for eachrican be determined based on the classification error of the best candidate feature subset; on each round, the values of distribution progress towards increasing the likelihood of difficult samples. This forces the algorithm to select a variable at the next round to work well for the classification of hard-to-classify training samples.It should be pointed out that the ultimate goal of our variable selection is to maximize generalized (validation) classification performance, rather than training classification performance. To achieve this purpose, we need to choose an optimal (or sub-optimal) subset of variables with low training classification error while at the same time its validation classification error should be kept to a minimum. Motivated by this, we propose a novel selection criterion which aims at selecting variables that achieve an optimal balance between training and validation classification errors.The training classification error for the m-th candidate feature subsetCt,m(at boosting round t) is calculated as follows:(7)εtraining(Ct,m)=∑i=1NTDt(i)|ht,m(ri)−ℓi|,whereDt(i)is the weight distribution for each training sampleriwith a class labelℓiandht,m(⋅)is a classifier trained with theCt,m.Without loss of generality, we assume that the outputs of theht,mspans the space in the range of [0,1] such thatht,m:F×T→[0,1].It should be also noted thatht,mcan be built using any classifier construction methods suited for implementing AdaBoost framework (e.g., decision tree [27]).In the proposed selection criterion, the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) is used to measure classification performance on the validation setV.This is mainly because AUC is a widely used measure of the performance of the classification algorithms developed for mammographic CAD applications [28]. The AUC is equivalent to calculating the mean classification performance, averaging over the distribution of the classifier decision threshold (i.e., the output of theht,m). Further details on the definition of AUC are described in [28]. Let us denote the value of AUC (as validation classification performance) obtained using theht,m(⋅)byAUCm.Then, the validation classification error for theCt,m(at boosting round t) is computed as follows [29]:(8)εvalidation(Ct,m)=1−AUCm=1−1NXNY∑i=1NX∑j=1NYδ(ht,m(ri),ht,m(rj)),where(9)δ(ht,m(ri),ht,m(rj))={1ifht,m(ri)>ht,m(rj)0otherwise,andNXandNYdenote the number of ROI instances (included in the validation set) with true class label 1 and 0, respectively, andht,m(ri)andht,m(rj)denote the output (i.e., the probability) score assigned by the classifierht,m(⋅)to ROI instanceriandrj,respectively. Note that in Eq. (9),δ(ht,m(ri),ht,m(rj))is an indicator function that returns 1 if the conditionht,m(ri)>ht,m(rj)is satisfied.Using Eqs. (7) and (8), the proposed selection criterionJ(⋅)is defined as follows:(10)J(⋅)=2−(εtraining(⋅)+λεvalidation(⋅)).Note that in Eq. (10),λcontrols the tradeoff between training and validation classification performance such that0≤λ<1.It should be also noted thatεtraining(⋅)andεvalidation(⋅)should be normalized to have values in the range of [0,1]. Normalizing both terms allowsλto have the same meaning across domains. Ifλis increased, the contribution ofεvalidation(⋅)will be higher. Considering generalized classification performance in our experiments, a good compromise has been found by settingλin the range of [0.3, 0.5].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In the mammography, breast masses with spiculated margins have a high likelihood of malignant cancer. Due to the high probability of the malignancy, early detection and diagnosis of spiculated masses may significantly improve the chance of survival for patients with breast cancer.In this paper, new region-based stellate feature extraction approach was proposed, aiming to correctly differentiate spiculated malignant lesions from normal tissues on mammograms. The proposed features have been designed for well encoding the physical characteristic that spiculated masses have stellate patterns. To this end, each region of interest (ROI) to be given for feature extraction is divided into three individual subregions (namely, core, inner, and outer parts) based on a band of pixels surrounding the segmented mass object in the ROI. The statistical characteristics (e.g., mean and standard deviation) associated with stellate (or spiculated) pattern information are then separately extracted from three different subregions. Finally, we combine these complementary sources of information to form the so-called region-based stellate features allowing for characterizing the stellate patterns of spiculated masses at a regional level.To further maximize classification performance, a novel variable selection algorithm based on AdaBoost learning is incorporated for choosing an optimal subset of variables of region-based stellate features. In particular, we develop a new variable selection criterion that considers generalized classification error that combines training error and validation error to effectively determine variable importance (ranking) within the conventional AdaBoost framework.Experimental results showed that the proposed region-based stellate feature extraction and variable selection algorithm can further improve the classification performance for correctly identifying spiculated masses. Consequently, it may be of high potential that the proposed method would improve radiologists׳ accuracy in the characterization of malignant masses via CAD systems, and ultimately may reduce the cost and patient stress of unnecessary treatment due to the prevalence of false-positive outcomes (biopsies).For the future work, we will develop the solution to combine our proposed region-based stellate features with other different types of mammographic features (such as texture [10,37] and intensity features [42]). It is believed that this future work would be useful for improving classification or identification performances on malignant masses with dense tissues in mammography. In addition, future work includes extending our proposed method to other different classification tasks of importance in mammography CAD systems, such as the classification of malignant and benign masses or the estimation of the level of malignancy of identified masses in mammography. This extension will enable our current approach to be feasible for a more realistic CAD system to fully meet the requirements for routine clinical examinations.None declared.