@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Integration of a prognostic gene module with a drug sensitivity module to identify drugs that could be repurposed for breast cancer therapy

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
New approach to identify suitable drugs for breast cancer therapy is proposed.Etoposide is found to have strong association with breast cancer outcome.Exemestane may be more specific to ER+ breast cancer.Our method can find drugs that could be repurposed for breast cancer therapy.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Prognostic associated module,Drug sensitivity module,Drug reposition,Breast cancer,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundEfficiently discovering low risk drugs is important for drug development. However, the heterogeneity in patient population complicates the prediction of the therapeutic efficiency. Drug repositioning aiming to discover new indications of known drugs provides a possible gateway.MethodWe introduce a novel computational method to identify suitable drugs by using prognosis information of patients. First, we identify prognostic related gene modules, Prognostic Gene Ontology Module (PGOMs), by incorporating multiple functional annotations. Then, we build the drug sensitivity modules based on gene expressions and drug activity patterns. Finally, we analyze the potential effects of drugs on prognostic gene modules and establish the links between PGOMs and drugs.Result and discussionWith PGOMs generated based on the patient outcome, FDA approved drugs for breast cancer treatment have been successfully identified on one hand; several drugs that have not been approved by FDA, such as Etoposide, have found to strongly associate with the outcome on the other hand. With PGOMs generated based on the patient ER status, Tamoxifen and Exemestane rank at the top of the drug list, suggesting that they may be more specific to ER status of breast cancer. Especially, the rank difference of Exemestane in ER+ group and ER− group is very large, demonstrating that Exemestane may be more specific to ER+ breast cancer and would cause side-effect to ER− breast cancer patients. Our method can not only identify the drugs that could be repurposed for breast cancer therapy, but also can reveal their effective pharmacological mechanisms.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Due to the expensive cost and time consuming processes in traditional drug discovery, the number of new drugs approved by FDA has declined recently [1]. Under the circumstances, one possible strategy to speed up the drug discovery and lower the developing cost is drug repositioning which aims to discover new indications of known drugs based on their comprehensive profiles. Some of the most successful examples of drug repositioning include Pfizer׳s Viagra (for erectile dysfunction) and Celgene׳s thalidomide (for severe erythema nodosum leprosum) [2]. However, the successful examples of drug repositioning are just from the experimental or clinical stage, for the underlying molecular mechanisms of complex diseases are still unclear.On one hand, human diseases are generally caused by the abnormalities of multiple genes. These dysfunctional genes may further perturb other biological functional pathways and rewire the whole cellular network [3,4], which may lead to some other diseases. On the other hand, with the rapid development of high-throughput technologies, the study of drug action has been characterized within the context of regulatory networks that might include additional undiscovered drug targets. Therefore, it is increasingly important to find the disease–drug associations, which are then used for repositioning drugs, by examining both drug actions and disease outcomes via biological functional modules.Up to now, a great number of computational methods have been proposed to reposition drugs. Some methods characterize the similar components of drugs by first building “disease–disease” and “drug–drug” associations, and then discovering new “drug–disease” associations by imposing the known “drug–disease” connections. The similar components of drugs vary from the overlap of the target protein sequences to the integrated features of multiple sources such as compound chemistry structures, phenotypes and side effect indications [5,6]. Incorporating microarray technology, some researches focus on using the gene expression data to build the connections between drugs and diseases for drug repositioning. For example, the “Connectivity Map” (CMAP) project has produced a reference collection of gene expression profiles by treating cultured human cells with bioactive small molecules; and compounds that have the most negative correlation with the gene expression profiles are identified as potential therapeutics candidates [7,8]. CMAP is used for gene expression profiling on drug perturbation. However, the mystery of the molecular mechanism of diseases still remains uncovered. Recently, some studies have shown that cellular components belonging to the same topological, functional, or disease modules have a high likelihood of being involved in similar diseases [9,10]. Thus, one can discover repurposed drugs by beginning with identifying gene modules that are associated with the same topologies, functions or diseases. A gene module is a group of genes that share a similar function or regulation mechanism and can be defined as: (1) a set of genes annotated by using the same biological process or cellular component or Gene Ontology (GO) molecular function term [11,12]; (2) a set of genes associated within a network from protein–protein interaction (PPI) [13]; (3) a set of genes involved in the same pathway[14]; or (4) a set of genes regulated by the same miRNA [15,16]. Up to now, there are some studies that reposition drugs based on the gene modules existed. For instance, Li et al. [17] defined the Gene Ontology Modules (GOMs) based on GO; and then they investigated the influence of diseases on GOMs and searched for the repositioned drugs based on the similarity of GOMs. Using GO, Xia et al. [18] investigated the functions of genes regulated by the differential miRNAs in various diseases and the functions of target genes of small molecules (drugs), and identified the links between diseases and small molecules. The existed work did not take the clinical prognosis information of patients into consideration, though some studies have suggested that the therapy of patients could be guided by related prognostic signature [19]. Since many studies on prognoses of diseases were also sampled by high-throughput gene expression profiles, it is possible to build an appropriate in silico model that could extract the intrinsic yet complex genetic interaction patterns from such prognosis data. Therefore, we propose to incorporate the clinical prognosis data with multiple functional annotations to generate the prognosis related gene modules, named as the Prognostic Gene Ontology Modules (PGOMs) hereinafter. In this work, we use associative-learning strategies based on multiple clinical trials to identify the PGOMs. To avoid overestimation of true clinical accuracy, we use two separate trial cohorts to train and evaluate the predictive signature respectively. In the meantime, by linking the chemotherapy information with bioinformatics, we define a sensitivity module for each drug to interrogate the mechanism of drug actions. The sensitivity module for each anti-cancer drug is generated by correlating the sensitivity data (e.g. GI50) from the DrugBank with the National Cancer Institute׳s NCI60 cell line panel profiling [20,21]. By analyzing the significant perturbation effects of drug sensitive modules on the PGOMs, we can build links between PGOMs and drugs and can then find the repurposed drugs. Since breast cancer is highly heterogeneous, and some studies have shown that estrogen receptor (ER) status in breast cancer is remarkably associated with the prognostic value [19], we further identify specific gene modules for patients with ER clinical status, trying to provide insights of underlying mechanisms into the association between drug sensitivity and disease.Here we proposed a systematic framework to identify the potential candidate drugs for breast cancer and the associated mechanism modules. The framework consists of three parts: (1) identification of the PGOMs: the modules were selected based on the statistical differences among the prognostic status of the patients from clinical trials of breast cancer; (2) generation of the sensitivity module network of drugs: the sensitivity module network of drugs was used to interrogate the mechanism of drug action; and (3) integration of the results of (1) and (2), to search for the potential candidate drugs. In the final step, we integrated the PGOMs with the anti-cancer drug sensitivity modules to filter the most significant potential anti-cancer treatment for breast cancer as shown inFig. 1.We downloaded the mRNA expression data and the corresponding clinical information (time to relapse or last follow-up and ER status score) of three breast cancer clinical trials (GSE2034, GSE7390 and GSE11121). Patients with positive or negative relapse scores were classified as those with poor or good prognosis respectively. All the data were processed by using Affymetrix HG-U133A gene-chips, and normalized by MAS5. All the probes in the mRNA expression data were mapped into Entrez Gene ID as the average values of the gene from multiple probes. The mapping information was downloaded from www.biomart.org[22]. The details of three datasets are described in Table S1 (Supplementary file).Gene module is defined as a group of genes that share a similar function or regulation mechanism. Here the gene modules are annotated mainly by biological relevance of PPI, functional annotation and pathway information. Therefore, the gene modules are defined by PPI core network, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway information and miRNA target information for more detailed gene functional annotation. The process is conducted as follows:(1)The PPI core network was built based on the Human Protein Reference Database [23]. We selected the sub-networks, within which the degrees of nodes are more than 20 and less than 200, to define the core PPI network.The pathway information was downloaded from the KEGG database [24].The miRNA target information was derived from TargetScan [25]. Each set of target genes of the same miRNA was considered as a gene module.GO was annotated according to three categories: biological process (GOBP), cellular component (GOCC) and molecular function (GOMF). The annotated GO term was considered as a gene module.Following above procedures, we collected 4611 gene modules (The distribution of different kinds of gene modules is presented in Fig. S1 in Supplementary file.). To determine the prognostic gene modules that can discriminate patients with poor or good prognosis, gene set enrichment analysis was performed using three different breast cancer survival datasets. First, the gene sets were adopted from the annotated gene modules. In each data set, we had n samples. Then the Kolmogorov–Smirnov (KS) statistic was employed to test whether the expression of the gene set was enriched among the whole gene expression (N) in each sample. The KS is calculated using the following formulas [17]:(1)a=Maxjt[jt−V(j)N](2)b=Maxjt[V(j)N−j−1t](3)KSPGOM={−b,a<ba,a>bWhere t is the number of the genes in the gene set, j is the jth gene according to the ranked expression in the gene set, N is the total number (13,698) in the gene expression profile, V (j) is the ranked position of the jth gene and KS score represents the enrichment score of a gene module within a sample. After the calculation, a matrix was generated for the gene module׳s enrichment score across all the samples (gene modules⁎samples).To identify gene modules that can discriminate patients with poor outcomes from those remaining relapse-free for five years, we used two supervised prediction approaches. Both methods used GSE2034 (GSE2034 contains 286 samples, which has 107 good outcomes and 179 bad outcomes.) as the training set. In the first approach, we used a resampling method to evaluate the discrimination ability of the gene module. We randomly selected 75% of all 286 samples and estimated the discrimination score of each gene module across the chosen patients by Cox proportional hazards regression (as shown in formula (4)). The resample procedure was repeated 100 times. Only the gene module with p-value<0.05 was considered as the prognostic gene module.(4)h(tX)=h0(t)exp(β1X1+β2X2+…+βnXn)Where h0(t) is a common baseline hazard function; β1, β2… βnare the coefficient estimates for the Cox proportional hazards regression; X1, X2… Xnare the expressions of gene modules across the selected patients.In the second approach, patients were allocated to one of two subgroups stratified by ER status (ER+ and ER−), and genes with low correlations with ER status were eliminated from each group. Each subgroup of patients was separately analyzed to select the gene sets, which is similar to the way of Wang et al.׳s work [19]. For each subgroup, we adopted the same strategy as in the first approach to identify the gene sets; and the gene sets selected from two subgroups were combined together as the prognostic gene modules.In order to evaluate the prediction abilities of PGOMs, we built the prediction models based on the Naïve Bayesian (NB) method. Each NB classifier was trained by using GSE2034, and tested on both the training and the independent test sets. Concretely, in the first approach, GSE7390 and GSE11121 were used as the independent test sets, while in the second approach, we only used GSE7390 as the independent test set, for GSE11121 does not provide ER status information of the patients.The prediction performance was assessed by the accuracy (ACC), sensitivity (SE), specificity (SP), F-measured (F1), area under the curve (AUC), and Matthew׳s correlation coefficient (MCC). These indicators can be measured by the numbers of true positive (TP, which means correctly identifying a patient with good outcome), false positive (FP, which means wrongly identifying a patient with good outcome as a bad outcome), true negative (TN, which means rightly identifying a patient with poor outcome as a relapse patient), and false negative (FN, which means wrongly identifying a patient with bad outcome as a good outcome) for each classifier. The performance measures are defined as follows:(5)Accuracy=(TP+TN)(TP+FN+TN+FP)(6)Sensitivity=TP(TP+FN)(7)Specificity=TN(TN+FP)(8)F-measure=2×TP2×TP+FP+FN(9)MCC=TP⁎TN−FP⁎FN(TP+FP)⁎(TP+FN)⁎(TN+FP)⁎(TN+FN)The drug sensitivity gene was measured by correlating gene expression and drug activity patterns in the NCI60 lines. The data is based on the in vitro drug screen project of the National Cancer Institute NCI60 [26]. The subset of drugs in this study is defined in the “Standard Agent Database”, which contains 172 anti-cancer compounds [21,27]. The NCI60 cell lines screen panel has been shown to be an effective way to screen drug action related biomarkers [27]. Therefore the panel has already been comprehensively characterized via profiling at different levels. The baseline gene expression profile is represented by a gene expression matrix (gene expression profile⁎60 cell lines). The biological response pattern is measured by GI50 value (the compound׳s concentration that causes 50% cell growth inhibition) obtained from DrugBank. The sensitivity module for each drug is determined by the Pearson correlation coefficient (PCC, as shown in Eq. (10)) between the gene patterns and GI50 patterns across 60 cell lines. This method of establishing a drug׳s sensitivity module is described in the work of Scherf et al. [27].(10)ρx,y=cov(X,Y)σXσYwhere X is a gene expression profile across the NCI60 cell line and Y is the GI50 profile of a drug across the NCI60 cell line. The gene with PCC p-value less than 0.05 is considered as a drug sensitivity gene. All sensitivity genes of a drug constitute the drug sensitivity module.We used the p-value of the hyper-geometric test (shown as formula (11)) to determine whether a PGOM has a significant overlap with the sensitivity module of a drug.(11)P=∑x≥nCNx⋅CM−Nm−xCMmwhere M is the total number of genes in the whole profiles, N is the number of genes in the PGOM, m is the number of genes in the sensitivity module of the drug and n is the number of the overlap genes between the PGOM and the sensitivity module. If the overlap is significant (with the threshold 0.05), then the drug is associated with the PGOM. According to the number of associated PGOMs, the drug list can be ranked as the descending order. The drugs on the top have stronger associations with breast cancer than those at the bottom of the list.Two approaches were used to identify markers predictive of disease relapse. In order to identify the tumor progression associated gene modules, we extracted the prognostic gene modules from GSE2034 [19], and validated it using GSE7390 [28] and GSE11121 [29]. Based on the enrichment score of the gene modules in each dataset, we randomly divided all the samples into training set and testing set, and then used Cox hazard regression to assess the gene modules׳ predictive ability of prognosis across all the samples. In total, 68 gene modules are identified (Table S2 in Supplementary file). The distribution of the selected prognosis gene modules is presented in Fig. S2 in Supplementary file. Among these gene modules, ‘AKT1 subnetwork’ and ‘cytoskeleton organization’ from GOBP showed strong significance. As shown in Table S2, the PGOMs are most likely to be related to the biologic processes of ‘transcription’ and ‘cytoskeleton’, which were generally reported to have a close association with cancer progression [30]. The Cox coefficient and Cox p-value of each selected gene module is also listed in Table S2 (in Supplementary file). The validation of the gene modules using GSE7390 and GSE11121 achieved an AUC at 0.5973 and 0.5621, respectively (Table 1).In the second approach, we analyzed the patient by grouping the samples on the basis of ER status. Each subgroup was analyzed for selection of gene modules. As a result, we identified 103 for the ER+ group and 11 for the ER− group. The final Cox coefficient and Cox p-value of each selected gene module is listed in Table S3 (in Supplementary file), and the distribution of different kinds of the selected modules is presented in Fig. S3 (in Supplementary file). The comparison of Figs. S2 and S3 suggests that the method based on ER status prefers to identifying MiRNA target information. Among the chosen gene modules, ‘adhesion junction’, ‘cytoskeleton’ and ‘microtubule depolymerization’ all showed strong significance in predicting prognosis. In fact, these modules are the sub-pathways of the ‘pathway in cancer’ [31]. Validation of the ER related gene modules achieved an AUC of 0.6082, SE of 0.6389 and SP of 0.6130 on GSE7390, as shown inTable 2. Obviously, the second approach has better prediction performance than the first approach.We have two approaches to identify the prognostic gene modules, therefore we have different results to evaluate their performances. For the first approach, we established a drug–PGOM network with 3092 edges (Fig. 2). By sorting the degree of the associated gene modules, some drugs with high degrees are highlighted. The FDA approved drugs, such as Paclitaxel, Doxorubicin and Mitoxantrone, are ranked at the top of the list (Table 3). Paclitaxel is a mitotic inhibitor that is approved by the FDA to treat patients with breast and several other kinds of cancers [32]. As shown inFig. 3, the presented Paclitaxel associated gene modules show significant relationships with ‘mitotic cell cycle’ and ‘cytoskeleton organization’ of biological processes which include the target genes of Paclitaxel, Tubb1 and BCL2, as provided by DrugBank [33]. From Fig. 3, the Paclitaxel associated cellular component term of ‘microtubule’, which is sensitive to the mechanism of action of Paclitaxel, has been validated from literature [34]. Mitoxantrone and Doxorubicin are also FDA approved breast cancer treatments. They both target the TOP2A gene which is a type II topoisomerase inhibitor and plays a important role in cell mitosis [35]. Our results also show that both Mitoxantrone and Doxorubicin are significantly related with the pathway of ‘ATP-hydrolyzing’ and biological process of ‘DNA replication’. The literature also validates that they have an inhibitive effect on MCF7 [36]. The associated gene modules of these two drugs are the cell mitosis related biological process terms as shown inFig. 4.Several drugs that did not obtain FDA approval are also found to have strong association with breast cancer. Etoposide is a topoisomerase inhibitor, as Mitoxantrone and Doxorubicin are, but hasn׳t been reported to treat breast cancer [37]. Our result suggests that Etoposide may have the potential in treating breast cancer. And it is also reported that Etoposide was selected during clinical trials for treating breast cancer [38]. This result highlights that similar pharmacology mechanisms of drugs could be found by our method.In conclusion, the drugs with high degrees of connection have confirmed the validity of their association with breast cancer in the literature. These results show that our method could reveal effective pharmacological mechanism for repositioning drugs.For the PGOMs identified from stratified patients by ER status, we also built a drug–PGOM network, based on degrees of the nodes, we got the drug rank list (Table 4). According to the drug list, some of the critical function modules are highlighted. Of these, ‘cellular component organization’ and ‘cytoskeleton organization’ have shown strong connection with drug sensitivity. The FDA approved drugs Tamoxifen and Exemestane, are ranked at the top of the list. They are used as an anti-estrogen therapy for hormone receptor-positive breast cancer in pre-menopausal women. Tamoxifen is connected with the “hormone metabolic process” of biological processes in our results, which is consistent with its mechanism of action of targeting ESR1 to prevent estrogen from binding to its receptor in breast tissue via its active metabolite (Fig. 5). Exemestane is also used to treat breast cancer. One of its associated gene modules is ‘regulation of steroid biosynthetic process’ which includes the drug target CYP19A1. From the literature, Exemestane is shown to be an aromatase inhibitor which blocks the synthesis of estrogen, thus lowering the estrogen level and slowing the growth of cancer [39]. From these results, it can be seen that the associated prognostic gene module is consistent with the medicinal effects of chemical agents.It is promising that not only FDA approved drugs are ranked highly by this method, several drugs with unknown mechanism are also found to have strong association with breast cancer. Actually, Geldanamycin is found (according to the rank) to be the most connected drug that had been taken to clinical trials for breast cancer treatment. It has completed the phase 1 stage from the report on clinicaltrial.gov (http://clinicaltrial.gov/ct2/show/NCT00004065).We also noticed that Tamoxifen ranked two and Exemestane ranked three (Table 4) when we considered the ER status based subtype of breast cancer, whereas they ranked 18 and 16 respectively (Table 3) if we ignored such information. The difference of the ranking results may suggest that Tamoxifen and Exemestane are more specific to such subtype of breast cancer. We then investigated the drug rank lists obtained based on ER+ and ER− respectively, and found that two drugs ranked top two in ER+ list while ranked six and 72 in ER− list (Tables S4 and S5 in Supplementary file), the results further suggest that Exemestane is specific to ER+ breast cancer and would cause side-effect to other subtypes.For comparison, we used gene signatures, instead of gene module in our method, to rank the drugs. The prognostic gene signature was extracted from GSE2034 by resampling repeatedly 100 times. Then an independent validation was carried on GSE7390 and GSE11121 respectively. We chose 79 genes that are the most significantly related to the prognosis risk (Table S6 in Supplementary file) to identify drugs. The gene signatures were identified by the same procedure as gene module identification. The validation for its prognosis prediction ability is shown in Table S7 (in Supplementary file). Then a ranked list of drugs was produced by the number of genes overlapped with drug sensitivity modules (Table S8 in Supplementary file). The result indicates that the 79 gene signatures have the ability to predict prognosis, however they are not very stable in the identification of useful drugs for breast cancer.For comparison, we also used 76 gene signatures derived from Wang et al.׳s work, which were also extracted from patients stratified by ER status, to rank the drugs. The signatures consists of 60 genes selected from the ER+ group and 16 from ER− group. A drug list is ranked by the number of genes overlapping between the signatures and the drug sensitivity modules using the same method as that to identify the 79 gene signatures (Table S9 in Supplementary file). It is interesting that Geldanamycin is still ranked at the top of the list. This information reminds us that prognostic information could be helpful in guiding medical usage. However, the FDA approved treatments of breast cancer (Tamoxifen and Exemestane) are ranked lower than the other results. This result shows that our method is an effective and stable method to connect prognosis information with drug sensitivity.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
