@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Investigation of the relationship between anxiety and heart rate variability in fibromyalgia: A new quantitative approach to evaluate anxiety level in fibromyalgia syndrome

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
HRV subband analysis is the significant part of the study.The study is realized for helping the diagnosis of FMS with HRV subband analysis.There is a new vision on the evaluation of anxiety that accompanies fibromyalgia.Novelty is supporting the subjective verbal tests by objective physiological tests.This method may be a beneficial tool for estimation of anxiety.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Auxiliary tests,Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI),Electrocardiogram (ECG),Fibromyalgia Syndrome (FMS),Hamilton Anxiety Test (HAM-A),Heart Rate Variability (HRV),Multilayer Perceptron Neural Networks (MLPNN),Wavelet Packet Transform (WPT),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstractfx1

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Fibromyalgia Syndrome (FMS) is a disorder characterized by widespread musculoskeletal pain accompanied by fatigue, sleep disturbance, anxiety and mood issues [1]. Paresthesia, cognitive difficulties, dizziness, weakness and a subjective feeling of swelling are also frequent symptoms of the disease. Another important characteristic feature of FMS is that of altering the sympathetic/parasympathetic balance immediately and completely. On the other hand, anxiety, which generally leads to a misdiagnosis, is very common in fibromyalgia and has been found to be related to the severity of pain in symptoms of FMS [2].In many clinics, the Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI) and Hamilton Anxiety (HAM-A) tests are both frequently used to determine anxiety level that accompanies fibromyalgia as well as to determine anxiety level in physiological and psychological disturbances. These are the most popular indicators currently used to evaluate the anxiety [3]. The BAI was developed by Beck and his colleagues in 1988 for determining the severity of anxiety [4]. Respondents indicate how much they have been affected by each symptom over the past week. It is composed of 21 questions and the responses are rated on a 4-point scale [5]. Each response is assigned a score ranging from zero (not at all bothered) to three (severely bothered), with a possible range of total scores from zero to 63. The value of the total score determines the person׳s anxiety level, with high scores indicating high anxiety levels. The HAM-A test is a psychological questionnaire originally published by Max Hamilton in 1959. It is a test composed of 14 questions, each with 5 possible responses, designed to rate anxiety severity [6–8]. It has a possible range of total scores from zero to 56. Total scores indicate the severity of the symptoms. Higher scores on both the BAI and HAM-A are found in patients with FMS than in the normal population.The BAI is a self-rated test and simpler in comparison to HAM-A. The HAM-A is doctor rated test and it is scored during quite detailed interviews. Both are not gold standard tests, but they are also not unreliable. Validity and reliability studies of the BAI and HAM-A tests in Turkey were conducted by Ulusoy et al. in 1988 [9] and Yazıcı et al., respectively. [10]. However, both BAI [11] and HAM-A [6,12,13] tests are still questionable because of their subjectivity and do not represent gold standards. Therefore, these tests should be supported with quantitative and more objective methods in the clinical evaluation of fibromyalgia. Moreover, even though fibromyalgia has many symptoms, there is no specific physical examination finding or laboratory test to diagnose a patient with FMS so far. Actually, there are many different assessments available to diagnose the FMS; however, their reliabilities need to be improved. So, none of the current tests is definitive.Heart Rate Variability (HRV) is an efficient tool for the assessment of autonomic balance in the human body [14,15]. On the other hand, psychological disturbances like anxiety are known to be closely related to disturbances of autonomic balance. This suggests that autonomic balance indicators, which are quantitative and more objective, may be used instead of BAI and HAM-A tests or may be used as an auxiliary diagnostic method in conjunction with these anxiety tests. Additionally, the reliability of these doctor- and self-rated tests may be evaluated with autonomic balance indicators. Due to the reasons mentioned above, it may be possible to determine if there is a correlation between HRV analysis and the BAI and HAM-A tests. Additionally, such a correlation could occur more noticeably in FMS patients.HRV signals are analyzed using different signal processing methods such as time analysis, frequency analysis and nonlinear methods [16]. But, a possible correlation may be better observed in subband analysis, unlike the standard HRV method. Time-frequency analysis of HRV signals can be analyzed using wavelet analysis, which is a more efficient method of feature extraction at low frequencies [17,18]. We could not find any information examining this approach in the literature in the evaluation of anxiety level that accompanies fibromyalgia and FMS.We used a Multi-Layer Perceptron Neural Network (MLPNN) for the analysis of relationship between anxiety that accompanies fibromyalgia and -HRV variables [19]. MLPNN is the popular feed forward artificial neural network model that has been playing a central role in applications of neural networks [20]. A backpropagation training algorithm is frequently used to train a MLPNN [21–23]. Levenberg–Marquardt (LM) backpropagation algorithm, the fastest backpropagation algorithm method, has been widely used for MLPNN training [24,25]. A MLPNN consists of more than one layer of nodes in a directed graph. Each one fully connected to the next layer. Each node works as a processing element with a nonlinear activation function other than the input nodes. Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) benefits from a supervised learning technique for the training part of the network [26,27].In this study, we examined the relationship between semi-quantitative anxiety tests and HRV variables. We aimed to support anxiety tests with an electrophysiological signal according to identify the anxiety accompanying fibromyalgia syndrome using a more objective and quantitative measure. In other words, the main purpose of this study is the quantification or digitizing of the verbal anxiety test to measure the anxiety level more objectively. Because, the accuracy of the self-reported answers given by the patient׳s and specialist with current psychology is still questioned. Therefore, it needs to be confirmed by quantitative tests such an electrophysiological signal. For this purpose HRV signal is preferred. Because, HRV signals have shown potential as a quantitative test because both HRV signal and anxiety are associated with the autonomic nervous system. Therefore, we propose that HRV signal monitoring may present a new electrophysiological signal based auxiliary test support to the anxiety test to measure the patient׳s anxiety level in FMS. Thus, an electrophysiological signal may supplant the anxiety tests as a means of assessing anxiety levels.We extracted the important characteristic features of HRV signal to understand the relationship between the anxiety tests and the electrophysiological signals by using Wavelet Packet Transform (WPT) which is more effective for HRV signals [15,17]. Therefore, the basebands are decomposed into subbands, these subbands are applied to the Multilayer Perceptron Neural Network (MLPNN) inputs, and it is evaluated with output values that contain BAI and HAM-A scores.We received approval from the Suleyman Demirel University Clinical Research Ethics Committee for this study. The patients, included in the study following ethical committee approval, were selected from the patients who were applied to Suleyman Demirel University, Faculty of Medicine, Physical Therapy and Rehabilitation Department. Patient group (n=56) was formed patients diagnosed with FMS for the first time by specialists according to the 1990 American College of Rheumatology (ACR) criteria [28] and the other clinical assessments. A control group (n=34) of the study was formed by healthy volunteers who had visited the outpatient clinics of the same hospital for routine check-ups or were hospital employees; this control group was paired with the patient groups with respect to age and gender. The number of controls admitted to the clinic for check-up, was relatively lower than the number of patients. So, numbers of controls are limited due to both working age matches and the fact that the number of controls admitted to clinic is less than number of patients. The age matched control/patient ratio is about three-fifths. In other words, three controls have been selected for every five patients.The FMS patients and controls were examined by specialist physicians to ensure conformity to the established criteria. The participants were informed of the study requirements and were required to sign written consent forms. Then, socio-demographic attributes and clinical findings were recorded. Some demographic data of subjects are shown inTable 1.At the clinic, specialists in internal medicine, neurology, general surgery, orthopedics, psychiatry, ophthalmology and otorhinolaryngology performed examinations and laboratory tests to clarify whether these participants had any kind of disease. The control group was accepted as healthy after passing all of the medical examination conducted by the specialists. Those undergoing a treatment that would affect HRV values, those, with FMS coexisting diseases, those who had consumed alcohol, tobacco, tea or coffee during the last 24h before the measurement or consumed a meal with high calories during the six hours prior to testing, and those who were not willing to adhere to the measurement protocols were excluded from the study. Participants who had received medical therapy (including tricyclic antidepressants, or antihypertensive such as beta blockers), or who had known comorbidities (hypertension, heart disease, diabetes mellitus, thyroid disease, depression, inflammatory rheumatic diseases, such as metabolic and acute infectious diseases) and have diseases that leave neurological sequelae (stroke, traumatic brain injury, Parkinson׳s disease, such as multiple sclerosis) were excluded from the study. On the other hand blood tests, rheumatoid factor (RF), C-reactive protein (CRP), white blood cell count (WBC), hemoglobin count (HB), platelet count (PLT) and sedimentation (Sedim) measurements, were conducted in order to exclude the possibility of any kind of secondary disease (Normal values indicated inTable 2). Those with cardiovascular and neurological conditions or any other diagnosed disease and those on medication for any reason were not included in the experiment. None of the subjects received any dietary restrictions.We applied some statistical tests to show the bias and correlation of data. “Group statistics” and “Independent Samples Test” results are shown inTable 3. The results indicate that there is a statistically significant difference between patients and controls in terms of BAI, HAM-A and HB count (p<0.05). On the other hand the results also indicate that there is no statistically significant difference between patients and controls in terms of Age, Weight, Height, CRP, RF, SEDIM, WBC, PLT count (p>0.05).The valid basic method today of fibromyalgia syndrome diagnosis is to use clinical and physical examination findings. The basis of clinical evaluation is the fibromyalgia classification criteria stipulated by the ACR in 1990 and back in 2010 [28]. FMS can be diagnosed using the ACR Fibromyalgia Diagnostic Criteria. Our patients were diagnosed according to the 1990 ACR criteria and clinical assessment tools. According to the 1990 ACR criteria, FMS diagnosis is based on the presence of widespread pain for at least three months and pain on 11 out of 18 tender points (examined though palpation, by applying pressure using fingers). So, tender point (TP) count and widespread pain (CWP) duration were recorded as a result of these physical examinations. On the other hand, the verbal pain scale (VPS), fibromyalgia impact questionnaire (FIQ) included visual analog scale for pain severity (VAS-PS) and visual analog scale to evaluate fatigue severity (VAS-FS), visual analog scale for sleep disturbance (VAS-SD), Beck depression inventory (BDI), Beck anxiety inventory (BAI), Hamilton anxiety test (HAM-A), Hamilton depression evaluation scale (HAM-D), total myalgic score (TMS) , physiological tests (skin temperature, pulse, respiratory rate) and laboratory tests (C reactive protein (CRP), rheumatoid factor (RF), sedimentation, white blood count – leukocyte (WBC), hemoglobin (HB), platelet (PLT)) were applied to all participants. In addition to the above-mentioned tests, symphetic skin response (SSR) and heart rate variability (HRV) signals were obtained from each participant.21 questions were asked to all subjects to determine the BAI scores; 14 questions were asked to all subjects to determine the HAM-A scores. Subjects with BAI psychological test scores between 0-14 were defined as nonanxious; those with scores of 14 and higher were defined as anxious. Subjects with HAM-A psychological tests scores between 0–1 were defined as nonanxious, while those with scores of 1 and higher were defined as anxious. On the other hand, abnormal anxiety scores in a randomly selected person may be possible. In other words, any person may have anxiety without having a disease. In our study three or four controls have border scores, which consistent with their HAM-A scores, in terms of BAI. But, as shown in Table 3 we can also say there are no anxiety in our controls according to BAI and HAM-A scores due to available a significant difference (p<0.001) between the our controls and patients. These scores were used as target values for the MLPNN as follows.A range of tests were conducted on the participants, including laboratory tests (blood tests), physiological (heart rate, skin temperature, respiration measurements) and anxiety tests. First of all the BAI and HAM-A psychological tests were performed. After 15min of rest, heart and respiration rates per minute and skin temperature were taken. These tests were implemented by specialist physicians and recorded. The average skin temperatures were calculated by specialist physicians using the Cadwell Sierra Wedge EMG / NCV brand, two channel EMG device as the skin temperature probe. Per minute respiratory rates of the participants were determined by examination.HRV records were taken in a silent and illuminated room with a suitable temperature (22°C–24°C) using a system set up by the Physical Therapy and Rehabilitation Department (PowerLab 8/30 with LabChart Pro, Data Acquisition Systems, AD Instruments, Inc. Colorado Springs, CO, USA). All signals were recruited in similar physical conditions after proper skin cleaning (With Medi-Swab, 70% v/v Isopropyl Alcohol Swab, BSN Medical, Victoria, Australia and with dry towel paper) around 2pm. HRV records were taken in different positions with a negative electrode (−) fixed to the subject’s right arm, a positive electrode (+) fixed to the subject’s left foot, and a neutral electrode (e) fixed to the subject’s right foot to obtain DII records in the ECG. Records were taken during the participant’s first ten minutes in supine position, during the following three minutes in the sitting position and finally five times during 20s in the posture position (while gulping) [16]. Either the poor quality records were repeated or the measurement time was extended if the records had reasonably significant artifacts, such as motion and speaking artifacts. All process lasted about 20min. To obtain noiseless ECG recordings, filters suitable for the software were selected (the settings were Range=500µV; Sampling rate=1000Hz; Single-ended=checked; Mains Filter and 50Hz Notch filter selected; High pass=0.3Hz; and Low pass=100Hz). The subjects then rested in a reclining position for 15min.The study purposes whether the HRV signals can potentially be used as an auxiliary diagnostic method in conjunction with psychological anxiety tests for the assessment of anxiety levels of FMS patients. According to the overview of the study, firstly, ECG recordings obtained from the subjects were converted to HRV signals. After cubic spline interpolation and 4Hz resampling processing, the signal was prepared for WPT. HRV signals were decomposed into wavelet packets having small frequency ranges using WPT, and RMS energy values were calculated for each one of the wavelet packets. According to the frequency formulas, wavelet packets were grouped onto new bands. These new bands, referred to as subbands, occurred in VLF, LF and HF basebands with considering frequency band ranges in the literature [16]. After this process, the subbands were applied to the MLPNN inputs respectively. Target values were grouped as nonanxious or anxious with respect to the BAI and HAM-A scores. MLPNN was trained and tested and accuracy results were saved. An overview of the study is shown inFig. 1.The HRV signal was obtained from the beat-to-beat (RR) interval variation in the ECG recordings by using the HRV add-on for LabChart analyses. Analyses were performed while data was being sampled. In this study, tRR(n) was assumed to be the time between two consecutive QRS complexes, where n is the number of QRS complexes on the ECG signal. For the time domain, the t(n) time was calculated as in Eq. (1).(1)t[n]=tRR(n)+t(n−1),n∈[1,N],t(0)=0ven∈Z+So, HRV signal x[n] is defined as(2)x[n]=[tRR(1),⋯tRR(n),⋯,tRR(N)],n∈[1,N],t(0)=0ven∈Z+It is supposed astRR(n)=xn,(3)xi=[x1,⋯xn,⋯,xN],i∈[1,N],i∈Z+″and(4)ti=[t1,⋯tn,⋯,tN],i∈[1,N],t(0)=0vei∈Z+where xiis HRV vector and tiis a time vector.Then the HRV signal was interpolated by using spline interpolation and resampled with 4Hz for WPT analysis. The “HRV add-on” automatically detects beats by finding the R waves in the ECG signals and classifying them. The missed beats and extra beat artifacts occurred while processing signals for HRV analysis were removed by using a sliding window average filter [15]. After interpolation, resampling and artifact removal, the HRV signal was represented as ypvector and tpwas the new time vector for the HRV signal. Here p is the number of samples with 4Hz sampling frequency in a 10min HRV recording.WPT is very popular in low-frequency analysis and the most suitable feature extraction method for HRV when compared to other time-frequency analyses and it has provided important parameters in HRV analyses that use 4Hz sampling frequency. In this process, ypis the HRV vector, h(k) is the high pass filter coefficient and g(k) is the low pass filter coefficient in the WPT. For WPT decomposition;(5)W2j(t)=2∑k=02J−1h(k)Wj(2t−k)(6)W2j+1(t)=2∑k=02J−1g(k)Wj(2t−k)whereW2j(t)=φ(t)is the scaling function and =W2j+1(t)=ψ(t)is the wavelet function. Moreover, it is generally defined as Eq. (7)(7)Wm,j,n(t)=2−m2Wj(2−mt−n)wherej∈N,(m,n)∈Z2and j is the scale parameter, m is the wavelet level and n is interpreted as a time localization. Analyses were tested experientially with all of the wavelet function in our previous publication [18]. Therefore DB4 was selected as the mother wavelet which formed the most obvious distinctions. And it was decomposed to nine levels. As mentioned before the numbers of packet were specified according to the frequency range of HF, LF, and VLF bands and accepted corresponding frequencies of these bands in the literature [16]. Frequency bands are designated as high-frequency (HF, 0.15 to 0.4Hz), low-frequency (LF, 0.04 to 0.15Hz), and very low-frequency (VLF, 0.016 to 0.04Hz) [16]. HF bands correspond to the wavelet packets between w9, 39 and w9, 102. LF bands correspond to the wavelet packets between w9, 10 and w9, 38 and VLF bands correspond to the wavelet packets between w9, 1 and w9, 9. Thus 511 units wavelet packets are consisted at 9th level. This process is illustrated inFig. 2.Then wm,j(n) was obtained from Wm,j,n(t) by WPT reconstruction this process is illustrated inFig. 3.The RMS value of each wavelet packet was determined as in Eq. (8)(8)wRMS,m,j=1N∑n=0N−1|wm,j(n)|2From Eq. (9), the RMS energy values were determined(9)EwRMS,m,j=|wRMS,m,j|2In addition, the subbands in the VLF, LF and HF basebands were calculated as in equation (10)(10.a)VLFR1=∑j=v+R1−1v+R1+w1−1EwRMS,9,J(10.b)LFR2=∑j=l+R2−1l+R2+w2−1EwRMS,9,J(10.c)HFR3=∑j=h+R3−1h+R3+w3−1EwRMS,9,JWhere R1, R2, R3 indexes are nominated as the number of subbands in each baseband. v, l, and h are the minimum rank of the packet over the each basebands respectively. And w1, w2, and w3 are the number of packets in the subbands respectively [28]. We identified 7 packets for subbands in the VLF baseband, 11 packets for subbands in the LF baseband and 16 packets for subbands in the HF baseband. We tried to narrow further these bands to get a better efficiency. We experimentally combined packets in different numbers. For example we grouped the packets as 10, 15, 20, 25, 30 etc. for HF band (from 10 to entire band). We achieved the most successful result with 49 subbands for HF component. We narrowed the bands and limited wavelet packets of LF and VLF components similarly. We achieved the most successful result with 19 subbands for LF, and 3 subbands for VLF components. Therefore, there were 3 VLF subbands, 19 LF subbands and 49 HF subbands as feature extraction from the HRV signal.WPT frequency calculation was realized using Eq. (11)(11)fhigh_m=j+12m+1×fsm=1,…,Mj=0,1where fhigh_mis the high frequency for each wavelet packet, fsis the sampling frequency of signal.The MLPNN provides more parameter changes when compared to other nonlinear methods. Providing different flexible changes in the number of layers, the number of required neurons, and the activation function and network structures with the very high input parameters are strengths for MLPNN. MLPNN is selected for a study made for the first time as the most suitable method for classification and association since it allows many parameter changes. MLPNN algorithm was coded in Matlab (http://www.mathworks.com/products/matlab/) using Neural Network toolbox. In this study, the role of MLPNN is to be associated between the features extracted using the WPT from HRV and anxiety text scores. The first aim of the association is to determine the more related bandwidth of HRV with BAI and HAM-A scores. Second is determining the anxiety level according to features in input. Last one is establishing a relationship whether patient has anxiety or not.The RMS energy value of each packet (71 packets available in the range) is calculated separately as shown in Eq. 10(a), (b) and (c). These energy values are compared graphically with each other. According to this comparison, the critical frequency ranges are determined. As a result, the critical frequency range obtained from WPT was applied separately to MLPNN as an input and its relationship to the anxiety scores is observed at the output. So, the number of inputs also changes to assess what is received for each band range. MLPNN structure has a maximum of 71 inputs. For example, when VLF (1:3) is input, MLPNN has 3 inputs; when HF (1:20) is input, MLPNN has 20 inputs; and when HF (1:49) is input, MLPNN has 49 inputs. Eventually, MLPNN has a maximum of 71 inputs when LF (1:3)+LF (1:19)+HF (1:49) are all evaluated together. These input numbers may be changed depending on the combination of the subbands selected from the basebands.In the study, MLPNN structures were optimized using different MLPNN parameters (the number of layers and neurons in the MLPNN, selection of activation functions, learning rate and moment constant values). The most useful structure occurred as a variable input according to number of subbands, 20 hidden layers, and 1 output layer. We performed the MLPNN with different number of neurons from 1 to 100 in hidden layer. But the highest classification accuracies were achieved with 20 hidden neurons. This network was trained using the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm that supplies the optimum values. Best training performance (mean squared error (mse) was 22906e-008 for BAI analysis at epoch 8, and 59628e-007 for HAM-A analysis at epoch 338. The MLPNN structure is shown inFig.4.Measured BAI and HAM-A scores were rescaled between maximum and minimum values for normalization on the MLPNN. Due to rescaling, the maximum measured value was found to be 39 for BAI and 38 for HAM-A. Target values were obtained from BAI scores (0 to 39 for the dataset used in this study) and HAM-A (0 to 38 for the dataset used in this study). In addition, target values were adjusted as non-anxious or anxious depending on the BAI and HAM-A scores.The MLPNN structure had been formed in Matlab. Network was trained with the data from 55 subjects, including 40 patients and 15 controls, and was tested with data from 35 subjects, including 16 patients and 19 controls. Data from a total of 90 subjects, 56 patients (40 for training and 16 for test) and 34 controls (15 for training and 19 for test), were used for analysis. Training data were used to train the MLPNN network. Test data were used to test the accuracy of the trained network.Dominant subband groups of fundamental frequency bands were determined by using wavelet analysis. Then relationships of the dominant subband combinations which were applied to MLPNN were evaluated separately. The results inTable 4 were obtained accordingly. Results were evaluated with the data of all 90 subjects in this table. Accuracy values for subbands were obtained as percentages. The frequency band with highest accuracy value has been identified as the most relevant band with tests scores.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
