@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Voxel-based fabrication through material property mapping: A design method for bitmap printing

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Bitmap printing workflow enables digital fabrication in printer’s native resolution.Voxel-based design and representation of objects for multi-material printing.Using 3D printed light guides, deformation of materials can be sensed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
3D printing,Voxels,Additive manufacturing,Digital fabrication,Bitmap printing,Prosthetics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We present a bitmap printing method and digital workflow using multi-material high resolution Additive Manufacturing (AM). Material composition is defined based on voxel resolution and used to fabricate a design object with locally varying material stiffness, aiming to satisfy the design objective. In this workflow voxel resolution is set by the printer’s native resolution, eliminating the need for slicing and path planning. Controlling geometry and material property variation at the resolution of the printer provides significantly greater control over structure–property–function relationships. To demonstrate the utility of the bitmap printing approach we apply it to the design of a customized prosthetic socket. Pressure-sensing elements are concurrently fabricated with the socket, providing possibilities for evaluation of the socket’s fit. The level of control demonstrated in this study cannot be achieved using traditional CAD tools and volume-based AM workflows, implying that new CAD workflows must be developed in order to enable designers to harvest the capabilities of AM.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Form, structure, material, and function are intimately intertwined in Nature, complementing and relying upon each other  [1]. The evolution of both form and material occurs in tandem, informed by their environment and enabled by the process of material fabrication. By contrast, conventional design processes today begin with desired forms to which material compositions are assigned on a macro level. These models are then refined to ensure that they will meet the set performance criteria when manufactured  [2].In this paper we present a design approach towards environment and performance-driven form generation and material mapping in Additive Manufacturing (AM). As a specific case study of voxel-based design and fabrication and the bitmap printing process, a workflow for the design, representation, and digital fabrication of variable impedance lower-extremity prosthetic sockets is demonstrated. Prosthetics provides a relevant class of objects upon which to test the voxel-based approach due to the scale of their functional requirements. Current digital fabrication processes, especially multi-material processes, are able to fabricate objects within the scale of prosthetics and work with accuracy below the millimeter range. Furthermore, prosthetics requires a high level of customization, which is generally considered to be an important asset of AM. Finally, the possibility to locally vary structure and material composition has the potential to provide improvements in the performance of such products.Despite the dynamic and heterogeneous nature of the human body, orthoses and prostheses designed to be situated along limbs and torsos are typically homogeneous in material composition and fail to mirror the functional gradients of stiffness and flexibility inherent in skin and muscle tissues  [3]. Limb loss is an increasingly relevant condition with approximately 1.6 million people living with limb loss in the United States alone  [4]. The development of advanced, high quality prosthetics is crucial to accommodate the needs of this portion of the population.In particular, we focus on a transtibial prosthetic socket, which targets the largest population of lower-limb amputees. As the component that interfaces between the residual limb and the prosthesis, a properly fitting socket is essential for patient mobility, comfort, and health.Conventional prosthetic sockets today are fabricated using a long, iterative, and labor-intensive artisanal process that does not utilize recent material advances and scientific instrumentation. As a result, current sockets often do not fit properly, leading to discomfort, pain, and occasionally skin breakdown in the residual limb  [5].Aiming to overcome the current issues in prosthetics, we present a method to produce sockets using a multi-material 3D printer, allowing for local variation of material stiffness in order to customize the socket and to increase socket functionality by integrating sensing elements.Although multi-material 3D printing has been in existence for several years  [6], currently available design workflows are based on volume representations and do not generally enable representations of functionally graded materials or control of material properties on a voxel scale.At the core of this research is an investigation into novel workflows that enable designers to utilize the capabilities of the rapidly evolving multi-material AM technology. In order to discuss the current limitations and challenges, we draw parallels with workflows in 2D printing. Considering these parallels, we argue that design workflows that take into account the build strategy can provide the designer with greater levels of control over the properties and functionalities of the fabricated object.To demonstrate this principle, we present a new workflow. Initially the object’s geometry and local material properties are determined and represented. Subsequently, the desired material properties are translated into local material composition at the native resolution of a multi-material AM system using bitmaps. These bitmaps are directly sent to the AM machine. Currently there are no software tools available publicly that support this type of workflow including 3D bitmap printing. We present a case study for a customized prosthetic socket to illustrate the capabilities of our approach. Through this case we demonstrate how new AM processes, in combination with a novel CAD workflow, allow designers to increase product performance and functionality.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
