@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Automatic detection of epileptic seizures in long-term EEG records

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
It is developed to reduce the visual inspection time spent by physicians.It is based on simple and low computational costs methods.It uses thresholds instead of complex classifier. So, no training step is required.It can be applied to new records that have not been presented to the algorithm.It is simpler than other algorithms, similar or superior performances were achieved.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Epilepsy,Intracranial EEG records (iEEG),Power spectrum,EEG frequency bands,Wavelet decomposition,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Epilepsy is a neurological disorder which affects nearly 1.5% of the world׳s total population. Trained physicians and neurologists visually scan the long-term electroencephalographic (EEG) records to identify epileptic seizures. It generally requires many hours to interpret the data. Therefore, tools for quick detection of seizures in long-term EEG records are very useful. This study proposes an algorithm to help detect seizures in long-term iEEG based on low computational costs methods using Spectral Power and Wavelet analysis. The detector was tested on 21 invasive intracranial EEG (iEEG) records. A sensitivity of 85.39% was achieved. The results indicate that the proposed method detects epileptic seizures in long-term iEEG records successfully. Moreover, the algorithm does not require long processing time due to its simplicity. This feature will allow significant time reduction of the visual inspection of iEEG records performed by the specialists.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Epilepsy is a neurological disorder that affects people of all ages all over the world [1]. This disorder is characterized by recurrent seizures, which are clinical manifestations of sudden and brief electrical shocks of a group of brain cells. Different brain areas may be the source of these seizures. Approximately, 0.5–1.5% of the world׳s population suffers from epilepsy [2].Electroencephalography (EEG) is the standard procedure to record electrical brain activity in patients with neuro-pathologies. The rhythmic activity of EEG signals is typically characterized by frequency bands, such as: Delta (δ; 0.5–4Hz), Theta (θ; 4–8Hz), Alpha (α; 8–12Hz), Beta (β; 12–30Hz) and Gamma (γ;>30Hz) [3]. When epileptic activity begins, synchronized and abnormal electrical activities in small areas of the brain are observed [3]. Consequently, this process is reflected in the EEG record and characterized as a seizure.Surgery is often prescribed for refractory epilepsy where patients have high chances to reduce the amount of seizures. The typical procedure for these patients is hospitalization due to the necessary evaluation of localization and main source of seizure. The pre-surgical procedure consists in placing an intracranial grid of electrodes on the suspected epileptogenic zone to record the brain activity during the seizures. This recording practice usually lasts between 24 to 72h obtaining EEG records to be analyzed. Medical specialists and neurologists visually scan the EEG records looking for epileptic seizures to identify the epileptogenic zone to be removed. This visual inspection has some negative effects, is quite complex, highly time consuming and, more often than not, it leads to disagreement between the physicians. Taking into account that some patients have intracranial grids in the brain it is vital to diagnose due to the risk of infections or even death. Once these steps are completed, the source resection surgery can be performed. Therefore, it is necessary to improve the exactitude often diagnostic stage and expedite the procedure.In order to provide clinical tools to contribute to more accurate diagnosis, several EEG signal processing algorithms have been developed. Some recent studies perform the analysis for single-channel EEG signals [4,5] while others carry out a multichannel analysis evaluating the synchronization between the EEG channels [6]. These detection methods are based on different features calculated from time and frequency domains [7,8]. Time domain features are usually combined with other parameters in seizure detection algorithms. The relative average amplitude, the relative average duration and the coefficient of variation of the amplitude were implemented in a commercial seizure detection monitor [9,10]. The Welch method and the Short Time Fourier Transform (STFT) are commonly used to estimate the power spectrum of a time sequence in EEG [11,12]. Some common features extracted from the frequency domain are maximum power [12,13]; the central, mean and peak frequencies [14] and the dominant frequency [7]. Besides, time-frequency (T-F) analysis has been used to calculate energy distribution in the T-F plane [14–16]. In the post, feature extraction by Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was done by De Lucia et al. [17], and Acharya et al. [18]. On the other hand, wavelet features [19–23] and chaotic features such as entropies [5,24] were also used. Generally, those authors performed combination of two or more techniques. Then, they test the same set of features with more than one classifier [25–27].The Empirical Mode Decomposition (EMD) is another method used for epileptic seizure detection [14,19,28,29] but EMD has a high computational cost and requires excessive processing time.The present work presents an automatic algorithm that is capable of detecting segments with epileptic seizures in long term iEEG records. The proposed method is based on the relative energy of the iEEG bands extracted from the power spectrum and the wavelet decomposition of such iEEG bands. Specifically, the relative energies of the iEEG bands (Theta, Alpha and Beta) are used to detect the seizure and, then the wavelet decomposition is used to obtain the time position of the seizure in the iEEG record.The proposed algorithm is simpler than other related algorithms and achieves similar or even better performances. Hence, this algorithm could be used to facilitate the work of physicians in analyzing long-term iEEG records and it can be implemented on a personal computer since the methods used require low computational cost.The iEEG database was recorded during invasive pre-surgical epilepsy monitoring at the Epilepsy Center of the University Hospital of Freiburg [30]. The iEEG database contains invasive EEG recordings of 21 patients (13M, 8F, age=29.9±11.9 years) suffering from medically intractable focal epilepsy. In nine patients the source of epilepsy was located in the temporal lobe; another six suffered from frontal focal epilepsy and one of parietal epilepsy. The other five patients had two different epileptic sources, three with temporo-occipital epilepsy and two with fronto-temporal and temporo-parietal each. There are 196 iEEG segments available in the database (only 89 of them with epileptic seizures). In order to obtain a high signal-to-noise ratio, fewer artifacts, and to record directly from focal areas, intracranial grid-, strip- and depth-electrodes were used. The iEEG data were acquired using a Neurofile NT digital video EEG system with 128 channels, 256Hz sampling rate, and a 16 bits A/D converter. Notch or band pass filters have not been applied in the acquisition stage.The iEEG recordings were divided into segments of 1h. The 89 iEEG segments that have epileptic seizure contain only one seizure per segment. The available data only include six intracranial EEG channels. This database contains annotations done by trained experts of the starting and ending times of the seizures.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This article presents an automatic algorithm that is able to detect epileptic seizures in long-term iEEG records for clinical applications.The proposed algorithm is based on simple and low computational costs methods. Therefore, it reduces the visual inspection time spent by physicians in pre-surgical studies analysis from hours to minutes.The proposed algorithm uses thresholds instead of complex classifier such as neural networks, or support vector machines. Therefore, no training step is required because the threshold is calculated automatically from the records. Consequently, the proposed algorithm can be applied to new records that have not been previously presented to the algorithm. Additionally to its simplicity, the achieved performance is similar or superior compared to other related and more complex algorithms.In summary, an iEEG signal processing algorithm has been developed in order to provide physicians with clinical tools that may help in achieving faster and more accurate diagnosis in pre-surgical studies.None Declared.