@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Pseudo progression identification of glioblastoma with dictionary learning

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Discriminating between the pseudo progression and the true progression of Glioblastoma with AUC of 0.87.Dictionary learning developed to process the DTI/FA volumetric images.A feature selection approach for the large number of sparse representation calculated by dictionary learning.ROI segmentation is not needed.Location restriction regarding the tumor position has been solved.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Pseudo progression,Glioblastoma multiforme,Dictionary learning,Genomics analysis,Fractional anisotropy (FA),Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Objective: Although the use of temozolomide in chemoradiotherapy is effective, the challenging clinical problem of pseudo progression has been raised in brain tumor treatment. This study aims to distinguish pseudo progression from true progression.Materials and Methods: Between 2000 and 2012, a total of 161 patients with glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) were treated with chemoradiotherapy at our hospital. Among the patients, 79 had their diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) data acquired at the earliest diagnosed date of pseudo progression or true progression, and 23 had both DTI data and genomic data. Clinical records of all patients were kept in good condition. Volumetric fractional anisotropy (FA) images obtained from the DTI data were decomposed into a sequence of sparse representations. Then, a feature selection algorithm was applied to extract the critical features from the feature matrix to reduce the size of the feature matrix and to improve the classification accuracy.Results: The proposed approach was validated using the 79 samples with clinical DTI data. Satisfactory results were obtained under different experimental conditions. The area under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve (AUC) was 0.87 for a given dictionary with 1024 atoms. For the subgroup of 23 samples, genomics data analysis was also performed. Results implied further perspective on pseudo progression classification.Conclusions: The proposed method can determine pseudo progression and true progression with improved accuracy. Laboring segmentation is no longer necessary because this skillfully designed method is not sensitive to tumor location.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is a highly invasive disease, and its recurrence at sites distant from the core of tumors is the main cause of its high mortality. The current standard of care is surgical resection, followed by radiation therapy (RT) and concomitant and adjuvant temozolomide (TMZ) chemotherapy [1].Pseudo progression (PsP) is a phenomenon showing changes of subacute imaging data in human glioma subsequent to chemoradiotherapy suggestive of progression [2]. The incidence of tumor PsP ranges from 28% to 66% in all GBM patients undergoing chemoradiation and typically occurs within three months after the completion of concurrent radiation and TMZ chemotherapy [3]. PsP has been associated with a variety of nontumoral processes, such as treatment-related inflammation [1], postsurgical changes, ischemia, and radiation necrosis [4,5].PsP is detected by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) as contrast-enhanced regions that can mimic early tumor progression. However, PsP is difficult to identify by conventional MRI and morphologic MRI features [1,6,7]. Currently, the only method to distinguish PsP from early progression is by follow-up examinations on patients [2]. Differentiation between PsP and tumor progression is critical because PsP is an indication of that the current therapy is effective and should be continued, in which group the patients have a better chance of survival, whereas tumor progression indicates that the current therapy is not effective and should be altered if possible. Developing advanced techniques and approaches to distinguish between PsP and true progression in GBM is important [2,6].Advanced MRI techniques, such as perfusion imaging, diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), and magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS), have been introduced into the GBM treatment response analysis [8,9]. Different modalities of MRI can provide additional information and novel aspects to improve the distinction. For example, DTI is based on the movement of water molecules that diffuse more rapidly in the direction aligned with the internal structure. Different metrics, such as apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) and fractional anisotropy (FA) [10], can be computed from DTI, which characterizes tissue integrity and describes the physical attributes of neuronal fibers in the brain. In [8], these values were observed to be significantly different in regions having or close to pathological changes. Therefore, these metrics can potentially be used for distinguishing PsP from early tumor recurrence.However, previous studies mostly focused on extracting bio-features or morphologic features from the scans and identifying the presence of PsP by comparing the value of the features with certain discriminative criteria [1,11]. The performance of such approaches cannot meet the precision required for the clinical management of patients. The authors were perplexed about the tumor progression and stated that advanced techniques are necessary.Consequently, researchers have started to apply machine learning approaches [12,13], such as support vector machine (SVM) [9], to improve the analysis of perfusion images. Eight parameters derived from multiple MRI sequences are used to compose the feature vector for classification. This approach directly uses the extracted morphological features without further analysis. The region-of-interest (ROI) should be segmented for each set of MRI sequence beforehand, but this step is labor intensive and introduces much ambiguity. A more complicated tumor growth model was developed as the metric of therapy response [14]. A score called Days Gained was computed by this model to distinguish PsP from true progression. This approach requires follow up of image data of patients. Segmentation cannot be avoided either. Generally, improvements to these approaches are greatly needed, particularly with the use of advanced analysis.This study focuses on DTI sequence and uses extracted volumetric FA images as the key measurement. The dictionary learning (DL) approach is applied to the image sequence to obtain sparse representations. DL is a powerful image analysis method based on sparse representation techniques. DL methods have various forms derived from different application problems, such as image denoising [15], image in-painting [16], and image compression [17,18]. However, most of these attempts are based on two-dimensional (2D) images. In the present study, we extend this approach to discriminate volumetric subjects. ROI segmentation is no longer needed in the DL approach. Therefore, the proposed method is more efficient and accurate. Then, the feature matrix is composed by the sparse representation with a specially designed permutation, which could solve the location divergence of tumors. Finally, a small group of features is selected from the feature matrix, and the subjects are classified using the SVM approach.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study, we developed and validated a new method to evaluate true brain tumor progression in contrast to PsP. This method was helpful in clinical decision making. DTI, as a promising method for characterizing microstructural changes or differences in neuropathology and treatment, was used in this approach. FA was extracted as the key measurement of PsP. PsP of patients were successfully identified using the proposed image analysis approach. The labor-intensive and time-consuming segmentation of the ROI was no longer needed. Furthermore, the proposed approach solved the location restriction with a skillfully composed feature matrix. We also explained the misclassified samples and the features.In future works, we will consider involving more measurements extracted from DTI data, such as the mean diffusivity, axial diffusivity, and radial diffusivity values. This additional information describes the different properties of the DTI data and provides more diagnostic value.None declared.