@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Noninvasive identification of two lesions with local repolarization changes using two dipoles in inverse solution simulation study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We modeled one or two lesions with repolarization changes in heart ventricle.We computed difference integral body surface potential maps on the torso surface.We suggested the inverse solution for identification of two lesions by two dipoles.Characteristics of solutions were specified for classification of correct solutions.For suggested method no apriori information about the number of lesions is needed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Inverse solution,Heart model,Two lesions with changed repolarization,Simulation of integral body surface potential maps,Classification of obtained results,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundThe method for inverse localization and identification of two distinct simultaneous lesions with changed repolarization in the ventricular myocardium (two-vessel disease) is proposed and its robustness to errors in input data is tested in this simulation study.MethodThe inverse solution was obtained from the difference between STT integral body surface potential map computed with repolarization changes and the STT integral map from normal activation. In a numerical model of ventricles 48 cases of two simultaneous lesions and 48 cases of a single lesion were modeled. The effect of the lesions was taken to be represented by two dipoles. The input data were disturbed by three types of added noise. Twenty three characteristics of every obtained inverse solution were defined and four of them were used as the features in discriminant analysis task distinguishing the correct inverse solutions identifying two lesions.ResultsThe mean localization error for identified two lesions was 1.1±0.7cm. The sensitivity and specificity of quadratic discriminant analysis with cross-validation and feature selection was higher than 90%.ConclusionsThe combination of the inverse solution with two dipoles and discriminant analysis allows the identification of two simultaneous lesions without a priori information about the number of lesions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In patients with ischemic heart disease and atherosclerosis two or more simultaneously occluded coronary arteries can be present [1]. It has been shown that multiple-lead measurements on the thorax give more information about the cardiac electrical generator than traditionally used standard 12-leads ECG [2,3]. Besides the evaluation of the body surface potential map (BSPM) pattern itself [4,5] various inverse methods based on the mathematical modeling of the cardiac electric field have been developed [6,7] to identify processes in the heart. The variety of the used inverse methods stems mainly from the assumed form of the equivalent cardiac generator which should be identified by the inverse computation.If a spatially distributed equivalent cardiac generator is considered, the inverse solutions are usually in the form of epicardial potentials [8] or transmembrane potentials [9]. In the case of a uniform double layer model of the activation wavefront, the isochrones are computed as a result of inverse solution [10]. New approach to inverse recovery of the cardiac activity (timing of depolarization) was introduced in [11] using the fastest route algorithm.A simple dipolar source as an equivalent cardiac generator could be used for inverse computations in cases, when the searched pathology is localized in a small area [12]. The equivalent dipole was suggested, for example, for finding the preexcitation sites (accessory pathways) in Wolf-Parkinson-White syndrome [12–14]. It is also possible to use the equivalent cardiac dipole for inverse localization of small regions with changed repolarization that occur because of local occlusion of a coronary artery. Changes of the repolarization phase of the action potential (AP) are reflected in the changes during STT interval in measured ECG signals [15–17] what is well noticeable in the integral maps from the STT interval as it was shown in [18,19]. The inverse localization of small lesions with changed repolarization by the inverse solution to one dipole was suggested in [20].Two-dipole equivalent generator was used for the first time in order to obtain better description of the potential distribution on the torso surface [21]. Later the problem of finding two moving dipoles by an iterative procedure was studied in [22]. The problem of the existence and inverse reconstruction of dual accessory pathways using two dipoles was outlined and solved, for example, in [23,24].The inverse solution to two dipoles for identification of two zones with changed repolarization is the follow-up of the previous study [20] and was briefly introduced in [25] and [26]. The assumption of presence of two simultaneous lesions leads to additional problems. One of them is whether we need the a priori information about the number of lesions or we are able to recognize the correct estimation of two lesions from the properties of the obtained solution. Therefore, in this study various characteristics of the inverse solution were suggested and tested as discriminating features for recognition of a correct inverse solution for cases with two lesions.The aim of the presented article was to suggest the method for localization of two simultaneous lesions with changed repolarization and to study and evaluate its robustness to additional random noise in the input data. Because no a priori information about the number of lesions was assumed, the next aim was to find some discrimination criteria of correct solutions characterizing just two lesions.In the simulation study the geometrical model of analytically defined heart ventricles was used [27]. The model consists of 1mm3 elements organized into five layers regarding their position between endocardium and epicardium. The experimentally observed action potentials (APs) are assigned to the elements of each layer [28]. The duration of AP is different in each ventricle and varies across the ventricular walls from 240 to 282ms [29]. In each step of activation, the moment of current dipole is computed in each cubic element from the difference between the APs of adjacent elements.The lesions with changed repolarization were modeled as parts of a sphere or of an ellipsoid located in subendocardial or subepicardial myocardium. Their location was typical for stenosis of one of the three main coronary vessels. Eight types of lesions were defined in each position, giving together 48 types of single lesions. The types differed in shape and size of the affected area. The size of the lesions varied from 0.1 to 6.1% of the modeled ventricular volume with the radius of the lesions from 0.5 to 3.0cm. The changed repolarization was modeled by shortening the AP duration in the affected area by 20%.Then the combinations of two lesions from different myocardium areas were used to model cases with two lesions simulating the two-vessel disease. In such cases pairs of lesions were created only from the lesions with approximately the same size and shape. Each member of the pair represented the area affected by different coronary artery. According the AHA anatomical nomenclature the lesions were situated in anterior, inferior and lateral segments of the left ventricle. To simulate the supply or demand ischemia both members of the couple of lesions were either subepicardial or subendocardial, respectively. The mean mutual distance between the centers of the lesions was 5.6±1.3cm (from 3.3 to 7.8cm). Three combinations of subepicardial and three combinations of subendocardial lesions were modeled. For each combination eight different types with various sizes and shapes of the lesions were considered, giving 48 pairs of modeled lesions in total. The positions and labels of combinations of lesions are shown inFig. 1.The body surface potentials and corresponding STT integral maps were computed for the normal ventricular activation and for pathological activations affected by the modeled lesions.To compute the cardiac electric field, the model of heart ventricles in the form of multiple dipole generator was inserted in a realistically shaped torso model, which was a modification of the Dalhousie torso model [30]. Models of lungs with four times lower conductivity than average conductivity of the torso and ventricular cavities with three times higher conductivity representing the main electrical inhomogeneities were inserted into the torso. Body surface potential maps were computed using the boundary element method, proposed in [31] that has been frequently used ever since [32–34].The difference integral map (DIM) was computed by subtraction of STT integral map obtained during normal activation from STT integral map obtained during activation of the ventricular model with pathology. Such computation of the DIM Δbm is then equivalent to the computation of an integral map for a difference multiple dipole integral generator Δs:(1)Δbm=A.sp−A.sn=A.(sp−sn)=A.Δswhere A is the time independent transfer matrix that represents the properties of inhomogeneous torso as the volume conductor and sn and sp are integral multiple dipole generators representing the normal and pathological activation of the ventricular myocardium, respectively. Δs can be considered as representing integral multiple dipole generator characterizing only the modeled lesions with changed repolarization. In this study the DIM was computed for 48 cases of two simultaneous lesions and also for 48 cases with modeled single lesion. All computed DIMs were used as the input data for the inverse solution with two dipoles to imitate situations without a priori knowledge about the number of lesions and to compare the properties/character of obtained inverse solutions for two lesions and for one-single lesion.To test the robustness of the inverse method three types of Gaussian random noise with the zero mean were applied to the DIMs. First, the random noise N1 was applied directly on DIMs to simulate the noise in ECG signals. The second type of noise - N2 simulated the noise in positioning of electrodes on the torso. The third type of noise - N3 was applied to components of dipole moments within the lesion and represented the variability of repolarization changes in the modeled pathology.The SNR in the DIMs was computed using the formula:(2)SNR=20log10rms(DIM)rms(noise)[dB]The basic assumption of the inverse method for localization of one lesion was, that the repolarization changes in one lesion can be represented by one integral dipole [20]. Using the same assumption for localization of two lesions the equivalent integral generator in the form of the couple of equivalent integral dipoles was searched in 168 predefined points evenly distributed in the modeled ventricular volume. The mean distance between the adjacent predefined positions was 1.05±0.13cm. All possible pairs of positions were considered for the inverse solution.First, for each pair of predefined positions the pair of dipoles was computed by the inverse solution [26]. Then the best pair of dipoles was selected from all obtained pairs of dipoles according to the criterion of minimal relative residual error RMSDIF between the input DIM and the map generated by the particular pair of dipoles.The value of RMSDIF characterized the quality of obtained inverse result. For further analysis of the inverse solution and stability of the results, the group of resulting pairs of dipoles with RMSDIF fulfilling the condition (3) was taken into account.(3)RMSDIF≤minRMSDIF+0.01Considering the range of RMSDIF (0,1), the quantity 0.01 represents 1% of the range.Then the modified K-means clustering method based on Euclidean distance between the dipoles was applied to all analyzed dipoles in the group to divide them into two clusters by an iterative algorithm [26]. The gravity center of the cluster and the mean dipole moment of the dipoles in the cluster were considered as the inversely found representatives of the modeled ischemic lesion.For each modeled pair of lesions the localization errors of the inverse solution were computed as the Euclidean distance between the gravity center of the first lesion and the closer dipole of the inversely found pair of dipoles and the Euclidean distance between the second lesion and the other member of the dipole pair. The localization errors for modeled single lesion were not evaluated.The modeled ventricles were divided into regions assigned either to the right ventricle or to one of three areas of the left ventricle supplied by three main coronary arteries (LAD-anterior, RCA-inferior or LCx-lateral). The cluster of dipoles was considered a correct representative of the modeled lesion (anterior, inferior or lateral) if more than 2/3 of the cluster׳s members belonged to the corresponding area of the ventricular model. The inverse solution was considered correct, if both clusters correctly denoted the positions of the two modeled lesions.Visual observations of all obtained solutions revealed different properties/behavior of groups of dipoles in correct solutions for two lesions in comparison with incorrect solutions for two lesions and in solutions for single lesions (Fig. 2). The incorrect solutions and the solutions for single lesions were similarly unstable. Therefore the inversely obtained solutions (clusters of results computed for modeled pairs of lesions and single lesions) were divided into two groups: the first group represented correct solutions for two lesions when both clusters assigned the locations of modeled lesions, the second group comprised incorrect solutions for modeled pairs of lesions as well as the solutions obtained for modeled single lesions. These two groups of solutions were used as classes in the next discriminant analysis. For each solution twenty three characteristics of the clusters of dipoles were specified as possible input features for the two class discrimination task.The features were based on geometrical and statistical properties of two clusters of dipoles obtained by the inverse solution: number of results in clusters, mutual distance between the centers of clusters, standard deviation (std) of positions of dipoles in each cluster, mutual angle between the summary dipoles in each of both clusters, std of angles of dipoles in each cluster, ratio of the norms of summarized dipoles in each cluster and their combinations. Quadratic variant of Fisher׳s discriminant analysis (QDA) was applied to the data [35]. Where appropriate, some of the features were log-transformed in order to adjust the data distribution towards the Gaussian one.Discriminant analysis was performed in two consecutive steps. First, the whole set of data was split by 5-fold manner into three sets 60%-20%-20% with five disjunct realizations for the last set. The first two sets were used for model selection, that is, feature reduction together with the choice of relevant features: Cross-validation technique was applied in a form of repeated random sub-sampling validation. In 1000 trials data from the first set was randomly chosen for training and data from the second set for validation. Feature selection was applied in order to reduce data dimensionality and to simplify data evaluation. Greedy forward selection algorithm was used by adding the best feature at each round. [36]. Then the third set was used in each of five trials for testing mode. Classification outcome was obtained as the number of correctly and incorrectly classified solutions. Percentage of true positives and true negatives as the sensitivity and specificity of the QDA was computed as well.Then the optimal number of features for separation of the correct solutions for two lesions from the other solutions was searched. When the number of features was chosen, set of particular features was selected. With this fixed set of features the final classification was performed: The whole data set was split only into two parts with 80% for training and 20% for testing. Once more cross-validation with repeated random sub-sampling validation in 1000 trials was applied.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
