@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Human factors study on the usage of BCI headset for 3D CAD modeling

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present a novel BCI based user interface for conceptual 3D modeling.The BCI performs CAD functions such as 3D shape creation and manipulation.Video abstract: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GATQUVgLLYY.A human factors study to assess intuitiveness of BCI in 3D modeling is presented.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Brain computer interfaces (BCI),Human factors,Natural CAD interfaces,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Since its inception, computer aided 3D modeling has primarily relied on the Windows, Icons, Menus, Pointer (WIMP) interface in which user input is in the form of keystrokes and pointer movements. The brain–computer interface (BCI) is a novel modality that uses the brain signals of a user to enable natural and intuitive interaction with an external device. In this paper we present a human factors study on the use of an Emotiv EEG BCI headset for 3D CAD modeling. The study focuses on substituting the conventional computer mouse- and keyboard-based inputs with inputs from the Emotiv EEG headset. The main steps include (1) training the headset to recognize user-specific EEG/EMG signals and (2) assigning the classified signals to emulate keystrokes which are used to activate/control different commands of a CAD package. To assess the performance of the new system, we compared the time taken by the users to create the 3D CAD models using both the conventional and BCI-based interfaces. In addition, to exhibit the adaptability of the new system, we carried out the study for a set of CAD models of varying complexity.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Computer Aided Design (CAD) systems form the basic foundation of any design and innovation processes. Modern day CAD systems rely heavily on the conventional windows, icons, menus, pointer (WIMP) user interfaces (UIs). A lack of natural interaction in WIMP UIs inhibits the creativity of the designer in the design process and this in turn hampers the quality of design solutions. There is a need for intuitive and natural interfaces that allow designers to interact with computers in the same way that they interact with people  [1]. In other words, the human–computer interaction (HCI) should encapsulate the characteristics of the human–human interaction (HHI). Extensive work has been carried out in developing new modalities that complement existing UIs. The brain–computer interface (BCI) is a novel technology that imbibes HHI-specific characteristics. The BCIs’ potential to become an important modality of natural interaction for 3D modeling is almost limitless and unexplored. The study presented in this paper lays out a preliminary foundation to allude to BCIs capability for 3D CAD modeling.Typically a BCI system is used to detect and relate patterns in brain signals to the users’ thoughts and intentions. In this regard, over the years EEG-based systems have been used for a variety of applications  [2–4]. Another form of input that can be used for the human–computer interaction is electromyogram (EMG) signals. EMG corresponds to electric signals generated by skeletal muscular activity. Unlike reading mental activity, these detections are very fast (10 ms) thereby conveying a decisive advantage and rendering them suitable for fast-paced applications like gaming. Gomez-Gil et al.  [5] demonstrated the reliability of EMG signals when it was used to control a tractor. The use of the Emotive headset for the study involves utilizing both EEG- and EMG-based signals in tandem. The user-specific signals are converted into intended commands which are consequently used to create 3D CAD models. All the CAD models constructed for the study are based on the following three operations: (1) create geometrical shapes, (2) edit shapes by resizing or by geometric operations such as booleans, sweeps and extrusions, and (3) move shapes by rotations and translations. As every individual has a unique thought pattern when it comes to performing the same task, human factors study have been carried out to assess the reliability and intuitiveness of the BCI-based system developed in this research. A preliminary human factor study on five subjects was carried out. The preliminary human factors study demonstrates that the developed system has the potential to have a lower learning curve and high usability.The paper is organized as follows. In Section  2, relevant work carried out in the field of multimodal interfaces for CAD applications is discussed. Section  3 outlines the basic hardware and overall system used in the study. The sample 3D models and results of the study are presented in Section  4. Results and conclusions have been summarized in Section  5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
