@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Off-centre Steiner points for Delaunay-refinement on curved surfaces

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Development of a new unstructured triangulation algorithm for smooth surfaces.Hybridisation of existing Delaunay-refinement and advancing-front techniques.Combines desirable aspects of both methods: high element quality, robustness.Provably good behaviour: guaranteed termination, bounded element quality.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Surface mesh generation,Delaunay-refinement,Advancing-front,Frontal-Delaunay,Off-centre Steiner points,Element quality,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
An extension of the restricted Delaunay-refinement algorithm for surface mesh generation is described, where a new point-placement scheme is introduced to improve element quality in the presence of mesh size constraints. Specifically, it is shown that the use of off-centre Steiner points, positioned on the faces of the associated Voronoi diagram, typically leads to significant improvements in the shape- and size-quality of the resulting surface tessellations. The new algorithm can be viewed as a Frontal-Delaunay approach — a hybridisation of conventional Delaunay-refinement and advancing-front techniques in which new vertices are positioned to satisfy both element size and shape constraints. The performance of the new scheme is investigated experimentally via a series of comparative studies that contrast its performance with that of a typical Delaunay-refinement technique. It is shown that the new method inherits many of the best features of classical Delaunay-refinement and advancing-front type methods, leading to the construction of smooth, high quality surface triangulations with bounded radius-edge ratios and convergence guarantees. Experiments are conducted using a range of complex benchmarks, verifying the robustness and practical performance of the proposed scheme.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Surface mesh generation is a key component in a variety of computational modelling and simulation tasks, including many forms of computational engineering and numerical modelling, a range of problems in computer graphics and animation, and various data visualisation applications. Given a geometric domain described by a bounding surfaceΣembedded inR3, the surface triangulation problem consists of tessellatingΣinto a mesh of non-overlapping triangular elements, such that all geometrical, topological and user-defined constraints are satisfied. While each use-case contributes its own set of specific considerations, it is typical to require that surface tessellations: (i) consist of elements of high shape–quality, (ii) provide good geometrical and topological approximations to the underlying surfaceΣ, and (iii) satisfy a set of user-specified element sizing constraints. While various strategies have been developed to solve the surface meshing problem in the past, a new algorithm is developed in this study with the aim of improving the quality of the resulting triangulations. This new work is an extension of initial studies presented by the authors in [1].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A new Frontal-Delaunay algorithm has been developed to triangulate smooth surfaces embedded inR3. The new algorithm is based on the so-called restricted Delaunay paradigm, in which a surface meshDel|Σ(X), conforming to an underlying surface descriptionΣ, is constructed as a subset of a full-dimensional Delaunay tessellationDel(X). The new restricted Frontal-Delaunay algorithm is based on a generalisation of the work of Rebay  [28] and Üngör  [34] for planar problems, in which generalised ‘off-centre’ Steiner vertices are inserted along edges in the Voronoi diagram. This work has been extended to support surface meshing operations through the development of a new point-placement strategy that positions vertices on facets in the underlying Voronoi complex. This new scheme allows for the insertion of both size- and shape-optimal Steiner vertices, leading to a hybrid approach that combines many of the advantages of conventional advancing-front and Delaunay-refinement techniques. A series of comparative experimental studies confirm the effectiveness of this new approach in practice, demonstrating that an improvement in mesh-quality is typically achieved when compared to conventional Delaunay-refinement schemes. Importantly, it has also been demonstrated that the new Frontal-Delaunay algorithm satisfies the same set of constraints as conventional restricted Delaunay-refinement approaches, adhering to limits on element radius-edge ratios, edge length and surface discretisation error. Results show that the new algorithm is an effective hybridisation of existing mesh generation techniques, combining the high element quality and mesh sub-structure of advancing-front techniques with the theoretical guarantees of Delaunay-refinement schemes. It is expected that applications that place a premium on mesh-quality, including problems in computational fluid dynamics and/or structural analysis, may benefit from the new Frontal-Delaunay technique. Future work should focus on support for an extended class of surface definitions, including domains containing sharp features.