@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Quantification of liver fat: A comprehensive review

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An overview on recent advances in liver fat quantification from histology, MR, US and CT is provided.The role of dedicated imaging modalities for quantification of liver fat is highlighted.The potential role of automated image processing methodologies to aid in image analysis is assessed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Biopsy,Fatty liver diseases,Liver fat quantification,Steatosis,CT,MR,US,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Fat accumulation in the liver causes metabolic diseases such as obesity, hypertension, diabetes or dyslipidemia by affecting insulin resistance, and increasing the risk of cardiac complications and cardiovascular disease mortality. Fatty liver diseases are often reversible in their early stage; therefore, there is a recognized need to detect their presence and to assess its severity to recognize fat-related functional abnormalities in the liver. This is crucial in evaluating living liver donors prior to transplantation because fat content in the liver can change liver regeneration in the recipient and donor. There are several methods to diagnose fatty liver, measure the amount of fat, and to classify and stage liver diseases (e.g. hepatic steatosis, steatohepatitis, fibrosis and cirrhosis): biopsy (the gold-standard procedure), clinical (medical physics based) and image analysis (semi or fully automated approaches). Liver biopsy has many drawbacks: it is invasive, inappropriate for monitoring (i.e., repeated evaluation), and assessment of steatosis is somewhat subjective. Qualitative biomarkers are mostly insufficient for accurate detection since fat has to be quantified by a varying threshold to measure disease severity. Therefore, a quantitative biomarker is required for detection of steatosis, accurate measurement of severity of diseases, clinical decision-making, prognosis and longitudinal monitoring of therapy. This study presents a comprehensive review of both clinical and automated image analysis based approaches to quantify liver fat and evaluate fatty liver diseases from different medical imaging modalities.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Excessive fat accumulation within the liver is called as hepatic steatosis. It has been a prominent feature of some of the most common health problems such as Non-Alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease (NAFLD) and Alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease (AFLD). This study presents a comprehensive review on both clinical and automated image analysis based approaches for quantitative measurement of liver fat and evaluation of fatty liver diseases from different medical imaging modalities.Patterns of steatosis can be categorized as microvesicular (microsteatosis) and macrovesicular (macrosteatosis) hepatic steatosis [1–5]. Microsteatosis refers to tiny lipid vesicles while macrosteatosis refers to a single large fat vacuole (which is greater than the hepatocyte nucleus) in the cytoplasm of the hepatocytes [6,7]. Microsteatosis is usually more severe than simple steatosis and associated with toxin-induced injury, acute viral and metabolic abnormalities [4]. Macrosteatosis is generally associated with diabetes, dyslipidemia, obesity, alcohol abuse and hyperlipidemia since it affects determination of insulin resistance (i.e.,interfering insulin signaling) and also increases risk of cardiac complications and cardiovascular disease mortality [8–18].The majority of fatty livers are related to NAFLD (Section 1.1). Both NAFLD and AFLD may continue to damage liver with cell injury and progress to their more aggressive or chronic forms like steatohepatitis, liver failure and even irreversible cirrhosis and HepatoCellular Carcinoma (HCC) [19]. Normal (a), fatty (b, c) and cirrhotic (d) liver tissues are illustrated inFig. 1.AFLD and NAFLD are fortunately reversible with timely intervention. Therefore, early and accurate diagnosis is essential. However, accurate diagnosis requires accurate evaluation of fat in the liver using non-invasive, quantitative and reproducible measurements. Accurate evaluation of fat in the liver also plays a vital role prior to transplant [20] since even a mild degree of steatosis in a donor liver could potentially increase the chance of liver failure in the recipient and can increase morbidity for the donor as well [7,21–23]. Clinical researchers reported severity of steatosis (when it is greater than 66%) as exclusion criteria for patients who need liver resection due to expected high risk of post-operative complications [22,24]. Due to the growing demands of the organ and the shortage of the available cadaveric organ, steatotic liver grafts are currently the most prominent “extended criteria” organs [20,25].Studies in the literature (see Section 3) indicate a growing interest in methods for accurate and quantitative grading of fat in the liver, motivated by an increasing need for early diagnosis, treatment and also monitoring of fatty liver diseases (see Sections 2 and 3).The number of obese people has increased dramatically at an alarming rate all over the world [26,27]. It is estimated that there will be 65 million more obese (only adults) in the U.S.A. and 11 million more obese (only adults) in the U.K. by 2030 [28]. An obesity prevalence map by state and territory in U.S. [29] indicates that prevalence of obesity is more than 20 percent in each state.There is a positive correlation between obesity and hepatic steatosis [30]. Obese people are four times more likely to develop hepatic steatosis [31]. Also, more recent studies showed that currently, NAFLD is one of the main reasons of liver diseases due to association with the presence of diabetes and obesity [32–34]. Fat concentration in the liver is not only influenced by obesity, it is also influenced by age, gender and ethnic differences.The rate for mortality in patients with simple steatosis, NAFLD, Non-Alcoholic SteatoHepatitis (NASH) and also cirrhosis has been reported in several studies [3,35–57], which are presented inTable 1.Prevalence of cirrhosis in this table involves patients who were diagnosed with liver cirrhosis at baseline and also following states of cirrhosis. Simple steatosis, NAFLD and NASH have been confirmed with biopsy in these studies that are presented in Table 1.It must be noted here that true prevalence rates for NASH and NAFLD are still unclear [35,58,59].The scope of this study is:1.To provide an overview on recent advances in liver fat quantification using histology, Magnetic Resonance (MR), Ultrasound (US) and Computed Tomography (CT) imaging.To highlight the role of dedicated imaging modalities for quantification of liver fat.To assess the potential role of automated image processing methodologies to aid in image analysis.This study presents a comprehensive review on clinical and automated image analysis approaches proposed for steatosis assessment. Our work is different from the previous reviews on this topic [60–62] because we present recent advances in medical imaging modalities and their role for quantification of liver fat. Additionally, we review both automated and non-automated quantification approaches for assessment of steatosis and their clinical applications, while previous reviews focused mainly only on MR based non-automated approaches. To our knowledge, this is the first review of automated quantification methods for assessment of steatosis.The organization of the paper is as follows. A brief description of the traditional diagnosis method for fatty liver and fat quantification is given in Section 2. Current clinical and automated liver fat quantification methods with descriptions of used imaging techniques are explained in Section 3. Finally, discussions, concluding remarks and future directions are given in Section 4.Serum tests (abnormal liver tests), hepatic imaging and liver biopsy are used for diagnosis of fatty liver diseases [61,62]. Currently, histological analysis and morphopathological results of biopsied liver tissue are considered as the gold reference standard for diagnosis and grading of hepatic steatosis to assess fatty liver. Liver biopsy evaluation is widely accepted and still performed to analyze correlations for any of new proposed tests. At biopsy, steatosis is graded by subjective visual estimation on percentage of the liver parenchyma, which has been replaced by fat (the proportion of hepatocytes that contains visible fatty inclusions).Several scales have been used to represent the degree of steatosis [63–65]. A commonly known grading system [66] categorizes hepatic steatosis as: Normal (grade 0) when the rate of affected cells is between 0% and 5%; Mild (grade 1) when the rate is between 5% and 33%; Moderate (grade 2) when the rate is between 34% and 66%; Severe (grade 3) when the rate of affected cells is greater than 67%. There are different pathologic protocols for grading fatty liver diseases [35,67]. According to the widely used scoring approach [68], a patient is diagnosed with NASH when a NAFLD activity score becomes greater than five. This universally accepted diagnostic criteria for NASH was proposed by the NASH Clinical Research Network Committee by analyzing liver biopsy findings and fourteen histological features in 2005 [68].Although histology analysis of liver biopsies is currently known as the definite diagnostic way for fatty liver diseases, it has the following drawbacks [69–72], which increases the challenge for quantification of the severity of hepatic steatosis:1.At biopsy, results of histology analysis are subjective since accurate visual estimation of proportion of the liver parenchyma that contains fat depends on the medical expert׳s experience. Subjectivity in grading estimations causes inter- or intra-observer variability and non-reproducibility.Another major shortcoming of histology and biopsy is that quantification of steatosis is performed by using small tissue samples [73]. It is known that the distribution of fat in liver segments can be non-uniform. Therefore, biopsy can be misleading in the case of inhomogeneous fat distribution in the liver. The sampling variability may cause errors for evaluation of liver fat.Due to its invasive nature, liver biopsy is inappropriate for serial measurement. Repeated evaluation of disease with biopsy increases the risk of complications. It is also inappropriate for screening and monitoring of treatment responses.Biopsy has potential risks like pain, bleeding and even life-threatening complications (rarely causes death).Patients need to be observed at hospital (post-procedure recovery) for a few hours, which results in a missed workday for both caretakers and patients.Biopsy is sometimes more expensive than medical imaging methods.Therefore, developing novel non-invasive approaches has increasing importance to estimate and quantify the degree of steatosis, to assess the pattern of steatosis distribution and to stage fatty liver diseases. Automated methods with minimal user inputs are desired for accurate and objective quantification of hepatic steatosis as an alternative to liver biopsy.The ideal method for quantification of liver fat should have the following characteristics: measurement should be quantitative, non-invasive and amenable to comparison of repeated measurements, imaging should use non-ionizing radiation and spatial information of fat should be quantifiable from images because both fat concentration and distribution of fat can be heterogeneous within the liver [74]. Therefore, an imaging-based method, which provides the fatty acid composition or percentage of fat on a continuous scale in each image voxel, with the above mentioned properties is desired.The role of radiological imaging to assess fatty liver diseases is in detection of steatosis, grading of its severity and its longitudinal monitoring. However, its use in quantification of liver fat is expanding [75] as it enables evaluation of further properties of NAFLD and its several complications (e.g., portal hypertension, fibrosis, cirrhosis and HCC). Moreover, radiological imaging is usually utilized to evaluate end-points (primary or secondary) associated with NAFLD. MR, US and CT based imaging methods are non-invasive and useful techniques for this purpose. Traditional US, un-enhanced CT, In-Phase (IP) and Out-of-Phase (OP) MR imaging approaches have important roles in diagnosis of hepatic steatosis. Improvements and refinements of the radiological imaging techniques allow quantitative analysis on the degree of steatosis.Table 2 presents properties of imaging techniques used for quantification of liver fat.Moreover, computer extracted image features such as entropy, homogeneity and Gray Level Co-occurrence Matrices (GLCM) can be used to detect and characterize diffuse liver diseases.In the literature, fully automated and semi-automated medical image analysis and diagnosis systems have been presented to evaluate hepatic steatosis with various solutions, which are based on different computer vision methods (Sections 3.1–3.4). In this section, we review these methods and clinical approaches.The ability of MR based methods for detection and quantification of steatosis has been investigated in the last 30 years [76–81]. Substantial correlations between the fat fraction (FF) determined histopathologically and radiologically have been demonstrated [82–95].Fat quantification with MR is based on MR׳s ability to distinguish between the fat and the water signals. The goal is to estimate the relative magnitude of the MR signals arising from fat (SFat) and from water (SWater) in each voxel. And the FF can then be calculated as(1)FF=SFat/(SFat+SWater).One way to separate the fat and the water signals is by taking advantage of the different spin-lattice relaxation times (T1) of fat and water. It is well known that the T1 of fat (~361ms at 3.0T) is significantly shorter than that of water (~933ms at 3.0T) [80]. Consequently, it is possible to use an inversion-recovery based MR sequence with a short inversion time to reduce the fat signal [96]. This approach is widely used to produce fat-supressed images, which are adequate for the purpose of visual assessment. However, it usually suffers from incomplete fat suppression due to the wide range of T1 values of fat in vivo. In addition, this method is not tissue-specific in that a variety of other tissues or fluids may have similarly short T1 values as fat [96]. Therefore, this approach is not suitable for the purpose of fat quantification.A more precise approach to separate fat and water is by exploiting the spectral difference between their MR signals. The magnetic field experienced by a proton differs slightly from the main magnetic field B0 depending on its chemical environment due to electron shielding of the field [97]. This effect, which is known as the chemical shift effect, causes different resonance frequencies of protons in different molecules and at different positions within the same molecule. Therefore, visualization of proton moieties of fat and water molecules in interrogated voxels can be provided by frequency spectrum of fat and water resonance peaks. For instance, inFig. 2, each of the numbered peaks in the MR spectrum corresponds to a group of hydrogen protons in different chemical environment in the liver triglyceride molecule [81]. It can be seen that a 3.4 parts per million (ppm) chemical shift exists between the water and the dominant fat peaks.It should be noted that MR signals, and hence the FF calculated by Eq. (1), depends on multiple confounding factors such as the T1, T2 and T2* decays, eddy currents, the J-coupling effect and noise [61]. These factors may affect the fat and the water signals differently, and therefore, the FF calculated using Eq. (1) is dependent on scan parameters and conditions, and may be more appropriately termed as the signal FF. If the true proton density FF is to be obtained, all the above confounding factors must be corrected for.Automated quantification of fat in the liver using several MR imaging techniques have been proposed [87–95,98–155]. There are three approaches, which are discussed below, for liver fat quantification based on the chemical shift effect.The MR excitation pulse may be tailored to have a narrow frequency range to cover only the water peak or the fat peaks in Fig. 2. This strategy is termed as CHEmical Shift Selective (CHESS) [156]. Fat suppression may be achieved by either selectively exciting only the water protons or by selectively exciting only the fat protons and removing their signals by “spoiling” their magnetization [84,108,110,114,115,118,129,131,132]. For liver fat quantification, two images are acquired with identical scan parameters, one with fat suppression and one without it. The signal in the image without fat suppression is considered to contain both the water and the fat signals: SNFS=SWater+SFat; while the signal in the fat-suppressed image is considered to contain only the water singal: SFS=SWater. Therefore, using Eq. (1), the FF can be obtained by(2)FF=(SNFS−SNFS)/SNFSApplying spectrally-selective saturation pulses comes with certain disadvantages, such as longer scan time, greater specific absorption rate and low Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR). In addition, this method is very sensitive to B0 inhomogeneity and incomplete fat suppression or inadvertent water suppression that may lead to erroneous FF results. It is an adequate method for estimation of signal FF, but has not been widely used to obtain proton density FF [61].Phase cycling technique for fat–water seperation was introduced more than 30 years ago by Dixon [76]. The original Dixon method involves acquiring two images at different echo times (TEs) when the water and the fat signals are in the phase (IP) or out of the phase (OP). For example, at 1.5T, the 3.4ppm chemical shift between the water and the main fat peaks corresponds to a frequency difference of 217Hz. As a result, the water and the fat signal come in and out of phase every 4.6ms (1000ms/217). And the IP and OP images can be obtained by choosing appropriate TEs. In the IP image, the water and the fat signals are additive:SIP=|SWater+SFat|; while in the OP image, the two are substractive:SOP=|SWater−SFat|. Consequently, the FF can be calculated by(3)FF=(|SIP−SOP|)/(2*SIP)where it is assumed that SWater>=SFat. It should be apparent from the above equations that this method is unable to distinguish a situation where FF=40% from one where FF=60%. Therefore, one drawback of this method is its limited dynamic range, i.e., the calculated FF is within 0–50%.The original Dixon method uses only the magnitude information from the IP and OP images (i.e., phase information is discarded). Today, more advanced Dixon-based techniques [157,158] are available, which use both the magnitude and the phase information to infer SWater and SFat, and offer a dynamic range of 0–100%. In addition, these techniques sample three or more points throughout the phase cycle, which makes it possible to estimate, and hence correct for, B0 inhomogeneity.Currently most chemical-shift-encoding techniques to separate fat and water signals are based on gradient-echo sequences [109,110,120,129–131] although the first few of them rely on spin-echo sequences [76,132,133].Recently, a novel framework was proposed for automated quantification of fat in the liver [134]. In this approach, the first step is rough segmentation of the liver from T1-weighted MR images using a statistical atlas. The second step is fine segmentation of the segmented liver image using a deformable model. Then, rigid registration is applied with the final segmented liver image and images that are obtained by dual-echo imaging method (i.e., magnitude-based chemical shift method that computes liver-specific FF). Finally, the assessment of FF is performed on the liver region, where each voxel has a FF ratio for the fat component. However, the method needs further investigation and testing on larger number of datasets. Complex-based multi-echo sequence should be assessed instead of the magnitude-based method to increase accuracy and efficiency. Also, errors in the registration, fine or initial segmentation steps cause inaccurate measurement of FF in this approach.MRS is the most direct approach to fat–water separation using the chemical shift effect, and is currently considered to be the gold standard for MR-based fat quantification. In MRS, Fourier Transform is used to convert time domain MR signals into frequency spectra such as the one shown in Fig. 2. The relative amount of fat and water signals can simply be calculated by summing the areas under the fat and water peaks. Eq. (1) can then be used to calculate the FF. Six lipid peaks can be distinguished under the condition of clinical MR. Ideally, all six peaks should be included in the calculation of the fat content, but in reality two peaks are usually obscured by the water peak (Fig. 2), resulting in a small error in the estimation of FF.MRS should be performed without saturation of water or fat signals. Also, spatial saturation bands should not be used in MRS because the signals in the voxel of interest may be partially saturated by these bands and the degree of saturation for fat and water signals may not be equal, leading to errors in the calculation of FF [61,137].MRS is typically performed with a single voxel [137,109,119,121,138]. The clinically used voxel size for liver is usually 2x2×2cm³ or 3x3×3cm³. The first step in the collection of spectra is to place the single voxel manually in the liver parenchyma avoiding large bile ducts, liver boundaries and vascular structures. Then, magnetic shimming is applied to make the magnetic field homogeneous across the voxel. A spectroscopic sequence process is then applied to acquire the spectral information. Two common approaches in single-voxel MRS are a spin echo based technique, such as the PRESS (Point RESolved Spectroscopy) sequence and a stimulated echo based technique, such as the STEAM (STimulated Echo Acquisition Mode) sequence. STEAM has lowered SNR compared to PRESS, but is less susceptible to the J-coupling effect, which can be advantageous if proton density FF is desired [139,61].In several published studies, MRS has been found to demonstrate excellent diagnostic performance for liver applications [92,93,127,141,142,144]. Furthermore, it uniquely allows studying the content of tissues in vivo noninvasively [94] because estimation of individual fat peaks and the chemical composition of fat are possible with this technique [81,121,144,145]. MRS is a reliable technique for measurement of fat since results of histological and biochemical assessments are closely correlated with the results obtained from MRS [61,125,146]. Therefore, it has been widely used in different studies for diagnosis of steatosis and quantification of fat in the liver [81,91,124,140,141,143,157,95] as well as heart [148,149], pancreas [155], skeletal muscle [151,152] and bone marrow [153–155].A fully-automated method [159] for quantification of fat in the liver with MRS datasets is based on the LCModel 6.2 software [146]. The authors used single-voxel MRS data (acquired by a radiologist) from three different areas by avoiding vessels. After recording three different acquisitions into each voxel, the ratios, L/(L+W) were calculated. In this ratio, L refers to summation of areas under the three lipid-peaks and W refers to summation of the area under the water-peaks. Then, the MRS FF was obtained by averaging values of the three voxels. In addition to this work, the authors also applied an automated calculation procedure for the hepatic FF by using T2*-corrected values, which were calculated from dual echo OP and IP images, in the same study. The FF formula of this procedure isFF=(Sli′−Slo′)/2Sli, whereSlo′andSli′refers to the calculated intensity values from OP and IP sequences. According to the reported results of the work, there are strong correlations between measured FF values obtained from MRS and the applied procedure with T2* correction and also the FF values obtained by histology. However, there are some limitations of this work. For instance, T2* corrections were performed with a single ROI instead of voxel-by-voxel correction. Also, segment I, which was in the left hepatic lobe, represents a small fraction of the hepatic volume. In addition, data sets do not include patients with simple steatosis. Chosen data sets (mainly NASH) had high FF values.In another fully-automated method with MRS data set, two other MR imaging modalities, which are Diffusion Weighted Imaging (DWI), and Dual-Echo Imaging (DEI), were used [160]. The FF obtained by DEI data was computed for three ROI areas, which correspond to areas that were used for MRS data. Experimental results demonstrate that there are strong correlations between the FF values and MR or bioassay values. Results show that there are significant correlations between FF values of DEI and MRS.In the literature, there is also a semi-automatic steatosis grading approach that builds and evaluates a color map system from OP and MRS image data [161]. In this approach, a liver signal intensity loss map was generated to obtain a color map model. The average value of pixels in a selected ROI was used as the “spleen_in” and the average of the corresponding region on the OP sequence was used as the “spleen_out” to compute signal-intensity loss images by calculating the percentage of loss of signal intensity with(4)liverinspleenin−liveroutspleenoutliverinspleeninx100where “liver_in” (liver_out) is the average value of the selected twelve ROI regions in the liver on the IP (OP) images [161]. Although color maps were reviewed for 78 subjects in this work, the number of subjects within each subset steatosis grade was still low. Also, T2* effects of iron, which could have resulted in underestimation of steatosis on MR images, were not corrected due to the retrospective nature of this work. Further refinement for liver fat quantification with validation of newer imaging FF techniques is required in conjunction with color mapping and automated assessment of steatosis heterogeneity and median steatosis grade in a larger population. MR imaging based detection of liver inflammation and fibrosis is beyond the scope of their work.Table 3 presents properties of different MR based imaging techniques for fat quantification with respect to (i) fat–water signal separation, (ii) contrast effect on tissues, (iii) assumptions on RF differences between fat and water protons, (iv) advantages and (v) disadvantages. Studies in this table indicate that measurement of fat depends on platform and imaging protocols. Numerous technical factors (i.e., different scanners or scanning parameters) as well as biological effects affect the relative MR signals from water and fat. Confounding factors (e.g., spectral complexity of fat signals, T2 relaxation effects, T2* decay, T1 bias, J-coupling or eddy currents, which are technique-dependent factors) may yield different signal FF.Robustness and reliability of chemical shift and MRS based fat quantification techniques with different clinical settings have been investigated [93,162]. It is reported that changing of slice thickness, number of echoes, matrix size and bandwidth has little impact. Also, changing the flip angle, field strength of the magnetic field and the TR requires caution. According to a recently published study by using chemical shift imaging with a large flip angle [163], T1 bias is an important confounder effect for the evaluation of steatosis in the liver. Correction of this confounding factor can be possible by using a larger flip angle. Residual error becomes very small after correction of T1 bias. However, this correction with a larger flip angle leads to higher SNR. The signal FF is not robust to noise bias. Unlike the signal FF, proton density FF is not confounded by physical, technical or biological factors when it is measured correctly. Only the proton density FF represents a measure of fat content in liver segments. It is an accurate and reliable biomarker due to its independence to scanner platform, magnetic field strength and scanning parameters. Therefore, all confounding effects should be corrected or minimized for conversion of the confounded signal FF to an un-confounded proton density FF.Proposed methods in the last 15 years that have corrected for confounding factors by complex or magnitude based chemical-shift techniques, hybrid approaches and also MRS based techniques are presented inTable 4. The studies showed that measurement of proton density FF can be achieved by correcting the confounding factors for liver fat. Effects of different flip angles on repeatability and accuracy of proton density FF were investigated with T2*-corrected, T1-independent, complex data-based and spectrum modeling based MR imaging in another study [125]. Results of the investigation show that proton density FF is repeatable for most flip angles and gives high accuracy. Only the proton density FF represents a measure of fat content in liver segments. It is an accurate and reliable biomarker due to its independence to scanner platform, magnetic field strength and scanning parameters. Proton density FF can be performed by magnitude-based methods (which use only magnitude images) and complex-based methods (which use both magnitude and phase images). Complex-based methods can be completed in a breath hold and allow simple calculation of fat fraction in any segment of the liver. Also, these methods provide correction of factors that influence MR signal intensity. Hybrid methods use both complex-based and magnitude-based separation methods to separate water and fat signals [164].To develop a non-invasive MR imaging technique that overcomes the limitations of biopsy, the technique has to determine fatty liver in terms of accuracy and computational cost. Secondly, a reliable and automated method should be developed for routine clinical evaluations. Such a method has to be precise, accurate, reproducible and easily accessible. There is not a technique that meets all of these required criteria. Therefore, this is still an active research topic in imaging. The following section presents automated liver fat quantification approaches that use different MR based imaging techniques.Non-contrast-enhanced CT imaging is a non-invasive and widely available modality, which provides objective measurement of x-ray attenuation in Hounsfield Units (HU) [170–174].Attenuation value of a healthy liver organ is about 50–57 HU and it is about 10HU higher than attenuation value of a healthy spleen [175]. Therefore, assessment of steatosis using CT is generally performed according to two measurements. One of them is the difference or the ratio of attenuation values of the spleen and liver since attenuation value of the liver, which is less than 40HU or 10HU smaller than attenuation value of spleen [173,174] or spleen-to-liver attenuation ratio that is higher than 1.1 implies presence of steatosis [176]. Moreover, the liver parenchyma seems darker compared to hepatic vessels and spleen in this case.The other measurement for steatosis assessment is the absolute measured attenuation value since CT images present decreased attenuation values in the liver parenchyma with fat accumulation because of the inverse relationship between fat concentration and CT attenuation. However, there are several drawbacks of quantification of liver fat using CT:1)The attenuation value of liver does not change only by fat contents. Different factors such as fibrosis, edema, accumulation of glycogen [177] or increased deposition of iron [62] affect the measured attenuation values differently. Different CT scanner devices may lead to variability in measured attenuation values [178]. Therefore, fat quantification using CT images is both platform-dependent and unreliable due to underlying diffuse liver diseases [170, 178].CT is not sensitive to low fat concentration and presents a lower sensitivity than MR based techniques for diagnosis [179].It is not useful for longitudinal monitoring of fatty liver diseases and clinical research studies as it exposes the patient to radiation.In the literature, various methods were proposed for fat quantification with CT images [174,180–182]. For example,, an automatic pericardial fat quantification method was proposed [183]. This method combines texture and intensity information is based on a hierarchical, multi-feature, multi-class and fuzzy affinity framework. It was observed from the applied cardiac CT datasets that the technique can classify and quantify the pericardial fat successfully. In [174], relative and absolute attenuation based approaches for quantification of steatosis in transplant donors were investigated. The conclusion of the investigation is non-contrast-enhanced CT images are useful for diagnosis and qualitative grading of hepatic steatosis when the grade is greater than 30%. However, quantitative evaluation of macrovesicular steatosis is not acceptable clinically with non-enhanced CT images. In [184], dual-energy computed tomography (DECT) and MR imaging was compared for fat quantification. The authors used tissue triglyceride concentration and histology as references in an animal model of hepatic steatosis. Their results showed that DECT data do not improve the accuracy of fat quantification. In a recently published study [180], evaluations of different classifiers (Back Propagation Neural Network (BPNN), Linear Vector Quantization (LVQ) Neural Network and PNN) to classify cirrhosis and fatty liver were performed using CT images. Experimental results show that PNN with biorthogonal wavelet-based statistical texture feature provides better performance for this classification. Reported accuracy is 96% for PNN, 93% for LVQ and 80% for BPNN. However, testing of the classifier with a larger database is required to ensure its reliability and compare computational costs. Also, the classifier should be extended for other liver diseases like steotosis and cysts.In contrast with MR and CT imaging, US imaging is mostly used to diagnose steatosis during treatment since it is completely noninvasive, easy to operate, user-friendly, widely available, portable and also inexpensive. Especially, its lack of radiation, accessibility and inexpensivity make this imaging as the most frequently used modality for screening purposes [185–188].The datasets are obtained by propagating sound waves from the transducer into the human body and from structures within the human body back to the transducer. The structure of the organs and their appearance on the computer screen are mapped in this method. Sound waves meet interfaces that correspond to the surfaces of organs and are reflected by the interfaces. Echogenicity refers to the ability to create an echo, which means a returning signal in US examinations. The signal is used to determine the brightness of US images. Echogenicity corresponds to the average value of intensities in the image. High echogenicity corresponds to an increased average value. A standard way to measure echogenicity is not available. The measurement is performed by comparison of the echogenicity of another tissue [189].The main property of US images is the decrement of echogenicity as a function of deepness. In cases of fatty liver diseases, such as steatosis or fibrosis, the liver becomes brighter than the renal parenchyma since the image feature obtained by accumulation of fat is the increase of the parenchyma brightness because of the higher echogenicity of the fat cells. Also, as echogenicity of the liver increases, there is difficulty in depth penetration of the sound waves causing poor far field visualization.In clinical studies, mild, moderate, or severe fatty liver is categorized as grade I, II, or III that relies on both the image quality and experience of doctors and sonographers, who use liver parenchyma echogenicity (hyperechogenic tissues) and its texture as a feature of the US image for evaluation. However, in addition to several difficulties such as, speckle noise, poor image quality and use of different US scanners, human visual inspection of US images is highly subjective (i.e. based on the radiologist’s knowledge and visual perception), confusing and does not provide reproducible quantitative assessment of the fatty liver. Therefore, studies on ultrasonographic examinations are still currently under research. Computer-aided analysis based non-invasive accurate methods are needed for steatosis detection and assessment of the stage of diseases from US images to make an accurate distinction between fatty liver diseases and to improve the reliability of US image analysis [62,187,190–193]. In the last years, many algorithms, which are based on conversion of the quantification problem into a pattern recognition and analysis work from US images, have been developed to evaluate fatty liver diseases. First order statistics [194], GLCM [194–197], wavelet transformation [198], attenuation coefficients [199], Gabor filter [200], Bayes factor [190] and entropies of texture edge co-occurrence matrix [201] were proposed to obtain texture features and achieve quantitative tissue analysis from US images in the literature.Different classifiers, such as Artificial Neural Networks (ANN), K-Nearest Neighbor (K-NN) or Support Vector Ma1chine (SVM), have been applied with extracted texture features in proposed automated approaches (Section 3.2). However, these classifiers were generally limited with a few feature sets.Table 5 presents applied clinical methods for diagnosis and quantification of fat in the liver using US images and their conclusions. For instance, in the literature, Brunt classifier was applied for quantification of steatosis in children with NAFLD [191]. Blood tests were applied to learn whether NAFLD is only a liver disease or it can also be an early mediator to estimate metabolic syndromes using US images [192]. SteatoTest, which is a blood test based on ten blood components with age, body mass index and sex, was applied to predict quantitative degree of steatosis in NAFLD [202]. Diagnostic performance of SteatoTest and an innovative parameter (the attenuation coefficient) for assessment of NAFLD were investigated in another study [203]. Accuracy of backscatter and attenuation coefficients was assessed for steatosis detection [204]. Inter- and intra-observer variability was evaluated from US images for assessment of presence as well as a grade of steatosis [205]. Different variables (body mass index, hepatic steatosis index, fatty liver index, percent fat mass and regional fat masses, signal FF and controlled attenuation parameter) were obtained and Pearson׳s r coefficient was examined to test the correlation between these variables [206]. More recently, clinical, biochemical, elastographic and US parameters, which were derived from patients undergoing liver biopsy, were collected prospectively and then all parameters were evaluated to see their correlation with the biopsy [207].Table 6 presents automated approaches that were proposed for classification of normal and fatty liver patterns without staging fatty liver diseases or grading of steatosis from US images [195, 208–219].In the literature, there are also automated methods [194,200,222–238] that were proposed for diagnosis and evaluation of fatty liver using US images. Table 6 gives these methods, which were published in the last 15 years, with their conclusions.Histological assessments provide information on steatosis distribution of fat in the hepatic lobules and also allow evaluation of hepatic steatosis [239]. Assessment of the amount of the white spaces, which are typically considered as steatosis in liver histology slides, has been performed with different approaches [240]. Objective measurement of steatosis with computerized image analysis methods on histology slides is possible according to a study in 2004 [241]; however, it is not performed routinely in practice. Instead, steatosis is graded subjectively with visual estimation on histological images by an expert, which is subject to intra- and inter-reader variability. Furthermore, assessment is on two-dimensional slides, while the fat content needs to be measured in three-dimensional liver parenchyma, leading to sampling biases. Some automated methods have been proposed to overcome these challenges since 2009 [242–248].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study, we have reviewed clinical and automated approaches for liver fat quantification. Also, MR, CT, US and histological image based techniques to evaluate steatosis were discussed with their advantages and disadvantages. Detection and quantitative grading of liver fat is important in many cases such as detection of lipodystrophy in a patient who has immunodeficiency virus infection. Additionally, metabolic diseases can be diagnosed, or viability of the graft in transplantation-especially for living liver donor-can be assesed by the amount of accumulated fat in the liver.Fatty liver diseases are fortunately reversible in its early stage; therefore, there is a recognized need to detect their presence and to assess their severity.Several clinical imaging techniques have been investigated and used for liver fat quantification. However, computerized techniques for liver fat detection and quantification can improve accuracy and speed. Also, computer based methods provide objectiveness and reduce operator dependency.Computerized image analysis techniques to quantify fat in the liver were investigated using MR (Section 3.1.2), CT (Section 3.2), US (Section 3.3.2) and histological (Section 3.4) images. Results and conclusions of these proposed techniques indicate that they have their own advantages and drawbacks due to the applied algorithms or chosen image data sets. For instance, MRS techniques do not allow for imaging of the distribution of fat within the liver volume unless spectroscopic imaging methods like chemical shift imaging are used. These methods generally have image acquisition times that are too long (tens of minutes) to be useful for human imaging. These techniques with long acquisition times, although possible for dedicated research alone, have very limited application and clinical use on patients.It has been observed in this study that although MR based imaging modalities provides several advantages such as non-ionizing radiation and better soft tissue imaging capability, there are only four computerized automated methods for quantification of fat in the liver from MR based images, which have been published recently. Therefore, further studies to develop semi- or fully-automated methods for quantification of fat in the liver are needed.Future works by using MRI should focus on quantitative assessments/tests of liver function, chronic liver diseases as well as hepatic inflammation to define the severity of liver diseases. In a recent study [249] MRI and DWI was compared for assessment of liver function in patients with hepatitis B virus (HBV)-related HCC. The authors identified that MR based imaging was more accurate than DWI to assess liver functions. Noninvasive, quantitative and automated procedures with MRI are also required to evaluate progression of chronic liver diseases (e.g., fibrosis, cirrhosis and HCC) since patient-related and operator-related factors produce significant variations in liver diseases [250].None declared.