@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Degrees of separation as a statistical tool for evaluating candidate genes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel method to validate candidate genes using network information is proposed.The package, CandidateBacon, enables GWA and QTL studies to utilize this method.Large variation between gene-networks are revealed when tested empirically.Proper validation will allow better interpretation of genome studies.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Candidate genes,Network analysis,GWAS,Degree of separation,Gene–gene interaction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Selection of candidate genes is an important step in the exploration of complex genetic architecture. The number of gene networks available is increasing and these can provide information to help with candidate gene selection. It is currently common to use the degree of connectedness in gene networks as validation in Genome Wide Association (GWA) and Quantitative Trait Locus (QTL) mapping studies. However, it can cause misleading results if not validated properly. Here we present a method and tool for validating the gene pairs from GWA studies given the context of the network they co-occur in. It ensures that proposed interactions and gene associations are not statistical artefacts inherent to the specific gene network architecture. The CandidateBacon package provides an easy and efficient method to calculate the average degree of separation (DoS) between pairs of genes to currently available gene networks. We show how these empirical estimates of average connectedness are used to validate candidate gene pairs. Validation of interacting genes by comparing their connectedness with the average connectedness in the gene network will provide support for said interactions by utilising the growing amount of gene network information available.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Interaction databases offer researchers with the opportunity to validate candidate genes identified from any of a wide range of analytical methods such as genome wide association studies (GWAS), linkage mapping and selective sweep analysis [1]. Once a set of regions of interest has been found using one of the methods above, the genes in the regions are typically screened for known interactions with each other or previously known candidate genes (see [1] and references within). If interactions are found, that is taken as support for the validity of the association-, linkage- or sweep signal [2].However, the small world phenomenon that is inherent to most networks, including those describing gene–gene interactions [3–5], makes this approach problematic, since all genes are connected to each other. Thus, it is not sufficient to only find links between possible candidate genes (i.e. guilt by association). Those links must be evaluated based on the context of the network they are derived from [4,6–10].We propose that the degree of separation (DoS) is a good metric to validate the likelihood of genes being truly associated. For example, two genes interacting with one intermediary may have a measurable biological effect on each other’s function. On the other hand, when two genes are connected, via a path of 10 other intermediates, they are less likely to have measurable effects on each other function. The length of the shortest route between two genes, relative to the average path length between any random genes in the network are therefore an estimate of the likelihood that these genes are associated by chance alone.Evaluating the DoS is not currently part of the normal analysis pipeline in GWA studies. This is becoming more important as analyses of expression data is used where eQTL are linked (often with several intermediate steps) to the expression phenotype. Additionally, as the connections in gene networks become denser, it is important to validate the connection between any two genes is not merely sporadic. For this purpose, we present an R package CandidateBacon that can, for an arbitrary network of pair wise interactions, provide both a measure of the average connectedness among a set of candidate genes and a network-specific distribution of the connectedness of random gene pairs. This distribution can then be used to assign a p-value to the observed connectedness of the candidate set, which is indicative of whether or not the observed links actually serve to validate the original associations findings, or simply reflect the general connectedness of the network.Since the rapid accumulation of biological interaction data through large-scale experiments means networks of known interactions expand on a regular basis, the degree of connectedness between a given set of genes will change over time [11]. The CandidateBacon package provides an extremely fast efficient way to obtain the average DoS (i.e. the average shortest path between any two genes) in the currently known network, and relate it to the properties of that specific network, which is a necessity for validation.We used organism-wide network data from the BioGRID (Release 3.1.94, compiled on October 2012) repository to evaluate the different levels of connectedness. We included all species with networks having more than 100 interactions (both physical and genetic interactions included) in the analyses (Table 1). Additionally the Saccharomyces cerevisiae network was also divided into two datasets separated on high- and low-throughput interactions, respectively. The degree_of_separation function was repeated 10,000 times for each network, and the network-specific DoS distribution was calculated from the result (Table 1).We used the package CandidateBacon to find the shortest path between two nodes in each network. Using a standard computer (2.66GHz Intel), it takes, on average, less than 0.3s to find the shortest path between any two nodes in a large network and complicated (e.g. S. cerevisiae). The package was specifically develop to be easy to use for biological networks in the R framework and is freely available at: http://www.computationalgenetics.se/?page_id=7. A full description of the algorithm is available in the package documentation (Supplementary material 1).In order to show the importance of obtaining an empirical distribution from each network, we compared the observed empirical distributions with theoretical DoS. The theoretical DoS is calculated using the following equation:DoS=lnNlnKwhere N is the total number of nodes in the network and K the average number of interactions per node [3]. K is calculated by dividing the total number of interactions (i.e. node pairs) in the network by the total number of nodes in the network. Node hubs and unequal distribution of connections between nodes are thus corrected for in the theoretical DoS.In order to provide a working example of the intended use of the package, we used the list of candidate genes for S. cerevisiae reported in Ref. [12] (Supplementary material 2). The proposed interactions were evaluated using network data from BioGrid, as cited above. The average DoS for this set of genes is 1.7 nodes per interaction pair. A t-test indicated that this is significantly less than random interactions, which have an average of 2.42 (p-value=0.008). Thus, in this case the detected interactions do lend support that the GWA signals are above the random expectation.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
