@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Micro-intestinal robot with wireless power transmission: design, analysis and experiment

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A robot with spiral legs is designed and tested in the in vitro intestines.The mechanism of robot movement for optimization is analyzed.Wireless energy is supplied to the robot, instead of batteries or wires.Ring-like receiving coil is designed for saving space and ensuring enough energy.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Intestinal robot,Archimedean spiral legs,Wireless power transmission,Electromagnetic coupling,Frequency stabliltiy,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundVideo capsule endoscopy is a useful tool for noninvasive intestinal detection, but it is not capable of active movement; wireless power is an effective solution to this problem.MethodsThe research in this paper consists of two parts: the mechanical structure which enables the robot to move smoothly inside the intestinal tract, and the wireless power supply which ensures efficiency. First, an intestinal robot with leg architectures was developed based on the Archimedes spiral, which mimics the movement of an inchworm. The spiral legs were capable of unfolding to an angle of approximately 155°, which guaranteed stability of clamping, consistency of surface pressure, and avoided the risk of puncturing the intestinal tract. Secondly, the necessary power to operate the robot was far beyond the capacity of button batteries, so a wireless power transmission (WPT) platform was developed. The design of the platform focused on power transfer efficiency and frequency stability. In addition, the safety of human tissue in the alternating electromagnetic field was also taken into consideration. Finally, the assembled robot was tested and verified with the use of the WPT platform.ResultsIn the isolated intestine, the robot system successfully traveled along the intestine with an average speed of 23mm per minute. The obtained videos displayed a resolution of 320×240 and a transmission rate of 30 frames per second. The WPT platform supplied up to 500mW of energy to the robot, and achieved a power transfer efficiency of 12%.ConclusionIt has been experimentally verified that the intestinal robot is safe and effective as an endoscopy tool, for which wireless power is feasible. Proposals for further improving the robot and wireless power supply are provided later in this paper.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Since the release of the Pill Cam by Given Image Company in 2001, video capsule endoscopies (VCE) have gained significant attention in the field of medical engineering [1]. Relying on gastrointestinal (GI) peristalsis, the VCE cannot actively move and treat effectively, necessitating further research into intestinal robotic devices [2].A number of intestinal robots with legs or paddles have been designed to enable the robots to move along the intestinal tract [3–8]. As described in previous research [6], two leg models were designed and optimized, but the size of the robot limits the maximum length of legs, due to the elasticity of the intestine its varying diameter. Furthermore, the sharp protrusions of the legs have the potential to damage the intestine. Most devices described in previous research use an incremental clamping and sliding method, similar to the movement of an inchworm [9,10]. This method was first implemented successfully in a hard tube, primarily due to its rotational symmetry which can maintain balance during movement; more therapy tools can be added to its long and thin compartment. However, its movement efficiency is largely reduced in smooth intestinal tubes [11].Based on the Archimedes spiral theory, we designed a single-section robot with elastic spiral legs. During the unfolding and folding leg movements, the pressure exerted on the contact surface is uniform, and the arc-shaped legs slide along the intestinal wall to avoid puncturing the intestinal tract. Simultaneously, such instance of radial clamping enhances the clamping stability and effective stroke of the robot movement.In this paper, the robot was integrated with a locomotion mechanism, control unit, image module and power supply system. The locomotion mechanism included the spiral legs and a telescoping mechanism, which perform radial action and axial movement, respectively. As previously reported [9], a micro-control unit (MCU) was used to set sensor parameters and control robot action through wireless bidirectional communication. The image module included a CMOS camera and transmitting circuit. Analog video signal was directly transmitted without any additional processing to simplify the circuit. The power supply system included receiving coils, a rectifier circuit and a voltage regulator circuit. The ring-like receiving coils were designed to surround the shell, in order to protect the inner space of the robot.Due to limited battery capacity, once ingested, the VCE can only travel passively through the GI tract by peristalsis, simultaneously capturing random images of the lumen wall. Furthermore, the image capture rate was 2–8 frames per second [3], which could miss areas with lesions. Researchers have attempted to use magnetic fields to steer a device with magnetic inclusions. However, this was not appropriate for the complexity of the human intestines [12]. Wireless power transmission technology could act as an alternative energy supply solution. The human body is placed in the primary coils, and a micro-in vivo device is loaded by the secondary coils and driven by inductive energy, which originates from the alternating magnetic field generated by the primary coil.Previous research on WPR technology has established a model of three-dimensional (3D) transmitting coils and one-dimensional (1D) receiving coils. However, this model demonstrates two major disadvantages: first, the robot requires positioning in order to adjust the direction of the composite electromagnetic field from the transmitting coils, which increases the computational complexity of system; second, the transmitting coils are susceptible to the mutual inductance among the three coils [13]. In addition, propelled capsules and vibratory-actuation capsules modeled after 1D transmitting coils and 3D receiving coils have been proposed, but video recording apparatuses have yet to be included [14]. Additional research has focused on the modeling of electromagnetic fields [15,16]. Although some progress has been made, energy delivered to the robot cannot meet the requirement of simultaneous active movement and video operation.In this paper, a WPT system has been designed to supply a robot with sufficient energy using a two-layer pair of solenoids as the transmitting coils and three ring-like coils as the receiving coils. We chose the transmitting coil structure by considering the uniformity and intensity of the magnetic field. The safety current and frequency ranges for the human body have been calculated by CST (Computer Simulation Technology AG.) software, and the relationship between the quality factor and frequency has been tested for transfer efficiency optimization.In this experiment, we observed successful communication between the robot and the control interface. On the WPT platform, the robot was able to successfully receive and execute instructions, move through the isolated intestine, and transmit high-quality video to the workstation.As shown inFig. 1, the system consists of three parts: a WPT system for energy supply, an intestinal robot for inspection, and a workstation for control and observation.When the robot was operating, a command signal input was sent to the human machine interface (HMI), and then sent to the communication box via serial peripheral interface (SPI). The control unit of the robot received a signal, and performed the specified actions after verification. If the robot system was abnormal, a closed-loop control program would stop its movement until a new order input was designated and a new status signal was sent to the HMI. After capturing images of the GI tract, the image module transmitted a video stream directly to the communication box. The video was processed by the video capture card, displayed on the HMI in real time, and saved to the storage. The frequency was 433MHz for the control signal and 1.2GHz for video transmission, in order to avoid any signal interference.An alternating magnetic field of a fixed frequency was generated by the transmitting coils; inductive energy received by the receiving coils of the robot drives the system. This paper focuses on the robot motion mechanism and the wireless power system, in particular.The robot was designed as a capsule shape with the diameter of 16mm and length of 31mm. Motor selection is a key design feature; a compatible mechanism needs to be powerful, and fit in the slim robot body. There are three mechanisms inside the robot, requiring three direct current brushless motors (ZWPD006006, ZHAOWEI Co., Ltd.) to independently drive the two clamping legs and single extensor.The internal mechanism of the robot is shown inFig. 2. Two pairs of spiral legs with gear engagements are actuated by respective motors. An additional motor drives a lead screw with a gear as the telescoping mechanism. The whole mechanical structure consists of more than 80 high-precision components.For easy control of the magnetic field, the wireless power transmission was operated in a 1D transmitting – 3D receiving mode, which also provides steady and uniform energy to the robot. For a transmitting coil with an inner diameter of 400mm, the frequency largely determines the quality factor, which is an important parameter to the energy transfer efficiency; the principles are explained below. In order to reduce the dimension of the robot, we utilized a combination of three ring-like receiving coils.The WPT structure, as shown in Fig. 1, includes four components: a control circuit, a transmitting coil, a receiving coil and a receiving circuit. The control circuit generates an excitation signal of a fixed frequency, which is then amplified to an alternating current in the transmitting coil, producing an alternating magnetic field. The induced energy in the receiving coil is stabilized by the rectifier, which eventually drives the robot system movement.The electromagnetic field generated by the transmitting coils may damage the human body in the coils, requiring the transmitting power to meet a firm security standard. Meanwhile, the robot is driven by the inductive energy of the receiving coils, which is proportional to the strength of the magnetic field, as demonstrated in Eq. (5). These two preconditions provide an acceptable range of transmitting power: an upper limit of safety and a lower limit of minimum necessary power. This range is very small due to the weak coupling effect, so improvement in energy transfer efficiency is the primary objective to meeting the energy requirement of the robot. In addition, a frequency shift may occur during locomotion of the patient or when the WPT platform has been running for a long time, which results in unstable resonance and a reduction in receiving power. Therefore, human safety, energy transfer efficiency and stability are the key features of the design process, details of which are described in the following sections.The inchworm-like mechanics of the robot consist of three components: two clampers are placed in the head and tail of the robot, respectively, and an axial telescoping mechanism is placed in the middle, which is integrated in a single chamber. By expanding the intestinal wall, the anchoring force significantly increases and prevents intestinal collapse, while the extensor achieves a positive or negative displacement. When the three mechanical components work in particular sequences, the robot can move forward, backward or anchor in any position. Detailed motion principles are shown inFig. 3.The axial mechanic consists of a gear screw module, which promotes linear movement and uniform output force. As shown inFig. 4, the micro-motor rotates the lead screw via the reduction gears, and drives the nut for axial movement eventually.The model of the Archimedes spiral leg is analyzed below. Using the Cartesian coordinate system, we set the original point at the center of the driving gear. Therefore, an Archimedes spiral leg can be described as:(1){r=α+λ⋅θx=rcosθy=rsinθBy changing the value ofα, the spiral turns; by changing the value ofλ, the distance between successive turnings can be adjusted. For optimal locomotion and distention of tissue, the position of the radial leg tip must be optimized. Previous experiments [17] have demonstrated that the open diameter should be approximately 30–35mm so that the legs can suitably engage the intestinal wall without causing any damage. Due to the diameter constraint, we set the maximum open diameter to 38mm in order to increase the anchoring force of the legs. The variablesrandαare set to 16.5mm and 6.7mm, respectively, while θ ranges from 0° to 155°. To ensure that all points uniformly distend the intestine, four legs were evenly distributed on the circumference, as shown inFig. 5.Fig. 6 shows the geometry of the spiral leg mechanism. Ignoring the weight of the robot, the anchoring force of the four spiral legs can be regarded as equal. The expanding force which overcomes the contractility of the intestine is denoted as Fs, which is localized at the contact surface; the turning force is denoted as Ft, which is the tangential component of Fs. The expanded radius of the intestine is denoted as bi, and the arm of force ciis the distance from the real turning center point O1 to the contact point A. Variables biand cimust be determined with a fixed spiral leg length. The central point of the entire structure is O2, and the distance a1 between O1 and O2 is fixed. The included angle of AO1 and AO2 is denoted as β, which changes during the leg opening procedure.When the legs open, the expanding force (Fs) to overcome the intestinal contraction force due to balance, can be obtained by(2)Fs=Ft/sinβThe value of β is determined by the law of cosines as follows:(3)cosβ=bi2+ci2−a122bici,i=1,2,⋯When the leg turning angle is ψ, the changes of bi, ci, and β are shown inFig. 7(a)–(c). By calibrating the output force of the motor to the driving current, the turning force Ft is tested according to current signal detection. Then, expanding force Fs can be calculated with Eqs. (2) and (3). As functions of ψ, Ft and Fs are plotted in Fig. 7(d) and (e). This figure demonstrates that the spiral legs can keep a uniform increase in diameter for an expanding intestine, and indicates that the extensibility of the spiral legs is effective for clamping in the intestine.Because of intestinal elasticity, the open force constantly varies. When the open angle expands from 0° to 78°, the open force reduces from 24N to 10N; when the open angle expands from 78° to 160°, the open force increases more rapidly. Under a rated voltage, the legs can be completely opened in 1.6s, as measured by the status signal from the motors. The design of the spiral legs is shown inFig. 8.The energy transfer efficiencyηand received powerP2of a 1D transmitting coil can be expressed as follows [3]:(4)η=ωM2RLQ1(R2+RL)2L1,ω=2πf(5)P2=η⋅P1=ω2M2RLI2(R2+RL)2Where the mutual inductance,M=B1׳Sμ2,B1׳=B1/I, denotes the intensity of the magnetic in the transmitting coil.Sis the orthogonal projection area of the receiving coil to the magnetic field direction;Iis the driving current in the transmitting coil; andμ2denotes the relative permeability of the receiving coil.fdenotes the operating frequency andωrepresents the angular frequency.P1is the transmitting power, andR2andRLrepresent the impedance of the receiving coil and the load of robot, respectively.Q1andL1are the quality factor and the inductance of the transmitting coil, respectively; (Q2) and (L2) are the quality factor and the inductance of the receiving coil, respectively. From Eq. (4), we determine thatηis largely dependent onω,QandL, implying that the structure of the transmitting coil and operating frequency must be optimized in order to achieve maximum efficiency.In order to easily control the magnetic field, we utilized 1D transmitting coils. Typically, 1D transmitting coils are constructed based on Helmholtz or solenoid coils which respectively create more uniform or denser induced magnetic fields. Combining the advantages of both, models of paired solenoids and of two-layer pairs of solenoids have been proposed by previous research in [3].Fig. 9 shows the structures of three transmitting coils. Helmholtz coils consist of two identical circular plane coils placed symmetrically along a common axis and separated by a distance equal to the radius of the coil. The paired solenoids consist of two identical solenoid coils with a relative position similar to that of the Helmholtz coils. The two-layer paired solenoid model is constructed of an identical layer of coils surrounding the pair of solenoids.The strength and uniformity of magnetic flux density are important indices of the transmitting coils, which determine the continuity of receiving energy and the safety of the human body in the system. In previous research [3], contrast experiments of magnetic flux density and uniformity of the three transmitting coils have been described in detail; solenoid coils were not included because of their non-uniform magnetic field. Results demonstrated that the magnetic flux density of Helmholtz coils was less than that of the other coils, which were approximately equal to one another; in contrast, the magnetic field of Helmholtz coils was the most uniform, followed by the two-layer pair of solenoids, and then the single pair of solenoids. In this paper, the two-layer pair of solenoids was selected as the transmitting coils, with an inner diameter of 400mm.The electromagnetic field generated by the transmitting coils may cause damage to the human body. According to the International Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection (ICNIRP) guidelines, electromagnetic influence on biological tissues includes a thermal effect and stimulant action when the frequency is between 100KHz and 10MHz [18]. The specific absorption rate (SAR, Wkg−1) and current density (Am−2) of the entire body are considered as the evaluation criteria, which are related to the characteristics of the transmitting coils including shape, number of turns, frequencies and driving currents.Table 1 shows the basic restrictions provided by the ICNIRP guidelines for limiting exposure to time-varying electrical, magnetic and electromagnetic forces.A simulation model and finite integration technique were employed to calculate current density and SAR [16]. The distribution of SAR and current density on the human body induced by the transmitting coils when the driving current Im is 1.8A is shown inFig. 10. Muscle tissue is most affected, and the values increase with reducing distance between the coils and tissue. As shown in Fig. 10, the maximum current density and SAR are 1.26Am−2 and 2.88Wkg−1, respectively, which meet ICNIRP regulations and thus are safe for use on human tissue.According to ICNIRP guidelines, the upper limit of coil turns when considering human safety is calculated under various currents (1A, 1.5A, and 2A) and frequencies (100–400KHz), as shown inFig. 11(a).As the power and operating voltage of the intestinal robot are 500mW and 3.3V, respectively, an equivalent resistance of 21.78Ω was used as the load, denoted asRL. Considering the structure of the transmitting coils, the minimum receiving area was chosen to be S, which is subsequently substituted into Eq. (4) to obtain the relationship between frequency and the coefficient of magnetic flux density. By calculating the number of turns (n), frequency (f) and the coefficient of magnetic flux density(B1׳)by CST simulation, the lower limit of n for each frequency can be obtained with driving currents of 1A, 1.5A and 2A respectively. Results are shown in Fig. 11(b).In practical application, when the receiving energy is insufficient, the driving current of the transmitting coil must increase appropriately. Considering the safety of human tissue, a current of 2A was chosen to provide sufficient driving energy, while the range of turns was determined with a different frequency. The values in Fig. 11(a) and (b) are combined, as shown in Fig. 11(c).We conclude from Eq. (4) that the effect of the transmitting coils on efficiency is primarily due to frequency f and quality factorQ1. According to the range of transmitting coil turns presented in Fig. 11(c), the quality factors of various numbers of turns at frequencies of 100–400KHz can be directly measured by an impedance analyzer. As shown inFig. 12, the quality factor peaks when the frequency is 200KHz. As a result, 24–30 turns were chosen for the transmitting coils. Detailed measurements are conducted with a frequency range of 150–250KHz, demonstrating that the maximum Q value is obtained with 26 turns and a frequency of 218KHz.Using three orthogonal coils on the outside of a solid core, the receiving coils occupy a spatial volume of 6–8mm3. We designed a combination of three ring-like magnetic cores (MnZn ferrite, Zk7K) of identical size (diameter=14mm; thickness=1mm; length=7.3mm), and placed coaxially, as shown inFig. 13.One of the cores is intact and wound with wires along the surface circumference, labeled as “Coil 1” in Fig. 13. The remaining two coils both have an axial gap, perpendicular to each other across the axis, and both are wound with wires on the walls; these two coils are labeled as “Coil 2” and “Coil 3” in Fig. 13. The projections of the receiving coils to the magnetic flow direction are also displayed. This composite structure conserves the inner space of the robot with only a 2mm increase in diameter, and ensures inductive energy stability when the robot moves.As previously described, the fabrication of the intestinal robot requires machining and the assembly of more than 80 high-precision components. The assembled robot is shown inFig. 14. The electronic circuitry is sealed inside the extensor mechanism housings in the capsule using silicone sealant glue. Its waterproof characteristics are tested by immersing and operating the capsule in clean water.When the legs expand isolated, the open force needs to overcome the contractility of the intestine. As mentioned above, the open force will increase when the legs unfold. By calibrating the anchoring force to the motor current, the output force can be monitored by the corresponding value of the current. Considering the safety of the human tissue, the open force is limited to 4N, which corresponds to the limited current at 150mA. The detection circuit sends monitored, real-time data to the control unit, which will stop the motors by a closed-loop control program once the value is exceeded; meanwhile the status signal will be sent to the HMI.Fig. 14 shows the measurement of the expanding force of the legs by pressure sensor (FSS1500NSB, Honeywell International, Inc.). First, the sensor is fixed in the hole of a transparent organic glass tube. A digital multimeter (34410A, Agilent Technologies, Inc.) measures the voltage of the pressure sensor, which is then converted into the pressure as displayed on a computer. Different tube diameters of 22mm, 27mm, 31mm and 35mm were used respectively to simulate the expansion of the intestine, and four measured values of expanding force were recorded.The theoretical values of the expanded intestine diameter and expanding force of the spiral legs are shown in Fig. 7(a) and (e), respectively; thus the relationship between them can be obtained by iterative computation. The comparison of the measured and theoretical values is shown inFig. 15, demonstrating a mechanical transfer efficiency of 75%. The energy loss is caused by the weight of the device and mechanical friction.When the robot is climbing the intestinal tract, the open force would be greater than 2.6N, which could balance the gravitational force of 1.96N. The tested pull force was 3.78N, and the average moving speed of the robot was 2.69mm per second (without load).A set of experiments designed to evaluate the locomotion ability of the capsule were performed with a closed and straight ex vivo model. The intestine specimen was fixed on both ends of the testing bed, as shown inFig. 16. This setup allowed the adjustment of the height and the distance between the fixtures for the intestinal robot to traverse. In these tests, the capsule was powered through cables.Experiments were conducted to compare the tissue distension capabilities of the robot and resulting irritation to the lumen wall. The locomotion parameters were selected based on best performance results obtained in earlier tests. From the locomotion test, we conclude that:1)The spiral legs are able to effectively expand the intestine. Additionally, the inchworm-like movement centers the capsule in the gut, which minimizes potential leg failure and tissue entrapment, and ensures the effectiveness of diagnostic results.When the robot anchors inside the intestine, the intestinal wall is not stabbed or damaged by the legs, ensuring the safety of human tissue.The moving speed of the robot is influenced by slope angle and the diameter of the intestine. The speed decreases when the robot ascends, and increases when it descends. In an intestine with a diameter greater than 39mm, the robot is likely to slip. In a straight intestine with a diameter ranging from 20mm to 45mm, the capsule is able to crawl at an average speed of 23mm per minute.The portable transmitting coil consists of a pair of connected solenoids of 26 turns, entwined with Litz wire containing 180 strands of AWG38 enameled copper wires, and with textile yarn on the ABS cylinder with an inner diameter of 400mm. The working space is a columnar with the diameter of 16mm and length of 31mm, and fixed with bonding glue.In order to detect the uniformity of the magnetic field within the transmitting coil, it was fixed on a bench and fed a DC current of 1A. The magnetic field intensity was then sampled equidistantly (10mm) using a Gaussmeter (LakeShore 460, Lake Shore Cryotronics, Inc.) via a positioning device.Fig. 17 shows the magnetic field distribution of the middle radial plane of the transmitting coil, indicating its uniformity in the working area of the transmitting coil by the contour of 1.6Gs.Because the human intestines are soft and flexuose, the robot motion would be opposed by the viscous drag force of the intestinal tract, and the receiving energy would be fluctuant with different postures of the robot. On the WPT platform, the experiments in isolated pig small intestines were done to mimic the human intestines environment and test the operation status of the robot.As shown inFig. 18, the working power of the robot is 500mW, and it can be driven by the WPT system in any postures. Active movement and successful transmission of the host image are experimentally achieved with the robot in the isolated intestines.When the angle between robot axis and magnetic direction is 0°, the driving current in transmitting coils is 0.8A, and the power transfer efficiency is 14%, which is the maximum value; when the angle increases to 10°, the driving current becomes 0.86A, and the efficiency reduces to 12%; when the angle is 90°, the driving current is 1.05A, and the efficiency is 8%, which is the minimum value. These results illustrate two points: the receiving energy and power transfer efficiency are fluctuant with different postures of the robot; and the receiving energy is sufficient in the allowed range of transmitting current.While there are remaining challenges to the development of an ideal power supply for capsule robots, this paper demonstrates important steps toward a practical mechanical design, mechanism analysis and wireless power supply for a clinical legged capsule robot. The spiral leg mechanism allows miniaturization of the mechanical components. The shape of the spiral legs allows them to achieve a greater open force which is consistent with the physiological features of human intestines. With textures on the tips of the legs, the anchoring force can be increased and thus prevent slipping and improve movement efficiency. It has been experimentally proved that the spiral leg shape is safe to patients.In addition, an ideal model requires an emergency stop system for the robot. For example, when the power transmission mechanism fails, the robot contracts its legs and other parts using a backup power source, and waits for gut purging treatment. If a minimally-invasive surgery can be conducted to remove the device, the positioning system will transmit location information.Because of the limitation of the weak coupling between the transmitting and receiving coils, the efficiency of energy transfer is low. Furthermore, considering the human safety and power requirements, the range of transmitting power is strictly limited. Thus, the design of a receiving coil that can induce stable voltage in any direction is a main component of robotic design, which can simultaneously ensure appropriate transmitting power and sufficient receiving power while the robot works in intestines. This can also improve the average energy transfer efficiency and reduce radiation to the human body.In this paper, the tolerance of the equivalent induced voltage is 4.7–45V due to the capacity of the voltage regulator and receiving coils. Although the stability of energy transmission using ring-like receiving coils is inferior to that produced by three orthogonal coils, it was proved that the wireless power system cannot only save space but also be feasible and safe.Future work will focus on the optimization of an emergency system and the receiving coils. In addition, the entire device will undergo experimentation of live anima to check the feasibility of design.We hereby claim there is no conflict of interest regarding our manuscript.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
