@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A compartment model of alveolar–capillary oxygen diffusion with ventilation–perfusion gradient and dynamics of air transport through the respiratory tract

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present compartment model of alveolar–capillary oxygen diffusion.Model of respiratory mechanics and impact of V–Q gradient are incorporated.A stream of oxygen mass transported to alveoli is modeled.Oxygen saturation is calculated for various levels of physical effort.Results of oxygen saturation are compared to results of various clinical trials.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Diffusion,Oxygen,Respiratory system,Saturation,Compartment model,Lung vessels,Exercise,Ventilation–perfusion mismatch,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a model of alveolar–capillary oxygen diffusion with dynamics of air transport through the respiratory tract. For this purpose electrical model representing the respiratory tract mechanics and differential equations representing oxygen membrane diffusion are combined. Relevant thermodynamic relations describing the mass of oxygen transported into the human body are proposed as the connection between these models, as well as the influence of ventilation–perfusion mismatch on the oxygen diffusion. The model is verified based on simulation results of varying exercise intensities and statistical calculations of the results obtained during various clinical trials. The benefit of the approach proposed is its application in simulation-based research aimed to generate quantitative data of normal and pathological conditions. Based on the model presented, taking into account many essential physiological processes and air transport dynamics, comprehensive and combined studies of the respiratory efficiency can be performed. The impact of physical exercise, precise changes in respiratory tract mechanics and alterations in breathing pattern can be analyzed together with the impact of various changes in alveolar–capillary oxygen diffusion. This may be useful in simulation of effects of many severe medical conditions and increased activity level.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The level of oxygen arterial saturation is one of the most significant factors determining the occurrence of respiratory failure. Both structural or functional disorders of the respiratory tract or lung parenchyma may result in a decrease in the value of oxygen concentration in arterial blood and adverse health consequences. Reliable and comprehensive mathematical models of these physiological processes can be used for detailed presentation of selected phenomena in a healthy individual’s body and simulation of pathological conditions caused by changes in relevant physiological parameters and structural damage [1–4]. Many mathematical models of pulmonary oxygen exchange have appeared in the literature over the past decades. Several describe diffusion at various levels of details (for instance, the model developed by Wolf and Garner [5] or Aberg et al. [6]). A number of models include additional physiological processes, that lead to more precise description. For instance Chiari et al. [7] presented a model containing a chemoreflex control of breathing, whereas Melo et al. [8] incorporated an impact of ventilation–perfusion (V̇/Q̇) mismatch. Moreover, Liu et al. [9] presented a comprehensive respiratory model including sub-models of lung mechanics, oxygen diffusion and blood flow. However, none of the models mentioned can be used for modeling alterations in respiratory mechanics in a specific part of the system (e.g. distal airway obstruction) easily and accurately. Moreover, in many models V̇/Q̇ gradient, describing distribution of ventilation and perfusion in the lung height domain is not taken into consideration. These drawbacks significantly reduce the applicability of the models mentioned, because various conditions (e.g. physical effort, specific changes in respiratory mechanics) cannot be properly simulated.The main objective of the present study is to present a compartment model of alveolar–capillary oxygen diffusion that incorporates a 16-coefficient model of respiratory mechanics. The effect of V̇/Q̇ mismatch is also taken into consideration because of its great influence on respiratory physiology, especially during physical effort or existence of various diseases, resulting in diversification of blood saturation in different lung regions. All the elements mentioned above can be used in modeling normal and various pathological conditions of the respiratory system and in simulation of their impact on the respiratory efficiency. Verification of the model is based on the results obtained for various levels of exercise intensities of a healthy individual represented by a corresponding Metabolic Equivalent of Task (MET).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
All issues and results presented in this paper prove the usefulness of the compartment model. The obtained simulation results of physical activity are verified by the results of various clinical trials. The benefit of the model comes from its usefulness in numerous comprehensive and combined simulation-based studies of the respiratory efficiency aimed to generate qualitative data of various effects of normal and pathological conditions. The impact of many alterations in both mechanical and diffusional parts as well as breathing pattern can be simulated and verified by clinical examination results of patients. However, a few model drawbacks, reducing its accuracy and arising from the non-linear character of respiratory mechanics and simplifications of specific physiological phenomena, should be considered. Further integration between the compartment model proposed and models of other biological processes, such as blood circulation and nervous control of respiration, seems very promising.The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.