@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
First review on psoriasis severity risk stratification: An engineering perspective

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
First review on psoriasis severity risk stratification in engineering perspective.In-depth examination of the existing literature for all parameters of PASI.pCAD system for psoriasis severity assessment in large population.Variety of psoriasis features based on tissue characteristics.Validation of system in terms of reliability and stability.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Dermatology,Psoriasis,Stratification,CAD system,PASI,Area,Erythema,Scaliness,Thickness,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) systems have been used for characterization of several dermatologic diseases in the last few years. Psoriasis is a potentially life-threatening skin disease which affects 125 million people worldwide. The paper presents the first state-of-the-art review of technology solicitation in psoriasis along with its current practices, challenges and assessment techniques. The paper also conducts in-depth examination of the existing literature for all clinical parameters of Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI) i.e., area, erythema, scaliness and thickness. We suggest a role of risk assessment using a decision support system for stratification of psoriasis in large populations. A balanced insight has been presented in all the components of the design, namely: feature extraction, feature selection, disease stratification and overall CAD performance evaluation. We conclude that CAD systems are promising for risk stratification and assessment of psoriasis.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Psoriasis is a chronic, inflammatory and autoimmune skin disease with red and scaly plaques. Statistics show that 125 million people of total world population are suffering from psoriasis disease [1,2]. The effect of psoriasis is global, but its prevalence differs depending on the geographical regions. Psoriasis is more commonly found in colder temperate regions than in the tropics [3]. China and Japan are less affected by psoriasis than Europe, while the Andean region of South America is not affected at all. The prevalence of psoriasis in Europe, USA, Malaysia, and India is about 0.6% to 6.5% [3], 3.15% [3], 3% [4], and 1.02% [5], respectively. Though psoriasis can appear at any age, it mostly occurs before the age of 40 years and a majority of the cases are found within 20–30 years age group [6]. The heritability of psoriasis is found highest among all multi-factorial genetic diseases, which is 60% to 90% as reported in [6]. Moreover, if both parents have psoriasis, there is a 50% chance the children develop the symptoms but it is reduced to 16%, if only one parent has psoriasis. Studies show that there is more risk of transmittance of psoriasis to children from men than women. According to the study of Murase et al. [7], 55% of women reported improvement, 21% no change, and 23% reported worsening of psoriasis disease during pregnancy due to hormonal changes. However, among women in postpartum phase, only 9% reported improvement, 26% no change and 65% reported worsening. Besides affecting the skin, psoriasis affects the quality of life [8,9] due to its discomforting social appearance. This results in increased risk of suicidality (about 30%) making psoriasis an equally dangerous disease at par with depression, heart disease and diabetes [10,11]. Psoriasis patients may have reduced level of earning livelihood and employment [3]. Besides these factors, the patients are sensitive to other diseases like inflammatory bowel, obesity, metabolic syndrome, type-II diabetes, cardiovascular, malignancy, and psychiatric co-morbidities due to similar genetic pool, immune system, toxicities arising out of medication, and associated psychological impact of the disease [6]. Thus psoriasis has become a major concern to health care organizations and the society.The growth cycle of skin cells can be accelerated to 3 to 4 days in psoriasis patients while it is 28 to 30 days in normal condition [12]. This leads to increasing amount of blood vessels which forms red patches with silvery-white scales [13]. Generally, psoriasis appears on scalp, elbows, knees, and lower back but it may spread further to all parts of body [14]. Up to 30% of patients develop a specific form of inflammatory arthritis termed psoriatic arthritis that may lead to joint damage [3]. There is no permanent cure for this disease, but it can be controlled by prolonged and attentive treatment. The cause of psoriasis is still unidentified but genetic factor is believed to be one of the prime reasons for psoriasis [15]. There are various types of psoriasis which shows distinct characteristics namely plaque, guttate, inverse, pustular, and erythrodermic. Plaque psoriasis is the most common form, almost 80% of all psoriasis cases [16].In literature, six psoriasis clinical severity scores i.e., Psoriasis Area Severity Index (PASI), Self-Administered Psoriasis Area Severity Index (SAPASI), Body Surface Area (BSA), Physician’s Global Assessment (PGA), Lattice System Physician’s Global Assessment (LS-PGA), and Salford Psoriasis Index (SPI) are discussed. These six psoriasis severity scores were analyzed in [17] and concluded that PASI score is the most extensively studied psoriasis clinical severity score and most thoroughly validated by clinicians as well as researchers. Further, Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI) is accepted as a gold standard [17–21] because it offers following advantages [20]: (i) it facilitates easy score; (ii) it helps in monitoring psoriasis disease and its clinical assessment; (iii) it provides a competitive score against other objective measurements; (iv) it is well established measure and standardized in daily practice; (v) offers strong repeatability (<±2%). Even though PASI has strong advantages, it has some challenges and we can categorize them in the list of the following disadvantages [20]: (i) there is no quantitative association between psoriasis and quality of life; (ii) PASI score does not take patient’s feeling into consideration; (iii) it suffers from inter-observer variability in surface area calculation; (iv) no linear relationship between PASI score and severity in the range of PASI score from 35 to 72, thus the scale has redundancy; (v) PASI is not measured on specific organ or physical locations of the body such as: genitals, palms, nails. Dermatologists generally follow visual inspection and sense of touch which requires skilled training and experience to determine the PASI score of any patient. By combining the subjective reports of patient and dermatologist, the severity of psoriasis disease is anticipated and also the effect of earlier treatment on patient is determined. Two dermatologists can have two different views on severity for the same patient, which makes the subjective assessment inefficient, unreliable and a time consuming process. Hence, an objective method for PASI scoring is needed, which could overcome the limitations of flawed subjective assessment.The first step for severity risk stratification of psoriasis disease is image acquisition. There is no standardized image acquisition technique for image analysis of psoriasis disease nor are psoriasis public data bases prevalent. The researchers have used different digital imaging cameras including 2-D as well as 3-D cameras. For example, Fadzil et al. [13] have used laser scanner, Konica Minolta Non-Contact 3-D Digitizer VIVID 910 for image acquisition while a 3-D optical scanner, Phase shift Rapid In vivo Measurement of Skin (PRIMOS) portable is used in [21] as shown inFig. 1. In the case of Ref. [22], images are acquired using a digital CCD camera Canon Power Shot A60. The psoriasis images presented in this paper are collected from Psoriasis Clinic and Research Centre, Psoriatreat, Pune, Maharashtra, India. The ethics approval was generated for the dataset and the image dataset were anonymized. The data was obtained by digitally photographing the patients of Indian ethnic origin under the supervision of a dermatologist. The images were captured using Sony NEX-5 camera with 22 mm lens and 350 dpi. However, the acquired images from different cameras may have different properties and the absence of a standard imaging technique for psoriasis analysis makes the comparison of any work with the literature difficult.The objective of the analysis of psoriasis is to diagnose the severity of this disease and to evaluate the treatment efficiency. Most of the existing work in literature aims to calculate the parameters of PASI such as area, redness, scaliness and thickness with their own advantages and disadvantages. The readers can find the details about PASI and related review in Section 3. CAD systems in machine learning paradigm are clinically useful in risk stratification of psoriasis [23]. Further, since such systems are automated and have low online execution time hence, it is easily adaptable in large psoriasis studies such and clinical trials for drug evaluation and therapy. There are medical reviews of psoriasis [24,25] present in literature but no engineering reviews covering risk assessment on stratification of psoriasis. Very little work has been done in the area of CAD system for psoriasis as seen by the lack of database in literature. One such work is proposed by Abbadi et al. [26], in which a neural network based classification of psoriasis and non-psoriasis skin diseases is presented. However, the system considers a very small database and there is no discussion on ground truth and performance evaluation with respect to sensitivity, specificity and receiving operating characteristic curve. Another work is presented in [27] is for the diagnosis of erythemato-squamous diseases which involves psoriasis. The classification is based on using clinical and histopathological features in a support vector machine framework. The aforementioned papers emphasize on classification of psoriasis disease with other skin diseases and no CAD system focusing on psoriasis severity alone exists.This paper presents a review on psoriasis severity risk stratification and to the best of our knowledge; there is no review available in literature related to this methodology. Masood et al. [28] and Maglogiannis et al. [29] presented a review on CAD system for melanoma skin cancer. There is a difference between melanoma and psoriasis in terms of symptoms as well as diagnosis. The symptoms of melanoma include unusual sores, lumps, blemishes, markings or look and feel of the skin lesions, whereas, in psoriasis the symptoms are skin plaques, silver scales, nail pitting and arthritis. Further, one of the key differences in terms of time of cure of these: melanoma can be cured in early stages of the disease, while psoriasis is a lifelong condition [18,30]. Because of the nature of differences in tissue characteristics, the risk stratification needs special feature extraction and selection paradigms.This paper reviews the existing literature on PASI parameters such as area, redness, scaliness and thickness. Furthermore, the paper presents the novel psoriasis computer aided diagnosis (pCAD) system for psoriasis severity risk stratification. Since there is little literature available on pCAD system, the paper discusses the feature extraction, feature selection and classifiers used in other dermatology disease such as melanoma and relate them with psoriasis. The novel aspects of this paper are: (i) pCAD system for risk stratification of psoriasis severity which can be employed in global paradigm, (ii) modeling of linear and non-linear psoriasis features, (iii) variety of psoriasis features based on tissue characteristics, (iv) validation of system in terms of reliability and stability (v) unique way of representation in which the authors are beaned and clustered for each type of system and sub-system in psoriasis risk stratification paradigm.The layout of the paper is as follows: Section 2 presents stratification of psoriasis disease. A pCAD system is presented in Section 3 with each of its stage in detail. The performance evaluation parameters and validation of system is discussed in Section 4 while the benchmarking and discussions are presented in Section 5. The paper concludes in Section 6.It is essential for the prognosis of psoriasis disease in terms of its level of severity for treatment. The current gold standard, Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI) is determined by evaluating the affected skin area and three symptoms namely erythema, scaliness and thickness of the psoriatic lesion. Erythema is the redness seen as a result of plaques on skin while a superficial deposition of white scales is termed as scaliness. Another symptom, thickness is characterized by the elevation between the lesion surface and skin surface. All the above four parameters are calculated for anterior and posterior side of four body regions i.e., head, upper extremities, trunk, and lower extremities as shown inFigs. 2–4. The head region is not shown to keep the patient’s identity confidential. Weights are assigned to consider body parts on the basis of area covered on the body surface. Thus, the weightsWh,Wu,WtandWlrepresenting 0.1, 0.2, 0.3 and 0.4 respectively are included in Eq. (1) for head (h), upper extremities (u), trunk (t), and lower extremities (l).(1)PASI=Wh(Rh+Sh+Th)Ah+Wu(Ru+Su+Tu)Au+Wt(Rt+St+Tt)At+Wl(Rl+Sl+Tl)AlAreas(Ah,Au,At,Al)mentioned in Eq. (1) are graded on a scale of 0 to 6 whereas erythema(Rh,Ru,Rt,Rl), scaliness(Sh,Su,St,Sl)and thickness(Th,Tu,Tt,Tl)are graded on a scale of 0 to 4 as depicted inTables 1 and 2. The range of PASI score is defined from 0 to 72. On medication, around 75% reduction in PASI score considered as a good improvement [19].Table 1 shows description of stratification for erythema, scaliness and thickness and Table 2 shows the psoriatic lesion area scoring system based on the psoriatic lesion area in percentage [19,31]. The examples for stratification of erythema, scaliness and thickness are shown inFigs. 5–7, respectively. Researchers have proposed objective methods for stratification which can help in psoriasis prognosis, discussed in Section 3. Furthermore, a pCAD system is discussed for risk stratification of psoriasis severity which allows the stratification of disease in large populations.Clinical decision support systems are widely adapted in literature [26,27,32]. This paper is the first of its kind, to develop a psoriasis risk stratification system with exhaustive feature strategies and elegant feature selection methodologies in classification framework. Since psoriasis disease is characterized by the images taken via camera, machine learning is well adaptable in image domain framework. Thus image-based feature extraction and selection plays a very important role for risk stratification. Further, this review literature explores reliability and stability of such machine learning frameworks applicable to psoriasis. Our pCAD system for risk stratification uses machine learning paradigm and is shown inFig. 8. It has two components as demarcated by the dotted line. The left side reflects the offline system since it uses the training image data while the right side reflects the online system since it uses the testing image data set. As features are extracted from psoriatic lesion, segmentation of lesion is the first step in both components i.e., offline and online. In the offline system, color and grayscale features are extracted from the images in the feature extraction step. In the feature selection step, dominant features are selected in order to reduce the dimensionality of the extracted feature set and to select only unique and highly discriminating features. The dominant feature set and the clinical ground truth are used as inputs to the offline classifier in order to determine the machine learning parameters. The dominant features generated in offline system are extracted from the test images. Subsequently, the machine learning parameters from the offline system and dominant features are used to determine the class label of the test images.The PASI parameters such as erythema, area, scaliness and thickness (EAST) can be used as features in pCAD system for stratification of psoriasis severity along with other features such as texture and color. As discussed in Section 2, each of the PASI parameters helps in determining the severity of psoriasis. Since features are extracted from psoriatic lesion, segmentation of lesion is essential. Furthermore, various features such as texture, color, redness and chaotic features are explored, followed by feature selection and classification methods.The assessment of psoriatic lesion area mainly involves three objects in an image i.e., the background, healthy skin and psoriatic lesion. It consists of two steps: (i) segmentation of region of interest (ROI) which is entire skin region including psoriatic lesions, and (ii) segmentation of psoriatic lesion. Then, the percentage of psoriatic lesion area is calculated by taking the ratio of the area of psoriatic lesion to area of ROI [31].There are different approaches for psoriatic lesion segmentation and area assessment in literature; each one has strengths and limitations. In the first line of research, Neuro-Fuzzy technique is proposed in [33] which is based on color and texture features, but suffers from high computational complexity. Other drawbacks of this approach are that it involves small database and also no performance evaluation has been reported. Multiresolution-based signature subspace classifier (MSSC) is proposed in Ref. [34] based on color and texture features, but the artifacts such as hairs, illumination variation are not considered. Juang et al. [35] proposed K-means clustering approach followed by morphological operations as part of post processing. Above discussed approaches aim towards segmenting lesion in cropped image of single lesion from complete body part image of any extremity. Thus it may not give area scores for any single extremity like in Table 2 required for measurement of PASI given in Eq. (1) for complete body part image.In second line of research, Kreft et al. [22] proposed an approach to calculate the area parameter on the full body images. The method is tested in a multicenter clinical trial, and reported that the computerized measurement of the area has advantages over subjectively assessed area by the physician. However, manual segmentation of psoriatic lesion is a time consuming process and may be erroneous due to monotony. Another approach which is based on analyzing the hue and chroma information in the CIE L⁎a⁎b⁎color space is presented in [31]. L⁎, a⁎and b⁎components of CIE L⁎a⁎b⁎color space represent lightness, degree of redness to greenness and degree of yellowness to blueness, respectively. Green as a background color is selected and the skin segmentation is performed using a⁎component of CIE L⁎a⁎b⁎color space, since a⁎component represents the degree of redness to greenness. From this, hue and chroma values of CIE L⁎a⁎b⁎are used to segment psoriasis lesions from healthy skin. The performance is evaluated by comparing results with the subjective assessment and the accuracy higher than 90% has been reported. The merits of this approach are that the healed lesions are correctly classified besides a refinement of misclassification of lips, eyes, eyebrow and nipples performed. The main drawback of this approach is the manual selection of healthy skin and psoriatic lesion samples. Here it is compulsory to image psoriasis patients on preselected green background which may be difficult to follow for dermatologists. In addition to this, the lesions covered by scales, are not classified correctly.A similar kind of approach is proposed by Bidaki et al. [36] which considers YCbCr color space. The background color blue is selected and K-means clustering is applied in Cr component of YCbCr color space for skin segmentation. Thereafter, the psoriatic lesions are segmented from healthy skin using Otsu optimal threshold method and region filling operations. The proposed method works even in the presence of artifacts such as eyes, eyebrows, lips, nipples, hairs and varying illumination conditions. The performance is evaluated by similar approach proposed in [31] and the average accuracy is reported as 98.10%. The drawback of the approach is its small database and preselected blue color background makes the skin segmentation task trivial.Superficial deposition of white scales which makes the psoriatic lesion thicker is termed as scaliness. There are very few works available in literature for scaliness assessment of psoriatic lesion. One such work is presented by Lu et al. [37] which discusses an algorithm for segmentation of scaling in 2-D digital psoriasis images. The algorithm contains two stages: (i) feature extraction stage and (ii) segmentation of scales. In feature extraction stage, a scaling contrast map is developed to enhance the contrast of scaling from erythema with the help of multi-scale center-surround filter. In addition to this, bank of Gabor filters is used for texture analysis to segment the scaling image from normal skin image where the color difference between the two is small. In the second stage, erythema and dark pixels are removed using threshold process on the output of scaling contrast map. Then the training data is generated applying morphological operations and soft-constrained K-means clustering. Further, support vector machine (SVM) is applied for initial lesion classification followed by Markov Random Field (MRF) to smooth the region located by SVM. Soft-constrained K-means clustering is tested on a set of 103 images considering all the artifacts and found better than traditional K-means and Fuzzy C-means (FCM). Furthermore, the paper demonstrates that the results of combined SVM and MRF classifiers are superior compared to sole application of SVM or MRF classifier. This amalgamated procedure is computationally very complex and expensive. The vague scaling and the scaling with thick and long hairs are found difficult to segment. Beside this, the approach aims at segmentation of scaling but does not consider valuable stratification of scaliness i.e., types of scaliness, which is more clinically relevant for risk assessment.In a further improved paper of Lu et al. [38], erythema detection is performed along with scaliness as well as stratification of erythema and scaliness. Erythema detection approach consists of decomposition of skin color into melanin and hemoglobin components in log RGB color space using Independent Component Analysis (ICA). SVM is applied to detect the erythema and further stratification of erythema is performed using K-nearest neighbor (KNN) classifier. On the other hand, researchers followed the same approach for scaliness detection from earlier work and the stratification of scaliness is performed using features such as roughness and relative area of scaling with decision tree classifier. Scores given by dermatologists are considered as ground truth. In experiments, it is reported that accuracy of severity 1 and 4 are better than the accuracy for severity 2 and 3 possibly due to ambiguity in scoring severity 2 and 3 lesions. This method showed an accuracy of 86.75% for KNN and 88.67% for the decision tree classifiers. These erythema and scaliness features further used by same group to analyze the change in severity of psoriasis in due course of time for patient under treatment [39].Fadzil et al. [21] proposed an approach which stratifies scaliness in 3-D psoriasis images. Here, the surface roughness feature is used for stratification, since lesion surface becomes rough and bumpy as shown in the graphics art ofFig. 9. Augmentation in vertical deviations can be observed as increase in severity seen in Fig. 9. The algorithm here is based on the calculation of vertical deviations between the lesion surface and its estimated surface waviness. The average of vertical deviation provides the roughness parameter. The waviness estimation involves subdivision of surface to avoid over-fitting followed by polynomial surface fitting. The stratification of scaliness is performed using K-means and FCM clustering techniques consequently. The boundary value between two adjacent score groups is determined by finding the middle point between the centroids by K-means clustering. Second, in FCM clustering boundary value is found to be maximum value of membership degree of a particular roughness belonging to a scaliness score. It is reported that FCM clustering provides marginally enhanced kappa coefficient 0.8708 than 0.8473 of K-means clustering. Finally, stratification of scaliness is done by applying the boundary levels to the surface roughness of the psoriatic lesions. The paper reported an accuracy of 94.12%.Dermatologists use sense of touch to the psoriatic lesion and normal skin on the background to assess the thickness. With this concept in mind, Fadzil et al. [13] proposed an objective way to measure the thickness of psoriatic lesion in 3-D digital images. The thickness is the elevation between the lesion surface and lesion base i.e., skin surface level. The captured 3-D image is cropped to remain with only one lesion as the region of interest. This cropped image is converted to STL (Stereo Lithography) format which only takes the height information while omitting the color information. The lesion is segmented maually and the 3-D STL file is converted to 2-D elevation map which provides the normal skin and lesion coordinates. With the assumption that lesion base is healthy skin under lesion surface, the least square surface fitting approach using polynomial function is used to construct the lesion surface. Finally, the elevation is calculated by subtracting the lesion surface from lesion base. K-means clustering is used for stratification of thickness. To validate the surface fitting, the coefficient of determinant (R2) is determined between the cropped center’s surface and the constructed center’s surface which is reported as 1. However, thick hairs remain an issue for the proposed approach and the setup is expensive.Feature extraction is one of the most vital components of computer-aided diagnosis (pCAD) system. For an optimal classification, the most effective features in terms of degree of discrimination between the classes have to be selected. The features are extracted by applying mathematical operations on pixels of an image and thus reduce the original data set. There are numerous feature extraction techniques available in literature which can be suited for dermatology images. Here, four main categories of features, texture, color, redness and chaotic are discussed. But, before feature extraction step hair removal algorithm such as conventional Dull Razor algorithm [40] can be applied as a pre-filtering step.Texture features provide the information about a particular pattern in an image. Thus, it is a significant feature to distinguish one pattern from another and quantify the texture present in a lesion. One of the most common texture analysis techniques is Gray-Level Co-occurrence Matrix (GLCM). GLCM indicates the probability of gray level i occurring in the neighborhood of gray level j. At most 18 features derived from GLCM have been reported till date [41,42].Another prominent texture feature extraction technique is Gray Level Run Length Matrix (GLRLM). It discriminates the coarse and fine textures. For a given image, a GLRLM is a matrix in which each elementp(i,j)represents the total number of occurrences of runs of length j at gray level i. From the GLRLM a total of 11 features i.e., short run emphasis, long run emphasis, gray-level non-uniformity, run length non-uniformity, run percentage, low gray-level run emphasis, high gray-level run emphasis, short run low gray-level emphasis, short run high gray-level emphasis, long run low gray-level emphasis and long run high gray-level emphasis can be extracted [41].Other than these two well-known texture feature extraction techniques, there are many other techniques [43–45] such as intensity histogram which provides the first order statistics of an image. There is another technique called invariant moment which makes the system invariant to scaling, rotation and translation. The seven moments(I1toI7)can be used as features. The Gray Level Difference Statistics (GLDS) describes the local properties of an image based on absolute differences between pairs of gray levels for a given displacement. The features such as contrast, angular second moment, entropy and mean can be extracted using GLDS. The Neighborhood Gray Tone Difference Matrix (NGTDM) is a summation of the absolute difference between the pixel being considered and the average of neighboring pixels. It correlates the texture features namely coarseness, contrast, business, complexity, texture strength with human visual perception. Another texture feature extraction technique is also available, Statistical Feature Matrix (SFM) which measures the statistical properties of pixel pairs at several distances. Readers may refer to [46] for comprehensive texture analysis.Since there is fine variability in colors of low to high severity of psoriatic lesion, the color features may provide valuable information for stratification of psoriasis. Statistics such as mean, standard deviation, variance, entropy, skewness, color asymmetry, chromatic difference of color plane and kurtosis for each color component of several color spaces is proposed in [47–50]. The most popular and prominent four color spaces i.e., RGB, HSV, YCbCr and CIE L⁎a⁎b⁎can be considered. RGB is the red–green–blue color space, HSV represents hue, saturation and value color space, YCbCr represents luminance and chrominance color space and CIE L⁎a⁎b⁎represents lightness and color-component space. Since each color space contains three color components, a total of 24 color features (4 color spaces×3 color components×2 statistics) has been extracted from four color spaces for each sample image [23].Features recognizing and classifying the redness of skin could be considered as good features for stratification, which can contribute to the whole system of psoriasis image classification. Keeping this in mind, three features can be extracted which indicate the redness of the skin i.e., aggressiveness of red to green(ARG), aggressiveness of red to blue(ARB), and redness(Rd)as the ratios of mean values of the R, G and B as shown inTable 3, where μR, μGand μBrepresent the mean values of R, G, and B color component of RGB color space.The fractal dimension (FD) can be used as chaotic feature [43,45] as it measures the degree of irregularity over multiple scales. The word “fractal” represents geometric pattern but is different from classical geometry. Since psoriatic lesion indicates the irregularity of intensity values, the FD may provide valuable information for stratification of psoriatic lesion. For a given self-similar object of N parts, scaled by a ratio r from the whole, its FD is given by the following mathematical equationFD=logNr/log(1/r).Table 4 presents features extracted for dermatology diagnosis in literature with corresponding references.Feature selection, generally used in machine learning paradigm is another important step for stratification of a disease. It avoids the redundant and noisy features (less dominant features) and thus reduces the dimensionality of the feature space which ultimately reduces the computational cost and improves the stability and classification accuracy [51]. There are numerous techniques for feature selection present in literature such as Principal Component Analysis (PCA) [52], Sequential forward selection (SFS) [53], Sequential backward selection (SBS) [54], Floating search methods [55], Sequential forward floating selection (SFFS), Sequential backward floating selection (SBFS), Fisher score ranking [56], ReliefF [57], Mutual information-based feature selection (MIFS) [58], Correlation-based feature selection (CFS) [59], Greedy or genetic algorithms [60] and Plus-l-take-away-r (PTA (l, r)) [61]. Each of the methods has its own pros and cons, and this is a statistical topic which is out of the scope of the current stratification paradigm. Among the techniques, PCA is commonly adopted in data mining where the cutoff factor(R)plays an important role in selection of number of principal components (dominant features). We suggest the reviewers to check the references used in this section.Classification is the final stage of pCAD system. Brief discussions on several classifiers used in dermatology diagnosis are presented in this section. The support vector machine (SVM) is a state of the art classification technique based on statistical learning theory [62]. Utilizing the training data set, SVM provide a linear combination of a subset of data in the form of support vectors. These support vectors build the separating hyperplane which classify the input data sets. Different kernel functions such as linear, polynomial and radial basis can be used with varying degree. Since the learning process of SVM is based on optimization of a convex cost function, it has advantage of no local minima. Another well-known classifier is artificial neural network (ANN) [63] motivated by human brain which consists of massive interconnections of neurons. The learning algorithm iteratively adjusts the weights (synapses) by minimizing a given error function. Another classifier, K-nearest neighbor (KNN) [64] is an instance based classifier which determines the k-nearest neighbors using the similarity criteria or minimum distance from the query instance to the learning samples. Here, a sample is assigned a class which is the most common among its K-nearest neighbors and K is a small positive number. KNN classifiers are particularly effective for highly irregular classification boundaries where it is difficult to discriminate the instances with linear classifiers like perceptron. A decision tree [65] is a flowchart-like structure in which each internal node represents a test on an attribute, each branch represents the outcome of the test and each leaf node represents a class label. The paths from root to leaf represent classification rules. It is often fast to train and generate easy-to-understand rules but does not generalize well to test data in case of large training data set. There are other classifiers in literature such as logistic regression [66] which is a discriminative probabilistic classification model based on the logistic function, Bayesian classifier [67] which is a statistical classifier based on Baye’s theorem and discriminant analysis [68] which assumes that different classes generate data based on different Gaussian distributions.Table 5 shows the classifiers used in literature for dermatology diagnosis with corresponding references.Several performance evaluation parameters have been proposed in literature as shown inTable 6. To provide an unbiased result, the recommended approach is cross-validation such as k-fold [83] and Jack Knife [84]. Furthermore, to understand the generalization of pCAD system, data size can be divided into several parts and plot between classification accuracy with varying data size can be obtained. The plot with initial sharp rise and monotonously increase thereafter confirms that the system leads from memorization to generalization.The validation in terms of reliability and stability of pCAD system is essential.Fig. 10 shows a general block diagram for this purpose. Given the classification results on test image and their corresponding a-prior class values as ground truth, the accuracy parameter is calculated. The accuracy parameter can then be used for computation of system’s reliability and stability in PCA-based framework. The reliability index of the system can be evaluated by taking the ratio of standard deviation to mean accuracy by considering all PCA-based cutoffs (R) (as discussed in Section 3.2.5) on all data sizes (N) as shown in Eq. (2). The concept is to see the reliability of pCAD with increasing feature population (i.e., changing cutoff R) and selecting the optimal features using PCA while increasing the data size.(2)ζN(%)=(1−δNμN)×100whereζNis reliability index,δNandμNrepresents standard deviation and mean of all accuracies respectively corresponding to a particular data size (N). Then reliability index of pCAD can be computed by taking the mean ofζNcorresponding to all data sizes (N). The low values of the standard deviation will reflect the highest reliability of the pCAD system.The stability of system is determined analogous to the dynamics of the control theory by computing the classification accuracy for each data size (N). If the deviation of accuracy from the mean accuracy at every PCA-based cutoff (R) is under the tolerance limit of 2% of mean accuracy, the system is declared as stable.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
