@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The dicrotic notch analyzed by a numerical model

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Aortic valve closure is the most widespread explanation for the dicrotic notch.Reflected pressure waves may participate in forming the dicrotic notch.A 1D numerical model based on Navier-Stokes equations can test this hypotheses.Changes in terminal resistance modify reflected waves and thus the dicrotic notch.Vasoconstrictors modify the morphology of the dicrotic notch in human subjects.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Dicrotic notch,Reflection wave,Numerical model,Medical physiology,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Divergent concepts on the origin of the dicrotic notch are widespread in medical literature and education. Since most medical textbooks explain the origin of the dicrotic notch as caused by the aortic valve closure itself, this is commonly transmitted in medical physiology courses. We present clinical data and numerical simulations to demonstrate that reflected pressure waves could participate as one of the causes of the dicrotic notch. Our experimental data from continuous arterial pressure measurements from adult patients undergoing vascular surgery suggest that isolated changes in peripheral vascular resistance using an intravenous bolus of phenylephrine (a selective alpha 1-receptor agonist and thus a potent vasoconstrictor) modify the dicrotic notch. We then explore the mechanisms behind this phenomenon by using a numerical model based on integrated axisymmetric Navier-Stokes equations to compute the hemodynamic flow. Our model illustrates clearly how modifications in peripheral artery resistance may result in changes in the amplitude of the dicrotic notch by modifying reflected pressure waves. We believe that this could be a useful tool in teaching medical physiology courses.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The dicrotic notch is a small and brief increase in arterial blood pressure that appears when the aortic valve closes. This landmark has been widely referred to in the descriptive analysis of the arterial waveform (especially of aortic and radial arteries) and is commonly used as an equivalent of end-systolic left ventricular pressure [8,11].Most medical textbooks explain the origin of the dicrotic notch as caused by the aortic valve closure itself [5,10,19,26,29,34]. These authors claim that towards the end of the ejection phase, blood flow across the aortic valve falls to very low values, until it actually reverses, producing a backflow that closes the aortic valve. As both flow and pressure are strongly coupled, this momentary backflow would produce a small positive shift in the aortic pressure trace. The dicrotic notch would therefore be the result of a short period of backward flow of blood immediately before the aortic valve closes. Many studies support this theory and have stressed that both events occur simultaneously [14,15].On the other hand, there are clinical data that emphasize that the morphology of the dicrotic notch is related to the value of mean arterial pressure and, therefore, to peripheral vascular resistance [7,11]. Peripheral vascular resistance is mainly influenced by the vascular tone of small distal arteries (diameter smaller than 500μm), called arterioles [18]. Pressure waves created by the heart travel through the arteries and reflect back towards the heart at places with high-vascular tone (such as the arterioles) and also at every vascular bifurcation [20]. Hence, blood pressure waveforms can be viewed as a large addition of the forward pressure waves generated by the heart and the backward components due to multiple reflections, in particular, from the sites of distal resistance [17,24,33]. This backward component would modify the mean arterial pressure and also change the morphology of the forward pressure wave, resulting in the creation of the dicrotic notch. The speed of these reflected waves depends on the mechanical and geometrical characteristics of the vessels [25] but their amplitude depends directly on the value of peripheral resistance, that is, on the degree of vasoconstriction or vasodilation of the arterioles [30,32]. In the following, the influence of the peripheral resistance will be quantified by a reflection coefficient (Rt=Ra/Ia), which is the ratio of the reflected amplitude (Ra) to the incident amplitude (Ia). Some authors state that a high vascular tone also increases the speed of the reflected waves [34]. We consider that this would only change the amplitude of the reflected waves, not the speed, and will be addressing this matter in our experiments.Based on this hypothesis, the presence of the dicrotic notch, created by the reflected waves, would induce a secondary pressure peak in the aorta, interrupting the aortic pressure downslope during end-systole. The increased pressure gradient between the aorta and the left ventricle would be sufficient to create a momentary backflow and close the aortic valve at higher diastolic levels, explaining why both the dicrotic notch and the aortic valve closure occur at the same time. We have arguments to put forward that this second approach responds to a better understanding of how the cardiovascular system actually works.Understanding the dicrotic notch as a result of reflected pressure waves suggests that this landmark contains valuable information on the peripheral vascular network. We believe that this is an important concept to underline in cardiovascular physiology courses; therefore we present a teaching example that combines theoretical reasoning, numerical modeling and human experimental data. We propose a 1D model to study the role of reflected waves in the origin of the dicrotic notch, and compare the results from numerical simulations to experimental data from adult patients.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
