@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Effects of blood in veins of dragonfly wing on the vibration characteristics

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The microstructures of dragonfly wing are observed by the SEM.Accurate three-dimensional FE model of the dragonfly forewing is developed.The blood in veins is considered in the analysis of the mass, moments of inertia and natural frequency/mode.We report the influence of the blood on the vibration characteristics of the wing for the first time.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Dragonfly wing,Vein,Blood circulation,Finite element method,Natural frequency,Mode shape,Multi-functional bionics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
How the blood in veins of dragonfly wing affects its vibration characteristics is investigated. Based on the experimental results of the wing׳s morphology and microstructures, including the veins, the membranes and the pterostigma, accurate three-dimensional finite element models of the dragonfly forewing are developed. Considering the blood in veins, the total mass, mass distribution and the moments of inertia of the wing are studied. The natural frequencies/modal shapes are analyzed when the veins are filled with and without blood, respectively. The based natural frequency of the model with blood (189Hz) is much closer to the experimental result. Relative to bending modal shapes, the torsional ones are affected more significantly by the blood. The results in this article reveal the multi-functions of the blood in dragonfly wings and have important implications for the bionic design of flapping-wing micro air vehicles.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Dragonflies fly in a highly maneuverable manner with their four flapping wings. They are capable of forward flight, backward flight, hovering, reversing direction instantaneously and accelerating rapidly. During flight, the beating wings accelerate the surrounding air to produce sufficient lift and propulsion [1,2]. Many previous researches focused on the aerodynamic performance of the flapping wings. The high-lift generation [3–7], flight efficiency [8–11] and stability [12,13] of the wings were comprehensively investigated. Both the motion of a wing and its three-dimensional shape contribute to the aerodynamics in flight. The insect wings are mainly passive structures and detailed studies of the structural features are necessary in determining the dynamic responses in the interaction with air. In addition, the understanding of aerodynamics of insect wings in turn facilitates the design of flapping-wing micro air vehicles.Accounting for only 1–2% of the total body mass, the highly corrugated wings possess a high load-bearing capacity and structure stabilizing function. The pleats vary both along the spanwise direction and chordwise direction, increasing the flexural rigidity throughout the wing [14–18]. Combes and Daniel [19,20] studied the relationship between the venation pattern and the wing flexibility through finite element method (FEM) by calculating the displacement along the wing in response to a point force. Kesel et al. [21] developed several finite element models to study the expenditure of material in constructing the dragonfly wing. The effects of sandwich structure of veins on mechanical properties of dragonfly wing were studied by Wang et al. [22]. Rajabi et al. [23] investigated the microstructural and morphological aspects of dragonfly wings and determined the natural frequencies and mode shapes by FEM.In almost all the numerical researches, the veins of dragonfly wing were considered as empty tubular structures with nothing inside. In our opinion, however, it is unreasonable, because the blood is not included in these researches. The biologist Arnold [24] introduced the blood circulation in some insect wings systematically and indicated that the veins of dragonfly wings are generally pathways for the blood, the tracheae as well as the nerves. Several distinct flow patterns were distinguished, involving longitudinal veins, cross-veins, and ambient veins. Based on this, the pattern of blood flowing in the right forewing of a C.servilia Drury is depicted inFig. 1. He suggested that there were no major differences among the species or between the fore and hind wings of individuals.In previous research, Zhao et al. [25,26] took a closer look at the ripple-like surface of the dragonfly veins through Environmental Scanning Electron Microscope (ESEM). They have estimated the mass and the moments of inertia of the anterior vein and found that both of them are increased by about 30% because of the blood inside. The relationship between blood flow rate and the stability of the vein was studied by a rotational elastic tube conveying fluid [27]. Besides, Chen et al. [28] investigated the material property of the leading edge vein of the dragonfly wing, and found that the loss of water contents increased the stiffness by approximately 20 times. As the blood may affect both the mass and the stiffness of dragonfly wings, it is predictable that the blood will certainly influence the dynamic behaviors of the wings.In the present study, we develop more reasonable and realistic 3D model of a dragonfly forewing based on the results observed in experiment. The FEM is applied to simulate the wing models and the blood within the wing is considered. The properties such as mass, mass distribution and moments of inertia are calculated and the natural frequencies/modal shapes are analyzed. To our knowledge, the blood in veins may be the first time to be considered systematically in the analysis of a complete dragonfly wing.The sample used is the right forewing of a C.servilia Drury collected in the suburbs of Shanghai. As shown inFig. 2a and b, both the forewing and hindwing are composed of the membrane and veins. The brown mark of the pterostigma is located on the leading edge near the tip. The span length and the maximum chord width of the forewing are directly measured as 26.4mm and 7mm, respectively. The zigzag cross sections are observed for the profiles of the corrugation when the sample is cut into chordwise pieces. Corrugation is pronounced both near the leading edge and the base of the wing. As shown in Fig. 2c, the corrugated section located near the pterostigma is shallow and the leading edge vein has a notable rounded profile. The ESEM is used to investigate the microstructures of the membrane and vein. To avoid any change of the microstructures, the sample is taken off from the living body in a short time. First, the sample is embedded in epoxy and cured at room temperature, after fixed by 2.5% glutaraldehyde and 1% Osmium tetroxide. Then, it is immersed in liquid nitrogen for 1~2min to allow the occurrence of brittle fracture. Finally, the sections are coated with gold about 6 nm thick and observed under ESEM.There are mainly two types of veins, the longitudinal veins and the cross veins. The longitudinal veins extending from the base to the tip act as girders to stiffen the wing. The cross veins connect the longitudinal ones to keep the structure stability. The thin and transparent membrane is divided into small cells by veins. All of them form a three-dimensional structure of the wing. The veins at different locations are basically tubular structures with wide-ranging sizes (Fig. 2d). The cross-sections are characterized by symmetric annular shapes. The pterostigma is like a box with irregular cross sections. It is connected with the veins in topology and can accept blood from the surrounding veins [24]. The dimensions of both the veins and membranes decrease from the base/leading edge to the tip/trailing edge.The extremely thin and flexible wing membrane is mainly composed of chitin, which is conducive for membrane to take a variety of deformations during flight. The reticulate veins made of long chain crystal polymers act as the support structure of the wing. Both the veins and membrane are idealized as isotropic material with Young׳s modulus of 2.8GPa and 1.5GPa respectively, and the Poisson ratio is 0.25 [21,29]. They are supposed not to be influenced by blood filled in the veins in the present study. The density of the wing is taken as 1.2mg·mm−3 consulting the results measured by Wainwright et al. [30]. The density of blood in the veins is 1.002mg·mm−3, referring to that of spider [31]. In addition, the effect of the pterostigma is considered in our models, which is found to help alleviating the wing flutter and making the wing beat more efficiently working as an inertial regulator in wing pitching by Norberg [32]. The dense pterostigma has a greater mass than an equally large wing piece in adjacent wing regions. A relatively higher value of 4.5mg·mm–3 is given for its density.The architecture as well as the material properties determines how the wing will deform in response to applied forces. A highly realistic and integrated three-dimensional model is created in this part. Firstly, high-quality images of a dragonfly forewing are taken by the high resolution scanner (HP Scanjet G3010). The geometry of the wing is obtained from AutoCAD software and the FE model is created in ABAQUS software.We use beam element B31 to simulate the veins with annular cross sections as shown inFig. 3a and b. The sizes of the veins are divided into three different categories considering the variable scales of the wing veins. The thickness of the wing membrane is only about 0.002–0.005mm. The thin shell element S4R is employed to simulate it in our model. The cross section of the pterostigma is simplified as an irregular quadrilateral with two perpendicular diagonals whose respective lengths are 0.3 mm and 0.11mm, also shown in Fig. 3c and d. The average thickness of the wall is 0.02mm. Similarly, we use four-node quadrilateral shell element to simulate it. The 3D corrugated model of the right forewing is meshed distinctly according to the different structure features described above (Fig. 4).The flow of blood in the veins may induce complicated additional forces, which are all ignored temporally and will be considered in the succeeding studies. We adopt the method of equivalent mass to characterize the effects of blood here.The mass of hollow vein and blood-filled vein per unit length can be defined respectively as(1)m0=π(R2−r2)ρs(2)m1=m0+πr2ρlwhere R is the outer radius and r is the inner radius as marked in Fig. 3b,ρsandρlare separately the densities of the veins and blood.The equivalent mass of the vein per unit length is(3)me=π(R2−r2)ρe=π(R2−r2)ρs+πr2ρlThe corresponding equivalent density is(4)ρe=ρs+r2(R2−r2)ρlSubstituting the parameters of the veins into Eq.(4), the corresponding values of equivalent density can be obtained, which are listed inTable 1. Similarly, the equivalent density of the pterostigma is obtained as 6.6mg·mm−3.The aerodynamic pressure acted per unit area of the wing scales withρfU2and the inertial force scales withρehU2/l, whereρfis the air density andUis the characteristic velocity of the wing,hthe thickness andlthe characteristic length. Then the ratio of the inertial force of the wing to the aerodynamic pressure is defined asρeh/ρfl. Consequently, a higher density of the wing increases the ratio of inertial force to aerodynamic force, which is important to the discussion about the role of inertial force on the wing deformation during insect flight [32,33].In short, two models are created in our article. The veins are empty in model I and filled with blood in model II. Both the geometrical and physical parameters remain the same in the two models. The deformation of the wing is described in Cartesian coordinates (O-XYZ) and the wing base is clamped.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this article, the morphology and microstructures of the dragonfly wing are examined by the ESEM, and the blood circulation in the veins is introduced. To illustrate how the blood works on the wing dynamic performances, three-dimensional finite element models are developed and analyzed. The multi-scaled diameters of veins and membrane are considered in the study, and the pterostigma located near the wing tip is also introduced.Blood in the veins is common in many insects, both in the forewing and the hindwing. It has increased the total mass as well as the moments of inertia to a large extent. In addition, the various sizes of the veins cause the uneven distribution of the blood, which moves the mass center ahead and the unfavorable inertial pitching moment causing flutter is suppressed. Affected by the blood, the natural frequencies decrease significantly and the fundamental frequency is in better agreement with the experimental results. In addition, the torsional modal shapes are prone to the blood within the wing relative to the bending ones. It is very important to predict the dynamic behaviors as the long and corrugated wing is flexible to torsion in flight. In addition to its physiological function, the blood within the dragonfly wing is found to influence the vibration characteristics in this article. Based on this, more factors could be taken into account in the design of flapping-wing micro air vehicles (FMAVs) if the flow rate and distribution of the fluids could be regulated artificially.None Declared.