@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Simulation of the microscopic process during initiation of stent thrombosis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We computationally simulated the microscopic process of initial stent thrombosis.An increase in strut height increased the area of dysfunctional endothelium.Platelets preferentially deposited on endothelium outside recirculation regions.With intact endothelium, mural thrombus was largest with the highest strut.With denuded endothelium, mural thrombus was largest with the lowest strut.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Shear-induced platelet activation,Endothelium activation,Stent thrombosis,Coronary arteries,Computational simulation,Discrete element model,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectiveCoronary stenting is one of the most commonly used approaches to open coronary arteries blocked due to atherosclerosis. However, stent struts can induce stent thrombosis due to altered hemodynamics and endothelial dysfunction, and the microscopic process is poorly understood. The objective of this study was to determine the microscale processes during the initiation of stent thrombosis.MethodsWe utilized a discrete element computational model to simulate the transport, collision, adhesion, and activation of thousands of individual platelets and red blood cells in thrombus formation around struts and dysfunctional endothelium.ResultsAs strut height increased, the area of endothelium activated by low shear stress increased, which increased the number of platelets in mural thrombi. These thrombi were generally outside regions of recirculation for shorter struts. For the tallest strut, wall shear stress was sufficiently low to activate the entire endothelium. With the entire endothelium activated by injury or denudation, the number of platelets in mural thrombi was largest for the shortest strut. The type of platelet activation (by high shear stress or contact with activated endothelium) did not greatly affect results.ConclusionsDuring the initiation of stent thrombosis, platelets do not necessarily enter recirculation regions or deposit on endothelium near struts, as suggested by previous computational fluid dynamics simulations. Rather, platelets are more likely to deposit on activated endothelium outside recirculation regions and deposit directly on struts. Our study elucidated the effects of different mechanical factors on the roles of platelets and endothelium in stent thrombosis.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Coronary stenting is one of the most commonly used approaches to open coronary arteries blocked due to atherosclerosis, but stent failure continues to occur in 10–20% of patients, though significant progress has been made over the last decade [1–3]. Stent thrombosis is a leading cause of stent failure, which can be fatal [4]. It is important to advance our understanding of the mechanisms of stent thrombosis.Stent thrombosis can occur both acutely after stenting and later after over a year. Acute thrombosis has been attributed to platelet activation, endothelium injury, and inadequate antiplatelet therapy [5–7], while late thrombosis has been attributed to platelet activation, inhibited re-endothelialization, and endothelial expression of prothrombotic factors [5,8,9]. In either case, altered hemodynamics caused by stent struts, which protrude into the vessel lumen, plays an important role. Low wall shear stress on the proximal and distal sides of struts promotes endothelial expression of prothrombotic factors and inhibits endothelial cell proliferation, hindering re-endothelialization [8]. High wall shear stress along the tops of struts may activate platelets and cause red blood cells (RBCs) to release adenosine diphosphate, which can also activate platelets [8,10]. The size of struts directly affects blood flow and wall shear stress and thus affects thrombosis. In vivo and in vitro studies have demonstrated that thicker struts were more thrombogenic than thinner struts, likely due to larger flow disturbances with thicker struts [11]. On the other hand, stent-induced mechanical injury of the endothelium is widely accepted as another mechanism that leads to stent thrombosis [6,7]. Inhibited re-endothelialization, due to penetration of struts into the necrotic core of atherosclerotic plaque [9] or due to anti-proliferative drugs imparted by drug-eluting stents that aim to prevent in-stent restenosis (re-narrowing of the vessel), has also been linked to stent thrombosis [5]. It is important to determine how hemodynamic changes and endothelium dysfunction and denudation affect the microscopic process of thrombosis.Platelets are the main cellular components of arterial thrombi. Platelets become activated under thrombogenic conditions in order to adhere to the endothelial wall and aggregate with each other. Adhesion and aggregation occur through glycoproteins that are embedded in the platelet surface membrane, various proteins in plasma, and networks of fibrin [12]. High shear stresses, along with chemical agonists, induce platelet activation [12]. Activated platelets activate additional platelets by releasing and catalyzing platelet agonists [12]. Platelet activation, platelet–endothelium adhesion, and platelet–platelet aggregation under prothrombotic environments induced by stents are key events in thrombus formation. Therefore, it is important to delineate the microscopic process of these interactions in order to understand the mechanism of stent thrombosis.To better understand the microscopic mechanism, a few studies have used computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulations (which did not include platelets) to determine the flow field and shear stress around struts to infer the activation and deposition of platelets in thrombus formation. Duraiswamy et al. [13] tested the deposition of previously-activated platelets onto two-dimensional (2D) configurations of struts using in vitro experiments and compared results with CFD simulations without platelets. They found that in vitro platelet deposition was higher in regions in which CFD flow was directed toward the wall, and lower where CFD flow was directed away from the wall [13]. In a purely CFD study, Jimenez and Davies [10] demonstrated that struts produced high shear stress on top of the strut and low shear stress along the wall adjacent to the strut, as well as produced recirculation regions. Thrombosis was predicted to occur on the endothelium in the recirculation regions on either side of the strut [10]. However, it is necessary to directly (rather than inferentially) determine how strut-induced changes in flow and shear stress affect the activation, adhesion, and aggregation of platelets. In addition, the contributions of vessel injury and inhibited re-endothelialization caused by struts need to be incorporated into computational models of stent thrombosis. Accordingly, the objective of this study was to determine the microscale processes and platelet-level mechanisms by which stents initiate thrombosis.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We developed and implemented a discrete element computational model of the dynamics of thousands of individual platelets and RBCs in initial thrombus formation induced by stents in coronary arteries. We defined and incorporated models of activation of platelets by shear stress and by dysfunctional endothelium and models of activation of the endothelium by shear stress and denudation or injury. The computational method exhibited good agreement with a previous in vitro study of platelet deposition between stent struts. Results showed that with shear-induced endothelium activation, the number of platelets in mural thrombi increased as strut height increased. In contrast with pre-activated endothelium, the short strut yielded a higher number platelets in mural thrombi than the other struts. The type of activation to which platelets were subjected (shear-induced, endothelium-induced, or both) did not greatly affect results. As well, the manners in which platelets and the endothelium were activated did not greatly affect the amount of emboli for a given strut height. The smaller the strut height, the less likely platelets were to enter recirculation regions and adhere to the endothelium in recirculation regions.This study was the first to computationally simulate the dynamics of individual cells in the vicinity of stent struts and to simulate the resultant thrombus formation, to our knowledge. Our work expanded upon previous CFD studies, which did not include cells, to reveal that platelets did not necessarily enter recirculation regions or adhere to the endothelium close to the strut in initial thrombus formation, in contrast to predictions of some CFD studies. Rather, platelets were more likely to deposit on activated endothelium outside recirculation regions and deposit directly on struts. Our study elucidated interactions within the initiation process of stent thrombosis due to struts (such as interactions between strut height and the extent of endothelium activation), and also shed light on the effects of mechanical factors on the roles of platelets and endothelium in stent thrombosis.None declared.