@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
POPPER, a simple programming language for probabilistic semantic inference in medicine

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The POPPER language was developed to explore probabilistic semantics.The application was developed to assist in medical reasoning.The core theory is the same as the Hyperbolic Dirac Net HDN.Like an HDN, it enables bidirectional probabilistic logic and cyclic paths.Unlike the basic HDN, it allows verbal relationships.Unlike the basic HDN, it evolves by, e.g., syllogistic reasoning.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Medical inference,Decision support system,Expert system,SW,Dirac,Hyperbolic,Complex,Bayes Net,Popper,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Our previous reports described the use of the Hyperbolic Dirac Net (HDN) as a method for probabilistic inference from medical data, and a proposed probabilistic medical Semantic Web (SW) language Q-UEL to provide that data. Rather like a traditional Bayes Net, that HDN provided estimates of joint and conditional probabilities, and was static, with no need for evolution due to “reasoning”. Use of the SW will require, however, (a) at least the semantic triple with more elaborate relations than conditional ones, as seen in use of most verbs and prepositions, and (b) rules for logical, grammatical, and definitional manipulation that can generate changes in the inference net. Here is described the simple POPPER language for medical inference. It can be automatically written by Q-UEL, or by hand. Based on studies with our medical students, it is believed that a tool like this may help in medical education and that a physician unfamiliar with SW science can understand it. It is here used to explore the considerable challenges of assigning probabilities, and not least what the meaning and utility of inference net evolution would be for a physician.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The resulting general finding for a purely multiplicative network at very least describes the collective degree of truth of all the statements in it, looking in one direction of the relationships as written, and the collective degree of truth of all the statements in it looking in other direction of the relationships as written. From the perspective of 1 representing that a statement is an assertion awaiting refutation, −logP for each of these probabilities represents the amount of refuting information, i.e. the evidence against. If for the sake of argument we take 〈dogs|chase|cats〉=(0.8,0.2) and 〈cats|chase|mice〉=(0.9,0.1), then the result for that very simple network is the dual (0.72, 0.02)=(0.8×0.9, 0.2×0.1). As a small network of knowledge, 〈dogs|chase|cats〉〈cats|chase|mice〉 does tell us something about dogs, cats, and mice and their natures by virtue of their relationships, but nothing more. There is, however, one important utility of the overall probabilities of a net. When metastatements are applied to evolve a network, usually into one with less but adequately representative statements, we wish to see that there is no extensive information loss. For example, a syllogism in which the conclusion is existentially qualified (“some”) while the premises are universally qualified (“all”) will lose information. To have more interesting meaning in many medical settings, one must argue for a chain of effect that implies categorical, causal, or transformational relationships in the verbs in statements used.Chain of effect occurs in many cases, for example spread of disease or contamination in epidemiology, or mechanisms of progression disease such as failure of systems in a chain that that lead to cancers. One way to approach it is by categorization of the relationship, i.e. putting it into an equivalent categorical form, as in 〈dogs|chase|cats〉=〈dogs|are|cat-chasers〉, but to say that 〈dogs|are|cat-chasers〉〈cats-chased|are|mice-chasers〉 requires a linker term 〈cat-chasers|cats-chased〉, or the assumption that this term equals 1 which is a POOA (principle of one-to-one action, Section 2.3) assumption. One can, however, almost always construct a network using statements in a categorical, causal, or transformational form in which the right hand side of the statement matches the left side of the statement that follows it, as in 〈A|R|B〉〈B|S|C〉〈C|T|D〉⋯ With R,S,T,… implying a chain of effect, this brings the net closer to the familiar BN. There is some art in this transformation, but similar challenges and pitfalls apply to building a BN “from scratch” and perhaps more so, since first building a hyperbolic probabilistic semantic network, i.e. with dual probabilities, might help. Consider the following epidemiological problem as a simple static net. There is a breach between a sewage system of a small town and a lake in which local fishermen cast nets for fish for local consumption. An infected person brings into two a new strain of a species of Vibrio bacillus and, via the sewage system, this enters the cycle of sewage to lake to fishing to consumption to sewage. To focus on the key issues, the following is compressed from a more elaborate network at the cost of some rather ugly wording in the arguments, and a simple stretch (Section 3.3) is made to give a symmetrical relationship in the case of statements (1)–(3). Writing out probability duals in full for clarity, we have(1)〈Vibrio|is associated with|sewage〉=0.3,0.3〈sewage|is associated with|lake X〉=0.1,0.1〈lake X|is associated with|fish〉=1,1〈fish|are|contaminated fish〉=0.2,1〈contaminated fish|are|netted fish〉=0.1,0.2〈netted fish|are|contaminated eaten fish〉=0.6,0.7〈contaminated eaten fish|become|sewage〉=0.9, pIn the last line (7), the converse statement that that sewage becomes the contaminated and eaten fish looks at first absurd but, indirectly, that is actually the case and indeed the probability that we are interested in. It suffices to see that (a) since the (1)–(3) are symmetrical values that therefore just multiply the net, we can put them aside to determine p, because (b) statements (2)–(7) start with sewage and terminating with sewage, which imply the cyclic path. Note that (7) does not by itself balance the rest of the cyclic path (2)–(7), because of the otherwise convenient way that the statements were written. Rather, the product of the left side of all duals should balance the product of all those on the right: 0.1×1×0.2×0.1×0.6×0.9=0.1×1×1×0.2×0.7×p. That is because in a cyclic path with all needed and correctly assigned values, the products of probabilities in the two directions are equal, and the overall result for the cycle is that real value. In this case, the cycle has the value 0.00108 and p=0.077 or 7.7%. Including the first statement to represent the overall net gives 0.00032 or 0.032%. A BN, which typically assess a joint probability and, putting aside the fact that it cannot traditionally address a cyclic path, would obtain 0.032%. As a statement about the collective truth of the scenario, this is correct. However, that does not address the larger probability that contaminated fish are actually eaten. Not all fish are contaminated and not all that are netted are contaminated and eaten. Nor is the case that contaminated feces will end up in that troublesome sewage system, e.g., an infected person may travel that day. The estimation of 7.7% is not, however, always the probability of most interest. In the above, 7.7% was initially a missing value that was evaluated to ensure coherence of the net, assuming the other probabilities to be reliable [2]. Had there been a provisional estimate of 0.09 or 9% that was well founded, perhaps objectively by counting, and supposing that all other probabilities in (1)–(7) are similarly well-founded, then there must be some impactful statement that is missing. It must also be p′ x (1, 0.077/0.09)= p′ x (1, 0.856) where p′min≤p′≤1 where p′min is some minimal value that will not imply an unreasonably low value for p or for the collective degree of truth of the network as a whole.It is clear that the above approach can provide powerful guidelines to net construction but it remains non-trivial. As regards POPPER language as input, a random sample of 15 medical students from the first three semesters were able to understand statements by analogy to the metrics of evidence based medicine and epidemiology, and metastatements by analogy to syllogisms as general rules of reasoning from statements. They understood the independency assumptions in P(A AND B)=P(A)P(B) and the epidemiologist’s chain rule P(A|B)P(B|C)P(C|D)⋯ They had no problem with the idea of probability calculations repeated in two directions of conditionality, having an introductory acquaintance with Bayes rule and being familiar with the “one third” probability diagnostic problem in the Introduction of Ref. [2]. They were also familiar with knowledge networks as “concept maps” linking medical ideas in medical revision textbooks. Hence they had no insurmountable difficulty in interpreting simple epidemiological nets including the above Vibrio example. However, they needed a significant degree of guidance to construct the nets that became a rapidly acquired skill in only 4 cases. The difficulty was not primarily in constructing statements and assigning preliminary probability values to them, but rather in doing so under the constraint of the statements fitting together as in the Vibrio example.Hence, much easier for the students was the “brute force” strategy used in the large TB example, i.e. of helping throw into the mix (of statements based on the traditional representation of the problem) a large number additional statements that seemed likely to have some relevance. The hope here was that the evolution under the action of metastatements might resolve the issues and at least cast some insight, with statements that were found not to connect up to others to be discarded later. Here, unsurprisingly, the output after net evolution, shown in Section 4.3, caused the biggest conceptual difficulty. There was the promising indication that the baby may be more likely to have respiratory problems from the smoking than from TB88On examining why this was reached, it could be seen that TB is not well propagated from mother to baby, even via the placenta or breast feeding, assuming that it was passed on to the mother from the father who may have contracted TB in Asia. The practice of avoiding breast feeding if a mother has TB has been discouraged since the late 1990s [30]., but what conclusions can be drawn from above results of the above kind that at first sight may appear a confusing mélange of fragmentary clues? Note that some were generated by inference, but some did not change from input. This fragment problem is not confined to POPPER for many reasons99Probabilistic inductive logic programming in general, including probabilistic variants of PROLOG, can have similar consequences if all the statements cannot link together in reasoning [31], although depending on the system philosophy it may just manifest as an attempted reasoning path that halts. It is easy to see that in using the classical chain rule P(A|Z)≈P(A|B)P(B|C)P(C|D)⋯P(X|Y)P(Y|Z) but proceeding by symbolically removing replacing P(B|C)P(C|D) by P(B|D) and so on will not complete to P(A|Z) if, say, P(X|Y) has been neglected in hurling a large number of conditional probabilities at the problem. Even for very large complicated nets where brute force addition of many probabilities that would appear to sufficient links somehow to complete evolution, Gödel׳s theorem explicitly gives no guarantees that starting from one point in reasoning will reach any other [32]. And even if it could in theory, it remains essentially a global optimization problem. Any long run does not guarantee reaching an optimal solution in reasonable time. More informed optimization methods may do better, but note that this is space of discrete states represent by discrete jumps, so that a simple gradient method is not helpful. Statements (not just metastatements) expressed as “extended twistors” [1,2] can take efficient account of symmetries in certain problems such as the farmer, fox goose and bag of beans problem [33] but these are relatively special cases., but even if all the issues were resolved, there remains a fundamental problem. Is the “optimal” solution in the above sense, even if reached, really what was wanted? The overall system involves another reasoning subsystem, one harder to account for, that of the human user.