@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Transition modeling of neuropsychiatric impairment in HIV

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A continuous time Markov model adequately described efavirenz treatment-associated neuropsychiatric impairment.Efavirenz dose reduction from 600 to 400mg would reduce the duration of neuropsychiatric impairment in HIV patients who get impaired without affecting efficacy.Delayed neuropsychiatric symptoms are less likely related to efavirenz exposure.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Neuropsychiatric impairment,Efavirenz,Continuous time Markov model,NONMEM,Monte Carlo simulation,Duration of NPI,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Few studies have reported analyses of neuropsychiatric impairment (NPI) data from HIV patients, in a real world clinical setting with the aim of establishing association between anti-retroviral drug concentrations and NPI development and resolution. No study has modeled the effect of efavirenz exposure beyond the pre-steady state period on the frequency and duration of NPI. The data used consists of 196 HIV patients whose efavirenz pharmacokinetic parameters were previously determined. Neuropsychiatric evaluation was done at baseline, week 2 and week 12. Patients were classified into NORMAL and NPI states. The duration of NPI was further classified as transient (NPI at week 2 but not at week 12), persistent (NPI at week 2 and 12) and delayed (NPI at week 12 but not at week 2). The proportion of patients in each duration category out of the total NPI patients was calculated. A continuous time Markov model was developed in NONMEM 7.3 and used to describe the relationship between efavirenz exposure and the duration of NPI. Monte Carlo simulations with the model were used to describe the effect of efavirenz dose reduction from 600mg to 400mg on the duration of NPI. The model adequately described the data. The influence of efavirenz exposure on the rate of development of NPI decayed with a half-life of 8.4 days. Efavirenz dose reduction to 400mg significantly reduces the duration of NPI, but has no impact on delayed NPI symptoms or efficacy.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Neurological and psychiatric disorders are among the most prevalent comorbidities in patients undergoing treatment for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) leading to significant impairment of functional capacity, quality of life and survival [1,2]. The etiology of these disorders is highly varied, ranging from substance abuse, preexisting psychiatric disease, toxicity of certain regimens of the anti-retroviral therapy, opportunistic infection of the central nervous system (CNS) or HIV infection itself [3–5]. In most cases there is more than one cause at a time in an individual. In order to address these neuropsychiatric complications, it is important to establish the etiology. Unfortunately, CNS side effects of highly active anti-retroviral therapy (HAART) and neurological complications of HIV infections overlap significantly in terms of symptoms, thus complicating diagnosis and subsequent management.The ART regimen, efavirenz is widely reported to cause CNS toxicity [6]. This toxicity presents with mild and transient symptoms but severe and persistent episodes have been reported. The incidence of NPI is higher in patients with a history of psychiatric impairment [7,8].Few studies have reported analyses of neuropsychiatric impairment (NPI) data from HIV aimed at establishing association between as anti-retroviral drug such an efavirenz concentrations and NPI [9–11]. These studies aimed at establishing statistical associations between risk of NPI and efavirenz concentration cutoffs among HIV patients who did not have NPI at baseline. However, these do not reflect reality in that the inclusion and exclusion criteria eliminate potential causes of NPIs and, therefore, interaction between different etiological factors is not considered. A pragmatic approach to obtaining data that reflects real world clinical setting is to relax entry criteria to include subjects with some history of NPI and subsequently in the analysis of the data collected. To date, not many studies have analyzed NPIs in such a study setting. Mukonzo and colleagues used descriptive and summary statistics to describe the association between frequency of NPI symptoms and genetic, demographic and pharmacokinetic factors [12]. Whereas they sought to establish a link between efavirenz pharmacokinetics and the NPI symptoms observed during therapy, the approach used in the analysis did not take into consideration the baseline NPI status and therefore presents a risk of bias in the analysis. In addition, the approach did not characterize the exposure response relationship adequately. Pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic modeling is a more suitable method for characterizing exposure–response relationship so as to maximize the amount of knowledge obtained from an experiment and enable prediction beyond conditions that have been studied [13]. This is particularly important if the outcome of interest is an adverse effect (AE) like NPI for which the design of dose-response studies may not be practical.Patients with NPI symptoms at baseline may experience persistence or resolution of the symptoms upon initiation of efavirenz. Likewise, those without symptoms at baseline may or may not develop NPI symptoms. A Markov process can be used to characterize the probability of development or resolution of NPI symptoms upon initiation of efavirenz therapy, and the factors influencing these probabilities. Thus, this investigation was undertaken to characterize the development and resolution of NPI symptoms during HIV therapy with efavirenz in order to gain an understanding of the process and the factors that modulate it.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
