@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Development of an automatic identification algorithm for antibiogram analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Development of an Automatic Identification Algorithms (AIA) is proposed.AIA allows automatic scanning of inhibition zones obtained by antibiograms.88.8% of the tests showed no difference between AIA and human readings.AIA resolved the overlapping of inhibition zones and other reading problems.Formation of a second inhibition halo were overcomed by AIA.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Antibiogram,Automatic measuring,Discs labels,Inhibition zone,Disc diffusion method,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Microbiologists play an important role in identifying the drugs that will be most effective in the treatment of clinical infections, as well as in defining the antibiotic resistance profiles of microorganisms found in the environment. Such environmental microorganisms have been established as antibiotic resistance disseminators [1–5]. Therefore, it is necessary to evaluate the sensitivity of microorganisms to antimicrobial agents as quickly as possible once isolated. Similarly, clinical determinations of the antibiotic resistance profile of a pathogen are critical for correct treatment.There are different types of susceptibility tests available, including disc diffusion and broth micro-dilution methods, as well as commercial tests for the determination of the minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC). The disc diffusion method is the most commonly used method worldwide [6], mainly owing to its low cost and simplicity. In this method, each disc containing an antimicrobial agent will form an inhibition zone where the microorganism is not able to grow. The size (diameter) of the inhibition zone is used to classify the strains as resistant (R), intermediate (I), or sensitive (S) [7].Several organizations are responsible for regulating the standardization of susceptibility tests, procedures, and interpretation criteria: the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI), the National Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards (NCCLS), and the French Society for Microbiology (SFM) [7]. These standards help to define the threshold diameters defining the antibiotic resistance phenotype (R, I, and S), tables for MIC interpretative criteria, as well as the optimal method for the preparation of the inoculums and the indication of which antimicrobials should be tested for each microorganism [6,7]. The spatial arrangement of antimicrobial discs on the plates is not always standardized and is usually defined by the professional in charge. However, strategies such as the use of a disc dispenser can help to standardize this procedure and simplify the task, mainly to standardize the discs in the same position when there is the need for numerous antibiograms. Nonetheless, a critical aspect of this procedure is the antibiogram reading step, after all while the manual zone measurement is reliable, the use of automated approach can reduce the number of errors and improve the accuracy of susceptibility test [8].The measurement of the inhibition zone diameter is usually performed manually by specialists using a millimeter-scale ruler (Fig. 1A). Although seemingly trivial, this task may present several challenges such as overlapping of inhibition zones [9-12] (Fig. 1B), problems related with the seeding of the organism [13] (Fig. 1C), non-homogeneity of the circumference (Fig. 1D), partial action of the antimicrobial (Fig. 1E), and formation of a second inhibition halo [14,15] (Fig. 1F). When faced with any one of these challenges, accurate interpretation of the results is dependent on the experience of the professional. In addition, the manual measurement of inhibition zones can take a considerable amount of time, making the method impractical for some diagnostic laboratories, mainly those in hospitals that must run through several samples in a timely manner. One potential solution proposed thus far is to focus effort on developing new methods for the automatic interpretation of susceptibility tests.An earlier approach [16] presented a solution for automatic identification of inhibition zones; however, this solution did not provide strategies to avoid problems such as overlapping and non-homogeneity of the inhibition zones. Another report [17] approached this challenge through the detection of edges with respect to their texture; meanwhile, this method is based only on the saturation of pixels for locating the discs. Another proposed approach for automatic identification of inhibition zones [13] relies on the assumption that only the regions of inhibition are homogeneous, which is not always true. Furthermore, Legrand et al. [18] presented an automatic method but did not describe the image processing techniques there used. The Oxoid Aura Image System [19] shows promising results; nevertheless, the techniques used are also not fully disclosed, which prevents the reproduction and application of the algorithm. Nevertheless, the main goal of these methods is to simplify and accelerate the processing of antibiograms, as well as their reading and interpretation, and to avoid variations in intra- and inter-observer readings when manually measured [13–18].Toward this end, the aim of the present study was to develop and detail an automated method for the detection of inhibition zones that can overcome the challenges described above to allow for simple readings of antibiograms obtained through the disc diffusion method. The measurements provided by an image-processing Automatic Identification Algorithm (AIA) were compared with those obtained by simultaneous manual measurements of the inhibition zones, performed by a professional using a ruler. A set of 63 environmental strains was used for this comparison.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we presented an AIA to measure the zones of inhibition obtained by the disc diffusion method. The proposed AIA software is expected to become a valuable clinical support tool to help specialists achieve robust antibiogram interpretation. It is not intended to be a substitute for human measurements; the goal is to increase examiner reliability, as well as the number of antibiograms that could be read within a short period of time. In this context, the results showed good performance such as 87% of tests were correctly classified and the developed technique enabled the identification of the inhibition region of antibiotics with high correlation coefficient (0.85;p<0.05). Furthermore, oddity images led to relatively lower estimates in the total sample size although problems – not addressed in other works – such as the multiple overlapping of inhibition zones, imperfect seeding of the microorganism, heterogeneity of the circumference, partial action of the antimicrobial, and formation of a second halo of inhibition were overcomed through automatic and adaptive techniques for each image received by the algorithm. Together, our results indicate that AIA is a versatile and solid tool for laboratory use.None declared.