@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Motorcycle graph enumeration from quadrilateral meshes for reverse engineering

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Motorcycle graphs of a given quadrilateral mesh are enumerated.Optimum motorcycle graph is found for reverse engineering.Highly curved parts of models are placed on motorcycle edges wherever possible.Mesh is cut into several sub-meshes.Enumeration is performed in each sub-mesh separately.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Semi-regular quadrilateral mesh,Motorcycle graph,Mesh segmentation,Reverse engineering,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Recently proposed quad-meshing techniques allow the generation of high-quality semi-regular quadrilateral meshes. This paper outlines the generation of quadrilateral segments using such meshes. Quadrilateral segments are advantageous in reverse engineering because they do not require surface trimming or surface parameterization. The motorcycle graph algorithm of Eppstein et al. produces the motorcycle graph of a given quadrilateral mesh consisting of quadrilateral segments. These graphs are preferable to base complexes, because the mesh can be represented with a smaller number of segments, as T-joints (where the intersection of two neighboring segments does not involve the whole edge or the vertex) are allowed in quadrilateral segmentation.The proposed approach in this study enumerates all motorcycle graphs of a given quadrilateral mesh and optimum graph for reverse engineering is then selected. Due to the high computational cost of enumerating all these graphs, the mesh is cut into several sub-meshes whose motorcycle graphs are enumerated separately. The optimum graph is then selected based on a cost function that produces low values for graphs whose edges trace a large number of highly curved regions in the model. By applying several successive enumeration steps for each sub-mesh, a motorcycle graph for the given mesh is found. We also outline a method for the extraction of feature curves (sets of highly curved edges) and their integration into the proposed algorithm. Quadrilateral segments generated using the proposed techniques are validated by B-spline surfaces.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Recently developed quad-meshing techniques can be used to generate high-quality quadrilateral meshes based on user-specified quality constraints. Such meshes are used in various applications such as mesh compression, texture mapping, surface modeling and finite element simulation. A quadrilateral meshQ〈V,E,F〉consists of a set of quadrilateral facesFwith edgesEand verticesV. Quadrilateral segments are defined onQas quadrilateral regions with four corners and four boundaries. In other words, they are isomorphic to ana,b-grid which is a mesh of unit squares in the rectangle{(x,y)|0≤x≤a,0≤y≤b}. In this paper, quadrilateral segmentation is used to describe a partitioning of a quadrilateral mesh with quadrilateral segments. The left image of Fig. 1(a) shows a quadrilateral segmentation featuring several quadrilateral segments with boundaries in red and corners in blue. The right image depicts a quadrilateral segment consisting of regularly arranged quadrilateral faces.Motorcycle graphs were first presented in continuous settings and can be used to compute straight skeletons of polygons  [1,2]. Later, Eppstein et al.  [3] extended this concept to discrete settings (i.e., quadrilateral meshes) in order to generate canonical quadrilateral segmentation (i.e., meshes with the same connectivity that always generate the same quadrilateral segmentation). This paper highlights the concept of motorcycle graphs as a means of generating quadrilateral segments and describes a novel algorithm that enumerates all motorcycle graphs of a given quadrilateral mesh so that one of them can be used for a specific application based on the criteria provided. In this approach, the method of Bommes et al.  [4] is used to generate a semi-regular quadrilateral mesh consisting of quadrilateral elements whose vertices mostly have a valence of four (ordinary vertices), while the others have other valences (extraordinary vertices).This paper also outlines a methodology for the determination of an optimal motorcycle graph for a given quadrilateral mesh to support reverse engineering. As the placement of highly-curved regions on quadrilateral segment boundaries is a common practice in surface modeling applications, the cost formula introduced for optimum motorcycle graph selection produces small values for motorcycle graphs whose edges trace a large number of highly curved regions of the model. Additionally, feature curves (i.e., sets of highly curved edges) that are very difficult to capture with motorcycle graph edges are also extracted and integrated into the enumeration algorithm. Because of high computational cost of the enumeration algorithm, a more efficient enumeration method (in terms of computational cost) is also proposed. Mesh is cut into several sub-meshes and the optimal motorcycle graph in each sub-mesh is found. By applying successive enumeration steps, a motorcycle graph of a given mesh with proximity to the global optimum is obtained. Enumerating all motorcycle graphs of a Beetle model shown in Fig. 1(b), (c) takes several days according to our tests. Using the proposed approach in this paper, the enumeration takes about one second (see the solution in Fig. 1(c)).This paper is organized as follows: Section  2 outlines related works, Section  3 details the motorcycle graph enumeration algorithm, Section  4 describes a quadrilateral segmentation technique for reverse engineering based on the enumeration algorithm in Section  3, Section  5 discusses the study’s experiments, and Section  6 concludes the work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
