@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Ubiquitous computer aided design: A broken promise or a Sleeping Beauty?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An overall account of the status of ubiquitous computing and technologies in CAD.Penetration of ubiquitous computing remained insignificant in most applications.Application of ubiquitous technologies did not lead to radically new functionalities.Computer aided design steps over the paradigm of ubiquitous computing.New CAD functionalities expected from the emerging new computer paradigms.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Ubiquitous computing,Computer aided design,Ubiquitous design enablers,Competing technology exploitation,Ubiquitous CAD applications,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
As a novel computational approach, ubiquitous computing was emerging at the beginning of the 1980s and has reached a rather mature level by now. It assumes that computing can be available anywhere, anytime and in any context due to technological developments, social demands and calm implementations. Over the years, the opportunities of this computing paradigm have been explored and the benefits have been exploited successfully in many application fields. This survey paper addresses ubiquitous computing from the perspective of enabling computer aided design. The specific objectives of the reported survey are to: (i) give an overall account of the current status of ubiquitous computing and technologies, (ii) cast light on how ubiquitous computing has influenced the development of CAD systems, tools, and methods, and (iii) critically investigate future development opportunities of ubiquitous computing enabled computer aided design. First, the paper discusses the principles and typical technologies of ubiquitous computing. Then, the development and spectrum of the so-called standard computer aided design tasks are analyzed from a computational point of view. Afterwards, the already implemented design enabling functionalities are discussed and some additional functional possibilities are considered. The literature provides evidence that ubiquitous computing has not managed to revolutionize the methodologies or the systems of computer aided design so far, though many researchers intensively studied the affordances and the application possibilities of ubiquitous technologies. One reason is that ubiquitous computing technologies had in the last two decades to compete with other kinds of computational technologies, such as high-capacity computing, high-speed networking, immersive virtual reality, knowledge ontologies, smart software agents, mobile communication, etc., which had a much stronger influence on the development of computer aided design methods and systems. In combination with the rather conservative and conventionalist industrial practice of CAD system development and application, this may explain why the ubiquitous computing revolution remained weak in computer aided design. The literature clearly indicates that application of ubiquitous technologies did not lead to radically new functionalities that could have been exploited by the concerned industries. Consequently, it seems to be possible that computer aided design simply steps over the paradigm of ubiquitous computing and expects new functionalities from the emerging new computing paradigms, such as brain–computer interfacing, cyber–physical computing, biological computing, or quantum computing.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
We have been witnessing a rapid evolution of computing, visualization, networking, sensing, communication and informing paradigms, technologies and systems over the last sixty years  [1]. Technology historians refer to this period as the fourth industrial revolution  [2] (or as the digital revolution  [3], or even as the intelligence revolution  [4]). The digital revolution (DR) has placed information and knowledge into the position of an industrial economic asset, likewise the first and the second industrial revolutions did it with materials and energies, respectively. It has also fundamentally changed the relationship of people to information by: (i) replacing the conventional paper-based recording of information by a digital representation of information, (ii) providing immediate access to repositories of information, (iii) offering various forms of digital media for representation of information, (iv) availing massive computing and storage capacities on demand, (v) enabling efficient alphanumerical, numerical and graphical processing of information, (vi) making possible to communicate information over geographical boundaries, and (vii) fostering digital assistance and automation of business and production processes. The engine behind DR is the fast growing scientific knowledge, sophistication of digital technologies, striving after ecologically, economically and socially sustainable products and services, and the need for innovation to address industrial and social challenges  [5]. DR influences a number of major trends  [6].The still commencing DR involves a number of shifts in the paradigms of digital information processing (Fig. 1). It started with the development and application of centralized mainframe computers that could be accessed simultaneously (and also remotely) by many users through various peripheral devices. The computing power of mainframe computers were mainly utilized in alphanumerical data processing, graphical visualization, remote communication, data storage, and user–system interaction. At the beginning of the 1980s, the paradigm of networked personal computing popped up and proliferated rapidly. This not only provided computing power and data storage sufficient for creative engineering work, such as computer graphics and computer aided design, but also facilitated digital connectivity through the Internet and direct access to web-based contents and repositories. By 1984, more people used personal computers than mainframe computers. Networking has developed into four categories: (i) master–slave satellite networking, (ii) node-centered wired networking, (iii) cellular wireless networking, and (iv) ad hoc hybrid networking. Networking facilitated novel forms of distributed computing such as grid and cloud computing. The evolution of digital data processing is gradually making possible to capture semantics of information and the context of computing and communication.The technological developments, such as continuing miniaturization, the increase of capacities and performance, the reduced power demand, and the decrease of production and operation costs of computing technologies, have facilitated a third wave of computing, which is referred to as ubiquitous computing  [7,8], or alternatively pervasive computing  [9,10]. The former term is used when the emphasis is put on the opportunity of humans to have access to computing and to use multiple computing devices from anywhere, any time, and in any form, also nomadically  [11], while the latter term is used to express that computing is (invisibly) embedded in everything in an all-embracing connectivity. These have been creating: (i) a kind of permeating computational thinking  [12], (ii) a new relationship between human, information and computing resources, (iii) not-yet-completely understood personal, social, cultural, and economic impacts, and (iv) a new situation for system, product and service developers and designers.Ubiquitous computing based products can be designed so as to be networked, portable, wearable, embeddable, and even implantable. The currently used wireless information appliances are able to connect to mobile phone networks, as well as to local Internet networks, in an ad hoc manner. Lyytinen and Yoo identified two dimensions of ubiquitous computing, namely the level of embeddedness (LoE), and the level of mobility (LoM). According to their interpretation, traditional business computing is characterized by a low LoE and a low LoM, mobile computing by a high LoM and a low LoE, pervasive computing by a low LoM and a high LoE, and ubiquitous computing is characterized by a high LoE and a high LoM  [13]. Independence from location and access modalities of computing has lent itself to the movement of computer technologies from the forefront of our daily routine activities to the background  [14]. Observing that people continue to view mobile computing devices as mini-desktops, applications as programs that run on these devices, and the environment as a virtual space that a user enters to perform a task and leaves when the task is finished, Banavar et al. proposed to adopt three precepts of pervasive computing: (i) a device is a portal into an application/data space, not a repository of custom software managed by the user, (ii) an application is a means by which a user performs a task, not a piece of software that is written to exploit a device’s capabilities, and (iii) the computing environment is the user’s information-enhanced physical surroundings, not a virtual space that exists to store and run software  [15].In this paper we concentrate on the current state of the art of using ubiquitous computing in the development of design enablers (systems, tools and methods)  [16]. The content of this paper has been compiled based on the results of a keyword-based online literature study (using Web of Science and Google Scholar), focus group sessions, and expert interviews. Without jumping into the details of our analysis, it must be noted that the search for scholarly publications and other documents on Google resulted in a rather unexpected outcome. A search with the keyword ‘ubiquitous computing’ resulted in more than 172,000 hits, while the keywords ‘ubiquitous systems’ and ‘ubiquitous products’ resulted in about 13,900 hits and 530 hits, respectively. Using the same search engine, the keyword ‘ubiquitous design tools’ brought up 3 hits, the keyword ‘ubiquitous computer aided design’ provided 2 results and the keyword ‘ubiquitous design enablers’ did not match any scientific articles, reports or patents. Considering the relatively large number of scientific publications on ubiquitous computing and its applications in other products, environments and services, the low number of hits on using ubiquitous technologies to extend the functionality of computer aided design system and to create ubiquitous design systems and tools was a surprising result. Consequently, in order to generate a proper information basis for this paper, we had to consider the above mentioned two other forms of explorative research too.Evidential is that ubiquitous computing may be in principle associated with all application fields of CAD. However, in this paper we concentrate our attention to the fields where geometric, morphological, and structural modeling play a role  [17,18]. These are mechanical, architectural, construction and electronic CAD. The content of the paper is arranged in the following structure. In the next section we recapitulate the main principles and technologies of ubiquitous computing. In Section  3 we sketch up the historical development line of computer aided design to show how it has been influenced by the overall development of digital computing. In Section  4 we discuss what has happened towards ubiquitous CAD tools and systems so far, paying special attention to the new functionalities which are supported by the affordances of ubiquitous computing. In Section  5, we reflect on the impacts of ubiquitous computing on computer aided design. Finally, in the last section, in addition to presenting some propositions as conclusions, we mention future research opportunities.The frequently quoted statement of Weiser, namely that “ubiquitous computing is the method of enhancing computer use by making many computers available throughout the physical environment, but making them effectively invisible to the user”, very expressively summarizes the essence and influence of ubiquitous computing  [19]. Ubiquitous computing is a manifestation of experimental computer science that intends to transfer information-interlinked technological means into a wide range of practical applications. The reasoning is that computers are ceasing to exist as distinct entities and are being merged with the everyday objects that people use in their daily tasks. This is made possible by the continuously decreasing physical size, power consumption, production price, and ecological impact of computing devices, as well as their ceaselessly increasing processing power, storage capacity and communication bandwidth. As research in nanotechnology and microsystems proliferates, computing means appear as miniature wireless devices and can easily be embedded in other artifacts. They cannot only be furnished with, but can also aggregate and generate information and knowledge. Thus everyday objects are becoming smart and capable to operate and make decisions under varying circumstances. In this context, digital computation manifests as an enabling infrastructure in which not the included computing facilities, but the services that are produced by their smart, distributed, networked, and collaborating operation are playing the central role.Design, development and implementation of smart and intelligent, embedded or stand-alone ubiquitous computing environments are seen as radically different from traditional desktop computing environments. Actually, these have proven to be challenging tasks with a strong need to address many technological, social, organizational and ecological aspects. Based on the work of Lyytinen et al., the challenges and issues raised by ubiquitous computing-based systems can be classified and summarized as: (i) application (relevance, usability, context-awareness, pro-activeness, personalization, efficiency, power consumption, sustainability, third-party services, limitations), (ii) networking (multi-connectivity, indoor and outdoor networking, mobile networking, wireless networking, area of networks, performance, dependability, location management, bandwidth, resource allocation, protocols, quality of service, number of users, over-provisioning, informing), (iii) access (availability, distribution, decentralization, access-points, transactions, heterogeneity, complexity, transparency, interaction, feedback, immediacy), (iv) data management (generating, searching, storage, replication, handling, update, synchronization, archiving, indexing, structuring, knowledge extraction, servicing, personalization) (v) security (strategy, intensiveness, confidentiality, authentication, integrity, authorization, non-repudiation, accessibility, standardization), (vi) impact (user privacy, information load, unpredictability, obtrusiveness, discomfort, measuring effects, context switches, task quality) and (vii) other related issues (multiple interactions, intelligence, fault-tolerance, ease-of-use, multi-functionality, multi-modality, special features)  [20]. In the literature a large number of design principles have been published related to practically each issue.A generic ubiquitous system is typically based on the specific technologies shown in Fig. 2. They include a great variety of capturing, processing, connecting, storage, and imaging technologies. The processing and storage technologies are becoming more and more interlinked as utility, grid and cloud computing are used to harness shared computational resources in order to optimally meet various demands in a timely and cost-effective manner [21,22]. Within conversion technologies, visualization and sensation conversion technologies (including haptic, tactile, audio, etc. technologies) are differentiated, which support both input and output functions.Sensing technologies include both hardware sensing and software sensing technologies. Michahelles and Schiele published a reference table that sorts sensor technologies with respect to six sensing dimensions, namely, (i) user’s ID, (ii) location, (iii) activity, (iv) object use, (v) bio signs/emotions, and (vi) human interaction and four sensor placement possibilities: in environment, on human, on object, and in mutual collaboration  [23]. Adaptive wireless sensor networks are in the focus of current research  [24]. Exploration technologies comprise search and data/knowledge mining technologies. Major exploration technologies are: common internet search, pattern-based discovery and object retrieval, context/semantics-driven search, and big data analytics  [25–27].Transmission technologies are for point-to-point transfer of signals and data in both wired and wireless forms  [28–30]. Ramasamy and Sankaranarayanan surveyed the routing protocols developed for the management of self-organizing hierarchical mobile ad hoc networks (MANETs)  [31]. Their classification includes: (i) routing information update mechanism (proactive or table-driven routing protocols, reactive or on-demand routing protocols, hybrid routing protocols), (ii) using temporal information (routing protocols using past temporal information, routing protocol that use future temporal information), (iii) using topology information (flat topology routing protocols, hierarchical topology routing protocols), and utilization of specific resources (power-aware routing, geographical information assisted routing). Networking technologies involve both fix node and ad hoc node networking technologies  [32,33].Actuator technologies have received strong attention in robotics system research, micro-electromechanical system research, and bio-engineering applications  [34,35]. In robotics applications, typical actuators are: (i) direct and geared drive motors, (ii) electromechanical grabbing hands, (iii) hydraulic and pneumatic arms, (iv) piezoelectric and magnetostrictive actuators, and (v) shape memory and contractile polymer actuators  [36,37]. Kim et al. identified three forms of ubiquitous robotics, including: software robots (sobot), embedded robots (embot), and mobile robots (mobot), which provide various services by any device, through any network, at any place, anytime in a ubiquitous space  [38].Ubiquitous computing related powering technologies are constant (power network), periodic (e.g. wind generated), and volatile (e.g. battery) electric energy sources  [39–41]. Due to this wide range and variability of the hardware and software technologies, the application scenarios of ubiquitous computing feature many functions, such as ‘sense’, ‘infer’, ‘control’ and ‘actuate’, which complement the traditional ‘compute’, ‘visualize’ or ‘communicate’ functions  [42].Ubiquitous computing has no single point of beginning  [43]. Since the time of its emergence, its main challenge was finding prospective ways of moving beyond desktop computing. In this context, four perspectives have been put forward (Fig. 3). The first one is the perspective of ambient computing, which claims that new functionalities can be realized if computers are embedded everywhere in the environment, designed to be alert (constantly available), able to sense users’ presence and situations and to act and interact accordingly. The second one is the perspective a mobile computing, which assumes that computational means can be embedded in mobile/portable hand-held devices such as PDAs, smartphones, tablets (and other solutions currently conceptualized on patent level) can be designed to interact with both the user and the ‘digital environment’  [44]. The third one is the perspective of wearable computing, which exploits the growing opportunity of integrating electronic devices into human-worn cloths or making possible to wear them as body accessories  [45]. The fourth one is the perspective of invisible computing that assumes that anything can be a computer in the future, as promised by the tenet of quantum computing, the next wave of computing.Blending of dispersed computing, flexible networking, context awareness, and accessible web repositories have led to what is called intelligent ambient environments (also referred to as ambient intelligence or context-aware computing)  [46,47]. Research in ambient environments looks back to a relatively long history  [48]. The idea of using ambient computing and intelligence for the benefit of people in their everyday life got into the focus of researchers some twenty years ago. One of the first overviews of the opportunities (and an analysis of different use scenarios) was published by Pentland, who concentrated on smart rooms  [49]. He described them as computing-augmented living spaces, which are able to: (i) identify people, (ii) interpret their actions, (iii) support their activities, (iv) influence their mood, feelings and relationships, and (v) feature embodied interaction. It has to be noted these are achieved by applying different principles, technologies and methods than those typical in the case of virtual or augmented reality-based immersive environments  [50]. For instance, the knowledge of affective computing and emotional engineering has been considered to detect and influence the mood and feelings of people  [51]. The research and development issues of smart homes were addressed from both historical and technological perspectives [52–54]. The infrastructure of ubiquitous computing environments may be organized and structured as a cyber-equivalent of an ecosystem, that is, a very complex and dynamic infrastructure. The paper of von Reischach provides a comprehensive design space for product recommendations in the ubiquitous computing domain  [55]. The paper also offers a visual notation for the design space that allows categorizing existing and envisioned systems. Lupiana et al. proposed a classification of ubiquitous computing environments. They differentiated between interactive environments (support group events), including creative spaces and meeting spaces, and smart environments, including ambient spaces and smart spaces  [56]. Roalter et al. discussed that one of the main and still unsolved problems for researchers in the domain of intelligent environments is a suitable middleware  [57]. They argued that the proposed systems and tools, with the presented extensions and novelties, are suitable to allow for a significant reduction in efforts and complexity, while maintaining a high degree of flexibility and possibilities for reuse.Mobile computing means utilization of computational means and capacity ‘on-the-go’, e.g., while traveling, or working on a site  [58]. It assumes possibility of making network connections in multiple forms while changing spatial position, and thereby of searching, visualization, data input, and communication  [14]. This is contrasted by the idea of nomadic computing, which is also based on the use of ‘portable’ devices, but no mobility while connected  [59]. Due to size, resolution and speed issues, processing large contents is not yet solved in the context of mobile devices, though many researchers dealt with the issue. The reason is that often there is a need not only for a representation conversion, but also for a semantic or even pragmatic transformation  [60]. Forman and Zahorjan investigated the challenges of mobile computing  [61]. Mobile computing plays an important role in mobile industrial robotics, intelligent transportation, and location change of humans  [62–64], where context-dependent operation is an issue  [65]. There are some typical results of the researchers who addressed the representation, semantic and pragmatic transformation issues. For instance, Qiu et al. proposed a method for geometric model simplification for distributed CAD in order to allow real time collaboration  [66]. Yang proposed an approach to CAD data visualization on mobile devices using constrained Delaunay triangulation  [67]. Kim and Albers addressed Web design issues when searching for information in a small screen display  [68]. Luigina and Liam addressed the issue of designing hybrid museum space  [69], and Oppermann and Specht developed a context-sensitive nomadic exhibition guide  [70]. Nevertheless, Stackpole raised the issue if smartphones and tablet computers will be able to detach engineers from their powerful multimedia desktop computers  [71].Wearable computing is about creating synergic relationships between human and animal body and computing instrumentation towards personal empowering and services. These systems can be included in garment cloths, shoes, belts, and wrist-, neck-, head- or ankle-worn accessories. Mann, S. formulated six basic attributes for wearable computing such as: (i) unrestrictive (to activities), (ii) unmonopolizing (attention), (iii) observable (by user), (iv) controllable (infinitely), (v) attentive (to environment), and (vi) communicative (expressive)  [72,73]. As affordances of wearable computing, shared or photographic memory, collective intelligence, tetherless operation, personal safety, synergistic combination, and enhancing experiences, are typically mentioned. Rhodes et al. identified a number of limitations with wearable computing such as; (i) maintaining localized information, (ii) restricted scope, (iii) multitude of controls, and (iv) resource management  [74]. Starner analyzed the major challenges of wearable computing and addressed the issue of human-powered wearable computing  [75].The term ‘invisible computing’ is used in many different meanings in the related literature. For instance, it is used as an umbrella term to describe miniature-sized, embedded computing solutions  [76]. Waller and Johnston analyzed the notion of ‘invisible information systems’ that are indistinguishable from the environment and collective work practices especially in routine operational contexts  [77]. Heer and Khooshabeh investigated two complementary concepts: (i) invisibility-in-use (the experience of direct interaction with artifacts and tools), and (ii) infrastructural invisibility (the capacity of physical, organizational, or technological infrastructures to be tacitly present in thoughts and actions)  [78]. Satyanarayanan interpreted invisibility as a ‘complete disappearance of pervasive computer technology from a user’s consciousness’  [10]. This interpretation blends invisibility-in-use with infrastructural invisibility. Tolmie et al. argued that the concept of invisible interfaces does not in any way imply literal physical invisibility. Invisibility is an experienced relationship between humans and their tools whether they are physical or conceptual  [79]. In this paper we refer to invisible computing as in vivo implantable health systems to affect vital functions of humans, animal and plants, and to provide necessary artifacts and deliver services such as bio physiological implantation and medical therapy. These typically unobtrusive and automatically working biomedical systems are equipped with sensors, wireless transceivers and data storage technologies. Studied by Rehman, one important challenge is interaction with invisible computing devices  [80], another is nomadic interaction  [81].Ubiquitous computing systems are alert and take actions according to environmental conditions or user requests. They apply both explicit and implicit interfaces. The most frequently used explicit interfacing modalities are such as (i) handwriting and sketch based interfacing, (ii) hand motion and gesture recognition-based input and control, (iii) video-interfacing, (iv) voice and speech recognition based interfacing, (v) on-screen/touch-panel interfacing, (vi) spatial and location information based control, (vii) physical signal dependent control, (viii) hybrid interfacing technologies, and (ix) brain–computer interfacing. The lastly mentioned form of interfacing points into the future, while the other modalities represent the results of the efforts researchers made in the last two decades towards natural interfaces. They have also been put on the list of objectives of virtual reality and tangible virtuality research. As formulated by Coyne, virtual reality research assumes that we can construct correspondences between the world we inhabit and the virtual world’s defined digital spaces, and we can immerse ourselves in such spaces so that we experience more than in the physical space  [32].Real world objects enriched with information processing capabilities are conceived to be able to operate smartly of even behave intelligently. The terms ‘smart object’ and ‘intelligent object’ are often (interchangeably) used to identify engineered solutions that are able to: (i) recognize each other, (ii) act as a transitory community of actors (that are aware of their belonging together), and (iii) form open, distributed and dynamic systems (that are able to make decisions autonomously)  [82]. Among others, the technological enablers of smart behavior are embedded multi-sensors, wireless interconnection, artificial intelligence techniques, and location or situation awareness  [83]. Having these capabilities, products are increasingly able to react on the changes in the environment around them, communicate with the agents of this environment, and thereby to optimize operation and improve efficiently  [84]. Typically three levels of smartness are differentiated in products:•Level 1—products equipped with basic sensing mechanism and simple means of communicating any changes in the environment.Level 2—products having the ability of taking corrective actions through embedded software in addition to having sensing ability and a means of data communication.Level 3—products which have increased intelligence, a two-way flow of communication, being connected through an Internet-based or wireless network, and having advanced capabilities of data collection, processing, reporting, and built in intelligence to sense, reason and take corrective actions.Niskanen and Kantorovitch characterized future smart products as systems that exploit advanced computation capabilities, aware of their surroundings, and able to support users in various tasks  [86]. Typical examples of smart system behavior are cars recognizing the drivers, homes adapting to the mood of occupants, systems supervising crowds of people or safeguarding elderly people, and culminate in applications such as teaching robots, intelligent cars, or rehabilitation systems  [87–89]. Eventually, without being aware of the context of operation, no product or system can be smart. A smartphone normally rings, but it only softly buzzes when, based on the available GPS information, it concludes that the user is in a theater. Context models have been proposed to include all necessary information about the objects, circumstances, or conditions which a system is surrounded by, and which is needed for semantic interpretation of these  [90]. In practice, smartness manifests in proactive and/or responsive context-sensitive operations and adaptation to users and environmental situations. Smartness and context-awareness together lend themselves to a situated operation of systems  [91]. For instance, Wagner and Arnfast implemented a context aware medication reminder system that responds to the context of the user and only disturbs the user when needed  [92]. It should be noted that ubiquitous systems are still struggling with sensing based capture of context since human activities, surroundings, and rationales are very diverse and usually change dynamically  [93].Ubiquitous systems place emphasis on the real (physical) world, rather than on the virtual or logical worlds  [94]. Ubiquitous computing enables the development of massively distributed systems that help transform physical spaces into computationally active and highly interactive smart spaces/environments. Nevertheless, they operate as information-intensive systems and should be able to cope with uncertainties  [95]. In other words, they generate and process large amount of data and knowledge, which usually need real-time distributed processing  [96]. As discussed by Ranganathan and Campbell, ubiquitous computing environments may include a large number of autonomous agents that work together  [97]. The agents sense and reason about the current context of the environment and interact smoothly with other agents. Reffat and Beilharz proposed a framework of intelligent agents to support designing in virtual environments. The semantic-based agents exhibit the following attributes in a virtual environment: autonomy, reactivity, proactivity and social ability. Employing intelligent agents in virtual environments empowers computers not only to support a much higher degree of visual realism, but also with processes of intelligent behavior  [98]. Smart design environment should provide appropriate design support to its users. They capture design semantics (high level relationships between objects) and incorporate them into intelligent agents. These agents interact with objects in the environment, monitor the actions of designers, and provide design guidance and assistance. Researchers reported on various challenges, as well as research and development issues related to data acquisition and management by and in ubiquitous systems  [99,100], which originate in their dynamic, distributed, heterogeneous, adaptive and autonomous nature  [48,101].Nowadays, direct communication between human brain and external devices is a progressively developing domain of research and it receives attention from many aspects  [102,103]. As Wolpaw and et al. postulated, brain–computer interfacing (BCI) is going to play a crucial role in ubiquitous computing systems because of the possibilities it offers for providing new augmentative communication technology to those who are motor paralyzed or have other severe movement or communication deficits  [104]. The technologies developed for this purpose acquire various signals (EEG, ECoG, LFP and SU) from the human brain, and apply various signal processing techniques (Fourier transformation, autoregressions, wavelets transformation, Laplacian filters, spatial filters) in order to generate control information for various actuators (e.g., robotic arms, assistive robots). On the whole, BCI is currently still somewhat underexplored and underdeveloped domain of ubiquitous computing  [105].Computer aided design (CAD) can look back to a self-triggered historical development plan  [106]. Over the years, CAD was utilizing the opportunities offered by general-purpose computing technologies, except some cases in the old past, when a few peripheral devices (like pen-plotters) were developed exclusively for the purpose of computer aided drawing or, later on, for interaction with systems. From a bird-eye-view, the historical evolution of computer aided design resembles a sigmoid-curve, which shows slow taking off, rapid and steep development, and slowing down again. This reflects the interplay between the available resources and the application opportunities.In a somewhat higher resolution, the historical evolution encompasses a number of development periods, which were brought about and triggered by: (i) shifting objectives in research and development, (ii) advancements of computational hardware and software technologies, and (iii) aggregation of algorithm and methodological knowledge. These periods have vague boundaries, therefore any effort to assign starting and ending years to them can be nothing else but a semi-objective judgment. From the perspective of academic research, we can identify the following periods: (i) establishment of the field of interest and the research community, (ii) consolidation and diversification, (iii) integration and networking, (iv) virtualization and collaboration, and (v) permeation into new domains [Fig. 4].The first phase of CAD evolution happened roughly in the years between the beginning of 1960s and the beginning of the 1970s. This period was about establishing the field as a separate domain of applied computing. The research was triggered by the opportunities offered by the development of computing technologies, rather than by any explicit real life demand or industrial need  [107]. There were some remarkable milestone results in this first period of time such as: (i) demonstration of the Sketchpad system by Sutherland in 1963 (which made the first step towards interactive systems)  [108], (ii) publication of Bézier in 1962 on the mathematical representation of a family of curves that is named after him nowadays, (iii) presentation of the UNISURF system by Bézier in 1968, (iv) holding the first CAD conference in 1964, (v) organizing the automotive design conference by Bezier in 1971, and (vi) starting of the first conference on computer aided geometric design in 1974 in Utah. The main issue for research and development was facilitation of engineering numerical computation and electronic graphical visualization by the then available premature hardware and software technologies. In addition, intense research started towards interactive data input and output (e.g. vector and raster CRT with light pen), and towards computer-controlled electromechanical graphical peripherals (e.g. drum and flat-bed pen plotters), which were considered prerequisites for computer aided drawing. There was an international research community established by the end of this period  [109].The second phase of evolution happened roughly between 1971 and 1982. This brought about the consolidation of CAD as a self-standing research and development field  [110]. The concentrated research efforts led not only to enhancement of capabilities, but also to a diversification of the considered application domains (mechanical, electronic, architecture, etc.) and supported phases of product development. This diversification triggered an articulation of the CAD functionalities. It gave floor to standard (cross-domain) functions such as computer aided drawing, free-form curve/surface modeling, wireframe, solid and boundary modeling, assembly modeling, finite element analysis, as well as to application domain-specific functions and domain-oriented implementations of standard functions, such as computer aided process planning, and computer aided manufacturing  [111]. The major change in terms of the underpinning computing technologies was that researchers shifted their attentions to interactive workstations. The need of the industry for CAD systems has rapidly increased, in particular in the high-tech industries  [112]. The paper of Tornincasa and Di Monaco gives a concise but very insightful survey of the philosophy and the ways of developing CAD systems, including some milestone development until 2010  [113]. In the field of electronic CAD, the concept of CAD framework was introduced with the goal of reducing the time and cost needed to develop or modify a CAD system according to the needs of its users and to support the interoperation of dissimilar systems  [114]. At the end of this second phase, the specific focus (geometry induced algorithms, methods and tools), the mainstream activities, and the application domains of computer aided design have been identified  [115].Lasting approximately from 1982 until 1996, a third period started with an intense diversification of the CAD tools, methods and systems. Several CSG and B-rep solid modelers and, later on, parametric and associative solid modelers have been developed  [116]. At the same time, the necessity of making efforts to integrate models, technologies, activities and representations also emerged  [117]. In fact, it was triggered by the growing need of the high-tech industry for integrated computer aided design systems  [118]. The industrial CAD system developers and software houses wanted to offer higher efficiency to their customers, who wanted to achieve interoperation, standardization, homogeneity and effectiveness in their daily processes. With respect to the computational support of CAD software packages, a major influence came from the appearance of personal computing and digital networks. These lend themselves to the advancement from self-contained CAD workstations to personal computer-based (remotely) cooperating CAD workplaces. Within-system integration was mainly concerned with: (i) database level, (ii) modeling level, and (iii) system interface level integration, whereas between-system integration addressed the issues of: (iv) standardized data exchange between systems, and (v) interoperation of dissimilar systems  [119]. Graphical and geometric kernels have been proposed for standardization, and data transfer specifications have been introduced  [120]. Among the large number of efforts towards between-system data/model exchange, the development of the Initial Graphics Exchange Specification (IGES)  [121,122] and Standard for the Exchange of Product Model Data (STEP) enjoyed the largest support from the industry  [123–125]. The technical opportunities of wired computer networking gave an impetus to the above mentioned research and development efforts. Towards the end of the period, a product life-cycle oriented thinking became dominant with the intention of placing CAD in a product lifecycle management (PLM) environment. The experiences with integration of life-cycle phases and activities pointed at the need for methodological integration. This triggered the research in and the development of the concept of form and application features, and led to techniques such as parametric design, feature-based design, and feature recognition  [126]. As a result, the development stream of CAD became interwoven with the development streams of three other technologies, namely:•computer aided engineering, that dealt with numerical calculations based on artifact and process modeling;computer aided process planning, that focused on planning of manufacturing processes, andcomputer aided manufacturing, that concentrated on providing information for computer numerical control of machine tools [127].Perhaps the terms ‘virtualization’ and ‘collaboration’ summarize best what has happened in the fourth phase of CAD development that lasted approximately from 1996 until 2005. The sophistication of the tools and techniques of mechanical, architectural and electronic CAD system, with three-dimensional geometric and structural modeling in their core, contributed to a wide industrial proliferation of these systems  [130]. Improvements have been achieved, for instance, in feature-based modeling, freeform surface modeling, assembly modeling, and product lifecycle management. According to Asanowicz, we may talk about mature CAD only from the end of the 1990s  [131]. For instance, history-based CAD systems were developed, which were able to record the chains of construction actions, and to capture the intent of the designs by storing and processing the relationships between the entities used for modeling. Interestingly, the concept of history-based modeling was challenged by a 3D geometry (and assembly) modeling technique, called direct modeling, which could be learnt fast and easy by designers, as opposed to mastering parametric and constraint based modeling, which was time consuming and needed expertise.However, from the perspective of evolution, the emerging new technologies, e.g.: (i) internet-based collaboration technologies, (ii) high-end scientific visualization, (iii) immersive and desktop virtual and augmented reality technologies, and (iv) semantic software technologies have made much larger effects on CAD and related activities  [132]. PC-based virtual reality (VR) has proved its potential to improve visualization of complex mechanical assemblies, high-tech products, buildings, plants and other installations, contrary to the fact that its implementation in the industry has yet to reach maturity. Immersive VR systems were showed to be beneficial at post-processing and visualization of the results of engineering analyses and simulations  [133]. From the mid-1990s, academic research in collaborative design methods, tools and systems has been intensified, and this resulted in both off-line and on-line collaborative CAD systems. The former systems were able to share the results of the modeling or design process, while the latter systems were able to share data instantly. Because of the offered benefits, on-line collaborative systems soon received more attention in research. Various agent based technologies have been considered in order to increase both the semantic level and automation of system collaboration  [134]. With the inclusion of virtual engineering and rapid prototyping technologies, computer support of product design and engineering could extend from the mental domain of humans through the virtual domains created by computers to the physical domain  [135]. This way, it could cover inspiration, conceptualization, realization and experiencing [Fig. 5].It seems that in the last period, namely from 2006 until today, the evolution of CAD has reached the ceiling set by traditional computing technologies  [136]. In the light of the literature it can be said that this period is bringing in methodological enhancements in certain new application domains, rather than brand new computing technologies  [137]. For instance, various reverse engineering (RE) approached were proposed based on image-based reconstruction or direct three-dimensional (3D) scanning. RE was supported by the development of various 3D object search, recognition and retrieval techniques. Based on the literature, four new rapidly-growing application domains can be identified: (i) bio-physical CAD (including medical and dental CAD), (ii) molecular-CAD (including pharmaceutical CAD), (iii) micro- and nanoCAD, and (iv) VLSI-CAD. Bio-CAD focuses on capturing biological, biophysical, and biochemical properties for modeling, design, and fabrication of complex tissue substitutes for biomedical applications, but it also extents to biomimetic design, analysis and simulation  [109]. For instance, as an early attempt, Mörmann proposed a system for restoring posterior teeth by bonded ceramic inlays using an in-office computer aided design and manufacturing system in a single appointment  [138]. Molecular-CAD systems are complements of computational chemistry packages, to facilitate designing molecular structures in full atomic detail and providing control for molecular manufacturing  [139]. Nano-CAD integrates the initial 3D nanostructures with the materials properties to build 3D geometrical models. Following the actual fabrication, the performance of the nano-structures are experimentally studied and compared with the predictions of the nano-CAD simulators. In each of these fields computing is applied to geometry-related modeling, analysis and simulation of artifacts and processes. VLSI-CAD systems apply artificial intelligence techniques to handle the complexities and to automate the logical and physical design of large-scale integrated digital circuits.It is worthy to note that these shifts have been followed by the changes of the thematic focus of the papers submitted to the Journal of Computer-Aided Design and the number of papers published concerning the above mentioned topics. The journal, as the first international peer-reviewed journals established in this field, has successfully created a forum for presenting the latest theories, algorithms, systems, and applications. Later on, in the position of a highly-cited high-impact media, it has also influenced the orientation of academic research. Over the years, it marked the boundaries of the domain of interest and contributed to the articulation and development of the discipline. However, over the years, it went well beyond what the original aim, namely computer aided drafting, was.In the fourth period of development, on the basis of a robust geometric and structural modeling, the Journal of Computer-Aided Design spanned over and interconnected all stages of a design process from concept creation to manufacture and beyond. The research and development fields currently considered relevant for the journal are: (i) foundational theories, frameworks, methodologies, and standards, (ii) geometric and topological methods for shape and solid modeling, (iii) structural, material and physical modeling, (iv) virtual reality and prototyping methods, (v) advanced support of manufacturing and downstream activities of product realization, (vi) user interfaces, system interfaces and system interoperability, (vii) knowledge-intensive technologies for design, (viii) design databases, knowledge repositories, object libraries and retrieval, (ix) modeling and design of multi-scale objects and systems, (x) specific applications and significant benchmarks of computer aided design. Now, in the fifth phase of development, the Journal of Computer-Aided Design is reporting on the results of application of geometric and structural modeling in a large number of maturing application fields.As explained above, ubiquitous computing is about equipping everyday things in the real world with information processing power. In this section we try to cast light on three issues, namely on (i) the impact of ubiquitous computing on the methodological foundations of computer aided design, (ii) the novel functionalities proposed for CAD tools and systems, and (iii) the current state of art of ubiquitous design support  [140]. Before doing this, however, it may be useful to deal with the two prevailing interpretations of ‘ubiquity’ in the context of computer aided design.In the first broad interpretation, ubiquity refers to the trend that CAD moves out of the hands of specialists and becomes a ubiquitous asset of designing. Computer aided design is ubiquitous in the design industry and is used to design all things from garment through electronic circuits to complex systems. From another viewpoint, ubiquity of CAD is reflected by the use of computer aided geometric design methods and algorithms in other geometry-intensive fields, namely, in computer aided engineering, computer aided process planning, and computer aided manufacturing. Model-based design and development has been a de facto standard of working in many industries. Over the years, three-dimensional artifact modeling penetrated into the advertisement and entertainment industries. Reverse engineering is now a method of choice in archeological reconstruction, and feature-based object retrieval is becoming a commodity on the second generation web. The appearance of tablet computers gave a new impetus to screen-based sketching, but its main application domains remained to be styling, artistic imaging, and conceptual design. It is also widely used by non-designers nowadays  [141].In the second narrower interpretation, ubiquity denotes the main promise of ubiquitous computing, namely, that it offers data collection and communication, modeling and representation, and computing and reasoning means and services anywhere, anytime, and in any context. A ubiquitous CAD environment is conceived as the result of augmenting CAD systems with mobile and embedded computing, and wireless networking and communication resources in an integral manner. The objective is to provide pervasive computing functionality and large-scale mobility. In principle, a ubiquitous CAD environment may involve all resources of current collaborative design environments and can extend them with many novel functions. Furthermore, they are supposed to be utilizable in many branches of designing and in many stages of a design process, from ideation, through concept creation, to detailed design, and beyond  [142]. However, as showed by our survey and inquiries, both the efforts towards the development of ubiquitous design enablers (environments, systems, or tools), and the adoption of the development results in practical processes are lagging behind the level that can be assumed after fifty years of existence of the discipline of computer aided design and the more than thirty years of existence of the theory and practice of ubiquitous computing. Below we try to find some general reasons and a defendable explanation for this situation. Procedurally, we will consider achievements in development of supporting methodologies, specific environments and systems, tasks related tools, and other initiatives.Let us start with some typical proposals for methodological foundations of the development and operation of ubiquitous design systems. Robertson and Radcliffe, examined the ways a computational environment may influence the ability of designing creatively  [143]. Their case study identified four phenomena that influence the impact of CAD tools on creative problem solving in engineering design. They are: (i) enhanced visualization and communication, (ii) premature fixation, (iii) circumscribed thinking, and (iv) bounded ideation. Each of these can be correlated with the interaction with design systems. Ndiwalana and McCrickard argued that the classic interface design processes should be changed to help designers to envision and design “better” systems interfaces  [144]. They suggested to consider: (i) early design factors (requirements analysis), (ii) community factors (conceptual design), (iii) system design factors (system architecting), and (iv) usage factors (deployment and evaluation). Landay and Borriello proposed ubiquitous computing design patterns that help solve difficult problems by reusing prior design knowledge, and offer an effective way to communicate solutions to ubiquitous computing design problems  [145]. Resembling use scenarios, the design patterns are named as context-sensitive I/O, physical–virtual associations, global data, proxies for devices, follow-me display, appropriate levels of attention, and anticipation. These patterns express either user interface aspects, or system aspects, or both. Kärkkäinen and Laarni proposed design guidelines to support designing websites for small display screens such are typical in PDAs  [146]. They sorted the guidelines into: (i) software and hardware, (ii) content and organization, and (iii) aesthetics and layout categories. Other researchers formulated design principles to support designing ubiquitous applications  [147,148].Horváth et al. reported on the results of a study that: (i) analyzed the current results and trends of ubiquitous technology development, (ii) identified various design-enabling functions that can be provided by ubiquitous technologies, and (iii) tried to form a vision about the possible manifestation of future ubiquitous design support environments  [149]. As novel ubiquitous CAD functionalities they proposed (i) sensor-based collecting of object and process information, (ii) exploration and gathering repository information, (iii) conducting operative design research remotely, (iv) data collection through products, (v) capturing and synthesizing of context information, (vi) stimulation ideation on spot, (vii) multi-modal inspiration of creative conceptualization, (viii) content adaptation to alternative devices, (ix) providing computing services on demand, (x) ad hoc networking with arbitrary information appliances, (xi) (collective) learning on demand (factual data, know how, design skills, design tools and methods), and (xii) information mining from verbal communication. They concluded that follow up investigations were needed to further articulate the full range of the identified major functions, to operationalize these functionalities based on appropriate mobile communication and ubiquitous computing technologies, to adapt the functionalities and implementations to real life application cases and practical application scenarios, and to study the impacts on designers, products and processes.In general, ubiquitous design enabling environments received much less attention than ambient living and working environments, apparently with the exception of one area. Van Doorn and Horváth studied possible use scenarios and technological platforms for digital design studios of the future  [150]. Jeng and Lee argued that the current approach to developing electronics-oriented design environments was fundamentally defective with regard to supporting multi-person multimodal design interactions  [151]. They proposed a ubiquitous computing environment, which can be considered as a media-rich design studio of the future. More than a decade ago, the concept of ‘living laboratory’ was introduced in which researchers may study ubiquitous technologies in home settings and develop context-aware technological and interaction solutions  [152].The idea of ubiquitous design tools (UDTs) emerged within the CAD research community almost thirty years ago. The objective of developing UDTs is augmenting human abilities variously, depending on the nature and context of the tasks. Potential functionalities such as (i) multi-location telepresence, (ii) distributed model sharing for mobiles, (iii) content transformation for mobiles, (iv) design context generation, and (v) network-based repositories have been considered. It has been conceived that some of the UDTs used in design enabling environments feature fixed location, or are remotely accessible through wireless networks (e.g. printers). Another part of them is moving with designers as portable, embedded, wearable and transferable devices, and feature ad hoc connectivity. These not only offer new ways for information seeking (i.e. for aggregation, processing and presentation of design information), but also enable alternative ways of completing design activities. The affordances of wired and wireless signal- and data-transfer, and communication and network management were also considered. With a view to the intense interaction with humans, a comprehensive analysis and modeling of the users was found to be important  [153]. As influential algorithm development issues, network-oriented concise 3D visualizations (e.g., HTTP, VRML, X3D, MPEG-4, OpenHSF and Java3D), and 3D streaming technologies (e.g., topological mesh simplification, vertex decimation, edge contraction, vertex clustering) and mesh refinement (e.g., multi-resolution mesh, progressive split) have been studied. UDTs that design engineers used in their everyday work influenced their ability of solving engineering problems creatively in both positive and negative ways. Recently, Dow et al. speculated about the next generation design tools, considering external representations used in ubiquitous computing design  [154].Co-development of products by designers at different geographical locations was one of the first challenges that received significant attention from researchers. Both methodological (concurrency, multi-disciplinary, procedural) and technological (modeling, computing and system architecting) proposals were published  [155]. Supporting remote, cooperation of designers and other stakeholders emerged as a prominent field of using ubiquitous computing. In this context various concepts were introduced and scrutinized. The issues of reproducing presence in various circumstances have been widely addressed, also considering virtual reality technologies  [156]. It was considered to be important to support creative collaborative work and collaboration enabling environments. Among others, Li et al. and Fuh and Li recently published surveys on the state of the art of collaborative CAD  [157,158]. Current collaborative design systems integrate knowledge of multiple domains, namely: design theories and methodologies, knowledge management, cognitive psychology, sociology, and computer science. The tools proposed to support collaborative work spread over a wide functional domain. Just to mention a few instances, Ouyang et al. developed a distributed collaborative CAD system using web services  [159]. Tang and Minneman proposed a video interface for collaborative drawing  [160]. Tay presented collaborative design software for MEMS development  [161]. Kao and Lin proposed a collaborative CAD/CAM system  [162]. Brown et al. presented a web-enabled virtual repository for supporting distributed automotive component development  [163]. Since the beginning of the 2000’s, language based interaction was used to support collaborative browsing and search. Han et al. proposed a framework for multi-device collaborative Web browsing, which enables multiple users to participate in the same browsing session using resource limited devices, such as a wireless PDA, and to benefit from the multimedia capabilities of other devices in the vicinity  [164]. Chen et al. described a collaborative design environment that includes multiple CAD systems  [165]. Feijó et al. claimed that the problems developers are facing at the development of distributed CAD systems require solutions based on concepts such as emergence and reactivity, and on online algorithms. Therefore, they proposed extended constraints graphs as online algorithms, which support emergence in a network of reactive agents  [166].The proliferation of ubiquitous computing based design tools and systems shows a unique picture. One would expect ubiquitous CAD technologies to penetrate first into mechanical or architectural design (as computer aided design did in the 1960s). Conversely, ubiquitous CAD has become prevalent in the construction industry. For instance, using mobile computing for information management and communication is a central topic for ICT application in this industry  [167]. This can be explained by the fact that design in the construction industry is sensitive to site and process information  [168]. According to Ahsan et al., the greatest benefit of ubiquitous computing in construction sites is that it enables timely collection of information and knowledge during the building process and this can positively influences the decision making processes  [169]. Reborlj et al. proposed a mobile computing approach to enhance information collection and distribution in construction processes  [170]. Oh et al. presented an interesting application of a PDA in teaching a pendant program for a mobile shipbuilding welding robot  [171].As the ability to query the company’s distributed knowledge base is important, Kelley analyzed a number of aspects of Web-centric product data management  [172]. Sivanathan et al. developed an application of ubiquitous multimodal synchronous data capture in CAD  [173]. Cooperation with co-workers is of a growing importance. Baresi et al. argued that designers need to move across organizational boundaries and collaborate with others within and outside their own organization  [58]. Videoconferencing on fixed network infrastructure is still the standard form, but multi-media conferencing on mobile devices is the scenario of the future. Goldin et al. reported on a NASA project, which established a truly-multidisciplinary design environment, called ‘intelligent synthesis environment’, whose five major components are: (i) human-centered computing, (ii) infrastructure for distributed collaboration, (iii) rapid synthesis and simulation tools, (iv) life cycle integration and validation, and (v) cultural change in both the engineering and science creative processes  [174]. The environment is intended to link scientists, design teams, manufacturers, suppliers, and consultants who participate in the mission synthesis as well as in the creation and operation of the aerospace system.Interestingly, the appearance of ubiquitous enablers did not result in fading away of the traditional technological solutions. In the building industry, traditional large size blue prints and construction plans (generally printed on 24 by 36 in size papers to provide the needed level of detailing and easy readability) retained their place in the daily practice. Subcontractors usually need these plans, not only the digital documentation. Therefore, architects and engineers use CAD for high power drafting to provide the builders with prints of the design. Anumba et al. identified seven facets of communication within construction projects, namely, communication between: (i) intra-disciplinary CAE (computer aided engineering) tools, (ii) each project team member and their design tools, (iii) design team members, (iv) each discipline and the common project model, (v) the project team and third parties, (vi) inter-disciplinary CAE tools, and (vii) across the stages in the project life-cycle  [156]. Jadid and Idress discussed the role of mobile computing and information technology in civil engineering construction projects  [175]. Many new ideas have been formulated about future enablers in the field of computer aided architectural design  [30]. One of them is the idea of self-organizing contents, which is stimulated by the need to over-bridge the differences that exist in terms of the data processing and storage, the display and visualization capabilities of various fix-placed and portable devices. Self-organizing contents are complemented with algorithms that are able to recognize the operating characteristics (such as screen sizes, display resolutions and data transfer speed) of various devices and adapts the contents accordingly with the objective to provide the best experience and working possibility for the end-users.Though not all ubiquitous computing applications are of a large scale, there are various compliance, complexity and scale issues related to many smart environments. Coroama et al. reported on a project that overviewed the blessings and perils of ubiquitous environments, based on various ubiquitous computing scenarios  [176]. Some researchers presented concepts for light-weight infrastructure and middleware for pervasive computing  [177,178]. Cook and Das discussed issues concerning the implementation of pervasive computing at scale  [179]. They identified subfields for pervasive computing at scale such as (i) scaling models of individual and group behavior, (ii) scaling pervasive computing devices, (iii) scaling pervasive computing applications, (iv) scaling through cloud computing, and (v) scaling through energy analysis and harvesting. Banavar and Bernstein argued that developments in ubiquitous design support will require fundamental advances in semantic modeling, context-aware software infrastructure, application modeling and tools, and user experience validation  [180]. Other researchers addressed the issues of integrating resources on large-scale, the emergence and effects of large-scale use, and processing large amounts of data.Based on the results of the overview presented in Section  2, we can state that ubiquitous computing creates new potentials for CAD in the following dimensions: (i) proactive ambient environment, (ii) multi-form seeking for information, (iii) flexibly networked communication, (iv) omnipresent access to computing, (v) smartly behaving tools, and (vi) direct brain interfaces. At the same time, the literature shows some sort of ‘virgin land’ as much as the development of dedicated tools is concerned. Apart from the tools developed by virtual and augmented reality researchers (which often has only limited overlap with ubiquitous design support tools per se), just a limited number of correlated research results have been published. This hints at the fact that application of ubiquitous technologies in design support systems and as specific design tools is lagging behind their application in general products, systems and services. What are the reasons of this situation and what can we expect for the near and further future? Can we state in the context of design enabling that ubiquitous computing has broken its promise to be everywhere? Or, is it better to think of ubiquitous computer aided design as a Sleeping Beauty, which can be expected to wake up when the ‘prince’ will arrive?First, let us consider the first question! Did ubiquitous computing indeed break its promise to be everywhere in the form of UDTs? Our study suggests that the answer is yes. But, what are the reasons? There are many of them. If we consider the development of the CAD functionality and the development of the computing technologies simultaneously, then we can observe two things. First, the functional spectrum of advanced computer aided design did not extend significantly in the last three stages of its evolution. The mainstream (or) kernel activities remained to be based on geometric or structural modeling and representations. Many of the technologies discussed in the second chapter are not related to these at all, or do not have too much to do with them. As discussed, the number of functions that may expect interest outside the academic world proved to be limited. The literature does not indicate any intense activity in this direction.Second, we have to consider the strategy of the market leaders in CAD system development. In this context we can observe similarity with the situation in the automotive industry. The products of both the leading automobile developers and the leading CAD developers are very similar in terms of their scope, have comparable functionalities, and struggle with the same unresolved issues. Their thinking is also similar in terms of their development strategies. The industrial CAD system developers have become somewhat reluctant to consider radical changes and to extend the CAD environments with new technologies. Though improvement has been achieved with regards to interfacing, connectivity, transparency and integration of the commercialized systems, nowadays only ‘face-lifts’ are being introduced in terms of their geometric modeling kernels. Apparently, speech and gesture based interfaces did not and will not be able to penetrate into commercial systems in their current forms, apart from those augmenting virtual reality systems, where they play a crucial role  [181]. Touch screen based geometric input is still not able to cope with the speed and precision of mouse based input. According to many experts, business process innovation is the current focus of the research and development of the main CAD developers. Industrial end-users also prefer incremental developments and improvements, rather than radical innovations and abrupt changes. For instance, they perform a large part of the communication using traditional fix networked wired or wireless communication, rather than ad hoc communication means. Though this hears as a philosophical issue, the next paradigm of computer aided design is not known at this moment.Thirdly, we have to consider the silent battle of digital computing-related or -induced technologies. As discussed by Geels and Smit there are many future images that do not come true because they are based on too simplistic conceptualization of technological developments and their impact on society. They call the attention to the importance of the dynamic co-evolution of technological opportunities and the application demands  [182]. This is the basis of our reasoning in the context of ubiquitous computing. Parallel with the emergence and proliferation of ubiquitous computing, several other technologies started their life cycles. In the last two decades, ubiquitous computing technologies had to compete with other kinds of computational technologies, such as high-capacity computing, high-speed networking, immersive virtual reality, knowledge ontologies, smart software agents, mobile communication, etc., which could have a much stronger influence on the development of computer aided design methods and systems. In combination with the rather conservative and conventional industrial practice of CAD system development and application, this may explain why the ubiquitous computing revolution remained weak in computer aided design. The literature clearly informs us about the fact that application of ubiquitous technologies did not lead to radically new functionalities that could have been exploited by the concerned industries. Consequently, it seems to be possible that computer aided design simply steps over the paradigm of ubiquitous computing and expects new functionalities from the emerging new computing paradigms, such as brain–computer interfacing, cyber–physical computing, biological computing, or quantum computing.Let us now elaborate on the secondly mentioned question! Can we look at ubiquitous computer aided design as the Sleeping Beauty,11Though everybody knows the classic fairytale of the Sleeping Beauty, in a nutshell, one variant of the story is: A fairy, who had not been invited to the christening of a long-wished-for new born princess of the king, became angry and placed the princess under an enchantment as her gift: the princess would prick her hand on a spindle and die. Another fairy managed to change the curse of the evil fairy from dying to falling into a deep sleep for 100 years and be awoken by a handsome prince. One day the princess hurt her finger by the spinning wheels and the curse was fulfilled. The good fairy foresaw that the princess would be alone when she woke up and so put everyone in the castle to sleep. A hundred years passed, and a prince came from a far off land. He found the old castle in the surrounding forest during a hunting expedition and the beautiful sleeping princess inside the castle. The enchantment came to an end, and the princess woke up together with the castle folk. The prince and princess fell in love, got married, and lived happily throughout their live.who is enchanted to sleep for hundred years and to wake up only when a king-son asks her to do so? In other words, can it be expected that, after the decay of the early hype, a next wave of ubiquitous computing comes and gives a new technological impetus to computer aided design? We are rather skeptic about this happening for two reasons. First, it does not seem to be the case that a next wave of ubiquitous computing would currently be formed. Second, digital computing is presently advancing under the influence of a next paradigm that has been called cyber–physical computing. Furthermore, other computing paradigms such as biological computing and quantum computing are already around the corner. Cyber–physical computing embeds many technological features of ubiquitous computing, but it also significantly extends the technological and functional capabilities. By saying this, we do not want to say that cyber–physical computing will have any bigger potential to enable next generation computer aided design, than ubiquitous had. Interestingly, there are no publications on any relationship of cyber–physical computing and computer aided design. We must be careful. Lee argued that cyber–physical computing is ‘pushing hard at the frontiers of engineering knowledge, putting severe stress on the abstractions and techniques that have proven so effective in the separate spaces of cyber systems (information and computing technology) and physical systems (the rest of engineering)’  [183].Ubiquitous computing emerged at the beginning of the 1980s and its main assumption is that computing can be available anywhere, anytime and any context and in anything due to technological developments, new affordances, and societal demand. This idea has been introduced and exploited successfully in many application fields over the years. In the past, whenever a new computational paradigm appeared, it was supposed to bring about disruptive innovations. However, our research informed us, ubiquitous computing has not managed to revolutionize the methodologies and the systems of computer aided design, though many researchers studied the affordances and the possible applications of ubiquitous technologies. In general, ubiquitous computing so far has had only a limited impact on computer aided design, except for some specific application area. Certain new functionalities and novel tools have been developed by researchers at the academia, but they have not been integrated into commercial systems and industrial best practices.In this paper we tried to find some rational explanations for this situation. It is hoped that the selected and analyzed papers could provide sufficient underpinning of the below propositions. However, it has to be mentioned that, as every survey, this one can be seen as incomplete. The selection of the papers considered is based on subjective decisions, but we were also constrained by the obvious page limitation. Our conclusions concerning the current situation and future opportunities can be summarized as follows:•In most of the application fields, the geometric and structure modeling capabilities of computer aided design are primarily exploited. The presently consolidating new application fields of computer aided design, such as bio-CAD, nano-CAD, and systems-CAD, rely on the modeling functions of CAD, Therefore, penetration of ubiquitous computing in these applications remained insignificant.However, in applications where real time information seeking and design communication play an important role, for instance in the construction industry, much significant penetration and advancement could be observed.In addition to the limited match of the technological affordances of ubiquitous computing and the functional extendibility of computer aided design, a probable reason of the moderate proliferation is that ubiquitous computing technologies had in the last two decades to compete with other kinds of computational technologies, such as high-capacity computing, high-speed networking, immersive virtual reality, knowledge ontologies, smart software agents, mobile communication, etc. These had a stronger influence on the development of computer aided design methods and systems.The industrial developers and influential users of commercial CAD systems seem to prefer incremental development to radical innovations. Since they favor consolidated technologies, the fast emerging and rapidly changing ubiquitous computing technologies could not get through their firewalls. The conservative and conventionalist industrial CAD practice also contributed to the slightness and localized nature of the ubiquitous computing revolution.The literature clearly indicates that even the academic researchers did not intellectualize and prototype radically new ubiquitous CAD functionalities. Based on the present application domains, unexplored functional opportunities seem to be limited. Consequently, it is very probable that computer aided design simply steps over the paradigm of ubiquitous computing. Fairy tales typically do not apply in real life.What seems to be interesting for near future research is a broader investigation and exploitation of brain–computer interfacing technologies and applications. It may introduce some new functions and novel ways of interacting within the physical world, as well as with virtual objects in the cyber world.Multidisciplinary research groups may also put on their research agendas and make the first steps in exploring the affordances of the currently emerging new computing paradigms, such as cyber–physical computing, biological computing, or quantum computing.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
