@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Rapid 3-D delineation of cell nuclei for high-content screening platforms

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We developed a 3D-RSD algorithm to detect nuclei in 3-D image space.3D-RSD can effectively deal with highly confluent specimens.3D-RSD is fast and more accurate than three other reference methods, and can be used in high-content screening tasks to evaluate drug efficacy in human cancer cell lines.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
3-D segmentation of nuclei,Image processing,High-content screening,Bio-image informatics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
High-resolution three-dimensional (3-D) microscopy combined with multiplexing of fluorescent labels allows high-content analysis of large numbers of cell nuclei. The full automation of 3-D screening platforms necessitates image processing algorithms that can accurately and robustly delineate nuclei in images with little to no human intervention. Imaging-based high-content screening was originally developed as a powerful tool for drug discovery. However, cell confluency, complexity of nuclear staining as well as poor contrast between nuclei and background result in slow and unreliable 3-D image processing and therefore negatively affect the performance of studying a drug response.Here, we propose a new method, 3D-RSD, to delineate nuclei by means of 3-D radial symmetries and test it on high-resolution image data of human cancer cells treated by drugs. The nuclei detection performance was evaluated by means of manually generated ground truth from 2351 nuclei (27 confocal stacks). When compared to three other nuclei segmentation methods, 3D-RSD possessed a better true positive rate of 83.3% and F-score of 0.895±0.045 (p-value=0.047). Altogether, 3D-RSD is a method with a very good overall segmentation performance. Furthermore, implementation of radial symmetries offers good processing speed, and makes 3D-RSD less sensitive to staining patterns. In particular, the 3D-RSD method performs well in cell lines, which are often used in imaging-based HCS platforms and are afflicted by nuclear crowding and overlaps that hinder feature extraction.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The objective and quantitative analysis of images from cells labeled with immunofluorescent probes takes microscopy from being purely visual, qualitative and subjective to a higher level. Quantitative analysis of fluorescently labeled molecular targets in cells can provide information of their spatial distribution, amounts and topology. The advantage of quantitative microscopy in cellular studies is further enhanced by the addition of automation. High-content screening (HCS)—or the automated acquisition of fluorescently labeled cellular images followed by an automated analysis enables the quantitative assessment of large numbers of images, thereby paving the way for large scale experiments in which multiple conditions are examined simultaneously [1–3].HCS platforms have primarily evolved as powerful approaches for drug discovery. Due to the involvement of high-resolution three-dimensional (3-D) confocal microscopy and multiplexing of fluorescent labels cell nuclei can be outlined and nuclear targets measured, rendering the cell nucleus the most frequently studied compartment. The 3-D screening turned out as a powerful tool for measurements of nuclear deformation, chromatin organization and cellular heterogeneity and essential in deriving deep, functional information involving spatial and temporal domains from single cells during response to drugs and assessment of cytotoxicity [4,5].The high automation of 3-D HCS necessitates image processing algorithms that can accurately and robustly analyze large numbers of images with little to no human intervention. In the automated processing pipelines the image segmentation is a front-end, yet most vulnerable numerical procedure. As a hardware and experimentally independent component, the image segmentation steps should be able to reliably separate nuclei from background and from each other. It is known that rapidly proliferating and overlapping cells provide a challenge for nuclei segmentation procedures. Variable nuclear shapes, chromatin texture, uneven image contrast and background noise increase the difficulty of delineating individual nuclei [6]. A simple intensity based thresholding approach can often separate nuclei from background, unless they contact each other or are closely spaced. To achieve a reliable segmentation of nuclei numerous semi-automated segmentation techniques have been published. However, many of them are tailored to a specific image analysis or screening method, or require the setting of multiple parameters [7]. Fully automated methods are frequently restricted by the morphological variability of specimens, and thus allow only the analysis of regular or pre-selected patterns. Three larger groups for 3-D segmentation techniques can be distinguished: watershed-based, hybrid, and deformable model-based segmentation techniques [8–11]. The latter is most reliable and requires little to no post-processing to refine the segmentation results. However, manual initializations and computational burden make them less practical for HCS analyses. Watershed-based techniques—especially those controlled by markers (seeds) are computationally less intense, and hence generally faster. Yet, post-processing procedures tailored to the specimen׳s morphology are often necessary to determine if splitting or merging of closely positioned, clustered or contacting nuclei is required to correct over- and under-segmentations [12–14]. Another family of nuclear segmentation advances utilizes geometric active contour approaches based on level-sets [15–17]. The level set method was originally used as numerical technique for tracking shapes based on a variant of the geometric heat equation [18], and it is meant to detect contours connecting pixels of the same intensity in an image. In the level set method, contours in 2-D or surfaces in 3-D can be represented by curves and surfaces on a Cartesian grid without the need to parameterize. The level set is able to represent the shapes even if their topology is complex. They are widely used since they do not require explicit parameterization. Yet, their main disadvantage is the computational cost. To separate objects (cells or nuclei), each object has to be represented by a level set function. In addition, a coupling constraint inhibits overlapping of neighboring contours. For N nuclei in the image, N level sets and N2 coupling constraints are determined. These requirements dramatically increase the computational cost in highly confluent specimens. The method proposed by Dzubachyk et al. to segment and track cells by means of a coupled-active-surfaces framework [9] can be used as an example of a level-set based technique. In their approach connected objects determined in the first image frame are segmented with one level-set function using a modified Chan and Vese algorithm [19]. One level-set is assigned to each object. Each level-set function is iteratively evolved until convergence criteria are satisfied. Next, watersheds are used to perform rough splitting of level-set functions in connected components. The algorithm determines whether existing level-set functions need to be terminated or new functions introduced. In the final step, the Radon transform is applied to separate level-set functions of closely positioned nuclei. Tracking of cells is possible by propagating the final position of the level-sets from one image frame to another and adjusting the separation of the level-set functions accordingly.Hybrid techniques for 2-D and 3-D nuclear segmentations such as those involving h-minima, h-maxima, or Laplacian-of-Gaussian filtering gradient or curvature analysis are better optimized for speed, automation and adaptability to new applications. A known example is the algorithm developed by Al-Kofahi and colleagues [20]. It this method the foreground-background separation through graph-cuts algorithm is subjected to seed detection using the scale normalized response of Laplacian-of-Gaussian constrained by the range of predefined scales. An initial segmentation of nuclei is obtained by the seed-based local-maximum clustering algorithm that allows separating the majority of clustered nuclei. The final segmentation is obtained through a α-expansion and graph coloring. This method is built into Farsight [21]—a free platform for image analysis. In [22] by Cheng et al. geometric active contours were used to initially segment 2-D images, and then an adaptive H-minima-based algorithm was applied to find shape markers that served as seeds for watershed-based splitting of closely spaced nuclei. Another published method involves a cascade of geometric filters insensitive to spatial non-uniformity coupled with geodesic level-sets [23]. It can partition clumped nuclei based on the grouping of points of maximum curvature that were combined according on their spatial properties to define planes dissecting clustered nuclei. Lastly, gradient methods published in [24,25] employed a diffusion of gradients followed by tracking of their flow and grouping to identify individual nuclei in Zebrafish embryos.Numerous other algorithms for 3-D image segmentation of cells and nuclei have been developed. While the majority is readily available for the analysis of non-complex cell images, there remains a deficiency of methods for imaging-based high-content screening that can deal with heterogeneity of nuclear texture and high confluency of cells. Such a method could enable screening and exploration of in-depth complex changes in nuclear morphology, signal topology, and signal co-localizations [26–28]. Thus, the main objective of this work is to introduce and evaluate a new approach for rapid delineation of nuclei in high-resolution images. According to the recent research, certain shape priors can be derived directly from the non-segmented image and funneled as features ahead of the actual nuclear segmentation routines. The core idea presented in this paper employs a 3-D radial symmetry transform followed by an adaptive post-processing of symmetry images to arrive at a mask of seeds that can guide a watershed-based segmentation. The output of 3-D radial symmetry transform can quantitatively approximate the circularity of nuclei without an explicit knowledge about their localization. It can therefore serve as an input for guiding image segmentation processes. In comparison to existing methods, the proposed approach requires only a small set of shape descriptors such as circularity and radius upfront. This concept was developed and tested with synthetic images. High-resolution 3-D confocal images of human cells exposed to anticancer drugs were used to validate the effectiveness of the technique and its applicability to HCS. Performance was validated by comparing three state-of-the-art nuclear segmentation methods.Image data was repurposed from an imaging-based high-content screening project [28,29] to characterize the potency of DNA methylation inhibitors in cancer cell lines. The material consisted of treated and untreated DU145 human prostate carcinoma cells, and HuH-7 liver carcinoma cells. Nuclei were immunolabeled with a 5-methylcytosine antibody and 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI)—a common blue-fluorescent dye that intercalates into double stranded DNA. Staining was followed by confocal imaging. High-resolution optical sections with 1576×1576 pixels, voxel size of 120nm×120nm×250nm (x-, y-, and z-axis) and 12 bits/pixel intensity depth were acquired to form 3-D stacks for each stain. 27 DAPI stacks that were generated on average from 35 slides (Table 1) and represented a high variability of nuclear staining patterns and cell confluencies (Fig. 1) were selected from a large set of pre-existing image data to test the proposed methodology. More details related to specimens, drug treatment schedules, staining protocol and imaging can be found in [28,29]. Stacks were divided into three groups: low confluency with up to 40 nuclei per stack, moderate confluency (41–65 nuclei) and high confluency (73–190 nuclei). A cell biologist from our team manually identified and delineated 2351 nuclei (ground truth) in mid sections of the 27 stacks to assess performances of nuclei segmentation methods.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper we address the issue of a rapid segmentation of nuclei towards fast and reliable phenotyping of large amount cells in 3-D cultures. As a user friendly, scalable and a relatively low complexity method the 3D-RSD achieved remarkable performances in cells lines treated by drugs. Thus, it is conceivable that the 3D-RSD can be used for high-content screening tasks particularly for preclinical compound screening or image cytometry for cancer research.