@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Analysis of flow and LDL concentration polarization in siphon of internal carotid artery: Non-Newtonian effects

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Non-Newtonian effects are considerable in U-type model of ICA siphon.Extend of the high LDL concentration regions are larger for the V type model.Local highest maximum concentrations occur for the C type model.C and V type models are more prone to atherosclerosis comparing with the U type.Averaged WSS can predict sites with more LDL accumulation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Internal carotid artery,Blood hemodynamics,Low-density lipoprotein,Mass transfer,Non-Newtonian,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Carotid siphon is known as one of the risky sites among the human intracranial arteries, which is prone to formation of atherosclerotic lesions. Indeed, scientists believe that accumulation of low density lipoprotein (LDL) inside the lumen is the major cause of atherosclerosis. To this aim, three types of internal carotid artery (ICA) siphon have been constructed to examine variations of hemodynamic parameters in different regions of the arteries. Providing real physiological conditions, blood considered as non-Newtonian fluid and real velocity and pressure waveforms have been employed as flow boundary conditions. Moreover, to have a better estimation of risky sites, the accumulation of LDL particles has been considered, which has been usually ignored in previous relevant studies. Governing equations have been discretized and solved via open source OpenFOAM software. A new solver has been built to meet essential parameters related to the flow and mass transfer phenomena. In contrast to the common belief regarding negligible effect of blood non-Newtonian behavior inside large arteries, current study suggests that the non-Newtonian blood behavior is notable, especially on the velocity field of the U-type model. In addition, it is concluded that neglecting non-Newtonian effects underestimates the LDL accumulation up to 3% in the U-type model at the inner side of both its bends. However, in the V and C type models, non-Newtonian effects become relatively small. Results also emphasize that the outer part of the second bend at the downstream is also at risk similar to the inner part of the carotid bends. Furthermore, from findings it can be implied that the risky sites strongly depend on the ICA shape since the extension of the risky sites are relatively larger for the V-type model, while the LDL concentrations are higher for the C-type model.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
It is well established that the formation and development of arterial stenosis are the result of a complex interplay between systemic factors, changes in the biomechanical properties of vessel walls, and local hemodynamic factors such as negative axial velocity and wall shear stress (WSS) [1]. Atherosclerotic lesions mainly form at specific sites of arteries, where low WSS occurs like bifurcations and curvatures [2]. The initial stage of atherosclerotic plaque formation coincides with the gradual accumulation of LDL particles on luminal surface. Different parameters affect LDL permeability of the endothelium such as pressure, LDL size, concentration, and lesions through the endothelial membrane [3]. Among many curved arteries inside the human body, the internal carotid artery (ICA) is more prone to atherosclerosis [8]. Therefore, understanding blood flow patterns inside ICAs can lead to the identification of patients vulnerable to atherosclerosis.In primary hemodynamic studies, arteries have been modeled by simple 45 and 90-degree curves [9]. In more developed patient specific models, different shapes have been identified for ICA. Qiao et al. [10] and Oshima et al. [11] computationally examined the hemodynamics related to the couple of these geometries in search for the prone sites for atherosclerosis. Complex flows with helical and twisting patterns inside carotid siphons in vivo have been by employing 4D MRI imaging technology [12,13]. Newtonian blood flow in three types of ICA with sinusoidal boundary conditions was studied to find risky sites [14]. Zhang et al. [15] performed a comprehensive study for classifying the ICA shapes and provided three ideal models based on the average morphological data. In their numerical simulation, WSS distribution for a sinusoidal inlet velocity and zero gradient outlet pressure was investigated, while blood flow was assumed Newtonian.Better identification of susceptible sites in the ICA requires exploring hemodynamic parameters and LDL mass transfer, concurrently. To this aim, appropriate mass transfer model should be employed for investigating LDL concentration inside the assumed ICA models. Modeling lipoprotein mass transfer in the arteries, three different models have been developed as wall free model [4], fluid-wall single layer model [5] and fluid-wall multilayer model [6]. It has been demonstrated that wall-free model can provide useful information regarding luminal surface LDL concentration, while keeps computational costs low [7,16]. Yet, very limited information is available about the LDL transport inside the ICA siphon. Deng and Wang [17] experimentally investigated the luminal surface concentration of albumin in the carotid artery of a dog. Wall-free model in a simple two-dimensional carotid bifurcation was employed to study WSS effects on the LDL transport [18]. Moreover, Nematollahi et al. [19] explored wall-free mass transfer model inside a carotid artery with and without stenosis assuming steady state flow. However, as mentioned earlier, mass transfer inside the ICA siphon has not received proper attention in literature.In the present study, flow and LDL transport in three idealized ICA geometries are considered, while real physiological inlet velocity and outlet pressure are adopted. Idealized models are obtained based on each ICA type averaged morphological data, which makes them more suitable for parametric studies as comparing to the patient specific models. Previous studies included some simplifications especially on the blood flow profiles and Newtonian consideration for the blood flow that causes some uncertainties regarding their findings. Besides, mass transport to the ICA siphon and its arterial wall distribution has not been examined previously. Although ICA siphon is considered as a large artery, nonetheless at bifurcation and twisting sites, where local shear rate and WSS drop drastically, non-Newtonian aspects of blood flow become significant [20–22]. Furthermore, experimental investigation by Gijsen et al. [22] in a 90-degree bend (a simple model for carotid artery) showed large discrepancies, especially at the peak systolic phase, between Newtonian and non-Newtonian blood flow behavior. Therefore, the purpose of the present study is to investigate the blood flow patterns, non-Newtonian blood effects and LDL mass transfer through the lumen and the arterial wall to identify the risky sites prone to atherosclerosis. Flow and mass transfer are simulated by the open source CFD software, OpenFOAM. New solver has been created in OpenFOAM to capture LDL luminal surface concentration. Flow patterns, non-Newtonian effect, wall shear stresses and mass transfer have been examined extensively identifying susceptible sites prone to stenosis along the assumed ICA siphons.According to the anatomic classifications of the siphon, the ICA shapes can be classified into four categories U-, V-, C- and S-type [23]. However, most of the cases are of U, V and C type that have attracted more attentions. CT angiography technique is used to construct patient specific models of ICA siphon by the authors as well (Fig. 1-I), where twenty patients were investigated and it was observed that U shape model is the more common model among four types of ICA models. However, to perform a more general study, idealized models of ICA are reconstructed following Zhang et al. [15] data as presented in Fig. 1-II.Employing relatively complicated statistical and mathematical approaches, they reported geometrical specifications of all three models based on the averaged morphological data of 74 subjects, as presented inTable 1 while corresponding parameters are defined inFig. 2-I and II. Fig. 2-I represents the location of characteristic points along the centerline of the siphon, where p1 and p2-located in plane 1- indicate the starting and ending points of the first bend, respectively, while p3 and p4-located in plane 2- show the corresponding points for the second bend. In Fig. 2-II, two views of the siphon are given. Details of the first and second bend planes are represented in Fig. 2-IIa and b, respectively. All necessary information for the construction of each model of Fig. 2-II including the angle between planes, curvature radius of each bend, bend angle and distance between two successive bends are listed in Table 1. The length of the straight sections attached to the inflow of the first bend and outflow of the second bend are 7D and 10D, respectively.ICA bends are also named according to their geometrical features and locations. B1 is the second bend, which is also called the anterior knee of the siphon and B2 is the first bend located in the posterior knee of the siphon.The governing equations are continuity and Navier–Stokes equation expressed as(1)V→.V→=0(2)ρ(∂V→∂t+V→.∇→V→)=−∇→+∇→.(S→)The mass transfer equation of LDL particles is described as(3)∂C∂t+V→.∇→C=D∇2CwhereV→is the velocity vector, P the pressure, C the LDL particle concentration, D the LDL diffusion coefficient in blood, andS→=2ηd→withd→=(∇V→+∇V→T)/2. For a Newtonian fluidυ=η/ρ, while for a non-Newtonian fluid, the viscosity is shear rate dependent asη=η(γ̇).The unsteady nature of the flow is applied by the realistic velocity wave form at the inlet and pressure at the outlet, which are taken from Ho et al. [24], as shown inFig. 3. The blood is considered incompressible with density of ρ=1056 kg/m3 and the blood vessel walls are assumed rigid with non-slip condition.Uniform inlet concentration is employed for the mass transport equation, while zero mass flux is applied at the outlet. The continuity of mass flux is applied at the lumen-wall interface as(4)D(∂C∂n)w=CwVwwhere D is the diffusivity, which is taken 1e−11m2/s,Cwthe wall LDL concentration, andVwdenotes filtration velocity, which is equal to 4×10−8m/s [25].It is commonly believed that the influence of shear thinning properties of blood are not significant for the flow in large arteries [26,27], however, in arteries with acute curvature such as U type ICAs, the shear thinning effects should be considered as will be discussed later. Experimental results demonstrated that the Carreau–Yasuda model suitably predicts non-Newtonian behavior of blood inside carotid artery [28]; therefore, in the present study, the shear thinning is accounted for by employing the Carreau–Yasuda model [29] as(5)η˜(γ̇)−η˜∞η˜0−η˜∞=[1−(λγ̇)a](n−1)/aIn Eq. 5,η˜0andη˜∞represent low and high viscosities, respectively andγ̇is the shear rate. Constant parameters a, n, andλcontrol how a fluid behaves in the non-Newtonian regime between these two viscosities. In the present study, model parameters are taken from Abraham et al. [30], asη˜0=0.1600Pas,η˜∞=0.0035Pas,λ=0.110s, a=0.64, and n=0.2128.The governing equations are solved by the open source software OpenFOAM. PimpleFoam transient solver, which works based on PIMPLE (merged SIMPLE-PISO) algorithm is used to simulate Newtonian blood flow, while for non-Newtonian blood behavior, standard solver non-Newtonian ICOFoam is employed. To simulate the LDL mass transfer in ICA, a new solver in OpenFOAM has been developed according to the wall-free model. As in previous ICA siphon studies [14,15], sufficient information for validation purposes have not been provided. Thus, present model has been validated with available experimental data of Van de Vosse et al. [31], through a model of a carotid artery. Blood flow velocity profile in this bend has the same features as in real ICA siphon. As shown inFig. 4, the axial velocity profiles at different cross sections are in good agreement with laser Doppler experimental results at Reynolds number of 300.LDL particles that accumulate on the artery wall creating a very thin concentration layer due to the existence of infiltration flow through the arterial wall. This phenomenon is known as concentration polarization (CP). In recent studies that were focused on lumen surface concentration (LSC) in common carotid arteries [7,19], they validated their results by those obtained by Fatouraee et al. [25] and analytical solutions of Johnson et al. [36]. The same approach has been followed in the present study for a simple CA model at Sc=1.6e5. Lumen surface concentration for the Newtonian fluid is compared with the mentioned analytical [36] and numerical [25] results inFig. 5-a. However, concentration variations in the radial direction have been compared with the numerical results of [25] in Fig. 5-b, where reasonable agreements can be observed.A structured mesh is used for all models, which are relatively finer at the wall adjacent for capturing severe gradients. Extensive computations have been performed to identify the number of grid points that produce reasonably grid-independent results. It was found the minimum grid points of 50, 31, and 155 are required in the azimuthal, radial, and axial directions, respectively. Since denser grid points are required in radial direction to capture the LDL accumulation on the arterial wall, the expansion ratio of 1.1 is set in the radial direction. The time cycle of the assumed pulsatile flow is 1s. Therefore, the time step was set to 1e−4s to obtain relatively time accurate results.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
