@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Prediction of recombinant protein overexpression in Escherichia coli using a machine learning based model (RPOLP)

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Studying the new area of recombinant protein overexpression level prediction;Using the novel database of EcoliOverExpressionDB;Utilizing a new set of features as the model input;Investigating a broad range of machine learning techniques for statistical analyses.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Protein overexpression level,E. coli,Prediction,Feature selection,Machine learning,Recombinant protein,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Recombinant protein overexpression, an important biotechnological process, is ruled by complex biological rules which are mostly unknown, is in need of an intelligent algorithm so as to avoid resource-intensive lab-based trial and error experiments in order to determine the expression level of the recombinant protein. The purpose of this study is to propose a predictive model to estimate the level of recombinant protein overexpression for the first time in the literature using a machine learning approach based on the sequence, expression vector, and expression host. The expression host was confined to Escherichia coli which is the most popular bacterial host to overexpress recombinant proteins. To provide a handle to the problem, the overexpression level was categorized as low, medium and high. A set of features which were likely to affect the overexpression level was generated based on the known facts (e.g. gene length) and knowledge gathered from related literature. Then, a representative sub-set of features generated in the previous objective was determined using feature selection techniques. Finally a predictive model was developed using random forest classifier which was able to adequately classify the multi-class imbalanced small dataset constructed. The result showed that the predictive model provided a promising accuracy of 80% on average, in estimating the overexpression level of a recombinant protein.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Recombinant protein overexpression is an important biotechnological technique in order to produce a specific protein in desired amounts. Successful overexpression can attain higher expression levels compared to most natural proteins [7,14].Escherichia coli (E. coli) bacteria is the major expression host used for recombinant protein expression. Approximately 30% of all of the recombinant pharmaceutical proteins are produced in E. coli[14].Although logical strategies of genetic engineering have been established, heterologous expression often suffers from low level of production and frequently fail due to ambiguous reasons. There is no generic solution available to enhance heterologous overexpression. The trial-and-error procedure of protein overexpression can be avoided by identifying the promising proteins to improve the experimental success rate [23].There had been a few attempts, mostly using machine learning techniques, to predict whether a given recombinant protein will be expressed based merely on its sequence [8]. The work of Christendat et al. [3] was the first attempt to predict the expression of protein as part of their analysis. They derived decision trees for expressibility, but their statistics were less reliable due to their smaller size and were not reported. Goh et al. [6] studied the relevance of physical and chemical properties to protein characteristics and its progress through cloning, expression, purification, and structural determination. Luan et al. [15] performed heterologous protein expression experiments using numerous genes of Caenorhabditis elegans. Then they applied bioinformatics analysis on the data to determine the key factors for a gene to yield a soluble expression product. According to Chan et al. [1], most previous works only investigated protein solubility related factors, and considered together the genes that formed inclusion fraction, and the genes that were not expressed, as negative samples. But in the study, they built a model to predict whether a vector-protein pair will be expressed in E. coli. For expressed pairs, the model additionally predicted if the pairs would be soluble or not. In the works of Hirose et al. [11,12], the authors investigated the overexpression and the solubility of human full-length cDNA in E. coli and a wheat germ cell-free expression system. They assessed the effects of sequence and structural features on protein expression and solubility in each system, and estimated a minimal set of significant features. van den Berg et al. [21] proposed a sequence-based predictor for extracellular protein production by Aspergillus niger; their major goal was to interpret which combinations of features were most important and predictive.Overexpression level is the amount of the recombinant protein produced and it is one indicator of experimental success. There are some rules to anticipate the expression level of a recombinant protein before the actual experiment (e.g. size of the recombinant gene, composition of nucleotides), but due to the existence of several parameters and their complicated relationships, which are partially known, it is not possible to know the expected level of overexpression in advance; thus necessitating a resource intensive “trial and error” approach. The provision of a tool to conduct theoretical prediction of protein overexpression level will facilitate the development of large-scale proteomics studies [2]. To the best of our knowledge, no previous study has addressed the problem of recombinant protein overexpression level prediction. We believe that using machine learning techniques, it is possible to predict the level of recombinant protein overexpression.Machine learning is about creating computer programs that automatically progress with experience. Pattern recognition is a sub-field within machine learning with the goal of developing systems that learn to solve a given problem using a set of examples (instances), each one represented by several features [4,16].In this work, a novel predictive model by means of machine learning techniques to estimate the overexpression level of a recombinant protein in E. coli was proposed, based on the sequence to be expressed, as well as the expression vector and host to be used.In the following sub-sections, the details of the materials and techniques required for conducting this study are explained.EcoliOverExpressionDB [9] (version 1.0, May 2014) which we had developed previously, was used as the dataset in this study. The definition of three overexpression categories of Low, Medium and High are given in the article [9]. EcoliOverExpressionDB includes about 300 records of protein overexpression experiments, collected from related papers. Each database entry contains data of the expression condition and expression result, including gene name, gene ID, gene sequence, vector name, host strain name, inducer concentration, incubation temperature after induction, expression level, expression yield, the reference paper and relevant notes.In order to prepare the dataset for the next phases, some pre-processing actions were performed, including discarding the records with unknown gene sequences; setting the vector and host fields with the missing values to their most common values in the dataset (i.e. “pET-28a(+)” and “BL21(DE3)” respectively); setting the expression level fields with missing values to “Medium” (the most common level value in the dataset which is “High” is not used to avoid making the dataset more imbalanced towards the “High” class); and replacing the string values of vector and host fields with numerical values (which are the orders of vector and host names as shown in Supplementary Data). The specification of the dataset used in this work, including size of each class and proportion in the dataset, is shown inTable 1.Because the dataset is small, Blastclust11http://toolkit.tuebingen.mpg.de/blastclust[5] with identity threshold 70% was used to check the sequences redundancy. The result showed the sequences were sufficiently diverse (93 clusters for 118 sequences).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
