@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Generic face adjacency graph for automatic common design structure discovery in assembly models

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Transform abstract relationships in assembly models into measurable entities.A more quantitative descriptor for assembly models has been developed.Transform the 3D assembly model into a 2D coordinate system.Common design structures in the assembly model can be discovered for reuse.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Generic face adjacency graph,Mating face pair,Common design structure,Frequent graph discovery,Assembly models,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Common Design Structure Discovery (CDSD) is to identify local structures shared by multiple models. Nowadays it is mainly restricted to part models. Extending it to assembly models can produce a significant value for assembly design reuse. However, current descriptions of assembly models usually capture topological information qualitatively, considering little geometric information, and thus are not suitable for CDSD in assembly models (CDSDA). To counter this problem, this paper proposes a generic face adjacency graph (GFAG) which is extended from the face adjacency graph for B-Rep part model description. GFAG can transform abstract relationships in assembly models into measurable entities by introducing a concept of mating face pair (MFP), thus facilitating a more quantitative and consistent description of parts and relationships in assembly models. Corresponding to geometric faces and edges in a part model, GFAG treats parts and relationships in an assembly model as generic faces and generic edges respectively. To make GFAG have a higher discrimination capability, a node in GFAG captures the geometric information of a part together with its mating parts by shape parameters and also quantitatively incorporates a relationship between parts by shape parameters of an MFP. By doing so, GFAG can take more geometric information, together with topological information, into account quantitatively, and thus can be mapped into a 2D coordinate system for easy validation. We also extend a discovery algorithm to validate the feasibility of GFAG for CDSDA, and the results demonstrate the expected effectiveness.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Design is a critical stage in any new product development and commits over 80% of the product development costs  [1]. In product design, there are many common subparts of different 3D CAD models (including part and assembly), and exploiting the commonality of product, as well as the knowledge embedded, could effectively inspire designs and speed up the design process  [2]. For this purpose, technology applications such as case-based design, product platforms, product families, and group technology have been developed and widely used. However, the commonalities are usually identified manually based on the past experience, suffering from low efficiency and lack of enough detailed information  [3]. This facilitates the significant development of a technique, namely, common design structure discovery (CDSD)  [3], which treats a common design structure as a problem of frequent substructure discovery: given a set of 3D modelsM={m1,m2,m3,…}and a local modelm′, ifm′appearsfitimes as a substructure ofmiand for a given threshold valueζ,∑i=1|M|fi/|M|≥ζ, thenm′is a common structure ofM. CDSD is a relatively new research problem in the CAD community and has shown potentials for automating design knowledge discovery. Its mathematical formation is quite similar to that of frequent subgraph discovery in data mining  [4], but it takes shape analysis of 3D models, especially local shape analysis, into account. In addition, although CDSD requires shape comparison as 3D geometrical model retrieval  [5] does, its goal is to identify local structures shared by multiple models instead of finding models with a given structure.Currently, CDSD is merely restricted to part models and not yet extended to assembly models. Similar to CDSD in part models, CDSD in assembly models (CDSDA) is of significance to (1) support downstream manufacturing and service operations; (2) reduce product development time by eliminating the need for modeling, analysis, and process planning repeatedly; and (3) provide access to existing design knowledge such as cost, reliability, and failure reports  [6]. However, traditional assembly model descriptions (graph-based, tree-based for example  [7,8]) are usually qualitative, mainly considering topological information, while CDSDA needs a more quantitative descriptor. The main obstacle may lie in the abstract relationships (such as mating and joint) between parts: they are not concrete entities and cannot be captured quantitatively easily.This paper attempts to extend CDSD to assembly models, with the main focus on the development of a suitable descriptor for CDSDA. Its main contribution is to transform abstract relationships between parts in an assembly model into measurable entities, leading to a quantitative capture of those relationships and a quantitative descriptor for assembly models. Concretely, we introduce a concept of mating face pair (MFP) to quantitatively capture abstract relationships in assembly models and propose a generic face adjacency graph (GFAG) to quantitatively describe assembly models. In order to implement CDSDA based on GFAG, a discovery algorithm  [3] that improves the well-known apriori-based graph mining (AGM)  [9] in the area of data mining is also extended.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. First, a brief review of the related works is given in Section  2, and some basic concepts and methods are introduced in Section  3. Then, the method to develop GFAG as a descriptor for the assembly model is demonstrated in Section  4. Following this, Section  5 illustrates the discovery algorithm based on GFAG, Section  6 gives the results, and Section  7 makes some discussion. Finally, conclusions and future work of this paper are discussed in Section  8.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
CDSD is a new research problem in the CAD community, and resolution of the problem shows potentials for automating design knowledge discovery and design feature library customization  [3]. Based on the significant research work that has been done, this paper presents a GFAG for CDSDA. Through identifying frequent subgraphs of GFAGs of assembly models, the common assembly structure can be discovered. The main characteristic of GFAG is that it can transform abstract mating and joint relationships in assembly models into measurable entities based on MFPs. As such, it can capture both the geometrical and topological information of assembly models more quantitatively. In addition, GFAG is easy to create and has good shape differentiation capability, for it considers part together with its mating parts. CDSDA based on GFAG is demonstrated by extending a discovery algorithm, and experimental results suggest the feasibility of the proposed approach. However, there are also some problems which need to be solved further.First, shape parameters in GFAG are obtained based on point sampling. As is mentioned in  [32], the graphs of the same part model will undergo a local change whenever they are drawn because of the characteristic of the random point sampling. Though our experiments show that for a simple part model the sampling results are stable, this is not the case for part models with many small features and free-form surfaces. This may be an inherent problem with GFAG. For the part model with many small features, we can pre-process these models carefully, as many literatures [3,12,32] have done. However, experiments show that this is not enough, free-form surfaces should also be avoided as much as possible. When free-form surfaces are present in a model, the two parameters from the statistics of point convexity are not sufficient to describe the shape of a face. As such, it cannot ensure that the discovery algorithm based on GFAG is also effective enough when it was used in assembly models with a large number of free-form surfaces.Second, the dimensions of the parts and their relative ratios are not considered in the shape comparison. To reduce the sensitivity of the GFAG to small parts for CDSDA, the relative volumes of parts could be adopted to differentiate the significance of the parts to the whole assembly model; they could be a weight for a part code or a threshold value for eliminating a node from GFAGs.We will continue our research on these issues in the future. In spite of these limitations, the proposed GFAG is still a useful graph for CDSDA and can be used for rough common structure discovery to narrow the discovery range for fine common structure discovery. It can also serve as a foundation for the development of other, more effective, algorithms, in other areas such as assembly model retrieval.