@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Enhanced Product Lifecycle Information Management using “communicating materials”

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A system for an enhanced Product LifeCycle Information Management (PLIM) is proposed.A dual challenge is addressed: providing a new intelligent material & a high degree of data synchronization.These challenges are addressed with the combination ofCL2Mand “communicating materials”.A scenario using “medical garments” shows how the desired degree of data synchronization is reached.Research perspectives on data synchronization regarding existing standards are introduced.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Product Lifecycle Management,Closed-Loop Lifecycle Management,Intelligent product,Communicating material,Data synchronization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
With traditional PLM (Product Lifecycle Management), people think toward the future: first comes product development, then manufacturing, then support and finally disposal — data flows only in the forward direction. With theCL2M(Closed-Loop Lifecycle Management) concept, there are also flows going backward, enabling better visibility and control of the product throughout its PLC (Product Life Cycle).CL2Muses “intelligent products” to gather information at any instant of the PLC and to make it available on downstream or upstream PLC phases. However, the information is often deported on a database and is accessed remotely via a network pointer carried by the product. To bring theCL2Mconcept a step further, this paper addresses a dual challenge: (i) providing a new kind of intelligent material capable of undergoing physical transformations without losing its communication ability and the data that is stored on it, (ii) providing a framework to achieve a high degree of data synchronization (i.e. enabling data updates on the product, regardless of the network availability). An applicative scenario is presented, showing how this kind of material is put into practice in the context of “communicating medical garments” and how the requirements of the desired degree of data synchronization can be reached.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Today, the study of the product life cycle (PLC) is an integral part of the company strategy to plan, design and manage their activities more effectively. In general, the PLC consists of three main phases: Beginning of Life (BoL), including design and production, Middle of Life (MoL), including use and maintenance, and End of Life (EoL), including recycling and disposal. It is a major challenge for a company to get real control of their products throughout their PLC. To enable such a control, the concept of Product Lifecycle Management (PLM) appeared in the 1990s as an extension of PDM (Product Data Management)  [1–3]. However, over the last decade, the research consortium involved in the FP6 IP 507100 project PROMISE (PROduct lifecycle Management and Information tracking using Smart Embedded systems) claimed that traditional PLM systems have a lack of product knowledge and visibility in both MoL and EoL phases. That is even more important today since companies recognize that future profits will not come from the manufacture of products (i.e. from BoL) in developed countries  [4]. Companies in countries where labor costs are 10% or 20% of those in Europe will be able to carry out manufacturing activities at a much lower cost. However, production is only one phase of the PLC and there are other areas where companies can add values. They can, for instance, develop ideas for new environment-friendly products, provide customized and advanced products and improve the customer experience. The PROMISE consortium reported that with emerging technologies such as wireless sensors, telecommunication and product identification technologies, it is possible to expand the scope of traditional PLM to fill the existing gaps. This extension gave rise to the concept of “closed-loop PLM”  [5], whose breakthrough challenge is to enable the information flow to include the customer and to enable the seamless transformation of information to knowledge. For instance, designers (in BoL) could be provided with real-time data about the conditions of use of their products (i.e. information from MoL) and of retirement (i.e. information from EoL). This is an important step in improving future product designs and product generations  [5,6]. This concept was renamed CL2M (Closed-Loop Lifecycle Management)  [7].Closing the product lifecycle information loops offers the possibility to analyze the different information feedbacks to extract new product knowledge. However, that requires the identification of a specific “item” from a given product family,11The term “item” could also be referred to as “individual product” or “product instance”  [8,9]. For consistency purposes, “item” is used all along this paper.from its manufacturing to its disposal. For this to happen, Product Lifecycle Information Management (PLIM) systems have emerged in recent years  [8]. Generally speaking, these systems associate a unique identifier (UID) with each produced item, which is a practical means of accessing remote item-related information. This principle is depicted in Fig. 1. Today, in many applications, intelligent products/items only provide a network pointer (e.g. via an RFID tag) to a linked database and a decision making software agent  [10,11]. In such a situation, it is necessary to have a permanent connectivity of the item with the associated databases. However, it is not an easy matter to fulfill such a requirement in the context of PLC. Indeed, an item passes through numerous companies, undergoes various operations and is used in different ways, which prevent connectivity to the right database at the right time (e.g. a matter of network availability, of access rights,…).To bring CL2M a step further, a dual challenge is addressed in this paper. The first one aims at providing a new kind of intelligent material capable of undergoing physical transformations without losing its communication ability and the data that is stored on it. Indeed, in the case where a standard product (e.g. a product fitted with a unique RFID tag) is cut,22The term “standard products” is used in this paper to make the difference with products/items made of “communicating material”.the resulting pieces lose all product-related data and their communication ability. The proposal of such a new material has been studied in the previous work  [12,13], giving rise to the “communicating material” paradigm. This paradigm and related tools are presented in Section  2. The second challenge aims at providing a framework for data synchronization. Indeed, storing information on the item inevitably generates data replicas in the system that must be managed properly. To get the most out of the “communicating material” paradigm, data synchronization is one of the important techniques to be developed. Section  3 introduces the existing data synchronization strategies and then details how the “communicating material” paradigm makes it possible to reach a high degree of data synchronization. Finally, an applicative scenario in the framework of medical garment lifecycle is presented in Section  4, which helps to show that the requirements of the desired data synchronization are met and that the information continuum throughout the PLC is improved.The new paradigm of “communicating material” studied in  [13] changes drastically the way to see the material that the item is made of. It aims at giving two main abilities to the material:•the ability of being intrinsically and wholly communicating: even if the product undergoes physical transformation, the resulting pieces shall still be able to communicate;the ability of managing itself its data: pushing the “communicating material” paradigm to its extreme, the material should be able to manage its own data according to the events occurring in its environment. For instance, the material could decide itself to propagate/replicate specific data onto different material parts because a physical transformation is scheduled, thus avoiding data loss. Another example would be the mutation of the data when adverse events occurs.Abundant research in the framework of database systems deals with the problem of data distribution  [16], but the approaches too often neglect the context of use of the data to assess its “relevance” to be stored on the mobile database/device  [17–20]. This problem is particularly important in the framework of PLC since the item’s environment dramatically changes. Indeed, an item moves through numerous companies with various core business sectors and many information systems  [21,4]. The appropriate information to embed on the item is therefore depends upon a variety of factors (user concerns, item’s environment,…). Accordingly, an approach was developed in the previous work  [13] to assess such a relevance. This relevance gives the degree to which information might be useful for the subsequent actors of the PLC and, accordingly, might be useful to be stored on the item itself. The essential elements of this approach are described hereafter.First, let us note that this approach uses the Logical Data Model (LDM). Fig. 3gives insight into a part of such an LDM. A given LDM entity corresponds, once implemented, to a relational table as shown in Fig. 3 with the table/entity MaterialDefinition. The attributes listed in each entity correspond to the table columns, each row is referred to as a “tuple” and a table cell is called a “data item”. In this example, MaterialDefinition has 4 attributes and 4 tuples (i.e. 16 data items). In our approach, the relevance is computed at the level of the data item. However, only tuples related to the item (i.e. to the individual product) are assessed.44An algorithm is developed in  [13] to identify such tuples from the database.In this paper, these tuples are referred to as “item-related tuples”. For instance, in Fig. 3, only tuple 3 is identified as an item-related tuple (represented with dashed background) and thus, only the data items that compose this tuple are assessed in term of relevancy. In our approach, several criteria are defined to represent the context of use of the item (actor’s expectations, LDM characteristics, geographic location of the item, etc.). For each criterion, the calculation of a relative priorityρx(withxa criterion) and an assigned priorityϕx(l)(withla data item) are performed. The first priority (relative) indicates how important the criterionxover the others is. The second one (assigned) corresponds to the priority value (between 0 and 1) computed for each data itemlwith respect to criterionx(withl={1,…,n},nbeing the number of item-related data items from the database). Both priorities are then combined as in Eq. (1), which provides the relevance degreeR(l)of data iteml, withsize(l)the size of data iteml(expressed in bytes). This formula shows that the higher the prioritiesρxandϕx(l), the higher is the data item relevance. Finally, data items are classified in order of relevance (according toR(l)). In the example given in Fig. 3, the relevance value of the four data items that compose tuple 3 is displayed.55The different steps to compute these relevances are not presented in this paper (see  [13]).It can be noted that the data item located at row 3, column 4, notedTMD{3,4}, is the most relevant (relevance of 0.6) and shall be stored in priority on the item.(1)R(l)=∑xρx⋅ϕx(l)ln(size(l))size(l)>1.Process step 2 of the information dissemination process deals with the storage of data items on the “communicating material”. An RFID tag may store more or less information according to the available memory on the tag and thus, one data item may require more memory space than that available in one tag. The idea is therefore to split the set of data items among several tags that compose the “communicating material”. To do so, a specific application protocol, named splitting protocol, was developed in  [12]. This protocol defines a header that is added in each RFID tag to know in which order the data items are split. This header requires, in each RFID tag, 16 bytes out of thenwritable. Appendix provides an example detailing the different header fields and, by the way, shows how the data itemTMD{3,4}(cf.   Fig. 3) is split over a “communicating textile” (cf.   Fig. 9).The “communicating material” paradigm enables to link information to specific parts of the material on a life-long basis. However, linking information to the item inevitably generates data replicas in the system that must be managed properly. For instance, if data carried by the item has to be updated without access to the database and later “synchronized” with it, some strategies/protocols are required. Such strategies are referred to as “data synchronization”  [22]. Section  3 describes how it is possible to ensure a high degree of data synchronization using the “communicating material” paradigm.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
