@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Monitoring of autonomic response to sociocognitive tasks during treatment in children with Autism Spectrum Disorders by wearable technologies: A feasibility study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Wearable sensors can be used to measure autonomic response in ASD during treatment.Correlation between autonomic response and engagement of the children.Longitudinal changes in the children's autonomic response during the engagement.Physiological data can help clinicians for objectivize and personalize the therapy.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASDs),Electrocardiogram (ECG),Wearable platform,Heart Rate,Heart Rate Variability (HRV),Respiratory Sinus Arrhythmia (RSA),Monitoring,Personalization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundAutism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) represent a heterogeneous set of neurodevelopmental disorders characterized by impairments in social domain, where the autonomic nervous system (ANS) plays an important role. Several researchers have studied the ANS in ASD, during specific cognitive or sensory stimuli while few studies have examined response during social interactions. Wearable technologies can be very helpful in monitoring autonomic response in children with ASD in semi-naturalistic setting. The novelty of this study is to use such technologies to acquire physiological signals during therapeutic sessions supported by interactive “serious games” and to correlate the ANS response to the engagement of the child during sociocognitive tasks for an evaluation of the treatment effect and for the personalization of the therapy.MethodA wearable chest belt for electrocardiographic (ECG) signal recording was used and specific algorithms for the extraction of clinically relevant features (Heart Rate – HR, Root Mean Square of the Successive Differences – RMSSD and Respiratory Sinus Arrhythmia – RSA) were developed. Sociocognitive tasks were mediated by “serious games” implemented on two tablets, which allowed a precise coding of the behaviors of the children. A longitudinal assessment of the physiological response of the children during six months of treatment was performed.ResultsA link between physiological response, i.e. decrease in RMSSD and RSA, and engagement of the children during sociocognitive tasks was found. Longitudinal changes in the children's autonomic response, including a decrease of RSA during the engagement throughout the therapeutic sessions, were found.ConclusionsThese results foster the feasibility of this methodology to be applied in a clinical setting for the monitoring of the ANS response of children with ASD during treatment. A larger sample of patients is needed to confirm these preliminary findings.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) are a set of pervasive developmental disorders characterized by social/communication deficits and by a limited range of interests with repetitive stereotypical behavior [1]. Early treatment is a crucial step to ameliorate some of the symptoms associated with ASD due to maximal brain plasticity [2]. In addiction, given the heterogeneity of the disorder and its developmental nature, a single treatment may not be appropriate for all children with ASD. Thus the implementation of personalized and evolving protocols for intervention could increase the effectiveness of treatments and better define the question of intensiveness of therapy [3]. This is particularly relevant in high-functioning ASD (HF-ASD), on which this paper is focused.One of the key aspects of HF-ASD is an impairment in social interactions. In particular the key social difficulties in school-aged children with HF-ASD include reduced ability to understand emotions, lack of social reciprocity, lack of interest in other's people feeling and emotions and limited use of eye gaze and facial expression [4]. Usually during playing or interactive activities with a social partner, these children have difficulties in coordinating actions, while they tend to perform repetitive and stereotypical behaviors not related to the social context [5].Social behavior is closely linked with variations in autonomic nervous system (ANS). The ANS plays an important role in the regulation of the dynamic changes of behaviors and physiological states during social interaction. The Polyvagal Theory [6] describes the connections between the autonomic system and the changes in social behavior.Several researchers have studied the autonomic function in clinical populations in the attempt of gaining new insights into the etiology of psychiatric disorders. Some studies have been performed also in ASD, although the research in this field is still in its infancy. The majority of these studies have assessed heart rate (HR), heart rate variability (HRV) or respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA) at baseline [7,8] or during specific cognitive or sensory stimuli [9–12]. Few studies have examined RSA or other measures of HRV in response to social events and stimuli [8,13–15]. Overall these studies have shown an altered autonomic function in ASD compared with typically developing controls. In particular patients with ASD seem to have an over arousal compared with age-matched controls at baseline (increased sympathetic activity) and a difficulty in adapting autonomic parameters, in particular RSA and HRV, in response to external stimuli (decreased parasympathetic response).A possible limitation of these studies is the artificial constraint in which the signals have been recorded. Indeed, participants are usually submitted to the selected artificial stimuli, which may or may not be closely related with naturally occurring situations. These settings may introduce systematic and non-systematic biases in the characterization of the physiological measures. In particular, for the monitoring of autonomic response to social situations it should be important to use an ecological setting as close as possible to that observed in a therapeutic scenario or in real-life situations. In a very recent study, Neuhaus et al. [16] recorded autonomic data during social interactions and showed that the responses were different according to the different social partners. These data suggest that the settings can influence the physiological response enhancing or constraining the social skills of the children.The monitoring of physiological parameters in children in such ecological settings is obviously much more challenging than recording the same parameters under controlled conditions. To successfully accomplish this aim, it is necessary that the equipment for the acquisition does not interfere with the activities performed by the child during the recording.At this aim, wearable systems and wireless technologies provide a useful support, allowing monitoring patients in an unobtrusive way [17]. These solutions are particularly suitable for the recording of physiological parameters in young children with neuropsychiatric conditions, thanks to their good tolerability by patients, as previously demonstrated [18]. Wearable solutions used during therapeutic sessions can also be effective in providing objective measures about the physiological response of the child, thus helping clinicians in the personalization of the treatment. To be efficient in the recording, wearable devices should be easy to use, comfortable to wear, efficient in power consumption and featuring very low failure rates. Another crucial point for the interpretation of the signal extracted from the wearable devices, which needs to be linked to the behaviors of the children during the social interaction, is the detailed behavioral coding of the interaction task [16].The present study describes the application of a wearable solution combined with wireless technologies for the monitoring of the autonomic response in children with ASD during treatment. Therapeutic sessions were supported by the use of the so-called “serious games”, which were simultaneously run on two tablets guiding the child-therapist interaction. Indeed in recent years, computer based approaches have been shown to be effective in improving the learning cognitive and social skills (i.e. sociocognitive) of children with various learning disability conditions [19,20].This study has been carried out within the framework of MICHELANGELO, a project funded by the European Commission (FP7-ICT G.A. #288241) (http://www.michelangelo-project.eu/). In this project a technological platform for the monitoring of behavioral and physiological parameters of children with ASD was developed, which allows acquiring in a synchronized way a video registration of the sessions, electroencephalographic signals (EEG) and electrocardiographic activity (ECG). This paper focuses in particular on the acquisition and the analysis of the ECG signals obtained in the six months exploratory study of the project at IRCCS Stella Maris Scientific Foundation. ECG recordings were obtained by a single-lead system realized by the Institute of Clinical Physiology (IFC) of the National Research Council (CNR) of Italy and analyzed in order to obtain measures of the physiological response of the ASD children during treatment and to link them to the behavior.This is a feasibility study whose aims were:(i)to test the tolerability of wearable sensors technologies by young children with ASD during treatment;to evaluate the possibility to detect some modifications in physiological parameters induced by sociocognitive tasks in a semi-naturalistic setting, i.e. during an interaction of the children with the therapists mediated by “serious games”;to observe whether some longitudinal modifications, specific for each child, could be registered in the physiological response to treatment over the therapy sessions.If successful, this protocol could be applied to investigate the relationship between dynamic changes in the behavior of the child autonomic response, indicating the child's level of engagement during the treatment, overcoming artificial and constrained situations characterizing common assessment protocols.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The methodology adopted for this pilot study and described here demonstrated its feasibility in a cohort of patients with HF-ASD. Therefore, in the future it could be applied in a larger number of patients to support the therapist for evaluating the engagement of children with ASD during therapy not only by behavioral observations but also with more objective data, in order to assess the progress of the children throughout the treatment and to properly personalize the therapy. Despite its application on a small cohort, being a pilot study, the protocol adopted seems to be effective in enhancing sociocognitive skills in patients with ASD, according to the overall longitudinal variations of children's cardiac autonomic parameters. However, this research also highlights the need for an individualization of the treatment, due to the variability experienced by the children enrolled in this pilot, and this should be taken into account when planning a personalized therapeutic approach in a similar population.