@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Improving point correspondence in cephalograms by using a two-stage rectified point transform

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
HighlightA two-stage rectified point correspondence for cephalograms is proposed.Correspondence is improved by constraining the variance of point transformations.Dental landmarks are classified into three categories to improve correspondence.Users can flexibly add and remove landmarks without intensive image pretraining.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cephalometric landmarking,Cephalogram correspondence,Point transform correspondence,SIFT,Cephalometry,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundAn improved point correspondence method was developed for automatically detecting two-dimensional cephalometric landmarks. The proposed method uses a two-stage rectified point transform: the global correspondence of interest points between two images and the local correspondence of landmarks.MethodIn the first stage, point-to-point matching pairs were established using local corner point features. The matched points on an input image were treated as a set of transformations, with varying directions and magnitudes, from the template image. Similarity of the transformation vectors was achieved through rectification to exclude vectors that deviated widely from the statistical mean. Rectification attempted to remove noise and irrelevant matched points. In the second stage, the point correspondences were fine-tuned within the regional centers of the landmarks, which were classified into three categories—corners, edges, and structural points—and each category was fine-tuned using a different strategy. Correspondence was performed by evaluating the shortest Euclidean distance between the point descriptors of the template and test images.ResultsThe correspondence results of 20 orthodontic landmarks were compared with those identified by dental professionals on 80 digital cephalograms collected from a dental clinic. The proposed method detected both hard and soft tissue landmarks with mean error distances of 1.63mm, compared with the 2-mm standard reported by previous studies.ConclusionsThis study enhanced the point correspondence technique for cephalometric landmarking. Using the proposed method, users can preferentially and flexibly add and remove landmarks on a template before correspondence without intensive image pretraining.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Cephalograms are medical X-ray images used in dentistry, showing lateral views of the head, and analysis of the prominent landmarks on cephalograms is termed cephalometric analysis. Developed by Broadbent in 1931 [1], cephalometric analysis provides diagnostic information in orthodontic treatment [2,3]. Manually identifying cephalometric landmarks is challenging because of the superimposition of complex bony structures of the head; their readability depends heavily on image quality. Practitioners must repeatedly adjust brightness and contrast levels for observing obscure details, which complicates clinical practice.Automating cephalometric landmark detection was first explored in 1984 [4], and numerous automation techniques have since been proposed. These techniques can be classified into four categories: image filtering and knowledge-based landmark search, model-based, soft-computing, and hybrid approaches [5]. The image filtering and knowledge-based approach uses a knowledge base for locating landmarks along lines and edges after applying specific filters [6–10]. The model-based approach uses pretrained models for matching landmark patterns [10–15]. In soft computing, artificial intelligence algorithms predict landmark locations [16–22]. The hybrid approach combines two or more of the aforementioned approaches [23–28]. The high precision required in clinical applications is a challenge for these approaches, and most fail to meet the criterion [29] of a ≦2mm mean error for each automatically detected landmark. Although mean error of a ≦0.81mm has been recommended in orthodontic practice and research, most studies published on automatic landmark location considered a ≦2mm error to be successful and a ≦4mm error acceptable [5]. In this paper, we propose an automated correspondence technique for cephalograms to assist dental practitioners. The proposed system reduces the massive professional effort required in preprocessing and model training. The correspondence errors were measured and compared with the aforementioned criterion.Previous studies have primarily focused on detecting hard tissue, which is the most prominent structure. However, cephalometric analysis is no longer focused only on hard tissues and has begun to consider the esthetics of soft tissue profiles. In 1981, Ricketts [30] proposed the esthetic line (E-line), a soft tissue profile estimator, which is a line drawn from the nose tip to the lower chin for determining the lip profile status. Numerous studies [31–33] have since used E-line for esthetic measurement. A recent study [34] emphasized that the esthetics of E-line soft tissue profiles differ according to racial groups. In summary, soft tissue measurement is now essential and has been widely used in esthetic treatments [35–37]. However, hard and soft tissues exhibit unequal readability on cephalograms, and optimal enhancement algorithms that simultaneously enhance both prominent and hidden tissues are scant. This study performed point correspondence for soft tissue esthetic landmarks seldom reported by previous studies. Practitioners can manually fine-tune any mislocated landmarks on a user interface with minimal effort.Point correspondence has improved over the years. In the scale-invariant feature transform (SIFT) proposed by Lowe in 2004 [38], the descriptor appears invariant to image scaling, rotation, and transformation and outperforms related algorithms. SIFT extensions, such as principal component analysis SIFT [39], gradient location orientation histogram [40], speeded up robust features (SURF) [41], and Affine SIFT [42], exhibit enhanced performance, small dimensional features, and high robustness to image variations. They detect corner points for identifying the same object in two images in nonmedical environments. In dental applications, cephalometric correspondence detects human anatomic landmarks. Because structures differ according to the patient, the aforementioned methods can fail in landmark correspondences in X-ray images. Moreover, previous studies have focused on the corner point correspondences in images and ignored noncorner point correspondences for clinical applications. To overcome the drawbacks of previous studies, we propose a method to reduce correspondence errors in dental images. Cephalometric landmarks are classified into three categories and correspondence is performed through a rectification process customized for each category to achieve a similar correspondence pattern, thereby increasing the accuracy of landmark detection substantially.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Anatomic structures in the human skull are primarily composed of skeletal and soft tissues, which are similar in healthy individuals. The proposed correspondence method addresses this similarity. The similarity of structures facilitates point-to-point correspondence between images. Moreover, medical images are less susceptible to scale, rotational, and distortional changes.We used these uniform characteristics of medical images to improve correspondence by using the proposed two-stage rectified transformation. The point-to-point transformations between images were highly rectified. In the first stage, global information was acquired and the relative locations of the landmarks were predicted. In the second stage, correspondences focused only on a small local region to perform a detailed search. In addition, we overcame the limitations associated with SIFT techniques, which correspond only the corner points, and provided a solution for clinical landmark correspondences.This study excluded computation that solves severe scale, rotational, and distortional problems, and the detection accuracy may differ in images affected by such problems. Future research efforts will be focused on solving existing problems and improving detection stability.None declared.