@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Indicators of hypertriglyceridemia from anthropometric measures based on data mining

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Waist-to-height ratio was the best predictor of hypertriglyceridemia in Korean women.Rib-to-forehead ratio was the strongest indicator of hypertriglyceridemia in men.The best indicator of hypertriglyceridemia may differ according to age and gender.Combined measures provide better predictive power compared with individual measures.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Hypertriglyceridemia,Data mining,Prediction,Triglycerides,Anthropometry,Statistical data analysis,Machine learning,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundThe best indicator for the prediction of hypertriglyceridemia derived from anthropometric measures of body shape remains a matter of debate. The objectives are to determine the strongest predictor of hypertriglyceridemia from anthropometric measures and to investigate whether a combination of measures can improve the prediction accuracy compared with individual measures.MethodsA total of 5517 subjects aged 20–90 years participated in this study. The numbers of normal and hypertriglyceridemia subjects were 3022 and 653 females, respectively, and 1306 and 536 males, respectively. We evaluated 33 anthropometric measures for the prediction of hypertriglyceridemia using statistical analysis and data mining.ResultsIn the 20–90-year-old groups, age in women was the variable that exhibited the highest predictive power; however, this was not the case in men in all age groups. Of the anthropometric measures, the waist-to-height ratio (WHtR) was the best predictor of hypertriglyceridemia in women. In men, the rib-to-forehead circumference ratio (RFcR) was the strongest indicator. The use of a combination of measures provides better predictive power compared with individual measures in both women and men. However, in the subgroups of ages 20–50 and 51–90 years, the strongest indicators for hypertriglyceridemia were rib circumference in the 20–50-year-old group and WHtR in the 51–90-year-old group in women and RFcR in the 20–50-year-old group and BMI in the 51–90-year-old group in men.ConclusionsOur results demonstrated that the best predictor of hypertriglyceridemia may differ according to gender and age.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In both Western and Eastern populations, hypertriglyceridemia is becoming more common [1–5]. Hypertriglyceridemia, or high triglycerides (TGs), which indicates an abnormal concentration of TGs in the blood [6], is a primary predictor of type IIb dyslipidemia [7], and it is one of several independent lipid factors used to predict the risk of cardiovascular disease (CVD) [7–9]. Patients with coronary heart disease (CHD) and coronary artery disease have higher levels of plasma TGs, total cholesterol, and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) [10,11]. Overweight and, more specifically, abdominal obesity have been associated with hypertriglyceridemia, dyslipidemia, type 2 diabetes, systemic hypertension, stroke, CHD, obstructive sleep apnea, gout, osteoarthritis, liver disease, and several types of cancer [12–16]. Additionally, obesity and body shape are associated with high levels of plasma TGs and low levels of plasma high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) levels [17–21].Anthropometric measures of body shape detailed by Cornier et al. [14] are reasonable alternatives used to identify fat distribution (regional obesity) and obesity-related diseases [22,23]. Although radiological imaging techniques, computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), bioimpedance, and dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry are useful and accurate methods to determine abdominal fat levels and body composition [24], they are expensive, not easily accessible, and potentially dangerous to some patients, such as pregnant women or individuals with pacemakers. Therefore, these techniques are not suitable for epidemiological and clinical purposes [10,22].For decades, numerous studies have investigated the association of anthropometric measures with hypertriglyceridemia, and the findings have directed the diagnosis and treatment of hypertriglyceridemia, CVD, dyslipidemia, type 2 diabetes, and metabolic syndrome [25–28]. However, the best predictor or indicator for the prediction of hypertriglyceridemia among the anthropometric measures of body shape remains a matter of debate [25–27,29–41]. For example, waist circumference (WC) was the best single predictor of hypertriglyceridemia in Korean adults [25,29], Taiwanese men and women [30], and Hispanic and Caucasian adolescents [31]. However, in Swiss men and women [26], Hong Kong Chinese women [32], Iranian men and women [33], and Thai women [34], the waist-to-hip ratio (WHR) was the strongest indicator of hypertriglyceridemia. The waist-to-height ratio (WHtR) exhibited superiority over other measures in Taiwanese [35] and German [36] men and women and in a meta-analysis [37]. In another study, body mass index (BMI) had a substantially stronger predictive power compared with other measures in Thai men [34], whereas in European women, the waist-to-thigh circumference ratio was the strongest indicator of hypertriglyceridemia [27].Several studies identified a combination of two factors for the prediction of hypertriglyceridemia. WHR and WHtR were better predictors compared with other measures in Hong Kong Chinese men [32], and WHR and WC were good indicators in Indian men [38] and Japanese subjects [39]. Furthermore, some studies have suggested that widely used anthropometric measures exhibited similar or identical predictive powers for hypertriglyceridemia. The predictive capabilities of BMI, WC, WHR, and WHtR for the prediction of hypertriglyceridemia were similar or identical in Iranian [40] and Asian/non-Asian [41] men and women.It has been demonstrated that the use of a combination of anthropometric measures to predict hypertriglyceridemia is important to improve the prediction accuracy. While some studies have indicated that the combination of two or more measures did not improve the predictive power for the identification of high TG status or dyslipidemia compared with the use of a single measure [31,37,41], combinations of several measures have been simultaneously used to successfully predict hypertriglyceridemia in other studies [30,42,43].The purpose of this study was to identify the best indicator of hypertriglyceridemia in Korean individuals using statistical analysis and machine learning techniques and to investigate whether a combination of anthropometric measures acquired from specific sites of the human body improves the prediction accuracy. For these purposes, we obtained data for 33 anthropometric measures from study participants and performed statistical analyses and prediction experiments. To our knowledge, no study has reported the outcome of hypertriglyceridemia prediction using a combination of anthropometric measures based on machine learning in Korean individuals. The results of the present study may help improve preliminary health-screening tools for hypertriglyceridemia and accelerate the integration of telemedicine or remote healthcare with existing medical systems.A total of 5517 subjects (3675 women and 1842 men) aged 20–90 years old participated in this retrospective cross-sectional study between November 2006 and August 2012. The data were collected from the Korean Health and Genome Epidemiology study database (KHGES). The Korea Institute of Oriental Medicine (KIOM) Institutional Review Board approved this study, and all subjects provided written informed consent.We used more detailed and varied anthropometric measures in the present study compared with previous studies. The specific sites measured in the body are important for the prediction of obesity-related diseases because small differences in the measured sites affect the ability to predict health risks [27,44]. For example, a study by Seidell et al. [27] regarding the association of cardiovascular risk factors with anthropometric measures proposed that the best site to measure WC in the body is midway between the superior anterior iliac crest and the lower rib margin in European women. All measurements were performed by a well-trained observer according to standard protocols. Height and weight were routinely measured in lightweight clothing without shoes to the nearest 0.1cm and 0.1kg, respectively (GL-150; G Tech International Co., Ltd Uijeongbu, Republic of Korea). The circumferences of 8 specific sites were measured using a non-elastic flexible tape while the subject was standing [45]. The BMI was computed as the weight in kilograms divided by the square of the height in meters. Detailed descriptions of the specific positions measured in the body are described in Jang et al. [45]. In previous studies [45,46], the forehead circumference (FC) was measured at the levels of the glabella and occiput in the head. The neck circumference (NC) was measured at the levels of the thyroid cartilage and cricoid cartilage, the axillary circumference (AC) was measured at the levels of the left and right axillae, the chest circumference (CC) was measured at the levels of the left and right nipples, the rib circumference (RC) was measured at the levels of the left and right 7th and 8th prominences of the costochondral junction, the WC was measured at the level of the umbilicus, the pelvic circumference (PC) was measured at the levels of the left and right anterior superior iliac spines, and the hip circumference (HC) was measured at the level of the upper edge of the pubis. The circumference ratios between 2 positions and all baseline data used in the present study are described inTable 1. The data used in this study were divided into male and female groups because the change in body shape with aging may differ according to sex.For the measurement of TG values, all participants were required to fast for at least 8h; blood samples were subsequently drawn (ADVIA 1800, Siemens, USA). Hypertriglyceridemia was defined as a fasting TG level of >2.26mmol/l (>200mg/dl) according to the recommendation of the National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) and previous studies [7,47–55]. Therefore, we followed the definition of a fasting TG level>200mg/dl and/or physician-diagnosed hypertriglyceridemia. Furthermore, if subjects who were diagnosed with hypertriglyceridemia completely recovered, they were considered normal subjects.All statistical analyses were performed with SPSS version 19 for Windows (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA) using binary logistic regression and the Waikato Environment for Knowledge Analysis data mining tool (WEKA) [56]. Concretely, a statistical evaluation of the significant differences between the normal subjects and subjects with hypertriglyceridemia was conducted using binary logistic regression. To identify the best predictor of hypertriglyceridemia among the various measures, we used two machine learning algorithms, logistic regression and the Naïve Bayes algorithm. Both Naïve Bayes and logistic regression are widely used to solve classification problems; however, their methods to estimate the classifier are different. For a brief explanation [57,58], letndenote the number of cases andprepresent the number of features. Then,yis ann×1random vector that denotes the binary class label, and a feature matrix can be represented asX=[x1,…,xp], wherexiis ann×1random vector that corresponds to the featurei. In Naïve Bayes, a classifier estimatesp(y|X)based on joint probabilityp(X,y)=p(y)p(X|y)from training data, and the weights for each feature are fitted independently, which is the so-called ‘generative model’. In contrast, logistic regression directly estimatesp(y|X)by minimizing error functions, taking into account the whole covariance among input features, which is the so-called ‘discriminative model’ [57,58].Furthermore, to identify the optimal combination of measures and to reduce model complexity, we used two variable-selection techniques: the filter approach, which used correlation-based feature subset selection (CFS) [59,60], and the wrapper approach [61,62]. In general, filter approaches select subsets of measures during a preprocessing step independent of prediction algorithms, and wrapper approaches employ a classifier to evaluate subsets of measures according to their prediction performance [62]. CFS was designed on the basis of the hypothesis that nice variable subsets consist of variables that are strongly correlated with the response variable (class) and are not correlated among independent variables (features) [59,60]. The CFS kernel was presented by the following equation, obtained from a previous study [59], which induces a ranking on variable subsets in the search space.Merits=kr¯cfk+k(k−1)r¯ffIn the equation [59], Meritsis the heuristic merit of a variable subset S that consists of k variables, andr¯cfis the mean correlation between the response and independent variables. Additionally,r¯ffis the mean inter-correlation between independent and dependent variables. Therefore, variables with a high correlation with the response variable and a low correlation with other independent variables are ranked as important variables. We can obtain the merit score of the best variable subsets during the search and identify the final variable subsets. In the wrapper approach [61,62], the variable subset selection is conducted using the induction algorithm (referred to as the black box) and performs a search using the induction algorithm itself as an evaluation function for the superior variable subset. A search in the wrapper approach consists of a search engine, such as a greedy search or a best-first search, a state space, a termination condition, and an initial state, such as the empty set of variables or full variable set. Each state in the search space organization indicates a variable subset. If there are n variables, there are n bits in each state. Each bit indicates that the variable is present or absent, and operators play the role of adding or eliminating a single variable from a state. Termination conditions may differ according to induction algorithms. We can determine the state with the highest accuracy using a heuristic function through the search process.In the statistical analysis step, the data were standardized with a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one; in the prediction experiments, we applied the supervised discretization technique proposed by Fayyad and Irani [63]. In the filter approach, after performing variable selection using CFS, prediction experiments were performed using logistic regression and the Naïve Bayes algorithm. In the wrapper approach, after performing variable selections using Naïve Bayes and logistic regression with a greedy step-wise (backward) search method, prediction experiments were performed using two machine learning algorithms. A schematic diagram on the workflow of this study is shown inFig. 1.The area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC or AROC) is a major criterion for comparison of the predictive powers of individual measures. The AUCs were derived from models that combined many measures to evaluate whether a clinically meaningful improvement in the discrimination of hypertriglyceridemia could be achieved by combining anthropometric measures. For a detailed analysis of the predictive power, we also included the additional criteria of sensitivity, 1-specificity, precision, and the F-measure in our analysis. The F-measure is defined as a harmonic mean between precision and recall, and it used important criterion for prediction or classification results; the maximization of both recall and precision values should be considered for a good prediction model and as a major issue of prediction algorithms [64]. A formal definition of the F-measure is provided as follows [64]:F-measure=2×recall×precisionrecall×precision=2×truepositive2×truepositive×falsepositive×falsenegative.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
