@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A personalized ellipsoid modeling method and matching error analysis for the artificial femoral head design

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We can obtain a more accurate personalized model of the femoral head prosthesis.The model can well match with the acetabulum.Static and dynamic matching error analyses can be implemented in our system.We can obtain a practical means for personalized modeling before manufacture.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Femoral head,Personalized modeling,Artificial prosthesis,Avascular necrosis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
For curing the worldwide disease — avascular necrosis of femoral head, the matching quality between the femoral head prosthesis and the acetabulum plays an important role in the operative treatment of the artificial femoral head replacement. In order to obtain a more accurate model of the femoral head prosthesis for the specified patient, a new personalized modeling system is presented in this paper. It is different from our previous system based on the sphere fitting method. This new system can reconstruct a more accurate ellipsoid model of the femoral head for the specified patient. It can recover the necrotic femoral heads into the satisfactory models. These models can well match with the acetabulum. Also, the static and dynamic matching error analyses for the reconstructed models can be implemented in this system. This new system can give a theoretical model for the accurate operation locating in the treatment of artificial femoral head replacement. And this system also provides an innovative practical means for the personalized modeling of the artificial femoral head before the prosthesis manufacture procedure.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In medicine, surgery and biomechanics, there is an increasing demand for computer aided instruments in order to assist doctors, technicians and engineers and to optimize clinical treatments and prosthetic devices. Therefore, new designing technologies and advanced CAD/CAM tools are essential today in that industry. Also, due to the growing number of surgical operations and the improvement of quality standards, surgeons and prosthesis designers are seeking tools that can support them in optimizing their activities, improving rehabilitative techniques and reducing the risk for patients. ‘Personalized’ and ‘precisionize’ are the development directions of modern medicine, especially for orthopedics. And ‘personalized’ is also the direct foundation and important guarantee of ‘precisionize’ in computer-assisted orthopedic surgery. Therefore, to meet the urgent requirements for the precise orthopedic surgery, we must utilize the patient’s own biological parameters, with the help of modern computer technology and modern manufacture technology, to produce the prosthesis which is matching with the patient’s bone structure.There have been many methods of 3D image reconstruction developed for the clinical treatment. For example, Davide et al. deduced a set of expressions which can be useful for the understanding of upper limb mobility and reproduce their complex motion. The methodology is based on the observations of previous contributions, which have been rearranged in order to be suitable for a complete implementation in modern Computer Aided Design environments  [1]. Sergei described a framework for the modeling of sweep solids on freeform surfaces, considering various geometric and functional constrains. The proposed approach was employed for semi-automatic computer aided design of ventilation tubes for customized hearing aid devices  [2]. Evila et al. presented an integrated tool for the design of a functional and innovative tracheal stent to meet the most critical requirements, based on physicians’, hospital administrators’ and patients’ experiences collected during the interviews and hospital visits  [3]. With the rapid development of 3D printing technology, the rapid prototyping based on reverse engineering can be achieved. Personalized prosthesis geometry reconstruction has become the current problems to be solved.As a typical disease in the orthopedic treatment, avascular necrosis of femoral head (ANFH) is a worldwide disease. Reportedly, there are millions of new cases annually all over the world. At the present time, there are mainly three treatment methods for patients with different age and different status. They are femoral head resurfacing arthroplasty, femoral head replacement and total hip replacement. Femoral head resurfacing arthroplasty is the most conservative treatment, and femoral head replacement is more conservative than total hip replacement. However, each treatment method has a not long period of validity (about 3–15 years), so the treatment choice is generally suggested to consider the sufferer’s age. Most of the scholars believe that the artificial femoral head replacement and the artificial femoral head resurfacing arthroplasty are the best treatment for most of the young advanced cases. When the period of validity is exhausted, the sufferers can receive the total hip replacement. Thereby, among these treatments, artificial femoral head replacement is the most commonly used method for young advanced cases  [4,5]. All over the world, more than 600,000 artificial femoral head implants are replaced in human bodies every year. More than 100 kinds of commercially available artificial femoral head implants exist at present. Nevertheless, these available artificial femoral heads are manufactured on an assembly line  [6–9]. The number of implant’s size which can be chosen by the surgeon is too small to meet the patient’s need.In fact, there is a significant individual difference in skeletal structure among different patients. The embedded artificial femoral head prostheses cannot match with the acetabulums well. As a result, a lot of patient’s thighbone cannot move freely. The replacement of artificial femoral head may modify the loading of bone, which might lead to direct overload or adverse remodeling of bone. What is more, artificial femoral head which does not match with the specified patient’s acetabulum will aggravate the stress shielding so that lifetime of the implant is reduced greatly [10–12]. Therefore, complications such as femoral neck fracture and implant loosening occurred constantly in the first few months post-operatively. In the end, the revision surgery which will cause tremendous physical pain and property loss may be the only method to relieve the patients’ pain and recover the basic function of hip joint. A great number of factors lead to the happening of post-operative complication, such as material property and geometrical property of the femoral head implant  [13–16]. Nowadays, there are many developments for the implant material, and it has achieved success in ensuring the stability of an implanted part. However, study on the geometrical property of artificial femoral head is still at the initial stage.Personalization and precision are the directions of development for the modern medicine. Personalization is also the direct foundation and important guarantee of the precision for computer assisted orthopedic surgery. We must make use of the patient’s own biological parameters and draw support from modern computer technology and manufacturing technology to produce the prosthesis which well matches with the patient’s bone structure. Thereby, the physiological functions of the patient can be farthest recovered. For the computer field, in order to better provide computational support to the diagnosis and treatment of orthopedic surgery, how to develop new graphical methods and how to utilize computer’s characteristic of precision have become a common goal of the academia. Along with the development of modern manufacturing, especially the rapid development of 3D printing technology, the reverse engineering based rapid manufacturing has become possible. Meanwhile, the world-wide researches on biocompatible materials are also advancing towards maturity. Consequently, for the femoral head prosthesis design, the personalized geometric model constructing has become the urgent problem to be solved.In recent studies, we developed a system to obtain the accurate ellipsoid femoral head model of a specified patient by reverse technology. Comparing with the previous system we developed based on sphere reconstruction, we can obtain higher precision and higher quality femoral head models by this improved system.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, a new system for reconstructing the femoral head model is developed. It can recover the necrotic femoral heads into the satisfactory models. These models can well match with the acetabulum. In this system, an accurate and automatic segmentation method is used to extract the acetabulum contours in the CT images of the specified patient. After reconstructing the acetabular bone model, a 3D mesh segmentation algorithm is utilized to acquire the mesh model of the facies articularis acetabularis. And then, the error data in the mesh vertex set are eliminated. At last, fit the ellipsoid model of the femoral head starting from the general equation of quadratic surface. For verifying the progressiveness and adaptability of the proposed modeling method, static and dynamic matching error analyses for the reconstructed models are implemented. The experimental results show that this system can well reconstruct the femoral head models of the specified patients. Comparing with our previous system, this new system can reconstruct more accurate models.Introducing the coordinate parameter constraints of the femoral head greater trochanter and lesser trochanter in the fitting process will be a probing direction in the future. Because these coordinate parameters can reduce the computational cost for solving the initial iterative values of the ellipsoid center. Biomechanical analysis is another important work in our future research process. The obtained personalized femoral head prosthesis model can be compared with the ordinary femoral head prosthesis models in the mechanics analysis system (such as ANSYS).