@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
LayTracks3D: A new approach for meshing general solids using medial axis transform

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The proposed meshing algorithm handles general solids.Output mesh is boundary sensitive and preserves sharp features.Output mesh has very low percentage of non-hex elements.LayTracks3D is based on a mathematically sound formulation of MAT.Extension to all-hex meshing is discussed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Medial axis transforms,Hex mesh generation,Hex-dominant meshing,Geometry decomposition,Assembly meshing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents an extension of the all-quad meshing algorithm called LayTracks to generate high quality hex-dominant meshes of general solids. LayTracks3D uses the mapping between the Medial Axis (MA) and the boundary of the 3D domain to decompose complex 3D domains into simpler domains called Tracks. Tracks in 3D have no branches and are symmetric, non-intersecting, orthogonal to the boundary, and the shortest path from the MA to the boundary. These properties of tracks result in desired meshes with near cube shape elements at the boundary, structured mesh along the boundary normal with any irregular nodes restricted to the MA, and sharp boundary feature preservation. The algorithm has been tested on a few industrial CAD models and hex-dominant meshes are shown in the Results section. Work is underway to extend LayTracks3D to generate all-hex meshes.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Many computational simulations such as non-linear solid mechanics require all-hex or hex-dominant meshes. Currently, there is no ideal automatic hexahedron meshing algorithm to mesh general solids or assemblies with commonly desired features in a hexahedron mesh as this is a very challenging problem. In most cases, users have to resort to using meshes of suboptimal quality or spend a significant amount of time generating them. In complex cases, the creation of a desirable hexahedral mesh may take months even for an expert user. This hexahedron mesh generation process tends to dominate the overall cost of numerical simulations. Therefore, improvements in the hexahedron meshing technology are of significant importance to the computational simulation community.The long-term goal of LayTracks3D is to generate hexahedron meshes of solids and assembly models with desirable features such as boundary sensitivity, orientation insensitivity, sharp feature preservation, high-quality mesh, and the handling of general solids. The mesh generator should have the ability to generate a variety of meshes by controlling sizing and anisotropy, generate geometry adaptive meshes, provide fast remeshing during FEM iterations, and should be scalable. The current focus has been to generate hex-dominant meshes.This paper is an extension of the all-quad meshing algorithm proposed by the author called LayTracks  [1]. Section  2 gives mathematical definition and properties of medial axis transform. Section  3 reviews the literature on the method of decomposition and advancing front methods as LayTracks3D combines the merits of these two methods. Section  4 gives an overview of the original 2D LayTracks algorithm on a single surface and multiple surfaces as it is easy to visualize the algorithm in 2D. Section  5 gives an overview of LayTracks3D on a single solid. The remaining part of the paper discusses extensions of LayTracks3D for assembly meshing and all-hex meshing. The Results section shows hex-dominant meshes on a few industrial models as the all-hex meshing is not fully implemented at this time.The Medial Axis Transform (MAT) was first proposed by Blum  [2–4] to describe shapes for biological problems. He defines the medial axis as loci of centers of locally maximal balls as it flows inside an object. The maximal ball can be defined as(1)Ball(x,r)=p∣distance(p,x)<r,p∈Rn.The loci with the radii of the associated locally maximal balls is defined as the medial axis transform of the object.Definition 2.1LetAbe a subset ofRnandx∈Rnbe a point inA. The Medial Axis Transform ofA,MAT(A), is a subset ofRn−1consisting of the closure of points(x,rx),rx∈R1such that the ball centered atxwith radiusrxis locally maximal inA. The set ofx, which contains centers of maximal balls is the medial axisMA(A). TheMATis the medial axis together with its associated radius function.Here we highlight Uniqueness and Continuity of MAT  [5], which is fundamental for many of the operations in LayTracks3D.Lemma 2.1Uniqueness and Continuity of Mapping to MATLet A be ann-dimensional compact sub-manifold ofRnand letMA(A)be its medial axis. LetPbe an open subset ofδA which isG1and piecewiseC2continuous. Then for every pointp∈Pthere is one and only one maximal ball touchingp. Furthermore, the functionM:P→MA(A), which maps each pointp∈Pto the center of its maximal ball, is continuous.Definition 2.2Projection of a Boundary Point onto Medial AxisLet the set of boundary points of a connected, compact, and regular regionAbeP, and set of medial axis points ofAbeQ. The projectionM:P→Qprojects a boundary pointp∈Ponto such a medial axis pointMp∈Qthat the medial axis ball centered atMptouchesδAatp.In other words,Mp=p+rpnp,∀p∈δA​whererpis the radius function atpandnpis positive unit normal atp.The projected medial axis pointMpof a given boundary pointp(see Fig. 1) is the point on the medial axis closest to the given boundary point and on its positive normal line.Mpis also the center of the locally maximal ball tangent to the boundary atp. From Lemma 2.1 we can show that projection exists for every boundary point of the compact region, and that the projection is continuous for a continuous boundary.Here we shall summarize a few other important properties of the MAT. Medial axis transform exhibits several properties that enable representation of an object in an unambiguous and simpler manner.•Uniqueness: There is a unique medial axisMA(A)for a given objectA.Invertibility: Given aMAT(A)one can reconstruct the objectAby taking the union of all the maximal balls.Dimension reduction: The dimensionality of the medial axisMA(A)is lower than that of its objectA.Topological equivalence: A medial axisMA(A)is topologically equivalent to its objectA.Symmetric: Medial AxisMA(A)is a skeletal representation which is equidistant from the boundaryδA.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
