@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Pharmacophore-based screening targeted at upregulated FN1, MMP-9, APP reveals therapeutic compounds for nasopharyngeal carcinoma

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We built Mendel, a workbench to analyze dysregulated genes in nasopharyngeal carcinoma.We analyzed druggable genes with high fold changes, cliques, and pathway constraints.Using pharmacophores, we virtually screened 22,723,923 compounds to identify 3 hits.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Nasopharyngeal carcinoma,Bioinformatics,Drug discovery,Virtual screening,Pharmacophore,Docking,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NpC) is rare in the west but common in Southeast Asia and only a few other locations. With the limited geographic incidence, it is relatively under-studied. It also has as co-determinant the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), which may adapt to NpC therapies, so not only must a therapeutic compound be found, the discovery process must be rapid, to cope with the changing basis of the EBV. An R-based computer workbench, Mendel, was developed so biologists could quickly upload genomic data, pre-process them, and identify upregulated and downregulated genes. Mendel was used on 10 control and 31 diseased cell lines to discover 3 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) that meet thresholds on fold-changes, 3-clique membership, pathway constraints, and druggability. From the DEGs, we conducted a pharmacophore-based screening of 22,723,923 compounds using protein-protein interaction anchor-residue clusters as binding sites. Of the 4 hits, 3 passed all the ADME-Tox tests. These 3 hit compounds, 6-(4-iminiocyclohexa-2,5-dien-1-ylidene)-4-(thiazol-2-ylcarbamoyl)-1H-pyrimidine-2-thiolate, 1-[4-[2-[(3R)-3-hydroxy-2-oxo-indolin-3-yl]acetyl]phenyl]-3-phenyl-urea, and (2R)-N4-[4-(1-piperidyl)cyclohexyl]morpholine-2,4-dicarboxamide have predicted pIC50 values superior to the current drugs fluorouracil (5-FU) and taxotere, which have side effects and face EBV drug resistance.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The incidence of nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NpC) is geographically and ethnically multimodal. It has a strong presence in places such as south China. In the U.S., it is common only among subpopulations of south-east Asian origin. Because of this scattered incidence, NpC has not been studied as extensively as other cancers. Previous studies have focused on the efficacy of chemotherapy[1], and radiological therapy [2]. There are also some commonly prescribed drugs, such as fluorouracil (5-FU), taxotere, and cisplatin. However, these have side effects and face drug resistance [3]. One cause of the building resistance is that NpC has as co-determinant the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), which may adapt to NpC therapies [4]. Therefore, not only must a therapeutic compound be found, the discovery process must also be able to rapidly cope with the changing basis of the EBV.This study reports several new advances to this end. First, an R-based computer workbench, Mendel, was constructed to facilitate the end-to-end process involved, from uploading and pre-processing of genomic data, to identifying dysregulated genes and deriving hit compounds. Mendel solves the current challenge in which many R packages have been developed with relatively specialized functions, so each package could undertake only a slice of the end-to-end process. Further, there are many packages for each functional slice, making it difficult for non-computer trained biologists to keep up with the state of the technology, such as what packages are most suitable for what functions and how to use the chosen packages. Finally, the packages often have incompatible input and output formats, making it time-consuming to convert one format to another. With Mendel, new genomic data, incorporating adaptations of the EBV that could lead to variations in differentially expressed genes in diseased versus control subjects, could be easily and quickly analyzed.The second major advance is to determine the genetic origins of NpC and identify hit compounds that inhibit dysregulated genes. Instead of theoretically hypothesizing about a single target dysregulated gene, an empirically-based approach was taken, using biological cell lines uploaded to Mendel to identify differentially expressed genes (DEG). Further, each DEG was analyzed for protein–protein interactions (PPI). This DEG–PPI approach properly accounted for the possibility of polygeny in NpC. Three dysregulated DEGs were determined, and these were used to successfully identify hit compounds, based on binding to PPI anchor-residue clusters and pharmacophore fingerprints. Of the 4 hits, 3 passed all the ADME-Tox tests. These 3 hit compounds, 6-(4-iminiocyclohexa-2,5-dien-1-ylidene)-4-(thiazol-2-ylcarbamoyl)-1H-pyrimidine-2-thiolate, 1-[4-[2-[(3R)-3-hydroxy-2-oxo-indolin-3-yl]acetyl]phenyl]-3-phenyl-urea, and (2R)-N4-[4-(1-piperidyl)cyclohexyl]morpholine-2,4-dicarboxamide have predicted pIC50 values superior to the current drugs fluorouracil (5-FU) and taxotere, which have side effects and face EBV drug resistance.Fig. 1 shows an overview of the main steps involved. Details are below.NCBI’s GSE12452 [5], which comprises 55,550,736 probes from laser-captured epithelium cell-line on the Affymetrix U133 Plus 2.0 microarray platform, was uploaded to Mendel. Mendel in turn did a remote procedure call to execute Robust Multichip Averaging (RMA) [6], pre-processing on cluster multi-core workstations with explicit parallelism under random cross-subset validation. RMA accomplished several goals: (1) background correction to enhance the arrays’ sensitivity by adjusting the intensity readings for non-specific signals, (2) between-array normalization to account for differences in handling, labeling, hybridization, and scanning, and (3), reporter summarization to compute expression values using probes that target gene transcripts. Mendel also provided reconstructed cell images [7], heat maps, volcano plots, receiver operator characteristic functions, and quality-control reports [8], for visual inspection, so as to further confirm the automated RMA.The goal in this phase was to identify upregulated and downregulated genes. Mendel was used to rapidly narrow down the search space of dysregulated genes. Using a single-channel design linear model with Bayesian fit [9], the vast amount of probe data was distilled into a set of upregulated and a set of downregulated genes. Following convention [10], only dysregulated genes above a threshold fold change of 2 were retained. Poinet was used for PPI interactome analysis, in which node centrality was based on three criteria: degree centrality, closeness centrality, and eccentricity centrality [11]. Genes in all 3-clique interactions so identified were collated. 322 cliques were analyzed with POINeT using shared gene ontology (GO) terms as interaction interologous filter type. The set of dysregulated genes were filtered further based on whether they were constraints in pathways. This was undertaken using DAVID [12]. The functional annotation clustering was performed using a κ‐similarity term overlap of 3 and threshold of 0.5, and enrichment threshold of EASE score of 1.0. Κ-similarity measures the overlap of annotation terms between two genes and if there was a minimum overlap of 3 terms, DAVID calculated the κ‐statistic. Two genes were defined to be in the same cluster if they exceeded the threshold. The EASE score, a more conservative version of the Fisher exact test, also measures similarity between two genes and served as an additional criteria for determining if two genes belonged to the same cluster.Of the clusters so obtained, a constraining gene was defined as one in the intersection of all the clusters. Finally, to filter out genes which expressed proteins without druggable domains, 452 domains for the remaining upregulated and downregulated DEGs were analyzed for druggability, using EMBL-EBI.To obtain an understanding of the biology of the DEGs, Mendel provided several ontological annotations. Using GoProfiles, Mendel provided gene ontologies, in both hypergeometric models and gene set enrichment analyses [13]. Disease ontologies, using the DOSE package, also showed the connection between the DEGs and known diseases [14]. Finally, the ReactomePA package showed pathways involving the DEGsM [15].Clusters of PPI anchor residue hotspots were obtained from PocketQuery [16], which used a machine learning algorithm to train a support vector machine on a benchmark set of small-molecule inhibitor starting points (SMISPs). These SMISPs were obtained from known PPIs that had interface residues with overlapping high-affinity ligands, thus providing validated starting points for the design of small-molecule inhibitors. For each residue, an aggregate was calculated based on six scores resulting from the residue going from the bound conformation in the complexed state to that as an independent chain. The first was the change, ΔGFC, in Gibbs free energy. The second, ΔΔGR, was the change in free energy of an alanine scanning mutagenesis. The third, ΔSASA, was the solvent accessible surface area (SASA) change, and the fourth was related, in the percent change ΔSASA%. The final two changes were evolutionary-based. One was the evolutionary rate and the other a conservation score based on multiple sequence alignment of related sequences. Residues with the highest aggregates were selected as targets.A 3-D pharmacophore model was built with ZincPharmer [17], whose distinctive feature was its indexing approach. This approach allowed for searches at O(query) complexity, rather than the O(library) typically associated with fingerprint-based or alignment-based pharmacophores. The pharmacophore required hydrogen bond donors/acceptors of the ligand and receptor to be within 4Å of each other. Similarly, opposite charge features on the ligand and receptor must be within 5Å of each other, and aromatic features also within 5Å. Buriedness required the ligand hydrophobic feature to be within 6Å of at least three hydrophobic receptor features.Virtual screening was done with a 2,256-core 63-DDR/21-QDR Infiniband supercomputer, screening the Zinc database of 215,407,096 conformations of 22,723,923 compounds [18]. The filter required a 1 maximum hit per conformation, 1 maximum hit per molecule, a maximum root mean squared deviation of 0.1, and a maximum of 4 rotatable bonds.To check against ADME-Tox pharmacokinetics, a comprehensive set of prediction models from Chemicalize was used. These included Lipinski rule of five [19], a bioavailability criteria [20], the Ghose filter [21], a lead likeness criteria [22], the Muegge filter [23], and the Veber filter [24].The final step was to undertake molecular simulation to dock the hits to the protein receptors corresponding to the dysregulated genes. To prepare the receptors, Chimera 1.10.1 [25], was used to remove the protein׳s original ligand, delete its solvent, replace incomplete side chains with Dunbrack rotamers, add hydrogen and OXT atoms to missing C-termini (with protonation states for histidine), and assign partial charges from the AMBER ff145B force field with non-monatomic ion residues using semi-empirical (quantum chemical Austin Model I) with bond charge correction (BCC). We then docked the compounds using Autodock Vina [26].To get at the biology behind the docking, it was useful to characterize the receptor-compound poses. We generated the poses with LigPlotPlus [27].Drug potency was measured with the pIC50 from eADMET GmbH. This was done by matching the SMILES code of a candidate hit to the best matched compound within an eADMET similarity score of 85% or better, with no restraint on pH, dosage, species, Pgp inhibition, ionic strength, or molecular mass. eADMET in turn used a Jaccard index in its prediction neighbors algorithm to calculate the similarity. The pIC50 value of the best matched compound was used as the predicted pIC50, with the criteria that the pIC50 was obtained experimentally and published.. For comparison, the pIC50 value was also obtained for two currently prescribed therapeutic compounds, fluorouracil (5-FU) and cisplatin.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Our analysis used an agnostic approach to identify dysregulated genes as targets, and then screened for their inhibitors and activators, so that we were able to obtain a comprehensive list of three candidate therapeutic compounds for NpC. These compounds are novel in that they do not yet even have PubChem common names. However, their predicted potency, measured by pIC50, is at least as good, if not better, than the existing therapies of fluorouracil (5-FU) and taxotere, which have side effects and face drug resistance.There are several outstanding issues which we now address. The first is whether the DEGs identified were in line with the results obtained by the cell line providers.[28], Mendel was constructed with the intent of allowing biologists access to standard R packages in differential gene analysis, which were different than the analysis by the cell line providers (e.g., they use gene-specific t-tests with a fold change threshold of 1.5, compared with our single- channel design with the standard fold change threshold of 2.0). Nevertheless, our results were in line with theirs. For example, our top 20 upregulated genes (Fig. 2) and their top 20 have 14 in common. Reaching a broader set of genes, 19 of our top 20 appear on their top 50.Another issue is whether the proteins were directly validated. Our appeal to druggability (Fig. 3), binding affinity energies (Fig. 9), and poses (Fig. 10) already speak to protein validation. In addition, the receptor-hit ensembles were also directly validated using MolProbity[29], and ProSA-web[30], with positive results.A third issue refers to FN1, which was found to be druggable, although we found no hits in our database of compounds. Nevertheless, it is quite possible that future, larger databases could reveal hits for FN1. Furthermore, structure-based, rather than ligand-based, drug design could lead to de novo inhibitors for FN1.Going forward, the candidate compounds will need biological assays and clinical trials, but the hit compounds now identified could produce a new cocktail of possible potent therapeutic drugs for NpC.