@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Skin Model Shapes: A new paradigm shift for geometric variations modelling in mechanical engineering

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We explain the core concept and fundamentals of Skin Model Shapes.Skin Model Shapes are Skin Model representatives from a simulation perspective.Approaches for the Skin Model Shape generation in discrete geometry are highlighted.Overview over applications for Skin Model Shapes in mechanical engineering is given.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Geometric variations management,Computer aided tolerancing,Geometric product specification,Skin Model,Shape modelling,Shape representation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Geometric deviations are inevitably observable on manufactured workpieces and have huge influences on the quality and function of mechanical products. Therefore, many activities in geometric variations management have to be performed to ensure the product function despite the presence of these deviations. Dimensional and Geometrical Product Specification and Verification (GPS) are standards for the description of workpieces. Their lately revision grounds on GeoSpelling, which is a univocal language for geometric product specification and verification and aims at providing a common understanding of geometric specifications in design, manufacturing, and inspection. The Skin Model concept is a basic concept within GeoSpelling and is an abstract model of the physical interface between a workpiece and its environment. In contrast to this understanding, established models for computer-aided modelling and engineering simulations make severe assumptions about the workpiece surface. Therefore, this paper deals with operationalizing the Skin Model concept in discrete geometry for the use in geometric variations management. For this purpose, Skin Model Shapes, which are particular Skin Model representatives from a simulation perspective, are generated. In this regard, a Skin Model Shape is a specific outcome of the conceptual Skin Model and comprises deviations from manufacturing and assembly. The process for generating Skin Model Shapes is split into a prediction and an observation stage with respect to the available information and knowledge about expected geometric deviations. Moreover, applications for these Skin Model Shapes in the context of mechanical engineering are given.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The need for geometric variations management is an important issue in design, manufacturing, and all other phases of the product life cycle  [1]. The main reason is, that even though modern manufacturing processes achieve steadily increasing accuracy, geometric deviations are observable on every manufactured part. Two main axioms cover these geometric deviations, namely the axiom of manufacturing imprecision and the axiom of measurement uncertainty  [2,3]. Geometric deviations have huge influences on the functional behaviour as well as the customers’ quality perception of the product. Thus, for quality-aware companies it is eminent to control and to manage these geometric deviations along the product life-cycle. In this context, geometric dimensioning and tolerancing (GD&T) during product development is the first step in geometric variations management. It aims at ensuring an adequate product quality level considering tolerance-related manufacturing and inspection costs by setting limits for manufacturing-caused geometric imperfections. In this regard, the basic tolerancing tasks in design are tolerance specification, tolerance allocation, and tolerance analysis  [4].Nowadays, computer aided tools support the product developer in these activities for geometric product specification and tolerancing. In the context of Computer-Aided Tolerancing (CAT), various models for the representation of dimensions and geometric tolerances have been developed, such as vectorial tolerancing  [5], the model of technologically and topologically related surfaces (TTRS)  [6], the Direct Linearization Method (DLM)  [7], Tolerance-Maps  [8], or the Deviation Domain  [9] based on the Small Displacement Torsor (SDT)  [10]. In the past, these models have mainly been used for assembly-oriented tolerance analysis, i.e., analysing the effects of part tolerances on assembly gaps and clearances, rather than for functional tolerancing  [11]. However, there is a growing interest in considering working conditions and operating windows in CAT  [12–14]. Though, many of these computer models for tolerance simulation and analysis disregard environmental impacts and different sources of deviations. Furthermore, most of these models make severe simplifications about observable geometric deviations since they are reduced to rotational and translational feature defects  [15–17]. Therefore, geometric tolerances are modelled instead of geometric deviations in a strict sense. This leads to results with large ranges of uncertainty and a discrepancy between the virtual models and the observed reality  [16]. Additionally, many of the applied models for CAT are not conform with the standards for geometric dimensioning and tolerancing (GD&T) such as the ISO or the ASME standards  [15,13,17–19]. A fact that impedes the use of these systems in product development. Furthermore, the tolerancing tasks in design as well as all other activities of geometric variations management should be incorporated in a complete and coherent tolerancing process  [20,21]. As a response to these needs, Ballu and Mathieu   [22–24] proposed GeoSpelling as a univocal language, which is common to design, manufacturing, and inspection and allows the communication of geometric information and requirements along the product life cycle. This language has been adopted by the ISO  [2] in the standards for the geometric product specification and verification (GPS) recently. A basic concept within GeoSpelling and the ISO standards is the Skin Model concept, which is an infinite model of the physical interface between the workpiece and its environment  [16].These highlighted shortcomings of most models for computer-aided tolerancing motivate the translation of the Skin Model concept into a discrete geometry framework  [25]. The idea behind this framework is to create part representatives with geometric deviations depicted as Skin Model Shapes. By employing computer aided engineering methods for assembly and use, the effects of geometric deviations on assemblability as well as the product’s functional behaviour can be analysed. The aim of this paper is providing the foundations behind this discrete geometry framework for CAT and highlighting possible applications. Furthermore, a comprehensive framework for the generation of Skin Model Shapes is proposed. It is structured as follows. In Section  2, GeoSpelling and the Skin Model concept are highlighted. Thereafter, the choice of a discrete geometry representation scheme for the Skin Model operationalization is motivated and furthermore established shape and deviation modelling approaches are reviewed. Following that, the Skin Model Shape simulation process based thereon is explained. Then, applications for Skin Model Shapes in engineering design, manufacturing, and inspection are given. Finally, a conclusion and an outlook are given.Many tasks in tolerancing, manufacturing, and inspection have to be performed to control geometric variations and their consequences on product quality. Thus, a coherent and univocal language for geometric specifications is required, which ensures a coherent and complete tolerancing process  [20]. GeoSpelling, as proposed by Mathieu and Ballu   [26] and adopted by the standards for geometrical product specification  [2], is a response to these needs. It is based on few basic concepts  [24] and offers a clear definition of a geometric specification as illustrated in Fig. 1: “A specification is a condition on a characteristic”  [27]. This characteristic is defined from one or between several geometric features.Various operations such as partition, extraction, filtration, association, collection and construction are required to obtain certain ideal or non-ideal geometric features. These operations are described and defined in GeoSpelling  [24] and can be applied to the nominal model as well as to the Skin Model  [2,28,23]. The Skin Model concept comprises the deviations brought in by manufacturing and assembly processes  [2,24] and is defined as a “model of the physical interface between the workpiece and its environment” [2,29]. However, there exist different viewpoints on the Skin Model. On the one hand, coming from the workpiece itself, the Skin Model is a model of the physical workpiece surface. Therefore, there is a clear distinction between the workpiece surface in the physical world and its model in the abstract world. On the other hand, coming from the engineering design perspective, the Skin Model is a model of the physical workpiece surface in contrast to the nominal model which is a “simple” model of the intended workpiece not taking into account inevitable geometric deviations. From a technical view, the Skin Model is an infinite model and does not allow identification or simulation since the theoretic workpiece surface comprises an infinite number of points  [16]. Therefore, the infinite description is required to be able to consider all kinds of geometric deviations from a macro to a nano scale and to capture these different variations. It is not possible to clearly define geometric specifications and to enable an unambiguous product development process at a conceptual level without the infinite description. However, a finite description has to be available in order to compute and to process the Skin Model  [30]. This leads to the idea of Skin Model Shapes, which are particular finite Skin Model representatives comprising a finite number of geometry parameters or points. Thus, a Skin Model Shape is a specific finite Skin Model outcome and comprises deviations from manufacturing and assembly. Due to the random nature of geometric deviations, there may exist an infinite number of possible Skin Model Shapes. If these Skin Model Shapes are sufficiently precise, then all relevant kinds of geometric variations can be captured. Fig. 2shows the Skin Model Concept from these different perspectives as well as a discrete and a NURBS-based Skin Model Shape.At a conceptual level, Skin Model Shapes are not related to a specific geometry representation scheme, such as discrete or parametric. Furthermore, they allow the consideration of geometric deviations at different scales from macro to nano. Therefore, the concept of Skin Model Shapes allows a holistic and persistent geometric deviations management process, in contrast to other models, such as the Geometric Deviation Model, which only considers rotational and translational feature defects from manufacturing and assembly and does not take into account other kinds of geometric deviations and deformations arising during usage  [31].In synthesis, the Skin Model is a conceptual tool useful for all persons involved in engineering design, manufacturing, and inspection to imagine the allowable deviations of a part’s shape with respect to geometric specifications. However, since the Skin Model itself is an infinite model, an operationalization is required to obtain a finite model ready for simulation  [30]. Therefore, particular Skin Model Shapes are generated, which represent the Skin Model. The geometry representation and shape modelling as well as the procedure for obtaining these Skin Model Shapes is explained in the following sections.Modern computer aided simulation tools in engineering applications are highly based on the representation of physical objects and solid modelling  [32]. Common representation schemes for three-dimensional models are wire frames, surface models, volume models, and cell models  [33]. Discrete Geometry representation schemes such as point clouds and surface meshes can be understood as surface models. They are straightforward and seem adequate for the representation of deviated workpiece representatives. Therefore, a point-based representation is often used for modelling geometric deviations  [34,3,35,36]. A point cloud can be defined as a set of vertices in a three-dimensional coordinate system, which are usually defined byX,YandZcoordinates. Typically, a point cloud is intended to represent the surface of a solid object  [28].The representation of the object’s surface by a point cloud offers advantages but also implies some limitations. The point cloud concept is quite simple and involves little conversion problems when using different software tools. Furthermore, point cloud formats are commonly created by 3D scanners in manufacturing and metrology/quality inspection applications. However, point clouds only approximate the surface of the object, but the level of approximation can be adjusted by the point density. A surface mesh of the object can be created from a point cloud via triangulation. This offers possibilities to approximate the surface of the object for visualization and further processing. Moreover, other surface models can be processed from the point cloud through surface reconstruction methods.The Skin Model is a surface model, which comprises the geometric deviations of manufactured parts. These geometric imperfections of surfaces can be roughly classified into lay, waviness, and roughness  [2]. These classes of geometric deviations differ in terms of the relationship between distance and depth of the imperfections  [2]. However, this classification is not disjunct.The described geometric deviations can furthermore be distinguished between systematic and random deviations  [37,38]. This classification is based on the experience, that in many manufacturing processes, similar geometric deviations can be observed on every part whereas some geometric deviations can be observed only on a few workpieces. The systematic deviations are deterministic, predictable, and reproducible  [28] and may be depending on the manufacturing process, such as products of clamping errors or the machine dynamical behaviour. In contrast to that, random deviations arise from fluctuations of the production process such as tool wear, varying material properties or fluctuations in environmental parameters (temperature, humidity, etc., …).Due to these different characteristics, systematic and random geometric deviations should be modelled employing different methods even if they can be classified as the same kind of geometric deviation (e.g. lay or waviness). Therefore, various mathematical approaches for generating and reproducing observable geometric deviations have been proposed, such as employing basic functionalities of parametric computer aided design (CAD) systems  [39], using Bézier curves, Splines and NURBS  [40], generating systematic deviations by second order shapes  [3,34] or modal shapes  [41], employing sampling methods such as the Gibbs sampling  [3,34], or applying random fields  [35,36,42,43]. Furthermore, the concept of fractals is often considered for describing the roughness of surfaces  [44–46]. However, surface roughness plays a minor role in most tolerancing considerations. An overview over these methods for modelling geometric imperfections can be seen from Fig. 3.These approaches for shape and deviation modelling can be applied to a single part feature or to a group of part features. However, these part features can be extracted from the nominal model by the GeoSpelling partition operation or other segmentation techniques  [47–49]. Furthermore, after the approaches for deviation modelling have been applied to all relevant part features, Skin Model Shapes can be obtained by collecting these features. By employing this procedure to several workpieces, also whole assembly groups can be modelled.In this regard, the scalability is an important property of Skin Model Shapes. Different shape and deviation modelling approaches can be applied to the whole Skin Model Shape or just to local features. In this manner, various kinds of geometric deviations can be captured.However, depending on the shape or deviation modelling approach, points on the edges have to be smoothed in order to limit their deviations when collecting the independently modelled features. For this purpose, for example Laplacian Smoothing can be employed  [50].Skin Model Shapes are Skin Model representatives which comprise various kinds of geometric deviations. However, in order to extract valuable information from these Skin Model Shapes in engineering design, visualization techniques have to be employed, which illustrate geometric deviations and make them visible.Coming from a point-based geometry representation, a straightforward idea for the visualization of geometric deviations of Skin Model Shapes is to determine the distances between the points of the nominal model and the Skin Model Shape. These distances have then to be converted to a RGB colour scale. Furthermore, the point distances may be weighted according to their spatial direction, for example in the direction of the vertex normal. For this purpose, the point distances between the nominal model and the Skin Model Shape are only computed in the local vertex normal direction. These local vertex normals can also be used to determine a deviation volume, which is composed by the vertex normals of the nominal model and those of the Skin Model Shape. Indeed, this approach should not be confused with other volume visualization methods, which are e.g. based on a voxelization  [51].The aforementioned visualization approaches build on a point-based representation of Skin Model Shapes. However, mesh-based representations are common in many engineering applications. In order to visualize geometric deviations employing such representations, a suitable approach is the computation of the distances between the centre of gravity of the mesh elements (triangles or polygons) of the nominal model and the Skin Model Shape. These centre of gravity distances are then also converted to a RGB colour scale and the mesh elements are filled according to these colours.Fig. 4shows an identical Skin Model Shape of a crank shaft where the geometric deviations are visualized by a vertex normal technique, by a deviation volume approach and a mesh-based visualization.As mentioned above, the operationalization of the Skin Model concept into a discrete geometry framework is highly based on the generation of realistic representatives of the workpieces showing observable geometric deviations. These generated Skin Model Shapes can then be used in various engineering simulations, such as assembly analysis or tolerance simulations for predicting the later product behaviour. For this purpose, the Skin Model Shape simulation approaches should incorporate all available information about the actual shape and dimensions as well as the expectable geometric deviations of the workpiece. Hence, it seems appropriate to split the process of Skin Model Shape simulation in two phases regarding the current status in product development and to develop a Skin Model Shape simulation approach for each of these two stages:•In early engineering design stages, geometric deviations of the relevant part are not yet observed. Therefore, assumptions on systematic and random deviations should be incorporated for predicting Skin Model Shapes. This stage may be referred to as the “Prediction Stage”.During later design stages, manufacturing process simulations and even prototypes of the part may be available. Thus, these observations should be taken into consideration and possible outcomes of the production process based on few samples should be simulated. This stage may be referred to as the “Observation Stage” accordingly.The required input information for both the Skin Model Shape simulation approach during the prediction and the observation stage can be seen from Fig. 5.In general, the generation of Skin Model Shapes in early design stages builds up on the nominal model (e.g. provided by CAD systems). The geometric data are then enhanced with information about the systematic deviations, which are likely to occur through a certain production process. Following that, random deviations are added to the model. The highlighted shape modelling techniques from Section  3.2 are employed for both systematic and random deviations.In this regard, similarities and differences between the Skin Model Shape simulation approach during the Prediction Stage and the generation of reference data sets for acceptance and reverification tests of coordinate measurement machine software as standardized in the ISO and ASME standards  [52,53] can be observed. These standards propose the generation of reference data sets based on the nominal range of a feature, to which form deviations are added by deforming the nominal feature range by Fourier series with random parameters. Thereafter, nominal points within the nominal feature range are sampled, which are projected onto the deformed feature. Finally, the resulting form deviations are scaled according to reference values and Gaussian white noise is added to the sample points in order to consider scanning errors. As can be seen, similarly to the Skin Model Shape simulation approach during the Prediction Stage, geometric deviations are added to the nominal model even if this is performed by continuous Fourier series methods and not employing shape modelling approaches for discrete geometry representations. However, no differentiation is made between systematic deviations and random deviations, since only random deviations are considered for the acceptance and reverification tests. Furthermore, the measurement uncertainties due to scanning errors are respected by Gaussian white noise, which are not considered in the Skin Model Shape simulation.The Skin Model Shape simulation approach for the prediction stage is illustrated in Fig. 6.Among the highlighted approaches for modelling systematic deviations in Section  3.2, quadric shapes (also depicted as quadrics or second order shapes) seems adequate. This is because most observable systematic deviations can be explained by a combination of quadric surfaces  [3]. Second-order algebraic surfaces are described by the general equation:(1)0=ax2+by2+cz2+2fyz+2gzx+2hxy+2px+2qy+2rz+d.The systematic deviations expressed by these second order shapes can be included in the Skin Model Shapes for example in the direction of the vertex normal.The procedure of describing systematic deviations by second order shapes can be summarized as follows:•Choose a second order shape or an interference of second order shapes that represent the expected systematic deviation best.The systematic deviationhPineeds to be computed for every pointiof the Skin Model and added to it, so that the new point coordinates result to:(2)Pˆi=Pi+hPiniwherePi=[xiyizi]Tare the initial coordinates of the pointi(nominal model) andni=[aibici]Tis the chosen deviation direction for pointi(e.g. the vertex normal).The point coordinatesPˆi=[xˆiyˆizˆi]Tnow describe the nominal model with systematic geometric deviations.However, in early product development stages, the manufacturing process may not even be known or decided. In this case, no sufficient assumptions about the expected systematic deviations can be made. Therefore, the step of modelling systematic deviations has to be passed in the procedure of Skin Model Shape simulation. Then the Skin Model Shapes consist only of random deviations, which can be generated by the following approaches.Different approaches for modelling random deviations can be found in the literature such as the 1D-Gaussian method  [34], the Multi-Gaussian method  [34] and random fields  [42]. Following the 1D-Gaussian method, each point is deviated along the estimated vertex normal direction, where the amounts of deviation are given by independently distributed Gaussian random variables. In contrast to that, the Multi-Gaussian Method deviates each point following a spatial random vector in three-dimensional space, which is generated by a trivariate Gaussian distribution. However, a main drawback of both methods is, that they model geometric deviations independently for points, that are close to each other. This may result in unrealistic shapes, since it is expected, that the deviations of adjacent points are less volatile than for points, that lie afar from each other. The random field method is an approach to sampling spatially correlated random variables and hence overcomes this shortcoming.Apparently, the random field theory offers possibilities to describe the random deviations within a Skin Model Shape generation and simulation process. Therefore, this section highlights the procedure of random deviation generation by random fields for the Skin Model Shape simulation.Over the past decades, Random Field Theory has become more and more popular in many research areas  [54,55,42], because it offers a framework for the expression and representation of spatial random processes. Random fields are also used in structural mechanics to model environmental loads and random deviations in geometry  [42]. Adler   [54] defines a random field as follows. Given a parameter spaceT, a stochastic (or random) processfoverTis a collection of random variables{f(t):t∈T}.IfTis a set of dimensionN, and the random variablesf(t)are all vector valued of dimensiond, then the vector valued random fieldfis called a(N,d)random field.Thus, a random field is a generalization of a stochastic process in this spirit, that the input variables are not unidimensional (e.g. “time”) but multidimensional (e.g. coordinates). It can be described by its finite-dimensional distributions and is called isotropic if the covariance function is a function of the Euclidean distance only.In many applications, a discretization, i.e. a transformation of a continuous to a discrete model, of the random field has to be performed. Hence, the continuous function of the random fieldf(t)needs to be approximated by a vectorf(t). Various discretization methods for random fields can be found such as the series expansion method which exactly represents the random field as a series involving random variables and deterministic spatial functions  [56]. The approximation is then obtained as a truncation of the series. The series expansion method is an efficient method for the discretization of a random field, since only a comparative small number of random variables is required. However, solving the arising eigenvalue problem can be problematic and is not possible analytically for all autocorrelation functions. Indeed, there are approaches to convert the underlying eigenvalue problem in a matrix eigenvalue problem, where the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the autocorrelation matrixρare determined and the largest eigenvalues are used for the approximation of the random field  [57,43]:(3)f(t)=μ(t)+σ(t)Aζ,whereμ(t)is the mean vector of the random field,σ(t)is the matrix of standard deviations,ζis a vector of random variables andAis the so-called transformation-matrix:(4)A=VD12.Dis a diagonal matrix with theMlargest eigenvalues of the autocorrelation matrix on the principal diagonal,D=diag(λ1,…,λM), andVis a matrix with corresponding eigenvectors.Since the Skin Model Shapes consist of a discrete number of points, it is obvious that a random field can be used to deviate these points in any direction. Different methods may be used to perform this, but a straightforward idea is to deviate each point in the direction of the local vertex normal. Then, for each point in the Skin Model Shape, one random value per sample has to be generated. Using the series expansion representation of the random field, the procedure is as follows:•Calculate a correlation matrixρusing an assumed correlation functionρ(⋅)and correlation lengthlρ, which is a parameter that varies the impact one random variable has on the neighbouring random variables.DetermineD, a diagonal matrix with theMlargest eigenvaluesλjofρon the principal diagonal, andVa matrix containing the corresponding eigenvectors. Compute the transformation matrixAas:(5)A=VD12.Compute the vertex normal vectornifor every pointiof the Skin Model.The vector of random valuesχis then given by:(6)χ=μ+σAξ,whereμis the mean vector of the random field, which is usually a vector containing only zeros, since the mean deviation is zero for every point, andσis the matrix of standard deviations.ξis a vector of independent random variables with zero mean and unit variance. If we assume a Gaussian random field, then the elements ofξare Gaussian distributed.Add the random deviation to the model with systematic deviations:(7)P̃i=Pˆi+χini,whereχiis theith element ofχ.The point coordinatesP̃i=[x̃iỹiz̃i]Tdescribe the nominal model with systematic and random geometric deviations.The main idea behind the Skin Model Shape simulation during the observation stage is extracting and generating Skin Model Shapes based on a limited training set of observations gathered from manufacturing process simulations or measurements. These observations comprise systematic and random geometric deviations, which are likely to occur through a certain manufacturing process. For this purpose, methods of Statistical Shape Analysis (SSA) known from computer vision and image interpretation are applied, which are based on adoptions of the Point Distribution Model (PDM)  [58] such as the Kernel Density Estimate/Point Distribution Model (KDE/PDM)  [59]. Generating new Skin Model Shapes by employing these approaches is based on the procedure of the Statistical Shape Analysis and comprises the following steps  [60]:1.Acquire a training set of observations from manufacturing process simulations or measurement data.Determine the correspondence between the training set if necessary  [61–63].Align the training set and correct differences in terms of rotation, scale and location if necessary. For this purpose, e.g. Procrustes Analysis, Generalized Procrustes Analysis and Tangent Space Projection are suitable methods  [60].Establish a Statistical Shape Model as for example the point distribution model or an extension of the PDM such as the Kernel Density Estimate/Point Distribution Model  [59].Generate Skin Model Shapes based on the employed statistical shape model.The last step in this procedure may be highlighted in detail in the following for the case of the point distribution model.The basic idea behind the PDM is to express each shapeXiin the training set as a combination of the mean shapeX¯, which can be computed easily by:(8)X¯=1n∑i=1nXiand the variation of the shape around the mean shape along the main modes of variation:(9)Xi≈X¯+Φbi.The main modes of variationΦare identified by applying a Principal Component Analysis (PCA) or a non-linear extension of the PCA such as the Kernel PCA (KPCA) or approaches employing autoassociative neural networks to the training set. The scoresbcan then be found as random variables, which distributions can be estimated by a multivariate Gaussian or using the kernel density estimation (KDE)  [61,59]. Skin Model Shapes can then be generated by sampling new scoresb̃from these score distributions via the inverse transform sampling. For this purpose, uniformly distributed random values in the interval[0;1]are generated and set into the inverse cumulative distribution functions (ICDFs) of the estimated score distributions. The Skin Model Shapes themselves can be obtained by transforming these random score valuesb̃by employing Eq. (9):(10)X̃=X¯+Φb̃.The general procedure of Skin Model Shape generation during the observation stage following this approach is illustrated in Fig. 7.It should be mentioned, that this procedure also reflects systematic and random geometric deviations of shapes, since the systematic deviations are implicitly included in the mean shapeX¯and the random deviations are expressed by the main modes of variationΦ. Furthermore, the representation of the training set in Eq. (9) is related to the series expansion representation of random fields.The overall procedure for the Skin Model Shape simulation during the observation stage is illustrated in Fig. 8.Information about the random and systematic deviations within the training set can also be extracted to help creating future Skin Model Shapes in early design stages, where assumptions about the correlation structure and the systematic deviations have to be made.The systematic deviations can be approximated by a quadratic descriptive model as:(11)y=β0+β1x1+β2x2+β11x12+β22x22+β12x1x2+ε,which is regressed to the mean shapeX¯. This quadratic model represents an interference of second order shapes. The resulting coefficientsβ〈⋅〉can then be used to model the systematic deviation of a new workpiece, which is fabricated using a similar manufacturing process.With respect to random deviations, several parameters have to be identified, such as the correlation lengthlρ, the meanμand the standard deviationσof the random field. A straightforward approach to identify the global meanμˆand varianceσˆ2of a Gaussian random field is:(12)μˆ=1N∑i=1Nχi,(13)σˆ2=1N−1∑i=1N(χi−μˆ)2,whereχiis theith random variable expressing the deviation of theith point in the point cloud. For the estimation of the correlation lengthlρ, first of all, the correlation matrixρneeds to be computed from the samples. The entriesρ(i,j),i≠jare the correlation coefficients of the random variablesχiandχj, the entries on the principal diagonalρ(i,j),i=jare 1. Since the correlation matrix is symmetric, there arek=∑i=1Ni−N=N⋅(N+1)2−Ncorrelation coefficients to compute. An approach to estimate the global correlation length as defined by  [42] is:(14)lρ=∫0∞ζ⋅|ρ(ζ)|dζ∫0∞|ρ(ζ)|dζ≈∑i=1kζi⋅|ρs,t(ζi)|∑i=1k|ρs,t(ζi)|.The accuracy of the Skin Model Shape simulation approach during the observation phase depends quite obviously on the used training set. However, few research deals with the question of finding an “optimal” training set (size), for which the trade-off between accuracy and costs for the training set acquisition is solved best.However, as mentioned earlier, in most cases the training set consists either of measurement data or manufacturing process simulation data. In the first case, it would be very helpful to know at least when the adding of new training set samples is no longer expected to increase the accuracy of the approach since every new training set sample requires expensive measuring. In the latter case, the training set size is usually determined by an experimental design which size depends on the factors of the manufacturing process. Even so, the size of the used training set may be increased if it is assumed that the available training samples lead to insufficient results.However, when performing the PCA as part of the Skin Model Shape simulation process in the observation stage, the sum of all eigenvalues of the covariance matrix is a measure for the variability comprised in the training set. For every new training shape, the growth of variability can therefore be computed. If the growth of variability is expected to be low for every new training shape, then the training set seems to be adequate and no further training shape has to be added.The highlighted approaches for the generation of non-ideal geometry for Skin Model Shapes in both the prediction and the observation stage enable the designer to generate plausible Skin Model Shapes based on assumptions, manufacturing process simulations or measurement data. However, the methods differ in terms of applicability and required previous knowledge. Therefore, methodical similarities and differences between the approaches are shown.For the analysis of methodical similarities and differences of the introduced approaches, firstly the basic equations for both methods, (7) and (10), are given:•The equation for the Skin Model Shape simulation approach during the prediction phase is (7):(15)P̃i=Pi+hPini︸Pˆi≈P¯i+χini.It can be seen, that this approach adds random geometric deviations to the nominal point coordinatesPiwith systematic deviations (hPini). These systematic deviations are expected ones which apply to every workpiece. Therefore, the nominal model with systematic deviations can be referred to as mean point coordinatesPi¯.For the Skin Model Shape simulation approach during the observation phase, the basic equation is (9):(16)X̃i=X¯+Φbi.This method also adds random geometric deviations to a mean model based on given observations. Hence, the mean model of the prediction approachP¯should reproduce the mean model gathered from observationsX¯.However, the modus operandi differs in both approaches. During the prediction phase, assumptions about the expected systematic and random deviations have to be made. Furthermore, parameter values for the geometric deviations have to be chosen. Though it is possible to estimate these deviations from earlier observations of similar parts and workpieces, these estimates may be uncertain and hence it is not always easy to make realistic assumptions about the later deviations. Thus, this approach requires good knowledge of the underlying mathematical methods, the workpiece itself and the manufacturing processes. Furthermore, the quality of the results is mainly influenced by the designers’ skills.In contrast to that, the procedure of the observation phase approach is straightforward. Based on the observations gathered from manufacturing process simulations or measurement data, the Skin Model Shapes can be generated without further assumptions or parameter settings. Therefore, no deeper expertise or knowledge of the mathematical background of this approach is necessary. Therefore, this approach may be referred to as more robust, since the obtained results do not depend on the user or the designer and their knowledge. However, the quality of the results highly depends on the training set. If the training set is gathered from a poor manufacturing process simulation or from bad measurement data, then this approach also may lead to implausible results.Both approaches for the Skin Model Shape simulation can be applied to uniformly or non-uniformly distributed shape discretizations. Even the results of the Skin Model Shape simulation approach in the “Observation Stage” do not depend on the mesh density and are not adulterated by an inhomogeneous point distribution. Furthermore, the obtainable Skin Model Shapes do not depend on the grid size of the nominal model or the training shapes. Therefore, different restrictions from engineering design, manufacturing, and inspection on the point distribution and the grid size can be considered. For example, in virtual metrology, the obtainable results for different dimension and form deviation measurements depend on the point sampling strategy and measurement point distribution. These aspects can be considered in the “Prediction Stage” by employing adequate tessellation techniques on the nominal model and in the “Observation Stage” by following these restrictions when acquiring the training set. Therefore, both Skin Model Shape simulation approaches allow a coherent tolerancing process, which covers also the restrictions from metrology.Many potential applications for Skin Model Shapes require the generated shapes fulfilling certain specifications. In order to assure, that the simulated Skin Model Shapes fulfil these requirements, a virtual assessment has to be performed. For this purpose, each simulated Skin Model Shape is checked for conformance with the specifications, and rejected, if the specifications are not met. In this case, a new Skin Model Shape has to be generated. This can be performed by adjusting the parameters for the systematic deviations or by sampling new values for the random geometric deviations in the Prediction Stage, whereas new samples have to be draw from the score distributions or new observations have to be added to the training set in the Observation Stage. The assessment process for tolerance specifications is illustrated in Fig. 9and highlighted in the following. This comprises the computation of tolerance zones, which limit the allowable zone for toleranced features and help to determine process capabilities or to compute the tolerance propagation. However, also restrictions on the grid size, on the point distribution or on further properties of the Skin Model Shapes can be considered. Beside this, the approaches for the Skin Model Shape assessment can also be used in the Observation Stage to qualify all shapes in the training set whether they are obtained by measurement data or manufacturing process simulations and to avoid poor input data for the Skin Model Shape generation.Although tolerances and tolerance zones for various tolerance specifications can be obtained from Skin Model Shapes, for the sake of comprehension, only the determination of the flatness tolerance zone for a plane feature and the position tolerance zone between two plane features is illustrated in the following. However, in an analogous manner, tolerance zones for various tolerance specifications with or without datum feature can be determined based on Skin Model Shapes.The flatness tolerance limits the deviation of surface planes or centre planes as well as the straightness of lines on even planes  [2]. All points of a toleranced plane feature are to lie between two parallel planes with the distancetE. This can be seen from Fig. 10. The orientation of the parallel bounding planes has to be chosen such that their distance is at a minimum. In order to compute the flatness tolerance zone for a plane feature with random deviations, the convex hull of the plane is computed  [65]. Following that, the distance between the farthest point and the patch are computed for every patch of the convex hull. Finally, the patch of the convex hull with the minimum distance leads to the tolerance zone and the corresponding distance can be interpreted as the flatness tolerance  [65]. This is illustrated in Fig. 11. In contrast to other approaches for the flatness tolerance zone computation, which employ associated plane features, the proposed method detects the parallel planes with the minimum flatness tolerance and is therefore conform with tolerancing standards.The position tolerance zone for a plane feature is limited by two parallel planes, which are symmetrical around the theoretically exact position, which is in turn defined by datum features. This is illustrated in Fig. 12. For the computation of the position tolerance zone between two plane features, the theoretically exact position of the toleranced plane feature is determined by a translation of the associated datum plane by the theoretical measure. The associated datum plane is obtained by the Principal Component Analysis. The position tolerance zone is then limited by two planes, which are symmetric around the translated associated datum plane. Their distance is determined by calculating the maximum point distance for each point of the Skin Model Shape feature and the symmetric plane. This is shown in Fig. 13.The Skin Model is a basic concept within GeoSpelling, which serves as a univocal language for all activities in geometric variations management such as engineering design, manufacturing, and inspection. Therefore, potential applications of Skin Model Shapes in each of these three domains in the field of mechanical engineering are discussed in this section.In order to ensure the product function during use, limits for geometric deviations of workpieces and assembly groups have to be specified during product development. However, this task is not trivial and requires a lot of knowledge and experience. In this regard, the operationalization of the Skin Model concept in discrete geometry supports the product developer by visualizing geometric deviations and their effects. For instance, the application of virtual and augmented reality systems in design reviews can be enhanced by considering geometric workpiece deviations  [66].Furthermore, Skin Model Shapes can be used in tolerance simulations. In this regard, simulation models as for example for the relative positioning of non-ideal geometries have been developed [67,68,41]. With the use of these models, Skin Model Shapes can be virtually assembled and the effects of geometric deviations on assembly gaps and clearances can be determined. Furthermore, models for analysing the effects of geometric deviations on the product behaviour during usage can be employed  [35].The assembly between a cube and a block as shown in Fig. 14serves as an illustrative example. Fig. 14 (d) shows the results of an assembly simulation of two Skin Model Shapes for this example, where the colours indicate the geometric deviations following the mesh-based visualization. For the tolerance simulation, Skin Model Shapes with random deviations have been generated, where the parameters were set toρ=50.0,μ=0.0, andσ=0.1. The tolerance zones for these shapes have been calculated with the methods described in the previous section. Thereafter, an assembly simulation based on an approach presented by Samper   [41] has been performed. Finally, the resulting gapsbetween the cube and the block is measured. Fig. 15shows a parallel coordinates plot of the results. It can be seen, that there exists a relation between the gap and the flatness tolerances of both the cube and the block. By adjusting the tolerance requirements of the cube and the block, the effects of the geometric part deviations on the gapscan be regulated. This can also be seen from Fig. 15, where the dimensional tolerances are set tod1=140±0.1;d2=170±0.1, the flatness tolerances tof11=f21=f12=f22=f1b=f2b=0.3, and the perpendicularity tolerances top1=p2=0.5, which leads to gaps from29.13to29.83.By extending this procedure for systems in motion, also the kinematic behaviour of Skin Model Shapes can be studied, which is part of ongoing research.The number of rejected parts, i.e. parts out of specification, is of high interest in the context of manufacturing process development. In this regard, e.g. the process capability indexcpkis a valuable measure for the extent of a process meeting its specification  [69]. The determination of the process capability index based on manufacturing process simulations or measurement data can be performed by Skin Model Shapes generated during the observation stage. For this purpose, the Skin Model Shapes can be analysed with respect to specified tolerance requirements as explained in Section  4.4. Based on the gathered results, manufacturing engineers can gain valuable information about critical process parameters and the process capability. Furthermore, based on the information about the impact of manufacturing process parameters on geometric deviations, the manufacturing process can be optimized and manufacturing costs can be saved. For illustration purpose, Fig. 16shows the systematic deviations of an injection moulding part due to shrinkage and warpage  [64]. Furthermore, the estimated distributions of the flatness tolerance of the top plane (blue, dashed) and the bottom plane (red, solid) are illustrated  [36]. It can be seen, that the process is capable with respect to the tolerance specifications. By employing a sensitivity analysis, the effects of manufacturing process parameters on the geometric deviations can also be determined, which helps to identify critical process parameters, which are to be controlled during manufacturing, and to optimize manufacturing processes  [64].Tight tolerance requirements lead to increasing costs not only because of cost-intensive manufacturing but also due to additional inspection routines. The optimization of measuring processes is therefore yet another action for costs reductions. In this regard, the operationalization of the Skin Model concept can be used to identify critical workpiece features, for which the inspection should be intensified, as well as features, which are not as relevant for the product function and quality. For this purpose, the Skin Model Shapes created during the observation stage can be used to identify workpieces features with a high variability by analysing the statistics of observed geometric deviations. For example, based on the results of the manufacturing process simulation illustrated in Fig. 16, it can be seen, that the centre of the part shows only little deviation compared to the nominal workpiece, whereas the corners and edges are more prone to geometric deviations induced by shrinkage and warpage. This information helps to optimize inspection plans and to reduce measuring expenditure.Moreover, the results gained from measurements can be returned to design in order to adjust the parameters for the Skin Model Shape generation in the Prediction Stage and to verify tolerance analysis and other computer aided engineering methods. Furthermore, based on the Skin Model concept, a straightforward comparison for conformance is anchored in the standards for geometric specification and verification, which simplifies the persistent process for GPS.The need for a univocal language for geometrical product specification considering all steps of the product life-cycle such as design, manufacturing, and inspection is inevitable and has led to the development of GeoSpelling and its consideration in international standards for GPS. The Skin Model concept is a key idea behind this language. Beside this, most models for computer aided tolerancing proposed by researchers and used in industry do not fully conform with the GPS standards. Moreover, most of them make severe assumptions on observable geometric deviations and can therefore hardly handle all kinds of 3D tolerances.These lacks inspired the idea and the development of a discrete geometry framework for GPS, that is capable of considering geometric deviations at different stages of the product life cycle and is versatile regarding current and future tolerancing standards. Proposed approaches and research works so far build on a point cloud-based geometry representation scheme for implementing this framework employing various mathematical concepts for generating deviated representations of workpieces which are denoted to as Skin Model Shapes. The process of generating these Skin Model Shapes can be divided in a prediction stage and an observation stage with respect to the available information about expected geometric deviations in product development. The proposed approach for the prediction stage is based on predictive assumptions about geometric deviations and therefore the obtained Skin Model Shapes depend on the accuracy of these assumptions. In contrast to that, the results of the observation stage approach are highly depending on the training set. The generated Skin Model Shapes and their adequate visualization can then be used in various applications such as tolerancing, manufacturing, and inspection.However, despite the highlighted potentials, the research interest in this field is slowly growing  [70]. Main future challenges are the development of assembly simulation techniques as well as of simulation tools enabling functional tolerancing for various applications based on the proposed discrete geometry framework. Furthermore, an important question, which is not limited to any shape modelling or tolerance representation concept, is the validation of the proposed approaches and the comparison of obtained results with real cases. Nevertheless, the current state of affairs in this research field and the works so far seem very promising and may serve as an impulse for abundant discussions in research and industry.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
