@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Precise contact motion planning for deformable planar curved shapes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present an efficient motion planning algorithm for a planar deformable robot.We employK-contact motion analysis to reduce the degrees of freedom of the robot.Our algorithm efficiently finds a feasible path via a graph searching algorithm.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Configuration spaces,Multivariate algebraic constraints,Freeform geometric models,B-spline curves,Deformable robots,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We present a precise contact motion planning algorithm for a deformable robot in a planar environment with stationary obstacles. The robot and obstacles are both represented withC1-continuous implicit or parametric curves. The robot is changing its shape using a single degree of freedom (via a one-parameter family of deformable curves). In order to reduce the dimensionality of the configuration space, geometrically constrained yet collision free contact motions are sought, that haveK(=2,3)simultaneous tangential contact points between the robot and the obstacles. TheK-contact motion analysis effectively reduces the degrees of freedom of the robot, which enables a more efficient motion planning. The geometric conditions for theK-contact motions can be formulated as a system of non-linear polynomial equations, which can be solved precisely using a multivariate equation solver. The solutions forK-contact motions are represented as curves in a 4-dimensional(x,y,θ,t)space, wherex,y,θare the degrees of freedom of the rigid motion andtis the deformation’s parameter. Using the graph structure of the solution curves for theK-contact motions, our algorithm efficiently finds a feasible path connecting two configurations via a graph searching algorithm, whenever available. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach using several examples.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The problem of collision-avoidance in robot motion planning has been an active research area over the last several decades. Remarkable progress has been achieved in numerous practical applications. However, relatively few results were introduced for the case of deformable robots, even though potentially many applications can benefit from the added degrees of freedom. The deformation ability of the robot provides more flexibility in the motion planning and enables the successful navigation of more challenging tasks that cannot be accomplished by rigid robots. Actual designs of deformable robots already exist, i.e.  [1]. On the other hand, more degrees of freedom in the robot exponentially increase the complexity of motion planning algorithms. As a consequence, it is very difficult to find feasible motions in a reasonable amount of time.The geometry of deformable robots and their environments are often designed with Non-Uniform Rational B-spline (NURBS) curves and surfaces, which is the de facto standard representation for industrial objects. Yet, the majority of contemporary algorithms for motion planning first tessellate the freeform NURBS curves and surfaces, as they can handle only piecewise linear discrete objects. The errors caused by the polygonal approximation are difficult to control. Moreover, it is non-trivial to precisely manage the collision detections (in particular when dealing with contact motions) using these polygonal approximations. Thus, it is highly desirable to directly process the NURBS curves and surfaces for applications requiring high accuracy.In this paper, we consider the precise (up to machine precision) contact motion planning for a deformable planar parametric or implicit freeformC1-continuous robotΦt(C(u)), with respect to aC1-continuous stationary (set of) parametric obstacle(s)D(v), in the plane. The transformationΦtrepresents a one-parameter smooth freeform deformation of theC1-continuous robotC(u)and we assume thatΦtis pre-defined algebraically. The deformable robotΦt(C(u))has two rigid motion degrees of freedom in translation,(x,y), and one rigid motion degree of freedom in rotation,θ. Finally, the last degree of freedomtprovides the shape control over the robot’s deformation functionΦt. The configuration space (C-space) is thus a 4-dimensional space, in(x,y,θ,t).A naive approach for planning the motion of such a deformable robot is to compute the entire boundary of the C-space’s obstacle which can be represented as an implicit 3-manifold,f(x,y,θ,t)=0, and use this 3-manifold for the motion planning. The optimal motion path may then be computed by considering all possible motion paths over the entire boundary of the obstacle’s C-space. Clearly, computing and even representing the entire 3-manifold solution is expected to be highly challenging. It is indeed inefficient and in fact unnecessary to compute the entire boundary of the C-space, because the robot typically follows a univariate motion path and thus only a small portion of the C-space is used for the motion planning.Therefore, instead of computing the entire C-space, we focus on analyzing contact motions that satisfy additional geometric constraints so that the dimension of the computed solution can be significantly reduced. Toward this end, we seek the collision free motion of a (deformable) robotΦt(C(u))while it maintains multiple tangential contacts, typically two or three, with obstaclesD(v). We denote such motionsK(=2,3)-contact motions. The reasons for usingK-contact motions, in the motion planning, are twofold:1.We can now effectively reduce the degrees of freedom in the contact motion analysis. Now, everyK-contact motion will be represented as a curve in a 4-dimensional C-space. As a result, the entire set ofK-contact motions forms a graph structure in the(x,y,θ,t)space and the motion planning can be addressed via well-known graph searching algorithms.AK-contact motion analysis often provides a good solution for narrow passage problems, because there is a high probability for the robot to have multiple contact points in such narrow passages. Fig. 1shows an example of a deformable robot withK-contact motion that follows a narrow passage.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section  2, we briefly review previous related work. Section  3 describes the different ways one can prescribe the deformation of the robot, algebraically. Section  4 introduces the algebraic conditions for theK-contact motion betweenΦt(C(u))andD(v). Section  5 addresses the construction of theK-contact motion graph and the motion planning algorithm using thisK-contact graph. Several experimental results are reported in Section  6 and the paper is finally concluded with discussions on future work in Section  7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this work, we have extended previous results on motion planning for rigid robots to a generalized approach that supports deformable robots. This extension is based on the representation of deformable robots using one-parameter family of deformations. Algebraic methods played a major role in this work, an approach that yields high accuracy in the order of machine precision. More importantly, based on the ability of the exploited multivariate solver  [21–23] that ensures finding all real solutions, we can guarantee that the configuration space will be exhaustively analyzed, and thus always finds a feasible motion if one exists, up to the prescribed tolerance. While the presented algorithms are slow and requires hours and days of computations, they all used a single thread. Parallelizing the solver is possible and can clearly reduce the computing time. Another possible consideration for optimization is the optimalδvalue to be used in the local tracing. One can also consider further optimizations via the use of differentδvalues for each variable, which potentially reduce the domain size of the system of equations.Our algorithm effectively addresses a narrow passage problem which is typically the most challenging part of the motion planning. On the other hand, it cannot handle open regions where there exist no 2/3 contact motions. These open regions can be effectively handled by using other well-known algorithms such as a probabilistic road map (PRM)  [2] or a rapidly exploring random tree (RRT)  [27]. However, there are several technical issues that must be resolved before applying these sampling based algorithms toC1continuous implicit or parametric curves. For example, collision test for the straight line in the C-space connecting two collision free configurations is non-trivial and it is even more difficult to check the condition efficiently. Therefore, combining our work with other sampling based method requires a further in-depth research and analysis.Clearly one can consider more than one degree of freedom in the deformation function of the robot. In fact, the tangible robot of  [1] can have several independent degrees of freedom. LetCi(u),(i=1,…,n),u∈[0,1], benregular parametric curves that can be convex-blended using(n−1)independent parameters. Differently stated, consider the multivariateM(u,t1,…,tn−1). By setting the(n−1)independent parameters,tj, fixed inM, a univariate is prescribed. While the complexity of solvers  [21–23] is exponential in the dimension, the algebraic structure of the problem is clear. One can hope that this algebraic configuration can be exploited, as in the local behaviors scheme exploited in this work, reducing the dimensionality and exploiting the deformations’ full degrees of freedom only when they are really needed.Similarly, one should also consider handling piecewiseC1-continuous shapes, handling curve–point contacts, where the point is a discontinuity point. While conceptually simpler than the curve–curve contacts, it does require the management of some book-keeping of all the different contact events’ cases.