@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Control of cardiac alternans in an electromechanical model of cardiac tissue

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This study presents a novel mechanical perturbation algorithm to control alternans.The control algorithm manipulates the cardiac tissue mechanics to suppress alternans.The proposed algorithm suppresses alternans in relevantly sized cardiac tissues.We alter the action potential duration by perturbing cardiac tissue mechanics.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Action potential,Alternans control,Electrical alternans,Mechanical perturbation,Nash–Panfilov model,Pacing periods,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Electrical alternations in cardiac action potential duration have been shown to be a precursor to arrhythmias and sudden cardiac death. Through the mechanism of excitation–contraction coupling, the presence of electrical alternans induces alternations in the heart muscle contractile activity. Also, contraction of cardiac tissue affects the process of cardiac electric wave propagation through the mechanism of the so-called mechanoelectrical feedback. Electrical excitation and contraction of cardiac tissue can be linked by an electromechanical model such as the Nash–Panfilov model. In this work, we explore the feasibility of suppressing cardiac alternans in the Nash-Panfilov model which is employed for small and large deformations. Several electrical pacing and mechanical perturbation feedback strategies are considered to demonstrate successful suppression of alternans on a one-dimensional cable. This is the first attempt to combine electrophysiologically relevant cardiac models of electrical wave propagation and contractility of cardiac tissue in a synergistic effort to suppress cardiac alternans. Numerical examples are provided to illustrate the feasibility and the effects of the proposed algorithms to suppress cardiac alternans.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Electrical alternans is a physiological phenomenon manifested as beat-to-beat oscillation (electric wave width alternation) of the cardiac Action Potential Duration (APD) [1]. Alternans has been shown to be a precursor to arrhythmias [2,3] and sudden cardiac death (SCD), which is the most common cause of death in the industrialized world. Experimentally, APD alternans is observed during pacing at high rates so that beyond a critical pacing value a sequence of long and short APDs emerges [4] as presented in Fig. 1. In this figure, APD is defined as the period of time during which the action potential exceeds the given threshold value, while a diastolic time interval (DI) is defined as the period of time during which the action potential is below the threshold value.The majority of feedback control algorithms [5–10] that have been developed until now to suppress alternans in cardiac tissue utilize the difference between the measurements of the two most recent APDs to make small adjustments to the timing of electrical stimuli. These algorithms are specific implementations of time-delay auto-synchronization [11] and extended time-delay auto-synchronization [12] feedback control techniques. Hall et al. [5] used this approach to successfully control cardiac arrhythmia called an alternans rhythm in an in vitro rabbit heart. Similarly, Rappel et al. [6] suppressed alternans in two geometrical models of both 1D and 2D tissues, to conclude that several control electrodes need to be placed on the tissue in order to stabilize normal heart rhythm. Control of atrioventricular-nodal conduction alternans has also been demonstrated in vivo human hearts [7] by stabilizing the underlying unstable steady-state conduction. The first experimental attempt to implement the electrical pacing interval technique is due to Hall and Gauthier [9], who succeeded in suppressing alternans in small pieces(≤1cm)of a bullfrog cardiac muscle. Echebarria and Karma [8] were the first to investigate this approach theoretically in a model of Purkinje fibers. They showed, by using Noble model, that alternans in fibers no longer than ≈1cm could be suppressed using single electrode. Their theoretical results were experimentally verified by Christini et al. [10]. In addition, Dubljevic et al. [13] proved regarding the stated approach, that the failure to suppress alternans completely in tissues exceeding 1cm in length is due to the lack of information of the spatial evolution of alternans away from the pacing site, and due to finite controllability of actuation at the pacing site.It has been shown theoretically and experimentally that the above mentioned control technique has a finite degree of controllability, such that alternans stabilization in cardiac tissues of the length above 1cm cannot be achieved [8,10,13,14]. Although such algorithms have proved effectiveness of controlling electrical alternans in small tissues, several electrodes need to be implanted along the length of cardiac tissue (≈6.25cm), so that each pacing electrode can suppress alternans in a finite part of the tissue (≈1cm). In addition, to the authors׳ best knowledge, all the electric-based realization algorithms have not take into account mechanical properties of cardiac tissue, despite the fact that mechanical deformation is shown to influence electrical activity of the heart tissue, and consequently the cardiac alternans. In fact, cardiac electrical waves propagate through cardiac tissue and initiate its contraction via excitation–contraction coupling (ECC), while contraction of the heart causes cardiac tissue deformation which in turn feeds back on the wave propagation and affects electrophysiological properties via mechanoelectrical feedback (MEF) [15–18].Many studies have shown the importance of the MEF and, for instance, that mechanical impact on the chest, in the area directly over the heart, can either cause Commotio Cordis, when the chest receives a blow [19,20], or terminate cardiac arrhythmia by striking a blow of the fist to the chest in a precordial thump [21,22]. Therefore, in this paper, we explore the feasibility of controlling electrical alternans by manipulating mechanical properties of the cardiac tissue. From mathematical point of view, electromechanical models where the coupling is between electrical and mechanical activity of the heart are more suitable for our study. A variety of these models has been developed to investigate various physical phenomena and they can be mainly classified into two categories. The weakly coupled electromechanical models [23–26] that account only for the effects of electrical activity on the cardiac mechanics, i.e., one way coupling, and the strongly coupled electromechanical models [27–31] that account for the effects of electrical activity on the cardiac mechanics and the effect of mechanical deformation on electrical properties. For more details about the electromechanical models, the reader is referred to [32,33]. In this work, we will use Nash–Panfilov (NP) model [27,28], which is a strongly coupled electromechanical model. This model includes an additional variable to link the electrophysiological properties of the heart tissue which is modelled with the well-known Aliev–Panfilov (AP) model [34], with cardiac tissue׳s mechanical properties. It has been shown in [4] that APD alternans occurs when the slope of the dynamic APD restitution curve is greater than one. Therefore, for the NP model, APD alternans can be induced by pacing cardiac tissue at a rapid rate as the slope of the dynamic restitution curve (Fig. 2) at high frequencies is greater than one. The dynamic restitution curve, which describes the relationship between action potential duration (APD) and preceding diastolic interval (DI), was constructed using a dynamic pacing protocol [4] and determined by plotting each action potential duration at 90% repolarization against the preceding diastolic interval at incremental pacing rates. The dynamic restitution curve of the NP model is the dynamic restitution curve of the AP when coupled with cardiac contraction. As the NP model is dimensionless, units are not used, refer to Section 4 for details, and the models׳ parameters used are given in Table 1.The main goal of this paper is to show that the control of cardiac alternans along a 7cm cable of cardiac cells can be achieved by control algorithms that use the mechanical perturbation approach. In particular, we consider several electrical pacing and mechanical perturbation strategies with two relevant mechanical deformations being considered. The first one is in small deformation, and therefore the model is governed by the equations of the linear elasticity theory [35,36]. Since the cardiac cells change length by up to 20%, which occurs as a result of cardiac contraction during a normal heart beat [24,27,37,38], the second strategy is therefore when the deformation is large. The model in this case is however governed by nonlinear equations of the finite deformation elasticity theory [35,36,39].It will be demonstrated that in small deformation, one can suppress alternans along the whole cable of cardiac cells by using mechanical perturbation strategy. The control algorithm proposed for the large deformation, which is an extension of the one used for small deformation, combines electrical boundary pacing and mechanical perturbation strategy. In all proposed algorithms, the electrical pacing is applied at the tissue boundary while the mechanical perturbation control is applied at one place over a small localized region within the cable length of 7cm. Recently, mechanics-based devices have been developed that can be attached to the membrane of the heart to treat cardiac diseases [40]. The proposed control algorithm is a promising approach that can be possibly incorporated into mechanical-based devices that can be equipped with mechanical patch to apply mechanical perturbation over a small localized region of the heart tissue in order to suppress alternans. Applying this control strategy to control cardiac alternans can potentially improve therapy since it requires that one mechanical patch, in a one-dimensional model, to be placed over a small region (≤1cm), to suppress alternans, while the existing electrical pacing control requires several electrodes to be implanted in the ventricles, which is very difficult to be realized, so that each pacing electrode should be able to suppress alternans over a finite area of cardiac tissue.To the authors׳ best knowledge, these methods of control of alternans have not been explored in previous studies. Only Yapari et al. [41] used mechanical perturbation approach in their control algorithm to suppress electrical alternans under condition of small deformation, where the deformation gradient is simply approximated, and their proposed algorithm cannot be extended to higher spatial dimensions. To show the performance and efficiency of our methodology in suppressing alternans in the whole cable of cardiac cells for small and large deformations, numerical simulations will be presented.Due to the fact that cardiac cells change length by up to 20% during a normal heart beat, the mechanical analysis in the NP model is based on the finite deformation elasticity theory for large deformation. However, for small deformation, the mathematical model of deformation can be reduced to a simplified one governed by the equations of the linear elasticity theory. The reader can refer to [35,36,39] for more details on linear and nonlinear elasticity theories.Nash–Panfilov model that couples cardiac excitation using a two variable reaction–diffusion model with the equations that model the deformation of cardiac tissue is given by(1)∂V∂t=D¯∂∂XM(CCMN−1∂V∂XN)+f(V,r)(2)∂r∂t=(ε+μ1rμ2+V)(−r−KV(V−b−1))(3)∂Ta∂t=ϵ(V)(kTaV−Ta)(4)∂∂XM(SMNFjN)=0wheref(V,r)=KV(V−a)(1−V)−rV−Ig. All parameters and variables are dimensionless. V is the membrane potential, r is the recovery variable, and a is the threshold parameter.D¯=1is the diffusion constant, XMare the reference (undeformed) coordinates, xiare the material (deformed) coordinates,FjN=(∂xj/∂XM)is the deformation gradient tensor,CMN=(∂xk/∂XM)(∂xk/∂XN)is the right Cauchy–Green deformation tensor, SMNis the second Piola–Kirchhoff stress tensor, andC=det(CMN). The active tension Ta, increases with V, with a delay fixed byϵ(V), given by 0.1 forV>aand 1.0 forV<a, kTais a parameter that controls the amplitude of Ta, the parametersε,k,μ1and μ2 have no clear physiological meaning, but are fitted to reproduce the key characteristics of cardiac tissue [27]. The mechanoelectric feedback is provided by stretch-activated currents (SACs),(5)Ig=Gs(V−1)(C−1),where Gsis the maximal conductance. The current, as defined in (5), is only present during stretch (i.e. whenC>1).Due to active tension, described by Ta, cardiac tissue will deform until a new equilibrium state is reached. The equilibrium equations (4), derived using Newton׳s laws of motion, and boundary constraints are imposed on the model and solved numerically to determine the mechanical deformation.Cardiac tissues are anisotropic, inhomogeneous, and exhibit nonlinear stress–strain relation called constitutive law [24]. A hyperelastic material model is a type of constitutive model to describe material, mainly elastic material, for which the stress–strain relationship derives from a strain energy density function. The hyperelastic Mooney–Rivlin material model has been used to model the nonlinear mechanical behavior of the myocardium [27,28,38,42], as this model provides a close fit to the stress–strain curve of cardiac tissue. In this work, this model is chosen to describe the passive mechanical properties of cardiac tissue. An isotropic model, which exhibits identical mechanical properties in all directions, such as the Mooney–Rivlin model, is a simplified description of the passive mechanical properties. But, since we restrict ourselves to study a one-dimensional model, this simplification is justified. Mechanical stresses in tissue are modeled as the summation of a passive and an active stress component [27](6)SMN=12(∂W∂CMN+∂W∂CNM)+TaCMN−1,whereW(I1,I2)is the strain energy function for the Mooney–Rivlin model [36]. It is given by(7)W(I1,I2)=c1(I1−3)+c2(I2−3),withI1(C)=tr(C)andI2(C)=12(tr(C)−tr(C2))are the first two principal invariants ofC, andtr(C)is the trace ofC, and c1 and c2 are material constants.In 1D, the deformation gradient tensorF, the right Cauchy–Green tensorC, and the diffusion tensorD=CC−1can be written as(8)F=[F(X)00010001],C=[F2(X)00010001](9)D=[1F(X)000F(X)000F(X)]Letx=X+u, where x and X are the material and reference coordinates respectively, and u is the displacement variable, we can write F(X) as(10)F(X)=∂x∂X=1+∂u(X)∂XThe second Piola–Kirchhoff stress tensor, given in (6), is the sum of the passive stress tensor (Spass) and the active stress tensor, and is expressed as(11)S=Spass+TaC−1The second Piola-Kirchhoff passive stress tensor (Spass) for the Mooney-Rivlin material is calculated, see [39] for more details, as:(12)Spass=2(c1+c2tr(C))I−2c2C,The stress tensorSbecomes(13)S=2(c1+c2tr(C))I−2c2C+TaC−1In 1D the second Piola–Kirchhoff stress S11 is expressed as(14)S11=c˜+TaF2(X),withc˜=2(c1+c2(D−1)), and D is the dimension ofFD=3. The Cauchy stress tensorσis given by(15)σ=1JF·S·FT,whereJ=det(F), wheredet(F)is the determinant ofF. In 1D the Cauchy stress σ11 can be calculated using (15) as(16)σ11=σpass11+TaF(X),whereσpass11=c˜F(X). In the absence of deformation, σ11passmust be zero. Therefore, we need to apply an internal constant pressure p into σ11passthat is given as(17)σpass11=c˜F(X)+pThe pressure p can be determined by requiringσpass11=0whenF(X)=1. This leads top=−c˜, and σ11 becomes(18)σ11=c˜F(X)−c˜+TaF(X)S11 can now be written, usingS=JF−1σF−T, as(19)S11=c˜−c˜F(X)+TaF2(X),and the elastic equation (4) in 1D is given as(20)∂∂X(c˜F(X)−c˜+TaF(X))=0Replacing (10) by its value in (20), the following is obtained:(21)c˜∂2u∂X2+∂∂X(Ta1+∂u(X)∂X)=0In the limit of small deformations,∂uk∂XM⪡1, and the deformation gradient F(X), given in (10), is approximated as(22)F(X)=1+u(X)AssumingTa⪡c˜, the elastic equation (4) in 1D is reduced into:(23)c˜∂2u∂X2+∂Ta∂X=0,wherec˜=2(c1+c2(D−1)).Linearized elastic model may be used for strains less than 5% [35,36,43].In this section, we describe the control algorithms developed to suppress alternans for the NP model in 1D. Two control algorithms are presented. The first one is provided under small deformation condition and uses spatially distributed mechanical perturbation control, which perturbs the tissue by exerting a force that causes nodal displacement in cardiac tissue. This is reflected in a reaction–diffusion model via the diffusion tensor and MEF, and consequently affects the electrical APD in order to suppress alternans. The second control algorithm provided under large deformation condition is an extension of the one developed for the small deformation condition. It combines spatially distributed mechanical perturbation control with electrical boundary pacing that can be realized by shortening or lengthening the period interval, which has the effect of suppressing cardiac alternans up to 1cm from the pacing site.First, we induce alternans by reducing pacing cycle length for the onset of alternans. The tissue is paced at the boundary at a basic pacing cycle length (PCL), namedτ⁎, such that the APD alternates. Under constant PCL, the amplitude of alternans grows. The APD is measured from the instant when V crosses the threshold value during the depolarization phase, until the instant it falls below this value during the repolarization phase. The threshold value is chosen to be 0.4 (in dimensionless units).Under small deformation condition, alternans suppression can be achieved by applying spatially distributed mechanical perturbation control which is implemented as follows:(24)∂Ta∂t=ϵ(V)(kTaV−Ta)+βen(ζ)(25)en(ζ)={APDref(ζ=0,τ⁎)−APDn−1(ζ)ifρ>00otherwise,where β is the controller gain, andρ=APDref(ζ=0,τ⁎)−APDn−1(ζ). The erroren(ζ)(defined in (25)) is generated from the difference between APD reference (APDref(ζ=0,τ⁎)) at the pacing site, recorded at the time we reachτ⁎, and the APDs at the nth stimulus (APDn), over the length of the area under spatially distributed control (1–1.5cm region).This basic state feedback algorithm takesen(ζ)and provides a control signal which is applied over the region of 1–1.5cm. The control signal is not null (active) only whenen(ζ)>0, meaning that the controller only acts on the short-APD. It is added as a positive quantity to (25), when the transmembrane potential crosses the threshold value during the repolarization phase at the nth stimulus (APDn), but it is set to zero during the resting time (V<0.01) until the transmembrane potential crosses the threshold value during the repolarization phase at then+1thstimulus (APDn+1) (see Fig. 3).As seen previously, the governing equations of the electromechanical NP model are composed of three components: Eqs. (1) and (2) that model the cardiac electrophysiology, Eq. (4) that models cardiac tissue mechanics, and Eq. (3) that models active tension. A simple schematic diagram of the mechanical perturbations control system, as shown in Fig. 4, consists of the three above mentioned components, the controller, as defined in Eqs. (24) and (25), and the sensor. The controller acts on the difference between the desiredAPDrefand the APDs measured by the sensor. When the difference is not null, it sends a control signal to the active tension model to perturb the active tension variable, which in turn perturbs mechanical properties of the cardiac mechanical model. The perturbation of mechanical properties alters the electrical APD of the cardiac electrophysiological model, via the diffusion tensor and MEF, in order to suppress alternans.Based on our numerical experiments, using this control strategy for the large deformation case does not suppress alternans, therefore, we combined it with electrical boundary pacing algorithm.Boundary pacing control is realized by adjusting the stimulation pacing interval subjected by the cardiac system, and is determined by the dynamic control scheme [8](26)Tn=τ⁎+γ(APDn(ζ=0)−APDn−1(ζ=0))Tnrepresents the amount of time between the nth and (n+1)th stimuli. Here γ is a tunable constant which defines feedback gain of the APD alternation of the basic pacing cycle. For positive γ the second term on the right-hand side of (26) has the effect of lengthening Tnif the difference of two consecutive APDs is positive. As a result, the following DI, and hence the next APD at the (n+1)th beat, is larger by using this control scheme.It has been demonstrated in [8,10,13] that this pacing control can suppress alternans for the region from the pacing site up to a finite distance (≤1cm). Beyond that region the instabilities grow along the tissue, and discordant alternans has been observed. To overcome this limitation in controllability, we added an error based feedback control algorithm that perturbs the tissue cardiac mechanics in a localized region. The spatially distributed mechanical perturbation control, implemented as defined in Eqs. (24) and (25), provides a control signal which is applied over the region of 1–2cm. The controller acts after the electrical boundary feedback controller stabilizes a finite part of the tissue׳s length (≈1cm). The mathematical model used for the case of small deformation is a simplification (elastic equation is linear) of the one used for the case of large deformation (elastic equation is nonlinear). Therefore, to illustrate the physiological differences in the models׳ responses to the mechanical perturbation algorithms, a mathematical analysis study, which goes far beyond the scope of the present paper which focuses on numerical exploration, is required.In all our simulations, a one dimensional cardiac cable of the length L=7cm, fixed at the end points (isometric contraction regime) is considered. The excitation characteristics of the medium was solved by a semi-implicit time integration scheme withΔt=0.02(dimensionless) andΔX=0.1(dimensionless), and we determined the deformation mechanics of the tissue using the second order finite difference scheme. As outlined in [27], to determine the scaling factor for the dimensionless time unit, the dimensionless APD obtained from the model must be compared to experimental measurements. Scaling factors ranging from 5ms to 14ms have been reported [34,44,45]. For the dimensionless space variable, 1 dimensionless unit corresponds to 1mm [44,45].For the given parameters of the cardiac model, APD alternans is induced by pacing the tissue at the boundary at a constant period, starting with a large one, of 81 time unit, until a steady-state APD is reached. This is repeated, but each time the period is reduced by one time unit, until an alternation in the APDs is observed, and the resulting period, named tau⁎, is the basic pacing cycle length (PCL).In order to induce alternans, no initiation of a new action potential, due to effects of SACs [19,28], should be allowed. Therefore, for a defined maximal local deformation, Gscan be given any value that is less than a certain threshold, which is determined by numerical experiments, above which a new action potential is initiated.Under condition of small deformation, Eqs. (1)–(3), and (23) of the NP model are solved. The constant materials c1 and c2, together with the parameterkTa, determine local deformations during contraction, so they are chosen to give rise to maximal local deformations<5%following excitation. All model parameters used in the simulation are given in Table 1. For the given parameters,τ⁎is found to be 60 time units. The controller gain β is chosen to be−0.0006in the simulation.The amplitude of alternans,an(ζ), is defined as the difference between two consecutive APDs at a given point in space ζ(27)an(ζ)=(APDn(ζ)−APDn−1(ζ))(−1)nAs shown in Fig. 5(b), the control action, applied at t=6000, successfully suppress alternans. This control action alters the tissue׳s transmembrane potential through the diffusion transport tensor and MEF, in which changes in Taaffect the mechanical displacement variable u in the elastic equation (4), which then affects the transmembrane potential (1), through the tensorDand Ig. As shown in Fig. 6, the APD width alternates when the control is not applied, Fig. 6(a), and is suppressed, Fig. 6(b), after the control is applied.The presence of electrical alternans induces, through the mechanism of ECC, an alternation in the heart muscle contractile activity, see Fig. 7. As can be seen, the displacement variable u for a single cell alternates when APD alternates (Fig. 7(b)). As shown in Fig. 8, the displacement variable alternates when the control is not applied, Fig. 8(b), and is suppressed (Fig. 8(c)) after the mechanical perturbation control is applied. It has to be noted that the largest displacements after applying control (Fig. 8(c)), with respect to the displacements before applying control (Fig. 8(a) and (b)), occur in the localized region (1–1.5cm), where the control signal is applied. As shown in Fig. 9, the largest changes in Igafter applying control (Fig. 9(c)), with respect to Igbefore applying control (Fig. 9(a) and (b)), occur in the localized region (1–1.5cm) where the control signal is applied.Although spatially distributed control is only applied over a localized region of the tissue (0.5cm), it successfully suppress alternans along the tissue. Thus, using a model based on the mechanical properties of cardiac tissue, it is clearly shown that spatially distributed mechanical perturbation control can be used to manipulate the electrical APD in order to suppress alternans.Moreover, although mechanical perturbation control is applied locally, it perturbs the mechanical displacement u globally in the elastic equation (4), since the perturbation occurs along the entire points of the cable but the end points which are fixed, and the largest displacements after applying control, with respect to the displacements before applying control, occur in the localized region (1–1.5cm) where the control signal is applied. This perturbation affects the transmembrane potential globally in Eq. (1), through the diffusion tensor (D) and MEF (Ig), since it is applied along the entire cable length of cardiac cells.Under condition of large deformations, Eqs. (1)–(3), and (21) of the NP model are solved. The constant materials c1 and c2, together with the parameterkTa, determine local deformations during contraction, so they are chosen to give rise to maximal local deformations between 5% and 20% following the excitation. All model parameters used in the simulation are given in Table 2. For the given parameters,τ⁎is found to be 53 time units. In the simulation,γ=−0.275and β=0.005.It has been demonstrated in [13] that in order to suppress alternans in the cables of the length>1cm, a model-based control algorithm, that is realized with a number of measurements used in the feedback realization at least equal to the number of unstable modes, must be used. The electrical pacing algorithm defined in (26) uses boundary point measurement of the amplitude of alternans, and therefore it can just stabilize a single mode. This is due to the fact that the tissue characteristic length of ≈1cm has one unstable mode. This algorithm cannot achieve stability for the cables exceeding 1cm in length due to the presence of unstable modes that start to appear when the length of the tissue size is considerably increased. Inability of electrical pacing algorithms to control alternans in longer cables (>1cm) is due to the lack of knowledge of the spatial evolution of alternans.On the other hand, it is not feasible to have a spatially distributed electrical perturbation for alternans control, since the existence of several pacing centers would change the location of the onset of the propagating excitation wave, which in general cannot take place away from the apex of the heart. Also, simultaneous pacing at two sites cannot be used, since the induced beats, coming from both sides of the cable, collide and annihilate when the two wavefronts meet. In addition, implementing spatially distributed electrical perturbations, by using many electrodes, placed one after another, in a small localized region will not suppress alternans either, because the perturbation input to voltage of a nonlinear cardiac excitable cell model cannot be realized due to strong coupling of ionic currents models. Therefore, using solely perturbation of the pacing control would not work due to the intrinsic nonlinear dynamics of the propagating excitation wave, and its manifestation of alternans instabilities, which is associated with unidirectional propagation of the electric wave from the pacing center to the external tissue. Hence, an independent type of interaction through the inclusion of mechanical perturbation is added, since this method of interaction is independent of the pacing protocol, and a model-based control algorithm that combines the pacing interval with the spatially distributed mechanical perturbation is used. This model-based control has a full knowledge of the entire state of alternans, since it is realized with sufficient measurements in the feedback.As shown in Fig. 10, the amplitude of alternans grows (Fig. 10(a)) when no control is applied, and when the control action is applied at t=14,000, it successfully suppress alternans (Fig. 10(c)). This control action alters the tissue׳s transmembrane potential when mechanical perturbation is applied, in which changes in Taaffect the mechanical displacement variable u in the elastic equation (4), which then affects the transmembrane potential (1), through the tensorDand Ig. Perturbing the diffusion tensor and MEF alter the tissue׳s electric wave profile, and consequently the APD. As shown in Fig. 11, the APD width alternates when the control is not applied, Fig. 11(a), and is suppressed, Fig. 11(b), after the control is applied.Although the spatially distributed control is only applied over a localized region of the tissue (1cm), it successfully suppresses alternans along the tissue. Thus, the control of alternans in large and relevantly sized cardiac tissues can be achieved by the manipulation of the electrical APD using a model based on the mechanical and electrophysiological properties of cardiac tissue.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
