@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
CNC double spiral tool-path generation based on parametric surface mapping

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We study a new double spiral tool-path generation algorithm for 5-axis HSM.We call a smoothness optimization method during solving PDEs to smooth curves.Machining parameters (e.g., path interval and step length) can be guaranteed.Mapping rules are based on the same ranges of NURBS curve and parametric domain.Our tool-paths have a self-complementary structure and can be suitably linked.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
High-speed machining,Partial differential equations,Parameter domain,Mapping rule,Double spiral tool-path,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
High-speed machining (HSM) has been an important method for machining complex parametric surface. Tool-path planning for HSM has a significant impact on processing efficiency and surface quality. A new double spiral tool-path generation algorithm for HSM is proposed in this paper. First, the isothermal lines which satisfy the machining parameters in the mapping parametric domain are computed by means of constructing a thermal conductivity model and solving partial differential equations (PEDs). Furthermore, a smoothness optimization method is proposed to improve the smoothness of the isothermal lines and avoid taking up too much memory. Then, the mapping rules are constructed and the trajectory is planned out in the standard parametric domain in order to generate double spiral trajectory in the corresponding parametric domain. Finally, the trajectory is mapped onto the parametric surface to obtain the tool-paths, and the tool-paths linking method is planned for complex multi-domains. This method can realize the precision milling of complicated parametric surface without tool retractions, and meanwhile it improves the uniformity of the tool-paths and machining efficiency. Our method has been experimented in several simulations and validated successfully through the actual machining of a complicated pocket. The results indicate that this method is superior to other existing machining methods, and it can realize HSM of complicate-shaped pocket based on parametric surface.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Pocket components with aspheric surfaces have been extensively applicated in different industrial sectors, including aerospace, space exploration, mold, powertrain system and so on [1]. At present, HSM has emerged as a key technology in machining components with aspheric surfaces and other manufacturing applications, which possesses obvious superiority in complicated surface machining with much higher rotational speed and feedrate of the spindle than traditional milling methods. So HSM has become one of the most widely adopted approaches to increase machining efficiency, improve machining quality and reduce cost  [2].HSM has not only brought higher requirements for the lathe, clamp, cutter, etc., but also proposed further requests for the topology geometric shape and dynamics performance of the tool-path. Spiral tool-path is an ideal tool-path planning method for HSM. Generally speaking, splintery machining trajectories rarely occur during machining, and furthermore, load fluctuation of the cutter can be effectively restrained and the times of cutter lifting can be reduced so as to achieve higher machining quality. In order to effectively avoid sudden direction changes of the velocity vectors, tool-path with smooth transitions at sharp corners will be needed. In all the transitions between feed and retract, etc., motions need to be as smooth as possible. Since the spiral tool-path starts on the outside border and stops in the center (or vice versa), undesired artifacts may occur in starting or stopping operation. This effect gets even more intensified when there is a high curvature at the start or the end of the tool-path, especially inside of the spiral  [3].Generally, tool load fluctuations, tool wear and the number of tool retractions can be reduced through generating a smooth continuous spiral tool-path, which plays a particularly important role for HMS.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper proposes a new spiral tool-path generation algorithm for high speed machining to ensure high efficiency and high quality. This method possesses the following advantages:(1)This method reasonably constructs the thermal conductivity model and determines boundary conditions to obtain the machining tool-path which satisfy the machining parameters for the complicated surface. The machining path interval is determined by the scallop height method. The feed step length is determined by equi-chord height difference method.To further improving smoothness of contours, let the definition of “C Key Loop” be the contour which is determined by curvature threshold value, while let the definition of “L Key Loop” be the contour which is determined by length threshold value. Furthermore, a smoothness optimization method is proposed to improve the smoothness of the isothermal lines and avoid taking up too much memory during solving PDEs.This method constructs custom mapping rules between standard parametric domain and parametric for generating double spiral tool-path. The double spiral tool-path is generated by means of the selected contours without generating any self-intersection loops. The presented double spiral tool-paths have a self-complementary structure with characteristics of low curvature, continuous and smooth.The linking method is flexible for machining pocket with complex geometric shape. The Bezier curve is adopted as the linking trajectory. It can guarantee the linking trajectory which is between two adjacent machining domains to be smooth and no retraction.