@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Automatic segmentation of cartilage in high-field magnetic resonance images of the knee joint with an improved voxel-classification-driven region-growing algorithm using vicinity-correlated subsampling

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Voxel-classification-based segmentation suffers from high dimensionality of MR images.Subsampling of voxels and feature selection can reduce complexity of classification.Random voxel subsampling in training data causes poor cartilage segmentation results.Vicinity-correlated subsampling of voxels improves cartilage segmentation accuracies.A small subset of significant features is adequate to segment cartilage compartments.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Segmentation,Knee joint,Cartilage,High-field MR images,Classification,Region-growing,Subsampling,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Anatomical structures that can deteriorate over time, such as cartilage, can be successfully delineated with voxel-classification approaches in magnetic resonance (MR) images. However, segmentation via voxel-classification is a computationally demanding process for high-field MR images with high spatial resolutions. In this study, the whole femoral, tibial, and patellar cartilage compartments in the knee joint were automatically segmented in high-field MR images obtained from Osteoarthritis Initiative using a voxel-classification-driven region-growing algorithm with sample-expand method. Computational complexity of the classification was alleviated via subsampling of the background voxels in the training MR images and selecting a small subset of significant features by taking into consideration systems with limited memory and processing power. Although subsampling of the voxels may lead to a loss of generality of the training models and a decrease in segmentation accuracies, effective subsampling strategies can overcome these problems. Therefore, different subsampling techniques, which involve uniform, Gaussian, vicinity-correlated (VC) sparse, and VC dense subsampling, were used to generate four training models. The segmentation system was experimented using 10 training and 23 testing MR images, and the effects of different training models on segmentation accuracies were investigated. Experimental results showed that the highest mean Dice similarity coefficient (DSC) values for all compartments were obtained when the training models of VC sparse subsampling technique were used. Mean DSC values optimized with this technique were 82.6%, 83.1%, and 72.6% for femoral, tibial, and patellar cartilage compartments, respectively, when mean sensitivities were 79.9%, 84.0%, and 71.5%, and mean specificities were 99.8%, 99.9%, and 99.9%.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Automated segmentation and three-dimensional (3-D) modeling of anatomical structures in medical images has attracted significant interest from researchers since the invention of volumetric medical imaging modalities, such as computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance (MR) imaging. These technologies have paved way for possibilities of quantitative and visual analyses that can benefit clinical diagnoses and treatments, surgical interventions, pharmaceutical research, and educational activities [1–3]. One such particular anatomical region of interest has been the knee joint. Because structural changes in the joint compartments, especially deterioration of cartilaginous tissues, indicate strong correlation with osteoarthritis, quantification and visualization of the cartilage can establish evidence or the progression of this disease as well as the effectiveness of therapeutic or surgical practices.The reliability of MR imaging in morphological assessment and quantification of cartilage has been proven by a number of segmentation studies validated through the method of water displacement of surgically retrieved tissues using cadaveric or amputated joints or patient joints prior to total knee arthroplasty [4]. Particularly effective for representing cartilage tissue are high-field MR images, which are generated by scanners with magnetic strength greater than 1.5T, and some MR imaging standards, which involve fat-suppressed (FS) T1-weighted spoiled gradient echo (SPGR), or water-selective excitation 3-D double echo in the steady state (DESS) [5]. Consequently, with better inter-tissue contrast and high-quality imaging capabilities, MR images have been widely preferred in the literature to realize the segmentation of articular cartilage in the knee joint.Osteoarthritis is a joint disease that leads to articular pain, stiffness, and swelling due to significant deterioration or destruction of cartilage, which enables efficient movement of the joint by reducing the friction between the bones in the joint. The disease is mainly caused by aging, injury, poor posture, and excess weight, so more prevalent in developed countries with large populations of the elderly and obese people.One of the joints mostly affected by osteoarthritis is the knee joint that is also one of the largest and strongest joints in the human body. Some of the anatomical structures of the knee joint include the bones of femur, tibia, and patella, cartilage tissue compartments that surround articular surfaces of these bones, synovial fluid, ligaments, muscles, and menisci. Cartilaginous compartments of the knee joint are femoral cartilage (FC) that covers the surface of inferior femur, tibial cartilage (TC) that covers the surface of superior tibia, and patellar cartilage (PC) that covers the surface of posterior patella. TC consists of two components called the lateral tibial cartilage (LTC) and medial tibial cartilage (MTC). Similarly, medial and lateral parts of FC are called as medial femoral cartilage (MFC) and lateral femoral cartilage (LFC). A greater portion of FC interacts with LTC and MTC in tibiofemoral joint while a small portion of FC interacts with PC in patellofemoral joint.Fig. 1 depicts these cartilaginous compartments that were segmented semi-manually in MR images, as 3-D models and in an MR image slice with a sagittal view, cross-sectional view orthogonal to the left-right directions of the human body.Studies aimed at reliable systems for monitoring the evidence or progression of osteoarthritis segment some or all of these cartilage compartments in knee MR images. In addition, segmentation of the bones may be performed to aid the delineation of the cartilage. Synovial fluid and ligaments, and menisci are mostly anatomical structures of no interest for such segmentation systems. Nonetheless, since they are located very close to the cartilage compartments, or may have similar appearance to the cartilage in MR images, they may be easily confused with the cartilage tissue increasing the number of false positives. Therefore, their accurate separation from the cartilage compartments is an important issue for increase of system robustness.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
It is necessary to deal with large number of voxels in MR images either using localized approaches or subsampling methods to implement efficient MR image segmentation systems based on voxel-classification approaches. In this study, we experimentally showed that vicinity-correlated background voxel subsampling method is a better choice than uniform or Gaussian subsampling to distinguish objects of interest from other similar and close structures frequently encountered in MR images, especially for objects with highly curved and complex shapes. Furthermore, it was possible to obtain reasonable accuracies with respect to the studies in the literature for segmentation of cartilage compartments in high-field knee MR images through voxel-classification-driven region-growing algorithm, when training models of VC sparse subsampling and a proper set of values for the system parameters were used. Consequently, the findings of this study can provide a basis for other researches that focus on segmentation of anatomical structures in MR images with voxel-classification.The performance of the classification procedure could be substantially increased due to elimination of a great deal of background voxels in the training models and reduced number of features. Additionally, the proposed system could segment the cartilage compartments without prior segmentation of bones or determination of BCI, and requiring multiple MR images of a participant. Therefore, the system can be applied efficiently without significant loss of accuracies even for MR images of osteoarthritic participants, which makes it promising from clinical point of view.Although classification-driven region-growing is an appropriate approach for the degenerative nature of cartilage, it may be prone to inaccurate segmentations especially in the case of severe full-depth deteriorations. For future work, high level cues such as relative positions and shapes of the cartilage compartments may be integrated with this approach in order to address the segmentation problems. Cartilage voxels determined by the presented approach may be regulated with the spatial information derived from multi-object atlas registration algorithms [9]. Processing images of coarser scale, which can properly represent the cartilage compartments, may be considered to further expedite the computationally demanding segmentation procedures.None declared.