@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Feature-based MRI data fusion for cardiac arrhythmia studies

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
MRI techniques can be used to capture and characterize cardiac states.Feature-based data fusion combines and enhances MRI data.Canonical Correlation Analysis is an effective tool to fuse and quantify MRI data.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Magnetic Resonance Imaging,Current Density Imaging,Diffusion Tensor Imaging,Data fusion,Cardiac arrhythmia,Ventricular Fibrillation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Current practices in studying cardiac arrhythmias primarily use electrical or optical surface recordings of a heart, spatially limited transmural recordings, and mathematical models. However, given that such arrhythmias occur on a 3D myocardial tissue, information obtained from such practices lack in dimension, completeness, and are sometimes prone to oversimplification. The combination of complementary Magnetic-Resonance Imaging (MRI)-based techniques such as Current Density Imaging (CDI) and Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) could provide more depth to current practices in assessing the cardiac arrhythmia dynamics in entire cross sections of myocardium. In this work, we present an approach utilizing feature-based data fusion methods to demonstrate that complimentary information obtained from electrical current distribution and structural properties within a heart could be quantified and enhanced. Twelve (12) pairs of CDI and DTI image data sets were gathered from porcine hearts perfused through a Langendorff setup. Images were fused together using feature-based data fusion techniques such as Joint Independent Component Analysis (jICA), Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA), and their combination (CCA+jICA). The results suggest that the complimentary information of cardiac states from CDI and DTI are enhanced and are better classified with the use of data fusion methods. For each data set, an increase in mean correlations of fused images were observed with 38% increase from CCA+jICA compared to the original images while mean mutual information of the fused images from jICA and CCA+jICA increased by approximately three-fold. We conclude that MRI-based techniques present potential viable tools in furthering studies for cardiac arrhythmias especially Ventricular Fibrillation.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Current techniques used to characterize cardiac arrhythmias such as surface [1,2] and transmural [3–5] mapping have been proven to provide meaningful information on the electrical activity on and within regions of a myocardium. Cardiac models [6–10] have also been developed to mimic myocardial characteristics with which simulations are performed to study electrical dynamics of cardiac arrhythmias. This allows researchers to study arrhythmias without using biological samples or living subjects. However, applications of such techniques are spatially limited and are restricted by mathematical oversimplifications while cardiac arrhythmias are complex global phenomena.Various medical imaging modalities may provide an alternative tool not only to improve on the spatial resolution of current mapping techniques but also information on tissue anatomy on which they occur such as fiber orientation and anisotropy. A joint analysis of anatomical and electrophysiological information within a myocardium could provide further insights on the structural and functional nature of cardiac arrhythmias. As an example, Ultrasound Imaging has been used in in vivo cardiac mapping studies such as creation of local activation maps through Electromechanical Wave Imaging [11,12].Another medical imaging modality, Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), has been thoroughly used in research and clinical practice to study and/or diagnose a wide array of human patho-physiologies. Some MRI techniques, such as Functional MRI [13] and Diffusion Weighted Imaging [14], are heavily used in neurological studies techniques. Moreover, techniques such as Magnetic Resonance Angiography [15], Myocardial Tagging [16] and Magnetic Resonance Perfusion Imaging [17] have been widely used in cardiovascular studies.In this work, we take advantage of two MRI techniques to identify functional and structural characteristics of different cardiac states, Current Density Imaging (CDI) [18,19] and Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) [14], respectively. On one hand, CDI was developed to detect changes in the magnetic field induced by electrical currents and was previously used to study electrical current distribution and pathways in biological samples [19–21]. On the other hand, DTI further builds on the concept of Diffusion Weighted Imaging which provides micro-structural information of tissues based on tensors derived from water molecules diffusion within a sample. DTI has been long used in cardiac studies, exploring contributions of myocardial ischemia and/or infarction to cardiac arrhythmias [23–25].Treating CDI and DTI as complementary tools for myocardial assessment may be beneficial in providing more in-depth understanding of cardiac arrhythmias most especially Ventricular Fibrillation (VF) since its electrical dynamics are poorly understood hence considered most lethal of the ventricular arrhythmias. Feature-based data fusion methods such as Joint Independent Component Analysis (jICA), Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA), and the combination of the latter two (jICA+CCA), which have been used for neurological studies in the past [26–32], could be useful to jointly analyze cardiac data from CDI and DTI. Therefore, we aim to demonstrate the combined capability of MRI techniques, CDI and DTI, to capture unique characteristics of cardiac states by using feature-based data fusion methods. Through these methods, we can then quantify and enhance information acquired from different cardiac states.To the best of our knowledge data fusion as applied to cardiac imaging data collected through CDI from live biological samples is novel. We have presented a preliminary study of fusing CDI and DTI data using jICA for a smaller database [33]. This work greatly expands on these initial results and analysis to a larger database, the addition of CCA and jiCA+CCA as fusion methods, and metrics of comparison for the said data fusion methods. This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 will outline our protocol for acquiring and preprocessing CDI and DTI data sets and introduce mathematical foundations of data fusion methods. In Section 3, we present the results of our experiments and application of fusion algorithms. We provide an analysis of our results in Section 4. We summarize our findings and discuss future work in Section 5. Finally, we provide some limitations of our study in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Overall, despite the limited number of cardiac states due to the resource intensive nature of the experimental protocol and logistical constraints, this work presented evidence towards the potential use of CDI and DTI to study cardiac arrhythmias, such as VF, in an ex vivo mobile Langendorff setup. Data fusion techniques can provide quantitative methods to enhance and quantify unique current distribution pathways in combination with structural information of a cardiac state. This study presents a strong precursor for medical imaging techniques as viable tools to study cardiac arrhythmia. The availability and viability of more advanced instruments to gain deeper insights of the underlying mechanisms of VF could lead to better treatment options for cardiac arrhythmia patients. Future works could include the design of data-driven, three-dimensional model of the images as a result of fusion that could prove useful in studying cardiac arrhythmia. These models can be used to study the myocardium from the macro- and microscopic levels. In addition, fusing information from surface mappings and other clinical data could result in the development of sophisticated tools and procedures to improve treatment options for cardiac arrhythmia.