@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Discrimination of retinal images containing bright lesions using sparse coded features and SVM

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Automatic feature extraction from retinal images.Discrimination between retinal images containing bright lesions.Retinal images classification using sparse coding.Better performance than bag-of-word approach.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Diabetic retinopathy,Exudates,Drusen,Sparse coding,Classification,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Diabetic Retinopathy (DR) is a chronic progressive disease of the retinal microvasculature which is among the major causes of vision loss in the world. The diagnosis of DR is based on the detection of retinal lesions such as microaneurysms, exudates and drusen in retinal images acquired by a fundus camera. However, bright lesions such as exudates and drusen share similar appearances while being signs of different diseases. Therefore, discriminating between different types of lesions is of interest for improving screening performances. In this paper, we propose to use sparse coding techniques for retinal images classification. In particular, we are interested in discriminating between retinal images containing either exudates or drusen, and normal images free of lesions. Extensive experiments show that dictionary learning techniques can capture strong structures of retinal images and produce discriminant descriptors for classification. In particular, using a linear SVM with the obtained sparse coded features, the proposed method achieves superior performance as compared with the popular Bag-of-Visual-Word approach for image classification. Experiments with a dataset of 828 retinal images collected from various sources show that the proposed approach provides excellent discrimination results for normal, drusen and exudates images. It achieves a sensitivity and a specificity of 96.50% and 97.70% for the normal class; 99.10% and 100% for the drusen class; and 97.40% and 98.20% for the exudates class with a medium size dictionary of 100 atoms.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Diabetic Retinopathy (DR) is a chronic progressive disease of the retinal microvasculature that has became a major cause of vision loss in the world. Due to the burden of diabetes over the past decades, the prevalence of DR is expected to grow exponentially and affect over 300 millions people worldwide by 2025 [1,2]. Despite the high risk factor, it has been established that early detection and timely treatment can reduce the development of severe vision loss in 60% of cases [3]. However, DR does not exhibit any distinctive symptoms which the patient can easily perceive until a severe stage is reached. It is therefore important to develop Computer Aided Diagnosis (CAD) systems that can help clinicians in tasks such as large scale population screening and early diagnosis.The benefit of such a CAD system is to quickly pre-screen patients and orient those at risk to an ophthalmologist, reducing time and cost of a visit.The diagnosis of DR is based on the detection of lesions or other vascular abnormalities in retinal images acquired by fundus cameras. Lesions of interest include microaneurysms, cotton wool spots, exudates, macular edema, and hemorrhages [4]. Many algorithms have been developed for DR detection over the past two decades, following a general pipeline: image quality verification, vessel segmentation, lesion detection, and automatic classification with a machine learning technique [5,6].However, most of the existing algorithms are designed to detect a specific type of lesions in retinal images, though different lesions might be present in a single image indicating the stage of the disease. Moreover, the lesions can appear very similar while being signs for different diseases. For instance, DR is characterized, at early stages, by red lesions (microaneurysms) and bright lesions (exudates) which appear as small white or yellowish deposits with sharp edges in retinal images. On the other hand, Age Related Macular Degeneration (ARMD), which causes a gradual loss of central vision, is mainly characterized by variable sized yellowish deposits in the retina called drusens. Therefore, discriminating between different types of lesions is of great interest for decision making in an automatic CAD system.In this paper, we propose an automatic classification of retinal images that discriminates between images containing different bright lesions. The method is based on sparse signal representation techniques that can capture strong structures of retinal images and produce discriminant descriptors for classification. In particular, the proposed methodology does not require any pre-processing of the images such as blood vessels segmentation or optic disc removal, and achieves higher performance than other feature representation techniques such as bag-of-visual-words approaches. This method can be used as an initial step for guessing the type of lesions a retinal image contains and then specific detection algorithms can be used for each type of lesion, increasing the performance of each specific detector by reducing the false positives.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We briefly review existing approaches for retinal images classification and discrimination in Section 2. Section 3 gives a detailed presentation of the proposed approach. In Section 4, different experiments are performed and the results are analyzed showing the good performances of our approach. Finally, concluding remarks are given in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
