@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Risk factors and prediction of very short term versus short/intermediate term post-stroke mortality: A data mining approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A data mining approach was used to analyse a clinical stroke data set.Differences in risk factors of short and longer term post-stroke mortality are found.Naïve Bayes analysis of wide range of variables across different time ranges is performed.Age is not significant in very short term post-stroke mortality.Successful predictive classification models of post-stroke mortality are built.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Data mining,Naïve Bayes analysis,Risk factors,Prediction,Stroke,Mortality,Medical relevance,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Data mining and knowledge discovery as an approach to examining medical data can limit some of the inherent bias in the hypothesis assumptions that can be found in traditional clinical data analysis. In this paper we illustrate the benefits of a data mining inspired approach to statistically analysing a bespoke data set, the academic multicentre randomised control trial, UK Glucose Insulin in Stroke Trial (GIST-UK), with a view to discovering new insights distinct from the original hypotheses of the trial. We consider post-stroke mortality prediction as a function of days since stroke onset, showing that the time scales that best characterise changes in mortality risk are most naturally defined by examination of the mortality curve. We show that certain risk factors differentiate between very short term and intermediate term mortality. In particular, we show that age is highly relevant for intermediate term risk but not for very short or short term mortality. We suggest that this is due to the concept of frailty. Other risk factors are highlighted across a range of variable types including socio-demographics, past medical histories and admission medication. Using the most statistically significant risk factors we build predictive classification models for very short term and short/intermediate term mortality.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Healthcare and medicine are two important areas where the revolution in data storage and analysis has permitted access to large quantities of data which can in principle be analysed for multiple purposes. Two important scenarios in which data are collected are (i) data associated with the clinical histories of patients – this is of relevance, for instance, to healthcare providers, insurers and healthcare authorities; (ii) data associated with clinical trials, where an intervention, such as a new drug or treatment regime, is tested on a particular group and outcomes measured. In case (i) the focus is on the individual, or a cohort of similar individuals, whereas in (ii) it is on the cohort itself or, rather, the intervention.The existence of large electronic data bases is of course not unique to medicine. The data is typically of large volume and of very high dimension. This presents several complicating factors for traditional statistical modelling, and so, data mining, or knowledge discovery in data bases, as a general research area [1], has developed as a useful form of statistical analysis alongside the exponential explosion of data and is now being used extensively. However, its impact in medicine and healthcare [2] has been less, and slower, than one might expect or hope. Part of the reason for this is associated with privacy issues and also the large data fragmentation often inherent in medical data. However, another potential reason, as hinted at in [3], is that medicine is largely hypothesis driven, such as in testing an intervention or treatment. Indeed, this is the case with the data we examine in this paper. On the other hand, much of data mining is associated with knowledge discovery, where an a priori specific hypothesis to be examined does not necessarily exist, allowing exploration of the data to provide interesting results. In this sense, the present study is an observational study, where it is not necessarily feasible or the goal to infer causality. Rather, by revealing interesting, previously unknown, patterns in the data one can establish more detailed hypotheses about causal relationships that can be further tested, using controlled trials for example.In this paper we will illustrate the potential benefits of a more data mining inspired approach, examining and analysing a bespoke data set, the academic multicentre randomised control trial, UK Glucose Insulin in Stroke Trial (GIST-UK) [4], with a view to discovering potentially new insights distinct from the original hypotheses associated with the trial. A discussion of the data can be found in Section 2. Due to the controlled nature of the data set used here, this case study will highlight the use of data mining techniques in this field of healthcare and the potential it offers. It is important to note however, that, due to the inclusion/exclusion criteria associated with GIST-UK, it is not necessarily the case that our conclusions can be taken over, as is, to a wider stroke population. Rather, we would see this paper as advocating the data mining approach and statistical methodology, with a view to applying it to other analogous data sets and, particularly, more representative stroke data sets.In general terms, we will concentrate on post-stroke mortality and the corresponding risk factors, developing predictive models for stroke mortality over different time horizons relative to admission – very short term, short term and intermediate term. In this sense, our probabilistic models can be considered to be clinical outcomes algorithms which would aid the decision making process of healthcare professionals and data mining analysis is proven to be very useful in work of this nature [5]. Probabilistic models for outcomes have been developed in other circumstances, for instance, in [6,7] for mortality among critically ill hospitalised adults, in [8] for kidney dialysis patients and also in the case of stroke [9]. Methodologically, we will take a classification type approach and use a naïve Bayesian classifier [1,10] which will be discussed in Section 6.The paper is organised as follows, the data used in this study will be discussed in Section 2. In Section 3, by examining the overall mortality curve, we look at the classification of the distinct time intervals – very short, short, and intermediate term and offer our own classification to be used in examining the impact of risk factors. Age, in particular, as a risk factor will be seen to play a different role over different time horizons and is analysed in Section 4. Other risk factors are identified and discussed in Section 5 which are used in Section 6 to build predictive models with the potential to categorise the risk of mortality for stroke patients upon admission to hospital. A comparison to other data mining models including regression and decision trees is made in Section 7. Finally, conclusions are made in Section 8.The data used in this case study is associated with the academic multicentre randomised control trial, UK Glucose Insulin in Stroke Trial (GIST-UK) [4]. Patient confidentiality makes any simple, large scale analysis of clinical records difficult and so most studies involve analysis of controlled groups where there is a specific goal to the analysis. In this paper we will study a cohort of patients who have suffered an acute stroke under the conditions specified by the GIST-UK protocol.The inclusion and exclusion criteria for patients in this study are highlighted here. Eligible patients had a fixed neurological deficit and no evidence of rapid improvement during a 60min period after stroke onset. Patients were excluded from the trial with subarachnoid haemorrhage, isolated posterior circulation syndromes with no physical disability, pure language disorders, renal failure (urea>20mmol/Lor creatinine>200μmol/L), anaemia (haemoglobin<9g/dL), or coma (motor response≤3on the Glasgow coma scale). Also excluded were patients with an established history of insulin-treated diabetes mellitus, previous disabling stroke (modified Rankin scale [mRS] score>3), established history of dementia or abbreviated mental test score<7/10, or symptomatic cardiac failure (New York Heart Association grade III or IV) [4]. There were 933 patients in the study where mortality was determined over a 3month period.As there is an elevated risk of mortality for an extended period after a stroke it is of interest to ask if the risk factors for mortality are constant across time. A relevant question is then: what are the appropriate time horizons for considering mortality? What might be considered short, intermediate or long term? Many analyses of stroke mortality as a function of number of days from stroke onset or days since admission have considered short term to be associated with periods of less than a month, with typical categorisations being short term<1month, intermediate term 1–3months and long term 3–12months [11–14]. However, typical mortality curves as a function of days since admission show that between approximately 50% (ischaemic) and 70% (haemorragic) of stroke patients who will die in the intermediate term (up to 93days) are already dead within 30days [11]. With this in mind, we suggest that a more appropriate characterisation of short, intermediate and long term comes from an examination of the cumulative mortality curve itself. The curve for this data set can be seen in Fig. 1, where we see the cumulative proportion of deaths as a function of all deaths through the 3month period in which mortality was measured. We would argue that the form of the curve suggests that immediacy of death should be more appropriately categorised by dividing the cumulative curve for death related to days from stroke onset into n time bins, such that an equal proportion1/nof deaths is included in each bin.First, we will consider four time bins, n=4, so that from Fig. 1 the number of days since stroke onset which corresponds to 25%, 50%, 75% and 100% of the total number of deaths will be observed. As can be deduced from the data of Fig. 1, the corresponding time frames for the four bins are 5days (25%), 12days (50%) and 33days (75%). Four bins are used for the investigation in Section 4 as we are testing the hypothesis on a specific variable and are interested in the change in risk over small time scales. The second division will be mortality over 1–7days and 8–93days to be used for building predictive models. In this case, the motivation for choosing two mortality periods was so that the statistical significance of the results would be higher when investigating a wide range of variables. Also a week has an extra significance as a time period as opposed to 8 or 9days. Given that short term is usually defined in the literature as<1month, we refer to the periods 1–5days as very short term, 6–33days short term and 34–93days intermediate term for the analysis of age alone. For the predictive model analysis 1–7days will be termed very short term and 8–93days as short/intermediate term.From a data mining perspective, the establishment of n time intervals for considering mortality corresponds to n potential classes,C1,…,C4, for classification where we wish to estimateP(Ci|X), the probability for mortality in a time interval corresponding to one of the n bins as a function of the set of risk factorsX. In this way we may determine which risk factors, if any, are distinct for different time horizons.The choice of number of bins is influenced by two important considerations. Firstly, that an increasing number of bins potentially allows for a finer resolution in terms of time scale and the possibility of identifying the relative change in importance of risk factors over smaller time intervals. However, by increasing the number of bins one reduces the statistical sample in each bin thereby potentially losing statistical significance. Our choices ofn=2,4are a compromise between these two tendencies. With a larger data set it would be possible to consider more mortality periods.With the goal of determining the temporal variation of risk factors a particularly relevant variable is that of age, where one might expect the phenomenon of frailty to play a significant role. Fig. 2gives the proportion of patients of a given age range who have died in different periods in number of days from stroke onset. The age ranges were determined by a process of coarse graining based on n=4 bins such that roughly equal numbers of participants were included in each bin. Thus, each age bin has the same statistical weight. It can clearly be seen that there are more older people in this group, corresponding to the fact that age itself, as is well known [15,16], is an important risk factor for stroke mortality.What is clear from the graph is that the importance of age as a risk factor for mortality is quite different depending on whether we are talking about shorter or longer term mortality, with a relatively weak dependence for very short term death, 1–5days, versus a very strong dependence for death in the period of 34–93days. Younger stroke victims (33–70) are clearly more robust with respect to death as a function of time, with 1–5days being a much more significant timescale than 6–93days. Whereas, for the oldest stroke victims we would argue that the strongly increasing mortality as a function of time from stroke onset is an indication of increased frailty in this group. In this context, frailty is given as the higher susceptibility to adverse outcomes which is common in elderly people as a general deterioration in health. Thus, over a longer time period there is more opportunity for the detrimental effects of suffering a stroke to cause mortality added to an already frail group [17–19].As the different time bins for days since admission are not uniform in terms of number of days we also show in Fig. 3the proportion of deaths per day as a function of age and days since admission. The relative mortality risk as a function of age as seen in Fig. 2 remains clearly visible, with the death risk per day being only about 40% higher for age group>82than age group 33–70 in the very short term 1–5 day period, but more than 400% higher for the intermediate 34–93days period. However, we also see that the true risk as a function of days since admission is a strongly decreasing function of time for all age groups.We can test the statistical significance of these results using a binomial test for the class of interest. The null hypothesis is that age does not affect mortality in a given time period. Thus, Eq. (1) gives our diagnostic [10],(1)ε=Nx(P(CT|X)−P(CT))NxP(CT)(1−P(CT)),where P(CT) = proportion of deaths in the time period T (1–5days, 6–12days etc.) and X=age group (33–70, 70–76 etc.). This is a simple binomial test, where the null hypothesis is that for the time horizon of interest, the mortality rate is not affected by the factor of X. The statistical significance, ε, is a measure of the extent to which the null hypothesis is verified by the data. In the circumstance, which is valid here, where the binomial distribution can be approximated by a normal distribution,|ε|>2corresponds to the standard 95% confidence interval. The results are given in Fig. 4, which shows that the enhanced mortality of the oldest age group as a function of time from stroke onset is statistically significant at a greater than 95% confidence level for intervals 6–12, 13–33 and 34–93days. For the age group 33–70, mortality in the intervals of 6–12, 13–33 and 34–93days is statistically significantly smaller than average. For age groups 70–76 and 76–82 there are no statistically significant differences between their mortality rates and the average for any of the time intervals. From the perspective of time interval as opposed to age group, for 1–5days – very short term mortality – we see that there is no statistically significant difference between age groups.In understanding whether this pronounced age effect is a consequence of frailty in the oldest age group we might posit instead that the effect is a result of a higher incidence of more severe strokes in the older versus younger population. There are four levels of stroke severity contained in the data set as classified by the Bamford stroke classification, also known as the Oxford stroke classification [20]. These are known as TACS, PACS, POCS and LACS. The acronym TACS refers to a total anterior circulation stroke, and is the most severe. The patients who suffered a TACS type of stroke will be used here. Fig. 5gives the proportion of TACS sufferers who have died over a certain time period as a function of age, and in Fig. 6the statistical significance of the results. It can be seen that qualitatively the results are as in Figs. 2 and 4. In other words the effect of advanced age is such as to lead to an excess mortality over longer time intervals from admission independently of the stroke type.As well as age, any other factor can be examined as a potential discriminator between short and medium term mortality. Tables A.1–A.5 of Appendix A display the list of all variables selected for initial investigation from the data set. The types of variable selected were loosely based on the criteria that the information about the patients could be obtained within the first 24 h, this includes socio-demographics, past medical history, drugs on admission etc. The tables give the corresponding probabilities, P and statistical significance, ε, values for two different ranges of death, very short term death in 1–7days and short/intermediate term death, 8–93days. The restriction to two time intervals rather than four, as seen with the age analysis, is made to enhance the statistical significance of the results. Also included is the relative difference in the probabilities of death between very short and short/intermediate term – the relative change in the odds ratios, D. This is calculated for death 1–7days versus 8–93days for each potential predictive driver X against the overall odds ratio for the two classes. Thus,D>1, respectively<1, means that the driver is associated with a higher/lower mortality rate 1–7days versus 8–93days for that risk factor than would be expected, the reference point being the average ratio over all risk factors.Initially considering admission medication, seen in Table A1 of Appendix A, it is evident that warfarin and digoxin both correlate with an enhanced mortality over the period of 1–7days when compared to the 8–93day period. As both drugs can be used to treat heart problems, namely atrial fibrillation for digoxin [21] and, in the case of warfarin, blood clots [22], this enhanced risk may be due to other health conditions the patient is suffering from or, alternatively, could be a direct affect for stroke patients. In contrast, the opposite is seen when administering lipid lowerers or diuretics, as this is associated with a reduced mortality rate over the interval 1–7days. For variables associated with past medical history, having either had a previous stroke or hypocholesterolemia is associated with a reduced mortality rate for 1–7days, whereas atrial fibrillation and heart failure are associated with an enhanced mortality in the 8–93day period. Interestingly, neither the presence of diabetes mellitus or hypertension is a statistically significant risk factor for this group.Assessing stroke type it is logical that the most severe TACS stroke, used in the age analysis in Section 4, has the highest risk for both short and medium term death. Also, for stroke type, both partial anterior circulation stroke, PACS, and lacunar stroke, LACS, have an increased mortality rate for the longer time period than the initial 1–7days. Interestingly, the usage of the GKI (glucose, potassium and insulin) intervention, assessed as the original purpose of the GIST-UK study, is associated with an enhanced survival rate in the period 1–7days and an enhanced mortality risk over the period of 8–93days. As the intervention was only given for a short period of time this could indicate that the intervention is efficacious only if continued. We can see also that the different stroke scales which currently exist, European Stroke Scale [23], Barthel index [24] and modified Rankin [25], in and of themselves offer little systematic discrimination between very short term and short/intermediate term mortality although they are predictive of mortality in general.The variables related to readings on admission are seen in Tables A.4 and A.5. Due to the coarse grained nature of these continuous variables it is possible to see clear patterns. These patterns often have association to reduced or enhanced mortality in the extremes. This is the case with glucose, temperature and plasma creatine. Certain readings do not differentiate between the two mortality periods at lower values but become significant for one mortality period as the level increases. This occurs in white cell count and systolic blood pressure, where the highest group is a significant factor for the 8–93day mortality period.Following on from the work to identify potential risk factors in the previous section, models for predicting mortality can be built. In principle, any one of a host of different statistical modelling or artificial intelligence techniques could be used, each of which has their own pros and cons dependent on their assumptions along with the type of data being used and the hypothesis to be tested. Comparisons of such techniques can be found for different scenarios [26,27]. Searching through the literature shows that there are few predictive models for post-stroke mortality and those which do exist use a range of different techniques and are often linked to specific aspects such as tomography for intracerebral hemorrhage [28], intensive care unit therapeutic intervention [29] or coronary artery bypass [30]. Other prediction models related to stroke also exist but related to a particular condition, examples include post-stroke infection [31] and recurrence of vascular disease [32]. Due to the fact that predictive models for post-stroke mortality have not previously been made in relation to a wide range of conditions from a data mining view point, we will use a simple classification algorithm – the naïve Bayes classifier. The naïve Bayes approximation is highly efficient in computational terms, due to the assumption that all variables are independent. It is a common choice of prediction algorithm in many initial investigations for data mining which can set a useful baseline for other more sophisticated techniques. A comparison to some other classification techniques will be made in Section 7.As we have determined that there are significant risk factors that are distinct for very short term versus short/intermediate term mortality we will construct two base models. These will be of binary form, where we have a death in the specified time scale defined as the positive set, against all other patients defined as the negative set. Thus, we have one model to predict mortality in the first week after the stroke and another to predict death between 8 and 93days after the stroke, the time scales used in Section 5. The goal is to calculate the posterior probabilitiesP(C|X), where C represents the class of interest, death 1–7 or 8–93days, andXis a vector of conditioning attributes used as predictors of the class C. The posterior probabilities can be calculated in the following way:(2)P(C|X)=P(X|C)P(C)P(X)(3)P(C|X)=∏i=1NP(Xi|C)P(C)P(X).where in Eq. (2), we are using Bayes׳ theorem to relate the posterior probability to the likelihood functionP(X|C)and the prior P(C), while in Eq. (3) by assuming independence of the conditioning factorsX=(X1,X2,…,XN)we can factorise the likelihood function,P(X|C)=∏(i=1)NP(Xi|C), the result being the naïve Bayes approximation [1,10]. Eq. (2) shows that an estimate of the posterior probabilities requires a knowledge ofP(X). However, if the overall goal is classification, where it is sufficient to know ifP(C|X)>P(C¯|X), withC¯being the complement of C, then we can consider the ratioP(C|X)/P(C¯|X)and assume the naïve Bayes approximation for the likelihood function forC¯,P(X|C¯)=∏(i=1)NP(Xi|C¯). Rather than the ratioP(C|X)/P(C¯|X)it is equivalent to consider the logarithm of the ratio, defining a score function, Stotal,(4)Stotal=∑i=1NlnP(Xi|C)P(Xi|C¯)+lnP(C)P(C¯).Another advantage of the naïve Bayes approximation is its transparency and interpretability. This can be seen in Eq. (4), noting that the total risk is a sum of risk scores from the individual variables, thus allowing for a simple comparison of the relative contributions of the different risk factors. As the total risk score is a monotonic function of the posterior probabilityP(C|X)it is equivalent for the purposes of classification.In order to select which variables are included in the model we used a simple filter feature selection algorithm by ranking the features based on the statistical significance, ε. Only those features with|ε|>1.5were included in the predictive model. This value was chosen by an optimisation procedure based on the performance metric of model sensitivity. This value of ε is low enough so as to include an ample mix of attributes, while still maintaining a good degree of statistical significance given the relatively small size of the data set. For comparison, we also tried the well-known correlation-based feature selection (CFS) technique [33]. CFS produced a similar set of attributes to the|ε|>1.5criterion, including age, stroke type and digoxin. It appears that the difference in results between feature selection methods is minimal.Additionally, the goal of this paper was not to produce the very best model for predicting stroke mortality with respect to a given metric but, rather, to show how a data mining approach led to interesting insights into predicting stroke mortality with the view that many different model types could be used to model these insights. Similarly, we chose not to report the results of a more sophisticated feature selection algorithm, observing that the appearance of distinct risk factors for the different time horizon models emerged from several different feature selection algorithms.The models were trained on a random sample of two thirds of the data and tested on a hold out set that consisted of the remaining third. The first model predicts mortality risk over 1–7days and the second over the period of 8–93days. Total risk scores were calculated for each model and assigned to the patients in the test set. The patients were then ranked according to their total risk score.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper we illustrated the potential benefits of a more data mining inspired approach to analysis of clinical data, examining and analysing a bespoke data set, the academic multicentre randomised control trial, UK Glucose Insulin in Stroke Trial (GIST-UK) [4], with a view to discovering potentially new insights distinct from the original hypotheses associated with the trial. This data comprised of drugs and vital signs on admission data, elements of the past medical history, some socio-demographic information and stroke score information. We concentrated on the area of post-stroke mortality and used a simple but robust classification algorithm – the naïve Bayes classifier – for predicting mortality probabilities as a function of days from admission.Our principal conclusions through using this data mining inspired statistical methodology can be summarised thus: (a) that a natural notion of timescale for stroke mortality is determined from the properties of the mortality curve itself, by defining time intervals according to the death of a fixed fraction of the population; (b) that the factors that affect post-stroke mortality risk are not constant across time as a function of days from admission; (c) that age was the most significant factor in differentiating between mortality rates as a function of time; (d) that a more accurate prediction of mortality as a function of time requires different models for different time intervals; (e) that such models can be successfully used to predict outcomes.For the data set for this study, by reviewing the mortality curve and the corresponding sample sizes, we chose two and four time intervals as being the most appropriate. We then determined the predictive power of each variable for each time interval. We paid special attention to age noting how it played little role in very short term (1–5day) mortality but became an increasingly important factor for longer time scales, especially the intermediate 34–93day interval. Notable was the fact that it was especially significant for the>82age group where the mortality rate was 4 times higher in the 34–93days interval than that of the 33–70 age group and over twice that of the 76–82 age group. We hypothesise that this non-linear age effect is a result of the prevalence of frailty in this group. Recently, Haque et al. [42] have provided some evidence that frailty indices may be a useful prognostic indicator of stroke mortality. We believe that further studies are required to determine to what extent a useful frailty index can be determined that is independent of other potential prognostic variables. Of especial interest would be measures that potentially differentiated between biological aging and chronological aging. Besides age we determined that certain drugs on admission – warfarin, digoxin, lipid lowerers and diuretics showed differences in their correlation with 1–7 versus 8–93day mortality. Similarly, past medical conditions, such as previous stroke, atrial fibrillation and heart failure distinguished between very short and short/intermediate term mortality.Using the most significant risk factors for each time interval we created predictive models for 1–7 and 8–93day mortality using a naïve Bayes classifier. We examined the performance of the models using various metrics: directly as risk measures, determining sensitivity as a function of risk score; and as direct classifiers, examining the associated confusion matrices and ROC curves. Both predictive models showed very good performance. To contrast with standard stroke scales as tools for stroke prognosis, we compared the performance of our 1–7day and 8–93day models with that of the ESS. We saw that the performance of the very short term 1–7day model was equivalent to that of the ESS, indicating that the other variables included in the model did not offer more predictability. However, for the 8–93day model we saw that its performance was significantly better than that of the ESS. This corroborates the notion that there are significant and different risk factors that influence longer term mortality that should be included to obtain more accurate prognoses. Finally, we showed how to directly relate the risk score to a mortality probability, giving as an example the results of the 1–7day model.We also compared the performance of naïve Bayes model with three other methods, logistic regression and C4.5 decision trees for classification and also linear regression for prediction. All of these techniques are appropriate for data mining purposes. However for this particular data set, we concluded that the naïve Bayes model performs better relative to the criterion of sensitivity.As emphasised above, although we believe our results to be novel, due to the inclusion/exclusion criteria associated with the GIST-UK population, it is not necessarily the case that our conclusions can be taken over, as is, to a wider stroke population. With that in mind, we would argue that the paper shows the potential value of the data mining approach and methodology with a view to applying it to other analogous data sets and, particularly, more representative stroke data sets. However, we would argue that the existence of different risk factors for distinct time intervals is a robust result that would be present for any stroke population; as is the conclusion that this implies a need for distinct models for each time interval. We believe that the creation of predictive models for different time intervals could lead to more accurate prediction of outcomes and better identification of particularly high risk patients, not just in the case of stroke but more widely, as well as the possibility of more appropriate interventions and treatments.No conflict of interest.