@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Computer simulations of pressure and velocity fields in a human upper airway during sneezing

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A computational study of velocity and pressure fields during a sneeze was performed.Both normal and suppressed sneezes were investigated.Air pressure along the airway during a sneeze is much higher than normal breathing.Suppressing the sneeze increases the pressure in the respiratory tract markedly.The increased pressure can explain the reasons of reported injuries during a sneeze.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
CFD,Flow field,Oral cavity,Realistic airway model,Sneeze,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, the airflow field including the velocity, pressure and turbulence intensity distributions during sneezing of a female subject was simulated using a computational fluid dynamics model of realistic upper airways including both oral and nasal cavities. The effects of variation of reaction of the subject during sneezing were also investigated. That is, the impacts of holding the nose or closing the mouth during sneezing on the pressure and velocity distributions were studied. Few works have studied the sneeze and therefore different aspects of this phenomenon have remained unknown. To cover more possibilities about the inlet condition of trachea in different sneeze scenarios, it was assumed that the suppressed sneeze happens with either the same inlet pressure or the same flow rate as the normal sneeze. The simulation results showed that during a normal sneeze, the pressure in the trachea reaches about 7000Pa, which is much higher than the pressure level of about 200Pa during the high activity exhalation. In addition, the results showed that, suppressing the sneeze by holding the nose or mouth leads to a noticeable increase in pressure difference in the tract. This increase was about 5 to 24 times of that during a normal sneeze. This significant rise in the pressure can justify some reported damage due to suppressing a sneeze.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Sneezing is a semi-autonomous defending mechanism of the body used to drain the stimulants entering the nose. When the nasal mucosa is stimulated by the foreign particles, the sensitive nerve cells of the nose are irritated and they send a signal to a part of the brain named the sneeze centre. The brain responds through sending a signal to the chest muscles, contracting the lung muscles and a number of other organs, so that a large amount of air flows out impulsively from the lung. The explosive airflow then exits from the respiratory tract through the nose and mouth outlets at high speeds to remove the foreign particles from the airways.There is a significant number of investigations in the literature which focused on different aspects of normal breathing and also coughing. Zhang and Lessmann [1], Cebral and Summers [2], Zhang and Kleinstreuer [3] and Nowak et al. [4] among others used a simplified geometry of the airways for the simulation of airflow. On the other hand, some other researchers used the CT-scan or MRI images to develop more realistic models of the respiratory system to study the normal breathing condition [5–13].Malve et al. [14] studied the unsteady turbulent airflow in the trachea using the FSI (Fluid-Solid Interaction) technique during coughing. Recently, Chen et al. [15] visualized the exhaled airflow during coughing while the mouth of the subject was covered with various methods by which people usually reduce the exposure of exhaled droplets to the environment. They also investigated the effect of a covered mouth on the receptor’s exposure to exhaled particles by numerical simulations. According to their observations, covering a cough with a tissue, hand, or elbow can markedly reduce the particle velocity. Zhu et al. [16] also measured the maximum airflow velocity exiting from mouth during coughing and reported a value of 22m/s. Malve et al. [14] numerically computed the velocity profile in trachea in a cough and Tang and Settles [17] obtained a velocity map during coughing by image analysis. They observed that the maximum surrounding air speed reaches 8m/s. Most of previous works performed a velocity measurement during coughing and there are significant differences among the reported airflow rates during a cough by different researchers. However, for addressing the air flow rate of a cough, Gupta et al. [18] carried out an experimental study on different subjects and concluded that airflow rate of an adult human during coughing is in the range of 2 to 8L/s. Nunn and Gregg [19] also carried out a study with experimental data to reach new regression equations for predicting peak expiratory flow in adults.As mentioned above, although some researchers studied the respiratory system during coughing, there is still an inconsistency between the reported data. The story becomes worse when we turn to the other important phenomenon, sneeze, which has not been investigated very much in detail. Some researches [20,21] cited the work of Badeau et al. [22] for an estimate of the airflow of 250L/min during sneezing. But, in fact, Badeau and colleagues studied the cough flow rate and that of sneeze was not discussed in their work. It seems that there is no accurate data on the airflow rate during sneezing reported in the literature. Wells [23] reported that the velocity of exhaled air in sneeze can reach 100m/s and Xie et al. [24] reported that the velocity of expelled large droplets which are carried by exhaled air during sneezing can be as high as 50m/s. According to the experimental observations of Jennison and Edgerton [25] and Jennison [26], the velocity of exiting droplets in a sneeze is about 46m/s. Nishimura et al. [27] studied the sneeze by taking images of a subject during a sneeze using a digital high speed video system and reported that the initial velocity of the outlet particles or their clusters is greater than 6m/s. Bourouiba et al. [28] presented the results of a combined experimental and theoretical investigation of the fluid dynamics of sneezing and coughing events and developed continuous models of droplet fallout from the cloud. They demonstrated that violent flows in such conditions are turbulent and multiphase puffs. Tang et al. [29] also reported that the maximum velocity of fluid in the environment due to sneezing is about 4.5m/s. Mentioned studies depict that a large variation exists for the air or particle velocity expelled during sneezing. The intranasal pressure during a normal sneeze in healthy volunteers was measured by Gwaltney et al. [30] and it was reported that the pressure value is about 612±505Pa.Few researchers investigated the effects of sneezing with closed airway on the health of humans. Faden et al. [31] reported the effect of the closed-airway sneezing on the laryngeal fracture which was due to increased intraluminal pressure. This increased pressure may cause undesirable outcomes such as cervicofacial emphysema and pneumomediastinum [32]. Also a case of fracture of the thyroid cartilage, odynophagia, neck pain and dysphonia after an episode of sneezing was reported by Martinez et al. [33]. It is conjectured that the main reason for these damages is the pressure built up in the respiratory tract during sneezing that is not allowed to be naturally released from nose or mouth. This indicates the importance of studying the pressure rise due to a suppressed sneeze.In this paper, a computational model of a realistic model of human upper airway including both oral and nasal cavities was developed using the CT scan images of an adult female subject. The airflow, pressure and turbulence intensity field during sneezing under various conditions were simulated and compared. One important feature of the present study is the inclusion of the oral cavity in the model. The presence of both oral and nasal cavities in the computational domain was rarely considered in the previous works, possibly due to the significant geometric complexity. This feature in the current work provided the opportunity to analyze various sneezing scenarios. In addition to the normal sneezing for which both nostrils and mouth are open, simulations results were presented for the stifled sneezes by holding the nose or closing the mouth. The results for different cases were compared with those for the normal sneezing. The presented numerical simulation results shed light on the airflow velocity and pressure fields in the respiratory tract during various sneezing scenarios.The human upper respiratory tract including the nasal cavity investigated in this paper is the same as that used in our previous studies [34,35,36]. However, in the present work the oral cavity is also included into the computational domain to generate a more realistic representation of the complete respiratory airways during sneezing. The patient was a 24-year old non-smoking female subject. The process for constructing the geometry of the airway passage from the CT scan images was presented in details in the work of Farhadi Ghalati et al. [35], and therefore is not repeated here for the sake of brevity. The distances between consecutive CT scan images used in the present research for imaging process was 0.625mm. It should be noted that the inflation level of the patient during CT scan was unknown. Lung volume during sneezing is different from normal situations and this might affect the geometry of trachea or some other parts of the upper airway. The glottal opening level may also have an impact on the pressure field during the expelling of air. To the best knowledge, no reliable experimental data about these parameters is available in the literature and therefore, their possible effects were ignored in the present research.Fig. 1 shows the schematic view of the upper airways investigated in the present study. Moving from the lower parts to the upper regions, the upper airway consists of trachea, larynx, oropharynx, oral cavity, nasopharynx and nasal cavity. Some coronal and transverse planes shown in Fig. 1 were used to present the airflow field simulation results for different parts of the tract. Some of these planes are also the boundaries between different regions of the investigated airway passages. For example, plane c is located between trachea and larynx, plane d is at the end of nasopharynx, and plane f is at the end of nasal cavity.Table 1 lists the information about the locations and the cross section areas of plane sections shown in Fig. 1.Fig. 2 also gives more information about the cross sectional area of the geometry. The areas at oral and nasal cavities were measured on coronal planes, while those of trachea, larynx and a part of nasopharynx were associated to transverse planes. The area at nasal cavity is sum of the left and right passages and the details of each can be found in the work of Dastan et al. [34]. As it can be seen, the oral cavity is narrower than the nasal cavity for most of its length. However, it should be noted that the complicated geometry of the nasal cavity, particularly within the narrow nasal valve and main airway, causes the hydraulic diameter of the passage to considerably drop and, therefore, the resistance of the airway to the air flow increases due to more friction with the walls of nasal cavity.A hybrid mesh scheme was used for grid generation. To properly capture the interaction between the airflow and the walls of the rather complex respiratory passages [34], 15 layers of prismatic elements were produced adjacent to the wall regions, while the inner domain was filled with the tetrahedral elements. A series of grid sensitivity study was performed for 4 different grids with 2.4, 3.2, 3.8 and 5.2 million elements and the velocity and pressure distribution over some selected lines in different regions of the airway model were compared. The results for the grid sizes of 3.8 and 5.2 million were almost the same and finally the former was selected as the most suitable grid having accuracy as well as efficiency. This grid with 3.8 million elements was used for the rest of simulations. The height of the first prismatic layer adjacent to the walls was 0.047mm and the exponentially growth perpendicular to wall led to 15-layer prismatic cells with total height of 1.5mm.Fig. 3 shows some views of the selected grid. The maximum y+ of the first grid adjacent to the walls in the trachea, nasal cavity, and oral cavity are, respectively, 7, 3 and 2 in normal sneeze for flow rate of 470L/min (see Section 3.1).A sneeze is a rapid drain of a large amount of air from the respiratory outlets. That is, the air flows in the airways for about less than a second and hence, the nature of the sneezing is strongly unsteady [30]. Since there is no available experimental data in the literature on the flow rate profile during a sneeze, in this work, as the first attempt to study the airflow velocity and pressure fields during sneezing, the simulation is performed in a quasi-steady manner. This means that a steady flow simulation with an estimated flow rate for a sneeze is carried out. To be sure that this assumption does not lead to unreasonable results, a comparison between the unsteady simulation of a cough, which is another unsteady drain of air, and its associated steady one was performed (the results are not presented here). The exhalation airflow rate profile, being similar to one used by Malve et al. [14] for cough simulation, was applied on the present upper airway model. Steady simulation data at a particular flow rate had a good agreement with the unsteady data at that flow rate. This suggests that the quasi-steady simulation should be a good estimation for the real unsteady situation.The flow field is assumed to be steady, compressible and turbulent. The reason for using a compressible model is the high velocity of the airflow in the studied sneeze case which will be shown in the results section. The walls were assumed to be rigid. This approximation can change the pressure and velocity distribution in the airway, as the elastic behavior of the real human airway tissues may damp the high pressure waves. However, this effect is out of scope of current work and left for a future study. The extra opening of the mouth during the sneeze was also neglected which may have some effects on the exit air velocity.Due to the high airflow rate during sneezing, the flow is turbulent in certain areas of the airways. It should be emphasized that the turbulence modeling is a major challenge for CFD studies especially for such complicated geometries of the human upper airway. To choose a suitable turbulence model for present computational work, a series of numerical simulations was performed and the results were compared with experimental measurements of Mylavarapu et al. [37]. In this reference, both simulations and experiments were performed on a double-size physical model of human upper airway at a peak expiratory flow rate of 200L/min. They measured pressure and velocity in different parts of the physical model. In order to have a valid comparison, the airway model in the present work was scaled up to have a generally similar size to that of the experimental model in the work of Mylavarapu et al. [37]. Different turbulence models available in Fluent commercial software [38] (standard k–ω, transient flow k–ω, SST k–ω, low-Reynolds k–ε and k–ε with enhanced wall treatment) were applied. The details of the turbulence models were discussed in FLUENT Users׳ Manual and hence are not repeated here for the sake of brevity. The trends of the results were similar to those obtained in the study of Mylavarapu et al. [37]. In general, a turbulence model could not be selected with confidence, as each model had a low accuracy for some points in the model where the experimental data are available. However, the results obtained by SST k–ω had a lower error. Zubair et al. [39] in reviewing of the CFD studies in airway models also concluded the same result and, although, no single turbulence model is universally accepted for solving all class of problems, they suggested that SST k–ω has been found to be suitable in many related studies. In conclusion, the SST k–ω turbulent model was used for the simulations performed in the current research.As noted in the introduction, there are considerable uncertainties on the airflow rate of a sneeze for different subjects. For a rough estimate, the results of Nunn and Gregg [19] were used in the current research. They carried out an experimental study for predicting peak expiratory flow in adults. For a normal female subject of age 24, the average peak expiratory flow rate was reported to be about 470L/min. Therefore, the volume flow rate of 470L/min is considered as the main case for the sneeze expiratory flow rate in the present work. In the normal sneeze, by applying the constant gauge pressure at the trachea inlet, the volume flow rate of 470L/min was achieved. The experimental data of Nunn and Gregg [19] also depicts that by considering a 90% confidence interval, the flow rate falls between 400 and 570L/min. Therefore, two different volume flow rates of 400 and 570L/min are also investigated to evaluate the effect of variation in the flow rates. It should be emphasized that as we have a compressible flow here; hence the specified flow rates refer to the inlet of trachea.Due to lack of reliable data for the details of the sneezing process, and also to provide a reasonable comparison between different cases of sneeze habits, two different inlet boundary conditions are considered. In the first case, a constant total gauge pressure is used as the boundary condition of the inlet plane for different cases of sneeze (normal and suppressed sneezes), while in the second case a constant normal velocity is imposed on the inlet plane at trachea and therefore the airflow rate is fixed for normal and stifled cases. In a normal sneeze, both the mouth and nose outlets are open and hence a constant zero gauge pressure condition is assumed at the nostril and the mouth outlet. To investigate the effect of suppressing a sneeze when a person blocks the nose or mouth by his/her hands, the closed outlet boundary is changed to wall, while the open one is left as the pressure outlet boundary condition with zero gauge pressure.The numerical procedure for solving the governing equations and applying the boundary conditions were discussed in our previous work [36], and hence it is not repeated here. However, as the flow field in the current simulation is compressible, in addition to the continuity and momentum equations, the energy equation is also solved. The ideal gas law is used to correlate the pressure, density and temperature. The detail of the governing equations can be found in FLUENT Users׳ Manual [38]. No-slip boundary condition is applied on all walls of the respiratory passages. The temperature of the walls and the inlet air was assumed to be 37°C. The accuracy of the present computational model predictions was also verified in our earlier works for the range of normal breathing flow rates. As noted before, to the best of authors’ knowledge, there is no study in the literature on the velocity field inside the upper respiratory tract during sneezing, but there is some data for the pressure which will be compared with the present numerical data.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In the present paper, the quasi-steady flow field in a realistic human upper airway model during sneezing was simulated. The airway computational model included both oral and nasal cavities. Three different sneezing conditions including normal sneezing with both open nose and mouth, suppressed sneezes with the closed nose or closed mouth were studied. Two different inlet conditions (at the trachea) were investigated for the normal and suppressed sneezing conditions. For the first case it was assumed that the inlet pressure of the trachea during the normal and suppressed sneezing remains the same and for the second case it was assumed that the inlet volume flow rate is similar.The case of normal sneezing was studied for three different airflow rates. The simulation results for normal sneeze with a volume flow rate of 470L/min showed that the pressure in the trachea reached more than 7500Pa and inside the nasal and oral cavities was less than 2000Pa. The maximum velocity reached more than 123m/s in trachea and nasopharynx. The average outlet velocities through the mouth and nose were about 48 and 30m/s, respectively.The simulations for the suppressed sneeze were performed for two cases of sneezing with closed nose or closed mouth. For each case, two conditions of inlet pressure and inlet airflow rate identical to those for the normal sneezing with open mouth and nose were studied. The results showed that a blocked sneezing condition markedly changed the airflow and pressure fields in the upper airway. If the sneezing occurs with blocked nostril, the pressure increases significantly in the nasal cavity. For the same inlet pressure as the normal sneeze, the pressure in the nasal cavity in a sneeze with blocked nose increased to around 7kPa. For the condition of the same flow rate as the normal sneeze, the nasal cavity pressure reached about 21.8kPa. This five to eighteen fold increase in the nasal cavity pressure in a blocked sneeze compared with that in a normal sneeze, scientifically confirms the global medical community recommendation about not suppressing the sneeze.For the sneeze with a closed mouth, the pressure increased markedly in the oral cavity to about 6000Pa for the same trachea inlet pressure, and to 39.0kPa for the same flow rate condition as the normal sneeze. In this case, the change in pressure along the nasal cavity was not noticeable.All the authors declare that there is no potential conflict of interest including any financial, personal or other relationships with other people or organizations within that could inappropriately influence (bias) this work.