@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A bilateral analysis scheme for false positive reduction in mammogram mass detection

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The proposed region matching method using shape context is robust to segmentation error.Matching cost is defined to quantify the matching credibility, which is discarded by existing bilateral analysis schemes.A hierarchical similarity is designed for FP reduction in bilateral mass detection.Promising FP reduction is obtained using bilateral analysis in mass detection.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Bilateral analysis,Mammogram,Mass detection,Similarity measurement,Region matching,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, a bilateral image analysis scheme is developed for the purpose of reducing false positives (FPs) in the detection of masses in dense mammograms. It consists of two steps: a region matching step for determining the correspondence between a pair of mammograms, and a bilateral similarity analysis step for discarding FPs in the detection. For the first step, a matching cost is defined to quantify the credibility of the corresponding region in a pair of bilateral mammograms. For the second step, a similarity measurement is introduced to discriminate between mass and normal for a pair of bilateral regions based on both global and local image appearances. The proposed scheme is tested on a set of 332 mammograms. The results show that the proposed scheme could obtain better performance when compared with several existing bilateral analysis schemes. With detection sensitivity at 85%, the proposed bilateral scheme could reduce the FP rate of a unilateral scheme from 3.64 to 2.39 per image, a 34% reduction.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Breast cancer is a leading cause of death among women in developed countries. The morbidity of breast cancer is increasing with a fast speed in developing countries due to the increase of life expectancy, urbanization, and change in lifestyles [1]. For example, China is among such countries where the incidence growth of breast cancer is fast increasing. Unfortunately, only 20% of the breast cancer patients are diagnosed at the early stage [2]. As the cause of breast cancer is not clearly known, early detection remains the cornerstone in breast cancer treatment [3].Mass is one of the main signs of breast cancer. A mass is a space-occupying lesion which usually exhibits higher intensity compared with fat tissues in a mammogram. The distinction between normal and mass has been largely a difficult task for the radiologists, as masses can be subtle at an early stage and exhibit a great variability in margins, shapes, and sizes. In dense breasts, masses are overlapped with glandular tissues and may be falsely diagnosed as normal, which are called false negatives (FNs). Also, glandular tissues may be compressed in a mammogram exam, exhibiting similar characteristics as masses. In such a case, they may be falsely diagnosed as masses, which are called false positives (FPs). The difficulty in detection has led to the development of computer-aided detection (CAD) schemes for the purpose of providing a second opinion [4].In the clinics, radiologists may compare mammograms of the left and right breasts to identify abnormalities and avoid FP regions when interpreting mammograms, which can be called bilateral analysis. The basic idea of bilateral analysis is that the corresponding regions in a pair of bilateral mammograms in the same view are often similar for normal tissue and dissimilar for a mass [5]. For a mass region of interest (ROI) in one mammogram, when its corresponding ROI is normal tissue in the contralateral mammogram, we call it a mass-to-normal pair. For a normal ROI, when its corresponding ROI is also normal in the contralateral mammogram, we call it a normal-to-normal pair.In this paper, a bilateral image analysis scheme is proposed for the purpose of reducing FPs in the detection of masses in dense mammograms, which consists of two steps. First, a region matching step is used to determine the correspondence between a pair of bilateral mammograms. Matching cost is defined and calculated to evaluate the matching credibility. This information is discarded by existing bilateral analysis schemes. Then a similarity analysis step is used to discriminate between mass-to-normal pairs and normal-to-normal pairs for detected ROIs. The similarity measurement between bilateral ROI pairs is based on both global and local image features.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews some related work in bilateral mass detection. Section 3 descrbes the proposed region matching procedure for bilateral mammogram pairs. Section 4 furnishes the similarity measurement for discriminating between mass-to-normal pairs and normal-to-normal pairs. Section 5 presents the overall FP reduction scheme. Experiment results are given in Section 6, and conclusions are given in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, a novel region matching method and similarity measurement were proposed. Integrating them, a FP reduction scheme for bilateral mass detection was designed. The proposed scheme had two advantages. First, matching cost was defined and employed to evaluate the actual matching credibility. Thus bilateral analysis on incorrect corresponding region pairs could be avoided. The idea of matching cost can also be used for matching mammograms in CC and MLO views. Second, a hierarchical similarity measurement considering both global and local appearance was given to discriminate mass-to-normal and normal-to-normal pairs. This hierarchical measurement displayed better performance compared with existing distance measurements. Experiment results showed that a promising FP reduction result was obtained. Future work will be focused on four mammogram analysis.None declared.