@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Non-uniform central airways ventilation model based on vascular segmentation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new lung volume sectioning technique based on vascular segmentation is presented.It is used to partition 4DCT based lung volumes, sampling a full breathing cycle.Volume change of lung sections over time is used to estimate non-uniform ventilation.The technique was shown to predict lobar volume estimates within a tolerance of 2%.Enables subject-specific boundary conditions for modelling the central airway flow.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Non-uniform ventilation,Bronchial flow modelling,Physiological boundary conditions,CT image processing,Vascular segmentation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Improvements in the understanding of the physiology of the central airways require an appropriate representation of the non-uniform ventilation at its terminal branches. This paper proposes a new technique for estimating the non-uniform ventilation at the terminal branches by modelling the volume change of their distal peripheral airways, based on vascular segmentation. The vascular tree is used for sectioning the dynamic CT-based 3D volume of the lung at 11 time points over the breathing cycle of a research animal. Based on the mechanical coupling between the vascular tree and the remaining lung tissues, the volume change of each individual lung segment over the breathing cycle was used to estimate the non-uniform ventilation of its associated terminal branch. The 3D lung sectioning technique was validated on an airway cast model of the same animal pruned to represent the truncated dynamic CT based airway geometry. The results showed that the 3D lung sectioning technique was able to estimate the volume of the missing peripheral airways within a tolerance of 2%. In addition, the time-varying non-uniform ventilation distribution predicted by the proposed sectioning technique was validated against CT measurements of lobar ventilation and showed good agreement. This significant modelling advance can be used to estimate subject-specific non-uniform boundary conditions to obtain subject-specific numerical models of the central airway flow.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Airflow analysis underpins the understanding of lung physiology and pulmonary target therapy. However, performing this analysis, either clinically or by in vivo experiments, is challenging due to the inaccessible nature of the lungs. For this reason, current research efforts are focusing on the numerical modelling of the central airways using subject-specific geometries extracted from volumetric medical imaging data, such as four-dimensional computed tomography (4DCT). A reliable numerical modelling of the central airway flow requires the appropriate representation of the tracheal bulk flow and of the non-uniform ventilation at its terminal branches imposed by the peripheral airways that are not captured by 4DCT.Few attempts have been made to approximate the effect of the non-uniform ventilation at the terminal branches when numerically modelling the bronchial flow. De Backer et al. [1] iteratively imposed different pressure values at the terminal branches of the left and the right lungs so that the numerically predicted mass flow towards the left and right lung reflected the proportional lung growth measured from CT images acquired at two different inflation levels. De Backer et al. [2] and Lambert et al. [3] adopted a similar iterative approach based on CT measurements of lobar growth rather than of lung growth. Although such iterative approaches improved the reliability of the numerical predictions of the central airway flow, they are not adequate to accurately capture the non-uniform inner lobar flow distribution. Yin et al. [4,5] used a 3D–1D coupling model associated with a ventilation map computed by registering CT images acquired at different inflation levels to estimate the flow at the terminal branches based on mass conservation. Their technique resulted in a good approximation to the CT measurement of lobar ventilation. However, the 1D model in their study uses Lobar-averaged volumetric airflow data. The apportionment of the lobar ventilation among its terminal branches has to be assumed, which may increase the uncertainty of the predicted ventilation within each lobe.Together with the bronchial airways, the pleural cavity encloses the vascular tree, which is responsible for conducting the blood between the heart and the alveolar sacs where gas exchange takes place. The pulmonary arteries run alongside the bronchial airways and the pulmonary veins show a similar branching pattern to the arteries, though separated from them [6]. The topology of the pulmonary veins divides the lung lobes into several segments known as the bronchopulmonary segments. These segments are separated from each other by connective tissue septa that cannot be identified in low-resolution CT images [7]. Each segment is supplied by a segmental bronchus and its accompanying pulmonary artery branch [8]. This pulmonary artery and its peripheral arteries are tethered to the surface of their adjacent airways and to the lung parenchyma via a connecting tissue [9]. In the conducting zone of the lung, the pulmonary arteries that accompany the conducting airways tend to retain their shape during breathing as they contain a number of smooth muscles and a large volume of blood passing through them. However, they stretch and displace in accordance to their adjacent airways during breathing as a result of that tethering [10–12]. In the respiratory zone of the lung, where most of the lung volume change takes place during breathing, more of the adventitial surface of the arteries (and veins) is tethered to the surrounding lung parenchyma [9] and the smooth muscles surrounding the blood vessels are less present. Hence, the overall structure (position, diameter and length) of the arteries (and veins) in the respiratory zone varies in accordance to the change in the lung volume during breathing [13–16]. This indicates a mechanical coupling between the lung tissues and the pulmonary arteries and veins in the pleural cavity. By this mechanical coupling, the deformation of the vascular tree in accordance to the change in lung volume during breathing can be used to approximate the volume change of the missing peripheral airways distal to each terminal branch.In this paper, a sectioning technique is proposed to segment a time sequence of 3D volumes of the sampled breathing cycle of a laboratory animal into several segments, where each segment encloses the volume of the missing peripheral airways distal to each terminal branch. The corresponding segments are defined based on the mechanical coupling between the vascular tree and the lung tissues. The computed volume change of the individual segments is then used to estimate the non-uniform ventilation at the terminal branches of the central airways. The proposed sectioning technique is validated on a cast geometry of the bronchial airways of the same animal coupled to a CT based reconstructed vascular tree. In addition, the accuracy of the proposed technique in approximating the volume change of specific segments within the lung during breathing is validated by CT measurements of lobar regional ventilation. Finally, the application of the proposed technique is considered for estimating subject-specific physiological flow boundary conditions to bridge the gap between the numerical modelling of the central airway flow and the actual flow within a living lung.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper introduces a lung volume sectioning technique based on vascular segmentation to estimate the non-uniform ventilation within the peripheral airways that are not captured by currently available 4DCT imaging techniques. The motivation for modelling the subject-specific non-uniform ventilation is the prospective of using subject-specific numerical models for investigating the flow within patient-specific geometries of the central airways.The vascular tree was used as a reference to section the lung volume generated from successive 4DCT images that sample the breathing cycle into several segments, where each segment encloses the missing peripheral airways associated to each CT captured terminal airway branch. Since the vascular tree is mechanically coupled to the bronchial tree and the lung parenchyma, the volume change of the corresponding segments defined by the vascular tree over the breathing cycle is expected to reflect the volume change of the same segment within a living lung. Therefore, the volume change of the corresponding lung segments defined by the vascular tree was used to estimate the non-uniform ventilation for their enclosed terminal branches.Using a cast model, the proposed sectioning technique was found to be able to successfully estimate the volume of the missing peripheral airways at TLC within a tolerance of 2%. Furthermore, the ability of the proposed technique in approximating the volume change of specific segments of the lungs over time during breathing was validated by comparing CT measurements of the lobar volume change to that computed following the proposed technique. Although the maximum observed discrepancy between the measured and the computed lobar volume change was less than 2.5%, this strategy is not sufficient to fully validate the capability of the proposed technique in estimating the non-uniform ventilation of the missing peripheral airways distal to each individual terminal branch.The significant output from this research is the availability of a technique that can be used to develop dynamic physiological boundary conditions for the numerical modelling of the central airway flow depending mainly on biological information obtained from the lung deforming constituents. This is different to the previously published algorithms that use the global lung (or lobes) volume change or empirical flow volume fraction models of the bronchial airways to predict non-uniform ventilation effects.None declared.