@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A new approach to modeling of selected human respiratory system diseases, directed to computer simulations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We model respiratory system with 11-coefficient electrical analogue.New method for diseases modeling is proposed, based on laws of mechanics.Some common, severe diseases are modeled on the basis of proposed method.Developed modeling method provide great time saving and acceptable results.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Model,Diseases,Respiratory system,Obstructive,Restrictive,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a new versatile approach to model severe human respiratory diseases via computer simulation. The proposed approach enables one to predict the time histories of various diseases via information accessible in medical publications. This knowledge is useful to bioengineers involved in the design and construction of medical devices that are employed for monitoring of respiratory condition. The approach provides the data that are crucial for testing diagnostic systems. This can be achieved without the necessity of probing the physiological details of the respiratory system as well as without identification of parameters that are based on measurement data.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The respiratory system is one of the most important systems of the human body that secures proper functioning of other systems. Hence, its functional or structural disorders cause real threats. According to various studies [1–7] respiratory diseases are usually defined as any exceptions to the normal state that is typically defined based on 90% of the healthy population. It is represented by a group of symptoms that reveal only in a specific population—named as ill individuals [1,2].It is well-known that the present medicine is powered by the latest biomedical engineering technologies, which support various types of treatments. Good examples of those achievements, leading to new solutions in the field of pulmonary diagnostics, are models of different medical conditions [8–16]. However, a deeper understanding of the respiratory system and its pathological mechanisms are the main requirements for application of such models. The present methodology to model respiratory diseases, known from the extensive literature [8–10,17–21], is based on combination of mathematical models and monitored biosignals (pressure, flow, etc.). Parameters of the model are estimated by appropriate optimization methods. Due to the physical analogies between pneumatic and electrical systems, the structure of the human respiratory tract is usually presented as analogous to an electrical system. This electrical system contains the RLC elements (R—resistors, L—inductors, and C—capacitors), which represent the pneumatic mechanical resistances, inertances and compliances of specific anatomical parts. Besides many advantages (simplicity, no requirement for significant computing power etc.), these models are not free from serious drawbacks such like:•inability to change the nature and the intensity of lesions modeled, which significantly reduces their versatility and applicability,low identification reliability obtained for certain model parameters [22,23],substantial influence of natural variations that complicates estimation of model parameters [6],great influence of optimization algorithms on the effectiveness and accuracy of parameter identification [8,22,24].Additionally, it can be noticed that information on model parameter values is significantly scattered in the literature.Referring to the disadvantages mentioned above, the purpose of this paper is to fill the gap present in the literature by proposing a versatile method useful to model selected respiratory diseases. The method is based only on the knowledge of sources and physiological effects of considered lesions that is accessible in medical publications. Moreover, the values of model parameters representing healthy and ill individuals are presented in this paper as a complement to the main paper objective. The ability to create models of respiratory diseases with defined parameter values is extremely valuable during various research stages (e.g. for verification of proposed or developed new scientific solutions). Moreover, the results presented are additionally valuable because of their potential applications in applied technical systems, employed for monitoring of respiratory diseases or diagnosis. Furthermore, the possibilities to change the nature and intensity of the modeled lesions, as proposed by the Authors, may support diagnostic or calibration processes of medical devices. As a result of that it is possible to impose requirements much more stringent than for real cases. For instance, if Model A (Fig. 1) represents a measured signal, the adoption of Model B instead—enforces to meet stringent criteria (e.g. for the amplitude A, the steepness angle α, the settling time T, etc.). Meeting stringent requirements (diagnosis 1) also guarantees proper operation under mild and real conditions (diagnosis 2).Because of a great variety of respiratory diseases and numerous ways of their classification (in terms of physiological changes: obstructive and restrictive; in terms of localization: bronchial, pleural, tracheal etc. [3]) it is impossible to tackle the problem in a single, comprehensive publication. Therefore, the Authors have limited the quantity of considered diseases to a few that result directly from certain lesions located in respective parts of the respiratory system. Both obstructive and restrictive groups of disorders are taken into consideration [3,4,25,26]. Those cases, for which the anatomical features are afflicted by both of them, have not been taken into consideration. According to [25], the obstruction is the prime phenomenon in relation to the restriction. Therefore, the following obstructive diseases are considered: asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and congenital tracheal stenosis. As the representation of restrictive conditions, idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis is selected. In addition, breathing difficulty mechanisms caused by neuromuscular disorder, myasthenia gravis, are also investigated.Several models of the human respiratory system may be distinguished by their applicability as well as different levels of complexity—according to [5,6,8,15,20,27–30,32–35]. Among all of them a 10-coefficient model, described in [27–30], is often used for lower respiratory tract mapping. For the upper respiratory tract the most typical is a 6-coefficient model described in [5,20,30]. The combination of both these models, presented in [30], represents all important anatomical parts by one comprehensive model of the respiratory system (Fig. 2). This enables one to analyze the central and peripheral respiratory tract. Based on the extensive literature survey [27,30,32,35,36] typical values of the model parameters for healthy individuals are presented inTable 1.The values of Ptand Pghave been adopted from the literature. According to [3,30–32] the tissue tension in the chest wall Ptreaches up to −5cmH2O and the driving pressure Pgcan be represented by a periodic function. Its frequency and amplitude can reach up to 0.2Hz and 5.5cmH2O, respectively.In order to model the obstruction and restriction, changes in the parameter values of the combined model (Fig. 2) are required, corresponding to changes in respiratory mechanics.The obstruction is a phenomenon that results in narrowing of specific anatomical features of the respiratory system. The considered phenomenon is frequently caused by: increased secretion of mucus, muscle cramps, swelling of the mucous membranes, inflammation etc. A significant growth in the values of resistance and inertance occurs as a result of respiratory obstruction. According to [32,36] changes in the resistance are proportional to the fourth power of the radii of considered anatomical features, while changes in the inertance to the second [36]. The final mechanical feature, the compliance C, is described by the formula:(1)C=dVdPwhere dV represents a volume change caused by a pressure change dP.The impact of volume reduction on the compliance C, resulted from the obstruction, may be assessed on the basis of Formula (1). Assuming constant driving pressure affecting the bronchi and provided by static contraction of the respiratory muscles, a decrease in the compliance C is characterized by the ratio:(2)CNCS=dVN/dPdVS/dP=dVNdVSwhere the subscript N represents obstruction variables, while the subscript S healthy ones.For a linearized system near its operating point it may be written:(3)CNCS=ΔVNΔVSThe ratio, defined by Formula (3), is dependent on the length l and the radius r of an anatomical feature (e.g. bronchi) according to Relation (4):(4)ΔVNΔVS=π×l×rN12−π×l×rN22π×l×rS12−π×l×rS22=π×l×(rN12−rN22)π×l×(rS12−rS22)=rN12−rN22rS12−rS22where the subscript 1 represents an expanded feature and the subscript 2 stands for the original size of the feature considered.Eq. (4) may also be expressed by the tissue stretch ratio k, as presented by Eq. (5). However, one must assume that the expansion is linear and the obstruction does not alter the nature of the feature:(5)rN12−rN22rS12−rS22=(k×rN2)2−rN22(k×rS2)2−rS22=k2×rN22−rN22k2×rS22−rS22=(k2−1)×rN22(k2−1)×rS22=(rN2rS2)2This implies that the ratio of bronchial compliances is proportional to the second power of the ratio of the relevant radii. Moreover, the ratio of alveolar compliances is dependent on the third power of that ratio, which may be derived in a similar manner. As an effect of all alterations described in the pulmonary mechanics resulted from the obstruction, the time constant of alveolar filling increases significantly [4,6,30].A change in the elastance E of lung tissues is related to all the phenomena described above. Frequently, remodeling of lung tissues is observed, which results in a decrease in the elastance E. It is observed along with the growth in the alveolar radius and a decrease in the surface area per unit volume [37]. Hence, Functional Residual Capacity (FRC) is increased, as a result of the disturbed balance between elastic recoil forces of the lungs and chest wall. Moreover, the alteration in the elastance E affects the degree of tension in peripheral airways. Lung tissues operate like a stabilizer that tightens the bronchial walls. If the elastance E is decreased the effect of the stabilization is reduced significantly consequently enhancing the obstruction (mainly peripheral part). The loss of the elastance E leads to a nonlinear increase in the compliance C[25] according to Formula (6). In fact, an alteration in the elastance E is accompanied by a smaller change in the compliance C[25,38,39] than calculated from Relation (6).(6)E=1CThe restriction is a phenomenon that results in reduction in the lung compliance associated with a decrease in Vital Capacity (VC). As a result the time constant of alveolar filling is reduced. This phenomenon is caused mainly by destruction of elastic fibers (elastin) [4] and leads directly to a decrease in the compliance C in certain lung areas. It is associated with an uneven distribution of the lung volume that increases significantly the effort of respiratory muscles.InFig. 3 functional disorders observed for individuals affected by the phenomena described in Section 3.1 are presented. Time histories of lung volume represent the alveolar filling during long deep inhalation. The volume is described by following equation:(7)Vao(t)=∫0tV̇ao(τ)dτOn the basis of [2,6,17,26,36,37,40,41–43] and simulation-based research by the use of the model presented (Fig. 2) the parameter values for the obstruction and the restriction have been estimated by the Authors. In the case of obstruction the central tract narrowing of 45% is considered (that leads to a 6-fold increase in the value of Rcand a 4-fold increase in the value of Ic, as discussed in Section 3.1). In the case of restriction a 2-fold increase in the elastance of lung tissues E is assumed that determines the decrease of 50% in the value of Cl.The time histories of lung volume in Fig. 3 are intended to present the impact of functional disorders in general terms. The localization and the intensity of every phenomenon depend on the considered medical conditions as presented in next section. It should be noted that in practice a great number of factors may disrupt the control of respiration [3,26,37,44]. As a result alterations of the respiratory pattern occur. However, for the purpose of simulation-based research, e.g. preliminary verification of developed solutions, in the opinion of the Authors the approach presented remains suitable.Precise modeling of respiratory diseases is very complex and time-consuming because of many factors that determine dysfunctions of examined individuals. Therefore in the case of any disease the results obtained during the examination may differ significantly. Multi-strain pathogens and natural variation in humans are the main reasons of that variation. Probably, it is impossible to model all those elements and factors that affect the condition because of the extraordinary dynamic complexity of biological systems. Therefore modeling of medical conditions is a technical process that should be construed as an assessment of the phenomena under consideration. Such an approach may be suitable for computer-based research and hardware-in-the-loop simulations that result in fast implementation and verification of new solutions developed. Moreover, all information on modeling processes is valuable to those scientists and engineers, who have a broad knowledge of the scientific and technical solutions. However, their competence in medical fields is not required, where these solutions are expected to be applied.Mathematical modeling of respiratory diseases presented in this subsection is based on the comprehensive model of the respiratory system (Fig. 2) and information accessible in medical literature. All medical conditions considered are discussed below:•Asthma is a chronic inflammatory disease of the airways that through the alteration in lung functions, blood gas abnormalities and chronic bronchial inflammation leads to significant changes in the breathing pattern and fierce respiratory responses to chemical stimulation. Among all symptoms of asthma, bronchial hyperactivity and substantial reduction in airway patency are dominant, induced frequently by muscle contraction [3,4,8,17,25]. Obstruction occurs over the entire length of the bronchial tree resulting in prolonged expiration and leading to lung inflation. Due to bronchial obstruction, the ratio of arterial-to-venous blood is changed that leads to hypoxemia and increased respiratory rate [21]. In the case of asthma the resistances of the central and distal airways are increased comparably. Therefore, the narrowing of the trachea and bronchi results in alteration of the values of the parameters Rc, Icand Rp. On the basis of the data available [8,21,36,45] it may be assessed that severe asthma is accompanied by reduction in the airway patency of approx. 30% to 40%. Hence, narrowing of 30% of the central and distal airways is assessed causing more than a 4-fold increase in the resistances Rcand Rp, and a 2-fold increase in the inertance Ic. Additionally, a stenosis of the respiratory tract of 30%, leads to about 2-fold decrease in the value of Cawbased on Formula (5).Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) results from pathological changes in the airways and incompletely reversible destruction of lung parenchyma. COPD is characterized by simultaneous occurrence of: chronic bronchitis, chronic bronchiolitis and emphysema. Alterations in respiratory control are more complex than in the case of asthma and depend on many factors related to the nature and severity of the disease itself. Inflammation of the bronchi (peripheral part mainly) leads to their structural disorders that as a consequence results in their untimely closure. The phenomenon of emphysema is denoted as destruction of alveolar walls and loss of tissue elastance [4,37,40,45–47]. As a result the value of expiratory pressure is reduced causing a significant reduction in the expiratory flow. The alterations in lung parenchyma increase the tissue compliance and decrease its resistance (represented by the parameters Cland Rl). Destruction of alveolar walls results in an increase in the gas volume of the respiratory tract that increases the value of the parameter Cg. The bronchial obstruction corresponds to a substantial increase in the values of the parameters Rc, Rpand Ic- and this effect is much more significant in peripheral parts. Hence, on the basis of the data available [3,4,9,10,23,25,26,32,37,40,45–51] it can be assessed that the stage of severe COPD is accompanied by central tract stenosis of approx. 15%, distal airways narrowing of 40% the and 45% loss of tissue elastance. Such assumptions result in a 90% increase in the resistance Rcand a 40% increase in the inertance Ic. In distal airways almost a 8-fold increase in the resistance Rpand nearly a 3-fold reduction in the value of Caware observed—according to Eq. (5). Moreover, according to Eq. (6), an approx. 1.8-fold increase in the compliance Cloccurs due to changes in the value of tissue elastance. Based on [52] the loss of tissue elastance is associated with a linear decrease in the resistance, hence a decrease in the value of Rlof approx. 45% is observed. Moreover, an increase in the value of the alveolar gas compliance Cgof 14% is assessed, based on [47]. It results from a significant growth in FRC.Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis is classified as an interstitial pneumonia. It is characterized by dilation of the distal airways and connective tissue deposition in the lung parenchyma that leads to scarring. That results in the loss of oxygen diffusion capacity and an increase in elastance preceded with the diameter expansion and stiffening of bronchi. Moreover a slight increase in the respiratory airflow and reduction in Tidal Volume (TV) is observed. The pathogenesis of pulmonary fibrosis has not been fully elucidated [43,53]. Thus a group of diseases that are accompanied by fibrosis is characterized by reduced compliance and increased tissue resistance—represented by the parameters Cland Rl. According to [41,42,52,53] it may be noticed that for severe idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis an increase in the lung elastance is significant—reaching 200%. Hence, based on Formula (6) and results presented in [52], nearly a 3-fold decrease in the value of the lung tissues compliance and a 3-fold increase in the value of the resistance is observed. Distal airways are stiffer, so the value of Rpdecreases slightly—in [52] this decline is almost imperceptible and it usually drops down to a few percent [41]. Moreover, based on [41,42] it may be stated that severe pulmonary fibrosis corresponds to an approx. 2-fold reduction in the value of Caw(due to the reconstruction of the bronchial wall) and a decrease in FRC of 30%, represented by the parameter Cg.Myasthenia gravis is classified as a neuromuscular disease, for which lung functions are not impaired, however a muscle activity disorder is observed. As an effect, muscles cannot support proper ventilation. The reason for that may be either damage to nerve or neuromuscular transmission or muscle pathology [54,55]. The selection of myasthenia gravis as a representative respiratory disease is conditioned by its extraordinary impact on the effectiveness of respiration. In this paper, damage to acetylcholine receptors in the neuromuscular transmission system is assumed. Modeling of severe myasthenia gravis (stage 3 and 4 [54,55]) results in a significant change in the value of Pgthat represents the driving pressure. According to [54], for the third stage of myasthenia gravis the drop of inspiratory pressure of 30–50% is observed. In this paper this drop was assumed as equal to 30%.Congenital tracheal stenosis is a pathological phenomenon caused by underdevelopment of cartilage and fibrous membrane of the trachea. Tracheal stenosis of less than 50% is asymptomatic, however repeated airway inflammations may occur [37]. Modeling of relevant medical conditions results in changes in the values of the central airways resistance Rcand the inertance Ic. It should be noted that the trachea constitutes nearly 50% of the total resistance of the lower respiratory tract and about 60% of the central airways [37]. According to these facts [3] the stenosis of the initial diameter of 60% is assessed. That results in a significant increase in the values of central airways parameters: the resistance Rc(more than 4.5-fold) and the inertance Ic(1.7-fold).The list of the necessary model parameters required for computational evaluation of the conditions described above, and based on the versatile model of the respiratory system (Fig. 2), is presented inTable 2.Results of simulation-based research, based on the values of the parameters presented in Table 2, and representing tidal breathing of medical cases considered by the Authors, are presented inFigs. 4–6 as a steady-state. Time histories of pulmonary volumes are illustrated in Fig. 4, while expiratory airflows in Fig. 5 and initial parts of inspiratory airflows in Fig. 6. The values of TV were calculated, as presented inTable 3, based on expiratory airflows. Furthermore, the results of dynamic spirometry are presented inFig. 7. The diseases were also described in details by forced expiratory volume in 1s (FEV1), forced vital capacity (FVC) and FEV1/FVC ratio, all well presented inTable 4.The time histories of the pulmonary volume, presented in Fig. 4, illustrate considerable functional differences. The waveform of the COPD is unexpected—the peak value of the pulmonary volume is increased in relation to healthy individuals. However, that growth is not beneficial as it results from two factors. The first is the loss of parenchyma elastance causing the emphysema, while the second comes from the influence of the nervous system that is not considered in this paper. Due to emphysema, greater volume oscillations may be noticed. However, they are counterbalanced by an increased value of FRC. As a result TV is only slightly increased. The increased value of FRC results from the growth in airway resistance only and may be seen in the final phase of expiration (Fig. 4). The remaining obstructive diseases are also characterized by an increase in FRC. However, in the absence of elastance loss, reductions in peak values of the pulmonary volumes are noticed. The fibrosis, as a restrictive disease, results in a significant reduction in TV by a decrease in the inspiratory volume. Furthermore, in the case of myasthenia gravis, diminution of muscle strength elucidates the reduction in TV that may be misdiagnosed as a restrictive disorder.Great differences are observed between individuals, based on waveforms of expiratory airflows presented in Fig. 5. In the case of all medical conditions the flow considered is limited and greatly hinders gas exchange. Generally, both amplitude and inclination of the expiratory flow are changed. Among the presented time histories only idiopathic fibrosis causes no significant alteration in the rate of growth/descent because of changes in the value of airway resistance. However, the amplitude is changed as a result of TV reduction, what corresponds directly to a smaller quantity of gas accumulated in the alveoli. In the case of COPD expiratory airflow limitation is smaller than in the case of other obstructive diseases. It results from the loss of parenchyma elastance that counterbalances the influence of increased resistance. The remaining medical conditions manifest themselves as changes in both amplitude and shape of the flow curves. In the case of obstructive diseases, the changes are caused by an increase in airway resistance and in the case of neuromuscular diseases by diminution of the muscle strength.Based on expiratory airflows presented in Fig. 5 tidal volumes were calculated according to Formula (8) and are presented in Table 3:(8)TV=abs(∫t1t2V̇ao(t)dt)where t1 and t2 denote time instances representing the start and end of the expiration. As expected, COPD leads to a slight increase in the value of TV consistent with [26]. The remaining respiratory diseases result in a considerable or great decrease in the values of TV[4,5,10,23,26,43,49,54].The time histories of inspiratory airflows, presented in Fig. 6, illustrate considerable differences between the time constants of alveolar filling. In the case of obstructive diseases their nature can be expressed by an increase in the time constant T of alveolar filling. It is obviously caused by a significant growth in the airway resistance. As expected, pulmonary fibrosis results in a small reduction in the time constant T. The only disease with no change in the considered parameter is myasthenia gravis. It affects the respiratory muscles and reduces the value of driving pressure, however the respiratory mechanics is not affected. Because of that the inspiratory airflow is reduced proportionally, however its shape is identical to the original one, as presented in Fig. 4.The assessment of the respiratory mechanics solely based on tidal breathing is problematic and questionable [3,6,32,36]. A much more convenient form of examination is dynamic spirometry. The research on dynamic tests was simulated, preceded by a deep expiration [25]. However, significant patient commitment is required during considered examination. Stronger contraction of the respiratory muscles was simulated by an increased amplitude and reduced frequency of the driving pressure. The amplitude was adjusted to reach both maximum and minimum volume of the lungs. Obviously, through the use of linear models, the reliability of the respiratory system mapping is insufficient. This principle applies especially to the highly nonlinear edges of pressure–volume characteristics of respiratory organs [3]. However, research on dynamic spirometry is aimed only to generate qualitative data.Significant differences between the results of dynamic spirometry appear in the time histories presented in Fig. 7. Most of them correspond with the results obtained by data presented in Figs. 4 and 5. The values of FEV1, FVC and FEV1/FVC presented in Table 4 describe the results of examination in details. However, in the case of COPD, the results obtained do not correspond completely with those expected, based on medical literature. The value of FVC is much greater than the value obtained for healthy individuals, while the value of FEV1 is only slightly reduced. This behavior results from the application of a linear model, which misrepresents phenomena of the respiratory tract. A significant decrease in the lung elastance leads to greater volume oscillations (Fig. 7). This reduces the negative effect of flow limitation, which on the other hand results from an increase in the airway resistance. Due to these facts at the end of expiration the alveoli become almost empty. In practice, the premature closing of the peripheral airways, as described in Section 4, increases significantly the respiratory resistance during expiration. Therefore, at the end of expiration the alveoli still contain a great amount of breathing gas, however in Fig. 7, they are almost empty. In practice, both FEV1 and FVC are reduced significantly.Nevertheless, all FEV1/FVC values clearly indicate the airway obstruction (values smaller than for healthy individuals) and lung restriction (values bigger than for healthy individuals). As none of these phenomena are observed in myasthenia, no change in FEV1/FVC ratio value is noted. In the case of COPD the obstruction is found despite incorrect values of the components of this ratio. All these facts result from the absence of non-linear resistance in each component. It should be noted that despite correct test results obtained by the Authors, significant errors in respiratory mapping resulting from miscalculations of the ratio components should be considered. Therefore the final results of dynamic spirometry for COPD are not always reliable.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
