@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Watermarking 3D CAPD models for topology verification

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a novel watermarking scheme for topology verification of CAPD models.Watermark bits are embedded in a subset of the model’s connection points.It is a semi-fragile and blind watermarking scheme.It provides good tamper localization accuracy.It is robust against similarity transformations and simplification.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Topological integrity,Topological tagging,Semi-fragile watermarking,Watermarking,Process plant,Connection points,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The Computer-Aided Plant Design (CAPD) model characterizes its peculiar complex topology among a tremendous number of plant components under complex constraints rather than just geometrical shapes. Lots of watermarking schemes for CAD models have been proposed for geometrical information protection or authentication. However, in the literature, none of them has mentioned the problem of topology authentication for CAPD models yet. In this paper, a semi-fragile watermarking algorithm for topology authentication of CAPD models is presented. We first discuss the problem of topology authentication of CAPD models. Then a subset of the model’s connection points are selected as mark points, also called watermark carriers, according to the mark point selecting principle. We encode the topological relation among components into watermarks. Afterwards, the topology based watermarks are embedded in mark points to keep them in a predefined relationship with neighboring connection points so that any changes will ruin the relationship between marked connection points and neighboring connection points. To the best of our knowledge, our algorithm is the first semi-fragile and blind scheme that can authenticate and verify the topology of CAPD models. Experimental results show that our approach not only can detect and locate malicious topology attacks such as components modification and joint ends modification, but also is robust against various non-malicious attacks such as similarity transformations and simplification.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Nowadays, process plant engineering is characterized by globalization. The design, engineering and construction of process plants often involve multidisciplinary team effort. Therefore, engineers and designers are increasingly focusing on a collaborative design approach with each other to survive in a competitive global environment. The Computer-Aided Plant Design (CAPD) system is an automatic solution designed specifically for process plant engineers and designers. It is devoted to increasing productivity, accuracy, and collaboration to meet the challenges of complex process plant design projects. With the wide application of CAPD systems, CAPD models may be copied and distributed frequently with an increase during the collaboration. Thus, the integrity, authentication and verification of CAPD models are critical to companies when sharing models with their collaborators. Digital watermarking has been considered as an efficient solution to solve this problem, and thus has been paid significant attention in recent years [1].Digital watermarking techniques intend to hide some secret information (called a watermark) in the cover content to mark the digital data content. There exist different classifications of watermarking techniques. According to whether the original digital content is needed or not during the watermark extraction stage, watermarking techniques can be classified as non-blind or blind schemes. According to the intended application, we can also distinguish between robust watermark schemes and fragile watermark schemes. Robust watermark schemes indicate ownership, whereas fragile watermark schemes authenticate and verify digital content. Moreover, good fragile watermarking schemes should be able to survive in some possibly unintentional operations the digital content may undergo. This kind of fragile watermarking scheme is called a semi-fragile scheme. In this paper, we intend to develop a semi-fragile and blind watermarking scheme to authenticate and verify the topology integrity for CAPD models.A CAPD model may be completely described by three kinds of information: the geometrical information describes the shape and 3D positions (coordinates) of all plant components, the topological information provides the adjacency relations among different plant components, while the engineering information refers to design constraints, engineering disciplines and so on. Even though the graphical representation of the results may look like a detailed engineering plant design, it has to be kept in mind that the aim of CAPD systems is only to optimize the plant layout [2]. The objective of plant layout design is to find the most economical spatial arrangement of process vessels and equipment and their interconnecting pipes that satisfy construction, operation, maintenance, and safety requirements [3]. This is an important aspect in the design of process plants since a good layout will ensure that the plant functions correctly and will provide an economically acceptable balance between the many, often conflicting, design constraints [4]. Therefore, the topological information is a significant part of integrity authentication for CAPD models.However, in the literature, watermarking techniques proposed for CAD models mainly focus on addressing the problem of geometrical information protection or authentication. And among them the topology authentication problem of CAPD models, to the best of our knowledge, has not been mentioned in any reported literature. Hence, the issue of defining watermarking for topological information of CAPD models is still an unsolved problem. To address the issue of verifying the integrity of the topological information, we propose a semi-fragile watermarking scheme in this paper. The topological information is exploited to generate watermarks. We prefer embedding topology based watermarks into a subset of a model’s connection points to keep them in a predefined relationship with neighboring connection points so that any changes will ruin the relationship between the marked connection points and neighboring connection points.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We review some related works in Section 2; Section 3 gives a brief introduction of CAPD models; and Section 4 describes the proposed scheme. Experimental results that demonstrate our watermarking scheme performance are presented in Section 5. Conclusions and future work follow in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper is the first paper, to the best of our knowledge, to report and analyze the problem of topology authentication and verification for CAPD models. A semi-fragile and blind watermarking scheme is proposed to address the problem of authenticating topology integrity. We generate content-based watermark bits for each plant component by taking their topological relation into consideration. And the watermark bits are embedded into a subset of the model’s connection points which are uniformly distributed in the model. Theoretical analysis and experimental results show that our scheme has a strong ability to detect and locate malicious attacks such as components modification and joint ends modification. And it is proven to be robust against various non-malicious attacks, such as transformation, rotation, uniform scaling and simplification. It is believed that the proposed scheme can make a valuable and industry-relevant contribution to the topology authentication of CAPD and other CAx models.There are two main drawbacks in our scheme. First, we generate the watermark through hashing the handle values of plant components and embed it in the middle bits of the mantissa field of the coordinates of connection points. Therefore, our scheme strikes a good balance between the contrasting requirements of low embedding distortion and high resolution of tampering localization. Second, our scheme can only authenticate and verify the topology integrity. To date, the authentication of geometrical parameters of plant components has not been taken into consideration in our scheme. Our future research will focus on taking both geometrical and topological information into consideration for integrity authentication and verification.