@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Polynomial local shape descriptor on interest points for 3D part-in-whole matching

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We solve the part-in-whole matching problem for 3D models in engineering domain.A local descriptor is proposed to describe the local shape of the interest points.The proposed descriptor is sensitive to the geodesic radius.Interest points are extracted based on the local saliency of the sharp features.We report the properties and the matching performance of the proposed method.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Part-in-whole matching,Interest points,Local shape descriptor,Attributed graph,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Part-in-whole 3D shape matching is to recognize query shapes as sub-parts of a target intact 3D object. It plays a pivotal role in a large number of engineering applications. The most critical component in a part-in-whole search system is the local shape descriptor which encapsulates the identified local feature on the query part and is matched with the local shape descriptors of the parts in the database. We propose a novel local shape descriptor based on the concept that the evolution pattern of geodesic iso-contour’s length is a good representative for surface features. Our local shape descriptor enjoys a unique advantage over most existing ones by being sensitive to the geodesic radius of the local region, and thus is able to capture more comprehensive shape information if the query portion of the shape is larger and includes more complicated surface features. Through a simple approximation scheme, our local shape descriptor is defined as a vector piecewise polynomial function of the geodesic radius of the interest point, thus enabling local matching to be performed quickly by simple curve evaluations. We also introduce a new schema of interest points sampling so that we can reserve the most corresponding information of the model by a small number of local feature descriptors. The proposed part-in-whole matching approach outperforms many existing approaches in matching efficiency and requiring a smaller input region. It is a shortcut solution for incomplete model matching/retrieval.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In applications of group technology and customized design, manufacturing companies often encounter the task of part-in-whole matching, that is, to recognize given shapes as sub-parts of a target intact 3D object in a database. It is especially applicable when global shape data of a query object is not available (e.g., a broken object) and only limited local features can be reliably used. In the literature, part-in-whole 3D shape matching approaches usually represent a model by a collection of features. In the engineering domain, features  [1–3] are often categorized into machining features (e.g., holes and slots) or design features (e.g., cylinder and cone), but they can only deal with shapes with exact representations. However, due to copyright protection and also large disk space concern, exact representation is not convenient for web communication when compared with approximated representation. Moreover, approximated representations (i.e., polyhedral mesh) are needed to describe data acquired with 3D scanners. Thus, in this paper, we address the part-in-whole 3D object matching problem for shapes with approximated representation, primarily for engineering components.There are two critical challenges that are still not perfectly answered for part-in-whole matching. One is that the query can share any portion of its intact model and the size of the query usually does not match that of the intact model. Two regions of different surface areas and sizes are not directly comparable by the existing shape descriptors. Currently, multiscale methods  [4–7] are often utilized to mitigate this problem. However, the scale sampling density can only be determined empirically, which makes most current approaches impractical. The other challenge is how to extract efficient interest points that present the distinctive features of the model without losing important information. Comparing to the existing methods, our contribution in this paper lies on two points:(A)We introduce a new local shape descriptor called Local Shape Polynomials (LSP). LSP is a piecewise polynomial that represents the continuous evolution pattern of the length of the geodesic iso-contours for a specified point. LSP enjoys a unique advantage that it is sensitive to the geodesic radius of the target region. It can be evaluated at very large scale and thus can describe a large query object with only one descriptor. We have solved the scale-invariant matching for LSP so that two regions with different surface areas and sizes can be directly compared.We also propose a new schema of interest point extraction. In addition to the normal sharp edges and junction points, a new type of interest points is introduced based on the idea of minimum geodesic distance between a loop edge and the other interest points. The extracted interest points significantly reduce the computational complexity of the part-in-whole matching, and also collect the most correspondence information of the model.The overview of our approach can be illustrated by Fig. 1. The models in the database are processed offline one-time only, with every part represented by an attributed relational graph (ARG) of which each node denotes an interest point with its LSP as the attribution and each edge denotes the Euclidean distance between every two interest points. Each LSP is computed using the maximum geodesic radius of the model. At runtime, given as queries a few partial surface patches (either scanned range images or tailed mesh patches) that are obtained around edge junctions or surface protruding points, the interest points are identified. Next, LSP’s of the identified interest points are calculated with the maximum geodesic radii of these partial patches and an ARG is built. This ARG is then matched with the ARGs in the database, and the closest one is returned as the matched part.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. After a brief review of the related works in Section  2, the details of our local shape descriptor will be presented in Section  3, and the interest point extraction method will be described in Section  4. The implementation in part-in-whole matching will then be described in Section  5. The experimental results will be given in Section  6, followed by the conclusion on the results and possible future work, in Section  7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
