@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Progressive point set surface compression based on planar reflective symmetry analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a progressive point set surface compression algorithm.The algorithm analyzes high-level semantic information existent in a 3D model.The original surface is partitioned and encoded by different encoding techniques.The proposed algorithm is able to process surfaces of arbitrary topology types.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Point set surface,Compression,Symmetry analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this work we propose an algorithm for progressive point set surface compression based on planar reflective symmetry analysis. For a given point set surface, we detect the primary symmetry plane and project the surface onto three orthogonal planes including the primary symmetry one. Then, on each projection plane, we adaptively subdivide the support domain into rectangular sub-domains. Analyzing the projected geometry on each sub-domain, we partition the original surface into portion(s), if any, that each can be modeled as a height field and the remaining portion, if any, that cannot. Further, we identify symmetric pairs of height-field portions, if any. Finally, different encoding techniques are designed for different types of surface portions, resulting in a generic progressive point set surface encoder that processes surfaces of arbitrary topological complexity and yields outstanding rate–distortion performance.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In recent years, three-dimensional (3D) models have become more and more widely used, as other types of digital media (e.g., audio, image and video). They have found applications in many fields such as video gaming, 3D animation and scientific visualization. The dominant form of representation for 3D models has been polygonal mesh, mostly due to the native support in modern graphics cards. Nevertheless, supported with the increasing storage and processing power of computers and the increasing capability of 3D data scanning devices, there has been an increasing interest in point-based representation that defines a geometric shape by a cloud of points sampled on the surface. As a result, increasingly more point set surfaces data are being produced, which give rise to a growing demand on effective compression schemes to efficiently utilize the storage, the processing and/or the bandwidth resources.Many compression schemes have been proposed for both polygonal meshes and point set surfaces in the past couple of decades. These algorithms can be divided into single-rate and progressive 3D model encoders. A single-rate encoder usually traverses the model surface driven by the local correlation in connectivity and/or geometry, while a progressive encoder typically encodes an initial coarse model and thereafter a sequence of local refinements to the model. Almost all the existing algorithms are based on the local syntax without explicitly analyzing and understanding the high-level semantics of the shape. Based on the belief that semantic understanding of the shape will help a compact representation, we in this work make our first step in detecting the symmetry in a point set surface and, based on which, designing an efficient encoding scheme.The major contribution of this work is a novel and effective algorithm for progressive compression of point set surfaces based on symmetry analysis. Distinctive features of this work include:•Symmetry analysis. We detect the primary symmetry plane for an input model and use it to determine three orthogonal projection planes. These planes facilitate extracting as many surface portions as possible that can be modeled with rectangular height fields and effectively retrieving symmetric pairs, if any, from them.Generic applicability. Due to the effective techniques specifically designed for different types of surface portions, the proposed scheme is able to process surfaces of arbitrary topology type, with or without obvious symmetry.Superior coding performance. The superior rate–distortion performance comes mainly from three aspects: rectangular height field modeling of surface portions; detection and utilization of symmetry between surface portions; state-of-the-art wavelet-based and octree-based coders for various types of surface portions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
