@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Feature-aware partitions from the motorcycle graph

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A given quadrilateral mesh is segmented into quadrilateral partitions.As many as possible highly-curved regions are located on the partition boundaries.The generated partitions are suitable for parametric surface fitting.Partition boundaries are improved via local path flipping operations.Feature curves in the model are integrated into the proposed framework.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Quadrilateral mesh,Motorcycle graph,Mesh segmentation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Today’s quad-meshing techniques generate high-quality quadrilateral meshes whose extraordinary vertices (i.e., not four-valence vertices except on the boundary) are generally located in highly curved regions. The motorcycle graph (MCG) algorithm of Eppstein et al. can be used to generate structured partitions of such quadrilateral meshes. However, it is not always possible for it to capture feature curves in the highly-curved parts of the model on the partition boundaries because model geometry is not taken into account.This study investigated feature-aware algorithms representing extensions of the MCG algorithm. Initial partitioning is first performed using a speed control algorithm identical to the MCG algorithm except that it assigns variable rather than constant speed to particles. Partition boundaries are then improved via local path flipping operations. The MCG algorithm and the speed control algorithm are intended to trace as many feature curves as possible, but do not necessarily trace all of them. For this reason, feature curves are extracted and integrated into the proposed framework by adding seeds located at ordinary vertices in addition to extraordinary seeds. The proposed algorithm generates partitions that are still structured, and has been tested with quadrilateral mesh models generated using the mixed integer quadrangulation technique of Bommes et al.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
State-of-the-art quad-meshing techniques have been proposed in recent years to support the generation of quadrilateral meshes from triangular meshes with optimized objective patch parameters (such as element alignment, orientation, sizing and aspect ratio). Besides applying to these parameters, many such techniques are intended to generate quadrilateral meshes with a simple underlying base complex of quad partitions in which each partition is structured of a regular grid involving no extraordinary vertices (i.e., not four-valence vertices except on the boundary). Such partitions are useful representations of objects, because they can be fitted with parametric surfaces with no parameterization step.In terms of surface modeling applications (i.e. reverse engineering), it is crucial to locate highly curved parts of the model on partition boundaries as these regions residing in inner regions of partitions cannot be well represented by smooth surfaces. The motorcycle graph (MCG) algorithm proposed by Eppstein et al.  [1] is a method that generates quad partitions from a given quadrilateral mesh. Partitions obtained using this algorithm do not always possess highly-curved regions on their boundaries. Fig. 1(a) shows a quadrilateral mesh partitioned by the MCG algorithm and highly-curved regions are seen inside the generated partitions. Our approach is based on the MCG algorithm but can locate feature curves in these highly curved regions (marked with blue circles in Fig. 1(b)) on the partition boundaries, therefore better surface quality is expected when fitting parametric surfaces to the partitions generated using our method. Fig. 2(b) also shows the partitions (with boundaries in different colors) obtained using the MCG algorithm, similarly not all portions (as shown by the black circle in Fig. 2(b)) of highly-curved regions (as shown in blue in Fig. 2(c)) are captured by the MCG algorithm.This study examined the generation of feature-aware partitions with highly-curved regions (feature curves) located on partition boundaries. To achieve this, feature-aware algorithms representing extensions of the MCG algorithm are proposed. Fig. 2(c)–(f) show these algorithms. First, feature curves are extracted and particles (spheres in colors) are placed on ordinary seeds (from where tracing starts) in addition to extraordinary ones (see Fig. 2(c)). A speed control algorithm that starts tracing from these seeds is applied with rules identical to those of the MCG algorithm, except a constant speed is assigned to particles (see Fig. 2(d)). The partition layout is then improved using local path flipping operations (see Fig. 2(e)). Partitions obtained using the proposed algorithms are still structured as no extraordinary seeds are introduced during the particle placement step. To form a much more compact partition layout while respecting feature curves, smooth boundaries are removed (see Fig. 2(f)). The difference between paths obtained using the MCG algorithm and those obtained after each step of the proposed algorithm are shown by circles in different colors in Fig. 2. In this study, we have utilized quadrilateral mesh generated using a mixed integer quadrangulation method  [2].The proposed algorithm is a practical and useful algorithm that can generate quad partitioning (withT-junctions). The generated curvature-aware partitions are appropriate to be used for surface modeling applications (B-spline,T-spline fitting), texture mapping, subdivision surfaces, etc.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
