@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Quantitative breast mass classification based on the integration of B-mode features and strain features in elastography

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Quantitative strain features wereextracted fromelastographic images to express tissue elasticity.A computer-aided diagnosis system based on the quantitative strain features was developed to classify breast masses.Combining the strain features with the B-mode features obtained a significantly better performance in malignancy evaluation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Breast cancer,Elastography,B-mode,Computer-aided diagnosis,Fuzzy c-means clustering,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundElastography is a new sonographic imaging technique to acquire the strain information of tissues and transform the information into images. Radiologists have to observe the gray-scale distribution of tissues on the elastographic image interpreted as the reciprocal of Young׳s modulus to evaluate the pathological changes such as scirrhous carcinoma. In this study, a computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) system was developed to extract quantitative strain features from elastographic images to reduce operator-dependence and provide an automatic procedure for breast mass classification.MethodThe collected image database was composed of 45 malignant and 45 benign breast masses. For each case, tumor segmentation was performed on the B-mode image to obtain tumor contour which was then mapped to the elastographic images to define the corresponding tumor area. The gray-scale pixels around tumor area were classified into white, gray, and black by fuzzy c-means clustering to highlight stiff tissues with darker values. Quantitative strain features were then extracted from the black cluster and compared with the B-mode features in the classification of breast masses.ResultsThe performance of the proposed strain features achieved an accuracy of 80% (72/90), a sensitivity of 80% (36/45), a specificity of 80% (36/45), and a normalized area under the receiver operating characteristic curve, Az=0.84. Combining the strain features with the B-mode features obtained a significantly better Az=0.93, p-value<0.05.ConclusionsSummarily, the quantified strain features can be combined with the B-mode features to provide a promising suggestion in distinguishing malignant from benign tumors.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
As an adjunct to mammography, ultrasound (US) is widely used in distinguishing between benign and malignant breast lesions [1]. The Breast Imaging Reporting and Data System (BI-RADS) lexicon for US was defined by American College of Radiology [2] to standardize the descriptive terminology. The sonographic descriptors defined in BI-RADS lexicon such as shape, orientation, margin, lesion boundary, echo pattern, and posterior acoustic features were evaluated to be important in classify breast lesions in the prior studies [3–5]. With the standardized BI-RADS descriptors, the radiologists improved their agreement and performance in US interpretation across all experience variables in the literature [5].After quantification, the sonographic descriptors were used in various computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) systems to estimate the likelihood being a carcinoma [6–8]. The quantitative characteristics extracted from B-mode images such as shape features were used in describing the physical properties of breast tumors [9,10]. The mechanical property of tumors is also investigated for histological and pathological relevance. For example, the pathological changes of the scirrhous carcinoma correlate with tissue stiffness [11]. As a newly developed sonographic imaging modality [12–14], elastography estimates the tissue stiffness by calculating the tissue displacement under a certain force. In quasi-static elastography, the tissue displacement is induced by manual pressing on the transducer such as the respiratory movement of patients utilized in this study. As another form of elastography, shear wave elastography [15], automatically radiates shear waves inside tissues and reconstructs the elasticity properties of tissues from the propagated shear wave. However, the simplicity of quasi-static elastography makes it can be implemented using conventional US hardware.The gradient of the displacement or strain is converted to the pixel value for imaging. Clinically, the size ratio between the strain area in elastographic images and tumor area in B-mode images was evaluated to interpret breast tumor malignancy [16–20]. The definition is the maximum horizontal length of the tumor measured in the elastographic image divided by the corresponding length measured in the B-mode. A tumor with an elastographic images/B-mode size ratio greater than 1.0 had high likelihood being malignant. The stiffness contrast and normalized shear strain area were also used to diagnose breast tumors [14,19,21–24]. The stiffness contrast is the ratio between the mean strains estimated in the background to that estimated within the breast tumor. The area obtained from the strain area can be normalized via the tumor size measured from the B-mode image. The performances of Az, area under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve achieved 0.84–0.99 in the results of the literature.However, by observing the elastographic images, the shape and boundary of tumor area are not as clear as those in B-mode images. Radiologists have to manually compare elastographic images and B-mode images to estimate the stiffness of tumor area which is operator-dependent. Burnside et al. indicated that inter-observer variability was an influence factor to the diagnostic performance [17]. Prior CAD approach which extracted quantitative elasticity features from acoustic radiation force impulse imaging achieved an accuracy of 80% in classifying breast tumors [25]. In this study, we proposed an automatic procedure to extract strain features from quasi-static elastography in a CAD system for tumor classification. Tumor segmentation was first applied to the B-mode images and the resulting tumor contour was mapped to the elastographic image. The fuzzy c-means clustering (FCM) [26] was then used to automatically extract stiff tissues with darker values for feature extraction. Compared to other CAD systems [6–10], the current study explored the performance difference between the quantitative strain features and B-mode features. The complementary advantage of combining both feature sets was also evaluated in the experiment. The flowchart of the diagnostic procedure is shown inFig. 1.This study obtained the approval from our institution review board and the patients׳ informed consent. A total of 90 patients underwent ultrasound examination with an ACUSON S2000 ultrasound system (Siemens Medical Solutions, Mountain View, CA) from November 2011 to June 2012. The equipped linear-array transducer was a 9L4 for the B-mode sonographic examination followed by elastography imaging. The target lesion was displayed in the B-mode sonogram with the corresponding strain image displayed side by side in the acquisition. The stiffness information is generated from the analysis of the gradient of the tissue displacement under a compression force and is converted to be a gray-scale image. The technique behind ACUSON S2000 is eSie Touch elasticity imaging which uses the respiratory movement of a patient to be the compress/decompress force source. In the acquisition, users only need to hold the transducer without placing any additional force on it. The imaging technique developed to reduce operator dependency would be sufficiently robust to establish a standard procedure. The acquired B-mode and elastographic images are 8-bit gray-scale which ranges from 0 to 255.The pathology was proved by core needle biopsy to be the gold standard used in a classifier. Benign lesions (45/90, 50%) were composed of 23 fibroadenomas, 14 fibrocystic changes, and 8 intraductal papillomas with lesion size 1.21±0.73cm. The patient ages ranged from 18 to 80 years, mean 44±12 years. For malignant lesions (45/90, 50%), 37 invasive ductal carcinomas (IDC), 2 invasive lobular carcinoma (ILC), and 6 ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) with lesion size 1.37±0.39cm were included. The patient ages ranged from 39 to 83 years, mean 54±12 years.A semi-automated segmentation method was used to extract tumor area from background tissues in the B-mode image. The implementation of tumor segmentation used in this study is the same as the procedure in the previous study based on level-set segmentation and preprocessing filters [26]. For the success of tumor segmentation, image preprocessing was first applied to the B-mode image. The image contrast was enhanced by the sigmoid filter [27] as shown inFig. 2(b). The gradient magnitude filter [28] was then applied on the contrast-enhanced image to obtain the gradient image (Fig. 2(c)). The intensity variations in the horizontal and vertical directions were calculated and combined by the filter. The previous sigmoid filter was applied again to enlarge the magnitude of the gradient image (Fig. 2(d)) for the enhancement of tumor boundary. After applying the sigmoid filter, the original gray-scale distribution with various values was reduced to extremely small (black) or large (white) values for the contrast enhancement as shown in Fig. 2(b) and (d). The contrast between black and white is the largest. The enlarged contrast also suppressed small variations such as speckle noises and only substantial edges with strong intensity gap were kept such as tumor contour.With the seeds defined in the tumor area, the level-set segmentation automatically delineated the contour as shown in Fig. 2(e). The segmentation method developed the propagation from the seeds to tumor boundary for the modeling of complex tumor contour. The initial seeds have to be defined by user. For homogeneous tumors, any seed location would generate the same segmented contour while the results may not be consistent for heterogeneous tumors with various seed locations. It provides elasticity to users for their preferences since different users may have different definitions of wanted contours for heterogeneous tumors. After segmentation, the tumor contour obtained in the B-mode image was mapped to the corresponding area in the side by side displayed elastographic image.In the acquired elastographic images, light pixels indicate soft tissue while darker pixels indicate relatively stiff tissue. The pixel values distribute from 0 to 255 as shown inFig. 3(a). Using an arbitrary threshold value to separate the gray-scale values into light and dark is not objective. In the experiment, FCM clustering [26,29] was used to classify the pixels into three clusters and show them with values of 0, 128, and 255 (Fig. 3(b)) to define the stiff area objectively. Black pixels in the FCM image with the value of 0 indicated that the tissues tended to be hard. Three clusters were used in the experiment because the corresponding result was closed to the original gray-scale distribution. After FCM clustering, the range and number of black pixels regarded as stiff tissues were quantified. Additionally, the gray-scale distribution in the tumor area of original elastographic image was analyzed to be features.First, two strain features were extracted from the area enclosed by the tumor contour in the original elastographic image. The definitions are formulated as following:(1)StrainMean=(∑E(i,j)∈TE(GrayScale))/TN(2)StrainVAR=StrainMean(∑E(i,j)∈T(E(GrayScale)−StrainMean)2)/TNStrainMean[19,25] is the sum of original gray-scale values (E(i,j)) divided by the number of pixels (TN) in the tumor area, T. This feature describes the average strain value of tissues within the tumor area to show whether a tumor is soft or hard. StrainVAR[19,25,30,31] interprets the strain composition using the mean and standard deviation (SD) of pixel values. StrainVAR is similar to SNRe, the elastographic signal-to-noise ratio, relates to the physical parameters of the ultrasound system used to acquire the data [30]. The SNRe value indicates the quality of strain estimation in elastography. Here, the purpose of StrainVAR is calculating the transformed gray-scale distribution in a tumor area. The variations of gray-scale pixel values indicate whether tissues in a tumor have similar or various elasticities. Heterogeneous tumors have spatial variations in different tissues such as angiogenesis and necrosis which could be an aggressive pattern of potential malignant tumors [32].In the observation, the sizes of the tumor area in the B-mode image and the strain area with dark pixels in the elastographic image are not usually equal. The increased stiffness surrounding the tumor may be caused by desmoplastic reaction and is useful to distinguish malignant from benign tumors [19]. In previous studies [16–21,24], the radiologists used the size difference between B-mode and strain images in tumor diagnosis such as size ratio. Itoh, et al. assigned each elasticity image an elasticity score on a five-point scale to describe strain ratio [33]. However, the result of Burnside et al. revealed that two readers had significantly greater diagnostic performance with B-mode and strain imaging compared with the third reader [17]. The inter-observer variability may be caused by insufficient training and experience in strain imaging. To provide an objective measurement, this study proposed an automatic procedure to estimate the size difference between the B-mode and strain images. The longest diameter of a tumor in B-mode image was compared to the corresponding diameter of the strain area after the FCM clustering. Because the lack of clear tumor location in elastographic image, using the same vertical line can confirm that the diameter associates with the specified tumor rather than other tissues. The comparison was calculated as the ratio of the two diameters:(3)LengthRatio=length(jmax,BFCM)length(jmax,TBmode),jmax=argmaxlength(j,TBmode)j is the row index. By scanning each j in the segmented tumor area in B-mode image (TBmode), we can find a jmaxwhich is the longest row (Fig. 3(c)). BFCMis defined as the black area after FCM clustering in elastographic image. The length (StrainLength) of the corresponding row (jmax) can be defined as another feature and calculated by counting the black pixels (the middle red line in Fig. 3(d)).The increased stiffness surrounding tumor may be caused by desmoplastic reaction [19]. Through the calculation of stiffness tissues distributed within and around the tumor contour, measurement can be extended to two-dimensional area as another feature, GlobalDarkLevel. The strain feature is the number of black pixels inside the area bounded by the two rows which the top and bottom pixels of the tumor contour are located in (Fig. 3(d)).(4)GlobalDarkLevel=∑BFCM(i,j),j≥argminrow(TBmode),j≤argmaxrow(TBmode)The original gray-scale pixel values in the same area are summed to be GlobalStrainLevel(5)GlobalStrainLevel=∑E(i,j),j≥argminrow(TBmode),j≤argmaxrow(TBmode)After tumor segmentation in B-mode image, the six proposed strain features were automatically generated.FCM is commonly used in pattern classification and recognition [26,29]. The purpose of FCM is to minimize the function(6)J=∑i=1N∑j=1Cuijm‖xi−cj‖2where xiis a pixel value, cjis the centroid of the cluster j, uijis the membership of the distance between xiand cj, m is a user defined variable, N is the number of pixels, and C is the number of clusters. The FCM algorithm [34–36] runs with the initialization of the membership matrix U(0)=[uij] where∑j=1cuij=1,∀j=1...c. In kth-iteration, calculate the centroid value C(k)=[cj] with U(k),(7)cj=∑i=1Nuijm⋅xi∑i=1Nuijmthen updating U(k), U(k+1),(8)uij=1∑k=1c(‖xi−cj‖‖xi−ck‖)2m−1The iteration stops while ||U(k+1)−U(k)||<ε, otherwise new centroids are calculated for next iteration.In medical images, clustering is a process of dividing tissues into different classes according to their intensity values so that tissues in the same class are as similar as possible. The fuzzy c-means clustering [34–36] used in the experiment is similar to the k-means clustering. The difference is that k-means clustering is a hard clustering, each tissue element is exactly a member of one cluster only. Instead, fuzzy c-means clustering relaxes the condition. Each element can have multiple membership degrees to multiple clusters to indicate the strength of the association between the element and a particular cluster. The memberships retain more information and are iteratively updated to reduce the influences of noise and outliers. In elastographic images, different tissues have different strain value presented by gray-scale. The clustering of heterogeneous tumor tissues composed of wide range of gray-scales especially depends on the iterative update to obtain an accurate classification. The benefits of using fuzzy c-means clustering rather than k-means clustering are also shown in prior literature [37,38].Fig. 4 illustrates the difference between fuzzy c-means clustering and k-means clustering.Conventionally, sonographic characteristics in B-mode images were used in the development of breast CAD systems [7,9,10,39,40]. Prior B-mode features described below were implemented in the experiment to compare with the proposed strain features. Shape features were the most common features in distinguishing malignant from benign tumors. Geometric properties of tumors extracted from the segmented tumor contour were used to describe irregular malignant tumors and ellipse-like benign tumors [7,8]. The construction of best-fit ellipse was used to approximate the tumor size and position. The circumference ratio of the tumor and its corresponding best-fit ellipse can be a roundness metric. The difference between round and ellipse shapes can be obtained from the ratio of the major and minor axes of best-fit ellipse [9,10]. Other shape features directly derived from the original properties of tumors such as tumor perimeter and area. Nie et al. [40] defined normalized radial length (NRL) calculated by the distances between the tumor boundary points and the tumor center. Rangayyan et al. [39] estimated the compactness level using the ratio of contour perimeter and area. The statistics of texture pattern inside the segmented tumor also calculated to be the B-mode features in this study. The echogenic texture was composed of the spatial correlations between pixels in gray-level and was quantified using gray level co-occurrence matrices (GLCM) [41].The quantified strain and B-mode features were evaluated to determine if they were statistically significant in distinguishing between benign and malignant lesions. Kolmogorov–Smirnov test [42] was first used to determine whether the value distributions of features were normal or not. Normal distribution features were then tested using Student׳s t-test [42] while non-normal distribution features were tested using Mann–Whitney U test [42]. As a result, features with p-value less than 0.05 were shown to be statistically significant in distinguishing between benign and malignant lesions.In the construction of a prediction model, features belonged to the same categories were all combined together to be a feature set. The feature sets evaluated in our experiment included the strain, B-mode and combined feature set. The evaluation of the feature sets was based on their performances in tumor classification. In the binary logistic regression model [43], backward elimination was used for feature selection. Each time, one feature was eliminated in the backward elimination. The eliminated feature was the one producing the minimum predictive residual error sum of squares. In the trained classifier, the subset features with the lowest error rate was selected as the most relevant for tumor diagnosis. Leave-one-out cross-validation method [44] was then used to validate the performance of the selected subset. A total of 90 iterations of training and testing were executed. Each iteration separated one case from the dataset and used it to test the result trained by the remaining 89 cases. Averaging the results of total 90 iterations obtained the final performance. The lesion types specified in the biopsy-proven pathology were the ground truth in the classifier. After the logistic regression, the tumors were given a predicted probability being malignant according to the features they have. Tumors with probabilities higher than 0.5 were classified into carcinomas. As a result, five performance indices including accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value (PPV), and negative predictive value (NPV) were generated. The trade-offs between sensitivity and specificity were calculated using ROC curve. The normalized area under the curve, Az, was used in ROC evaluation. The differences between two feature sets in the performance indices were tested by the chi-square test in SPSS software (version 16 for Windows; SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA). Az was tested by the bivariate chi-square test in ROCKIT software (C. Metz, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
