@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Fast global and partial reflective symmetry analyses using boundary surfaces of mechanical components

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An approach to global and local reflective symmetry analyses for B-Rep CAD models.Use of a divide-and-conquer principle over the B-Rep faces as atomic entities.The symmetry accuracy obtained is of the order of the CAD kernel modeling accuracy.The process time is very low, and compatible with user’s interactions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Reflective symmetry,Local symmetry,B-Rep CAD model,Accuracy,CAD/CAM,Divide-and-conquer,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The detection of shape symmetry properties (both axisymmetry and planar reflective symmetry) finds a large range of applications and covers numerous categories of geometric models. The use of symmetry properties to characterize shape similarities through a shape descriptor has produced numerous contributions  [1–6]. Shape symmetry properties are also helpful to highlight shape structures  [7,8]. Symmetry can contribute also to the compression of shape models  [9].Here, the context is placed on mechanical components, as described through B-Rep CAD models. The corresponding shape models addressed are solids and their symmetry properties are useful to restructure their feature tree (see Fig. 1). Indeed, when a designer generates a solid, often its feature tree does not contain the mirror operations or other symmetry constraints, because a design process includes functional objectives and modifications that prevent the designer from generating a well structured feature tree of the final solid (see Fig. 1b). Therefore, analyzing the local as well as the global symmetry properties of a solid is useful to reorganize its feature tree so that successive modifications can take advantage of its effective symmetries and become more intuitive (see Fig. 1c). The object model thus obtained is often designated as a structured and/or compressed model. It has to be pointed out that the location of symmetry planes and the dimensions of the symmetric primitives obtained through the symmetry analysis must produce a compressed model that replicates the input model within the accuracy of the manufacturing process, at least. LetM,M′,Tandddesignate respectively the initial object, the compressed one, the geometric transformation expressing the symmetry and a distance measure. Then, the replication error ofMwithM′, homologically identical toM, andTcan be measured by the Hausdorff distance:ϵ=d(M,T(M′))=max(supp∈M(infp′∈M′‖p′−p‖),supp′∈M′(infp∈M‖p′−p‖)).Now, letδbe the CAD modeler tolerance expressing the maximal distance between boundaries of adjacent patches.δis mandatory to process shapes incorporating trimmed patches. Then,ϵ≤δis the condition of validity ofM′so thatMandM′can be regarded as identical in the CAD modeler. Consequently, conventional machine tools used to manufactureM′produce an object that cannot be distinguished from the object manufactured fromM. This means that the object boundary sampling process ofM, often part of symmetry analyses  [6], must be either dense enough so that the validity condition is satisfied withM′or global properties of surfaces boundingMmust be combined with the sampling process to reduce the density of the latter  [10].Analyzing the symmetries of a component is also useful at other steps than design. As an example, component symmetries can be taken into account to compute tool path trajectories of a machining process and structure these trajectories to optimize the tool displacements. Similarly, symmetry properties of components contribute to that of assemblies and help defining trajectories that optimize assembly processes. In topological optimization, the automatic generation of new designs takes advantage of symmetries defined on the design and non-design sub-domains in the initial CAD model  [11]. Finally, symmetries of components combined with the symmetry of boundary conditions form the basis of possible simplifications of the domain used in finite element models since a symmetric configuration forms the basis of a domain reduction expressing the symmetry of a physical phenomenon. The above configurations are common ones that are often appearing during a product development process. However, the symmetries engineers commonly refer to, may not be strict geometric properties (see Fig. 2) and show how the concept of symmetry can evolve and get designated as repetitions. Additionally, symmetries of interest are not those valid for the entire object but also some that are valid on a subset of the object boundary, i.e. partial ones  [8].The above configurations share a common requirement: the geometric differences betweenMandM′must preserve the validity condition stated above. Consequently, if symmetry properties are incorporated into tool path trajectories, they produce a machined component that is as accurate as the machined component obtained without using its symmetry properties. Assembly and finite element simulation processes share also the same requirements. The validity condition can be expressed as a need to obtain symmetry properties as accurate as the modeling kernel of a CAD system since the incorporation of symmetry properties in the feature tree or in the machining trajectories ofMmust produceM′that does not deviate fromMwith a distance greater than the accuracyδof this CAD modeling kernel.From a complementary point of view, to integrate symmetry analysis in design and manufacture processes, it is also necessary to perform this analysis in an interactive time. This is particularly true in the design context where all modeling operations must be performed interactively to let the engineer generate efficiently components. Consequently, restructuring a feature tree under symmetry constraints is an operator belonging also to the modeling process and hence, it must be interactive.It is the purpose of the proposed approach to meet both the accuracy and interactivity requirements. Section  2 analyzes prior work to put forward their key features, Section  3 states the principles and hypotheses of the approach, Section  4 describes the mandatory boundary decomposition transformations to obtain a representation intrinsic to the symmetry properties of the component. Then, Sections  5 and 6 detail the divide and conquer phases of the symmetry analysis process. Section  7 illustrates the results and performances currently obtained.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
