@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A roadmap for parametric CAD efficiency in the automotive industry

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We describe the particular constraints of design in the automotive industry.An efficient use of parametric CAD requires a clear strategy.Roadmap for CAD methodologies and KBE approach.It can be used by CAD managers in the automotive industry.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Parametric CAD efficiency,CAD training strategy,PLM,Collaboration,Knowledge integration,Automotive industry,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
3D CAD systems are used in product design for simultaneous engineering and to improve productivity. CAD tools can substantially enhance design performance. Although 3D CAD is a widely used and highly effective tool in mechanical design, mastery of CAD skills is complex and time-consuming. The concepts of parametric–associative models and systems are powerful tools whose efficiency is proportional to the complexity of their implementation. The availability of a framework for actions that can be taken to improve CAD efficiency can therefore be highly beneficial. Today, a clear and structured approach does not exist in this way for CAD methodology deployment. The novelty of this work is therefore to propose a general strategy for utilizing the advantages of parametric CAD in the automotive industry in the form of a roadmap. The main stages of the roadmap are illustrated by means of industrial use cases. The first results of his research are discussed and suggestions for future work are given.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The automotive market is characterized by intense competition between the manufacturers but also the main suppliers, co-makers andn-tier suppliers. This is associated with a long and complex design activity, which starts with identification of requirements and a preliminary design phase, and extends to the detailed design phase and digital mock-ups. In this design process, mainly routine-design oriented, each design phase requires reusing information from previous phases. One of the solutions to optimize the reuse of information is to use Computer Aided Design (CAD) systems based on an associative parametric concept. CAD systems are now integrated into the broad concept of Product Lifecycle Management (PLM) that can be defined as a strategy for the management of all information and processes linked to the product during its life cycle, from the definition of the product requirements up to the recycling, and the context of extended enterprise  [1,2].Today, parametric–associative CAD systems have to help companies to create more efficient virtual development processes. These systems enable the creation of parametric–associative CAD models, which are geometrical representations of products, where certain characteristics are controlled by non-geometric features called parameters. According to Shah  [3], the term parametric design in engineering is a process of designing with parametric models in virtual surroundings where geometric and parameter variations are natural.Normally, in parametric CAD, designers are able to create associative relationships either between components, parts or assemblies, or between features, in order to integrate design specifications. All these relationships are stored by CAD systems as geometrical or dimensional relationships or as intrinsic parameters and are made accessible for the user in case of subsequent modifications. The concepts of parametric–associative models and systems are powerful tools whose efficiency is proportional to the complexity of their implementation.Currently, an important challenge for companies concerning CAD systems is to define a real strategy that leads to better efficiency for the design of their products and takes into account the specific products of each company. Carried out within the framework of the French automotive competitiveness cluster “Véhicule du futur”  [4], the aim of our research is to find the best strategy to take full advantage of parametric–associative CAD in the product development process. The novelty of our research is therefore to provide a clear and structured approach in order to set up the best CAD strategy to adopt for the design organization, design activities and standards of a company.We will define a generic strategy for better effectiveness in parametric CAD in the automotive industry with a framework and its application based on a roadmap format. The proposed strategy is the result of two years of research following Design Research Methodology (DRM)  [5]. During the descriptive study phase (DRM 2nd phase), we undertook a series of studies as CAD and PLM consultants in different automotive companies over a period of more than two years.These studies included multiple industrial projects carried out over more than two years as CAD and PLM consultants. The most significant projects were global training of CAD users (worldwide), definition of training strategy, coaching of users, definition of product-oriented methodologies, creation of KBE applications and generic CAD models, and alignment of CAD methodologies with integration capability of the PLM system, etc. During these various projects, data, such as the results of questionnaires and analysis of case studies, was collected and designers and CAD managers were interviewed. We also participated in the drawing up of parametric design CAD strategies in collaboration with first tier suppliers of the automotive industry.The result of all these studies is formalized in a framework based on several phases, which integrates and highlights the role and impact of the CAD strategy on Product Lifecycle Management (PLM) systems, on parametric modeling methodologies and on knowledge management (KM). This framework can be used in CAD education at university level, but it also goes beyond post-graduate training in a CAD course. It allows rapid returns on investments and improvements in development time, provided the structure is sufficient in size.We will first of all explain why we use a roadmap for the application of our framework and then present an overview of the literature in the field of parametric CAD as well as the high potential for performance improvement that parametric CAD presents. For each phase, we will use industrial case-studies, suggest the departments to be integrated during decision-making and validating the technical aspects. Some assumptions regarding the training methods for designers in parametric CAD will be made. Finally, we will define the limits of our roadmap before drawing conclusions.A commonly used definition of a roadmap is that it corresponds to a plan that matches short-term and long-term goals with specific technology solutions to help meet those goals. Developing a roadmap has three major uses: it helps reach a consensus for a set of needs and the technologies required to satisfy those needs; it provides a mechanism to help forecast technology developments; and it provides a framework to help to plan and coordinate technology developments. More information can be found in Kostoff’s  [6] work and the five-step method for Information Systems (IS)  [7] deployed at VALEO—a Tier1 automotive company.We undertook a series of studies in several Tier-1 companies in the automotive industry on the use of parametric CAD in the product development process for the “Vehicle of the future”. This study included projects such as training CAD users, defining a training strategy, coaching users, defining product-oriented methodologies, the creation of KBE applications, etc. for ten Tier-1 companies. During these projects, the authors gathered miscellaneous data, which came mainly from interviews with designers and with CAD managers during the average four-day period in audit that the authors spent at each visited company. The audited companies were working on components such as engines, power trains, exhaust systems, interior and HVAC systems. The proposed roadmap corresponds to the first layer of parametric design CAD strategy elaborated in collaboration with a Tier-1 automotive supplier. The names of the companies are confidential.The results of the industrial interviews and studies highlight a lack of strategy and planning inside suppliers to the automotive industry. These companies have to work with several original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) which sometimes work with different CAD systems. Furthermore, the supplier development platform (i.e. CAD system and release version), as well as in the methodology to be applied, are defined by OEM requirements.After the first step of the study, where a general framework for CAD practices was recognized, we worked on the main goals and objectives that have to be reached to define our strategy.Using interviews, we settled on the following main aspect axes for an efficient CAD strategy:•To reduce design time in all design phases (conceptual, preliminary or detailed),To reuse existing CAD models and geometry,To accelerate the automation of routine design tasks based on knowledge-based engineering (KBE) applications,To enhance collaboration between designers,To improve the general quality of CAD models.Research oriented toward CAD collaboration approaches, such as those described by Fuh and Li  [8] and Li et al.  [9], explore web-based technology or 3D streaming technology in order to improve collaboration between designers. But this type of work does not specifically consider how to improve collaboration between stakeholders with existing CAD systems.Fuxin  [10] at Volvo Truck Corporation demonstrates, with an industrial application based on configuration management systems, how to create a framework to improve the reuse of geometry by providing relevant geometry-based product information. This research however only considers the reuse of geometry for the development of new configurations, not the global CAD strategy to be deployed for a better efficiency with CAD design processes.Other research on geometry retrieval and reuse have been proposed by Hong et al.  [11] and Bai et al.  [12]. The first one suggests an algorithm to compare the similarity of mechanical parts in order to reuse existing parts in the design process, whereas the second one suggests an automated process that extracts and stores subparts of 3D CAD models in a library based on design semantics. The limitation of this second approach is that the extraction of sub-parts is done in a B-Rep model and needs to re-create the feature in parametric format (interactive mode). In all cases, they do not consider modeling aspects or methods to support the reuse of geometry in an industrial environment.In KBE, Cooper and LaRocca  [13] extract what they consider to be the fundamental properties of a KBE application by observing developments designed for aircraft and the automotive industry. They also suggest a KBE toolkit based on a web-based environment, compatible with contemporary CAD system independence from CAD system proprietary formats. Bermell-Garcia and Fan  [14] explore the interoperability between PLM and Knowledge-Based Engineering (KBE) as a strategy for engineering KM. Prasad and Rogers  [15] discuss the system architecture of the Knowledge-driven Automation (KDA) program. Through strategic use of generative modeling, spreadsheet tables, part and assembly templates, system engineering concepts, and their proprietary “smart part concepts”, they engineer-to-configure a family of hydraulic actuators automatically using a commercial CAD software. In the same area, Gomes et al.  [16] offer an approach to automate the design of CAD models in which all the known expert rules are integrated by changing only functional requirements. Requirement specifications are determined through their PLM system. At the boundary of the KBE domain, we also consider Design for X (DFX) methods, which correspond to an integrated design approach that may help to generate and apply technical knowledge in order to control, improve, or even invent particular characteristics of a product (i.e. Design for Manufacturing–DFM–or Design for Assembly—DFA). All these studies on knowledge integration in CAD or PLM systems demonstrate the high potential of integrating knowledge and CAD tools. However, none of them contextualize the global strategy of CAD aligned with general design processes within the automotive industry.From a different viewpoint, Van der Meiden and Bronsvoort  [17] and more recently Krish  [18] consider some parametric design methods and techniques as well as new design solutions, called “generative design method”. However, such generative design methods are difficult to apply in the automotive industry, especially for suppliers, due to the high level of constraints and requirements that limit the design solution space.Another question found in a lot of research is the optimization of the simulation loop consisting of successive tasks, such as CAD model definition, conversion to a mesh model, and finite elements simulation followed by results analysis, a sequence which can be repeated several times during the development process. Thakur et al.  [19] explore techniques for automated CAD model simplification that play an important role in effectively utilizing physics-based simulation during the product realization process. Today the main difficulty is the lack of common tools and models that can bridge the gap between CAD model definition and the next steps of the simulation loop. Some authors, such as Lou et al.  [20], suggest answers to this problem by means of CAD-Less Finite Element analysis. The integration of Computer Aided Engineering (CAE) must be carried out in a parametric design roadmap.We have divided the research contributions of the authors into five classes (Table 1): product methodology, feature-based modeling, knowledge integration, design automation, collaborative methods. The choice of these classes is based on our own identification of axes that can improve the design process with CAD systems.None of the above research considers the global CAD strategy of a company. Their contribution does however highlight the importance of some tasks that need to be taken into account in such a CAD strategy. The aim of this section is therefore more to highlight needs than to discuss the methods themselves.Product methodology is mainly focused on the whole design process, providing an efficient transition of information and knowledge between design phases. Tay and Gu  [21] propose a function-based product model based on two areas, functional and physical, with function-form relations used to map them. This facilitates design decision-making through the whole conceptual design process. Aleixos et al.  [22] offer an integrated modeling with a top-down approach to enable a better reuse and faster transition of the product from conceptual design phase to the detail design phase. They also pinpoint the need for “a generic modeling guide (which) is necessary to fix good practices and reinforce cooperation”. Mun et al.  [23] develop a top-down approach, based on a skeleton model that incorporates the protection of intellectual property in the context of product design collaboration. Ma and Tong  [24] introduce the concept of associative feature and illustrate this with the design of cooling channels in the design of plastic injection molds. Salehi and McMahon  [25] complete all the previous studies and present the results of the descriptive study according to Blessing Design Research Methodology (DRM)  [5] in order to identify the challenges, problems and weaknesses involved in the use of CAD systems in the automotive design process. Their study demonstrates that engineers have major difficulties in identifying and structuring the parameters as well as associative relationships used in parametric–associative CAD on part and assembly levels, thus they propose an integrated approach for parametric–associative CAD design  [26].Concerning feature-based modeling, Riou and Mascle  [27] suggest assisting designers using feature modeling. The originality of this research is to associate the notion of lifecycle (PLM) on the features so that the CAD structure facilitates the accessibility of information for each stakeholder throughout the product lifecycle. Bergholz and Pierre  [28] experiment with different scenarios with the designers of German car manufacturers in order to determine the benefits and limits of advanced features in 3D-CAD templates in association with the design task complexity and the knowledge of the designer.Concerning knowledge integration and design automation, Danjou and Koehler  [29] observe the development of CAD systems and analyze contemporary techniques in parametric CAD such as feature technology, application programming interface (API) and knowledge-based design steps (Knowledge Based Engineering—KBE). They focused on SME because they identified a general lack of strategy on virtual product development processes in such companies. Lamarche and Rivest  [30] explore different customization methods for CAD tools in order to decrease the development time of design activities in the aerospace field. They conclude that for many activities (described in their study), the design through User-Defined Feature (UDF) is a better investment than automation. Danjou et al.  [31] complete the previous study and explore the integration of know-how in the design activity using features. Chu et al.  [32] propose full parameterized solutions to automate the design of products for tire mold production.Danesi et al.  [33] consider collaborative work as a lever to improve quality, delay and costs during product design in the framework of extended enterprise. According to them, a CAD model becomes a digital mock-up (DMU) at the center of communication and interaction between all parts of the project. But this approach does not consider the methods and priority to be defined for improving the use of CAD systems for product development.Hirz et al.  [34] make an inventory of advanced 3D-CAD design methods in education and research. They develop the concept of integrated 3D-CAD strategies made up of a parametric–associative method on part and assembly, CAD models parameters controlled by external sources (i.e. spreadsheet) and the use of macro for programming routines. They also highlight the value of creating structured 3D-CAD design methods based on predefined structures (start-up models), a subject also examined by Bergholz and Pierre  [28] from the user’s acceptance point of view. One of the conclusions of this study is that “Parametric–associative design methods only work with a high efficiency when they are well structured and planned”. They also underline that 3D-CAD design methods have to be carried out “within the boundaries of modern product lifecycle management (PLM) systems”.We can see here that the scientific studies related to parametric and associative design approaches have offered various methods and methodologies. They have also demonstrated the high potential of parametric–associative CAD tools and have highlighted some techniques allowing for semantic additions within the CAD model. However, none of these studies provides a clear vision on how to select and apply these methods, or how to identify priorities between these methods in order to be more efficient in the design process. Furthermore, the highly competitive market and its consequences on design processes and products, in addition to the current period of decreasing product development, underline the importance for a company to have a real strategy for an optimized deployment of CAD design methods aligned with product development processes which are integrated into the PLM approach  [29].From an industrial point of view, the application of the strategy should enable a company to increase its efficiency by creating more parameterized CAD models for the automation of the design of products, parts or sub-geometries. It should also aim at increasing the reuse of existing CAD models and feature geometry, integrating more knowledge into CAD models and improving the collaboration between designers. In other words, obtaining global efficiency in the use of associative parametric CAD systems in the context of a subsidiary company in the automotive industry.From a research point of view, this means defining a CAD strategy that supports design processes in order to decrease routine design time. We will go through the description of the various phases of the roadmap in the next section.The roadmap is a plan that matches short-term and long-term goals. It can be considered as a strategy to improve the design process by enhancing the efficiency of associative parametric CAD systems deployment and use during the development of products. This roadmap is specific to the automotive industry and can be used by companies to evaluate the effectiveness and the level of efficiency of their general CAD practices and methodology, in line with their design processes. It can also be used on a single product line to identify the next steps.The roadmap is composed of five key phases:•Standardization.Methodology.Generic modeling.Expert rules.Automation.Each phase has specific aims and objectives (Table 2). This can explain why some phases are more important than others, depending on the specificity of the company (product, process, design process).The model used to represent this roadmap is a pyramid. This has the advantage of coupling the vision of sequential and mandatory phases (from the bottom to the top level—an analogy can be made with a construction which needs foundations) and also to visualize the effort required for each step (Phase 0 requires more effort and time than Phase 1).The automation phase (Phase A in the Table 2) is interconnected with the other four phases (as shown in Fig. 1). This phase is not detailed in this paper as it is of little interest in our research area. A basic example of automation, often considered as a priority, is the creation of an application for the Title block using scripts that enable users to fill in the Title block of a drawing by retrieving information directly from the 3D model or from the PDM/PLM system. Even though this program corresponds to automation, it actually belongs to a part of the standardization phase.The phases of the roadmap are arranged in a sequential order with possible interactions and iterative feedback loops between phases. Interactions are possible in both directions (from phase 1 to phase 2 or from phase 2 to phase 1), for all the phases. For example, after the creation of a full parameterized product (also called “expert model”) or a full parameterized geometry (i.e. user-defined feature) corresponding to phase 3 of our roadmap, it is necessary to update the methodology (phase 2) to promote or extend the use of these expert models for the design of new products.In order to illustrate each phase of the roadmap, we used real industrial problems encountered during the validation phase of the proposed roadmap, corresponding to the last step (descriptive study II) of the Design Research Methodology.The context of the study is an international company in the automotive industry (Tier 1 supplier). This company uses CATIA V5 as a parametric–associative CAD system. The scope of the study was the assessment of CAD modeling practices for the design of automotive clutch master cylinders, with the aim of adapting (in terms of compatibility) these practices with the Product Lifecycle Management (PLM) system and processes (see Fig. 2).At the beginning of the project, CAD model files were stored and managed using local shared folders by projects (i.e. In Work, Released, Standard Parts, etc.). The aim was for all CAD model files from projects in development (detailed design phase) and projects already in series (design phase completed) to be managed by the PLM system.A standard infrastructure for CATIA V5 exists, which allows designers to work with the same software version and licenses. CAD model files are therefore compatible and can be shared between designers.Options and settings implemented in the CAD software are accessible to all designers (no administrative restriction). Some designers set as a default option the automatic creation of associative relationships between components (parts), whereas others restrict the creation of this type of associative link between CAD model files. Depending on designers and projects, the structure of CAD models regarding links is not compatible. It is very easy to see the negative effects of such a situation on collaboration between designers and on the capability to share CAD models on different products and projects.Our methodology uses a complex structure based on a skeleton modeling approach using 2 skeletons: a master skeleton and a slave skeleton. The function of the master skeleton is to centralize design information, such as the engineering connection between components at the product level; this is a top-down approach. The function of the slave skeleton is to update the assembly in case of changes to the dimensions of the components. This is called a “bottom-up” approach. The CAD structure of a product and the associative relationship between files are illustrated in Fig. 3. The first part (PRT Part 1) is positioned inside the product (PRD Product) on the master skeleton (SKL Skeleton Master) using an assembly constraint (see 1 on the figure). A feature of Part 1, such as an axis of a hole, is copied with the link inside the slave skeleton (SKL Skeleton Slave) (see 2 on the figure). With this operation, an associative relationship exists between both CAD models. The copied geometry is then used to position a second Part (PRT Part 2) (see 3 on Fig. 3).The methodology used is a combination of two distinct approaches with separate aims: a top-down approach (product-oriented), and a bottom-up approach (individual-part-oriented). Both approaches are described in VDI2209  [35].The main advantages of the current methodology are the ability to propagate a component modification in all products where the component is used, while centralizing main product information in a skeleton. Although the aim here is not to discuss the relevance of the previous CAD approach, but simply to illustrate one step of our roadmap, the previous CAD structure is considered by some designers as the optimized way to manage standard components while using the skeleton approach with a file-base CAD data management principle. This case study reflects a typical situation where the lack of a Product Data Management (PDM) system drives CAD designers to find substitute solutions for the management of CAD data.Starting from the assumption that the management of standard components inside several products must be carried out by a PDM/PLM system and not by CAD techniques, the CAD structure and methodology can be simplified and focused on design processes and on the performance of the modeling activity.The proposed case study illustrates the need for a company to define a general framework for the use of a CAD system which integrates general design processes and which is compatible with the design of all the company’s products. It corresponds to the definition of standards that, amongst other things, determine how CAD data should be managed according to business needs (technical requirements related to design processes). This step should come prior to any CAD methodology specific to the design of a product (phase 2 of the roadmap).Based on our studies, including interviews and real case analysis, the authors consider the following main tasks as mandatory steps within the first phase of the roadmap: definition of a common infrastructure (IT), definition of CAD standards, and definition of recommendations on modeling practices (often called “CAD Rules”) as described in Fig. 4.The first step for a company to find a CAD solution is to ensure that all users in the company have access to the same functions and possibilities in the CAD software. This can be achieved by defining a standard CAD infrastructure, CAD rules or recommendations, and CAD standards.Interviews with designers and the analysis of real use cases have demonstrated that the lack of standards in CAD structure reduces designers’ efficiency at the beginning of a new project (first CAD tasks achieved for new project) in the preliminary and detailed design phase. This loss of efficiency is still significant in design teams with a high turnover.The PLM approach corresponds to a common framework between the design processes and CAD practices. As a consequence, low-capacity CAD integration in a PLM system limits the use of advanced CAD practices. In this case it implies low design efficiency.The purpose here is to consider constraints and needs in the product development process but not the physical characteristics of the product. Product characteristics are taken into account in the next step of the roadmap.During the standardization phase, the role of designers is very limited because a CAD designer is not necessarily familiar with the entire design process and its associated constraints, and does not always have a real vision of the PLM strategy.For the proposed standardization phase, we identified 3 main topics: the CAD infrastructure, CAD standards and CAD Rules.CAD infrastructure. In almost all companies investigated, the IT department or the CAD support department are in charge of the definition of the CAD infrastructure.CAD standards. The aim of CAD standards is to ensure that CAD files can be managed inside the PLM and that outputs of the CAD design activity comply with company standards and quality rules.CAD rules. The aim of CAD rules is to define guidelines and basic CAD methodology for designers about how to design products. During this standardization phase, it is highly recommended for a company to carry out some CAD Data Quality Rules and implement them in commercial tools dedicated to quality checks such asQ-Checker   [36] or I-CHECK IT   [37]. The CAD checking tool has to be customized in order to integrate the company’s standards and rules.As for phase 1 of the roadmap, we propose a real industrial use case as an illustration of one possible situation related to phase 2 of our roadmap, in order to explain it in more detail.This use case comes from another international automotive industry company (1st Tier). This company uses CATIA V5 as a CAD system and the aim of the study is to reduce the time taken to design radiators and to improve collaboration between designers in anorganization distributed worldwide (R&D centers in NA, SA, EU, Asia).At this stage, the company already has some guidelines and standards that can be likened to CAD standards and rules as proposed in the first phase of the roadmap. These standards are applicable for the design of all the company’s products and correspond to a general framework for the management of CAD data inside the PLM system. As shown in detail in the next sections, the advanced methodology for associative parametric CAD are necessarily product-oriented, but two separate aspects can be considered: methodology for assembly and methodology for parts (modeling methodology).In the present case study, the different radiator technologies and manufacturing possibilities (mechanical or brazed) to be used for the development of a new radiator are standardized by internal norms (including material, dimensions, authorized configuration, etc.). These norms have been implemented in CAD by creating full parameterized assembly structures for radiators where the main functional parameters are accessible to designers in order to find a configuration that matches the customer requirements. The assembly process is fully automated and standardized for designers (illustrated in the phase 3 of the roadmap).For the design process of a product such as a radiator, the most complex task during the detailed design phase is the interaction between the radiator and the other components of the vehicle, i.e. the front end structure, the location of the feeding pipes, condenser, or shroud structure for the fan, which must be consistent with the input data for the designer (often called “customer packaging” which is a part of the OEM requirements). This task corresponds to the adaption of the radiator in the vehicle while conforming with customer requirements in terms of performance. The components inside a radiator that achieve this function are the tank parts (made from plastic). The design of a tank is a time-consuming task, because it integrates all connections of the product with the customer packaging (as illustrated in Fig. 5). Several optimization loops using CFD and CAE tools are necessary before obtaining the final inner shape of the tank. The same applies to the charge air cooler with the air tank.The solution consists of a design guideline for plastic tanks associated with templates, including the generic wireframe elements (also called “reference elements”) used to manage the relationship between the solid features, themselves grouped into distinct functional parts (i.e. shape, nozzle, clip, etc.). The proposed methodology, based on a functional decomposition of the tank component, enables designers to modify individually each function of the tank without any implicit and non-managed propagation with other functions. The main advantage of the proposed methodology is that all functional geometries (here created as solids) can be retrieved from the model and reused in another model by saving the construction data construction tree structure. Time measurement on two different tank development projects handled with the proposed methodological approach shows a reduction of around 20% in the development time in the detailed design phase of a radiator. Interviews with designers about the methodology show that additional time reductions can be expected because new tank models can be used as a library of functional geometry (see Fig. 6).We followed the Pahl and Beitz  [38] definition regarding the concept of methodology. This is the type of concept which is in line with our idea of an advanced and product-oriented methodology. Applied to associative parametric CAD design, the term methodology corresponds to a logical sequence of actions for a designer in the CAD system, or a means of supporting the designer during the design process.For the first step of the roadmap we provided an overview of activities and techniques that can be applied during the second step: the advanced methodology phase.Defining a general CAD framework for the design of all components based on best modeling practices (what we call “CAD standards” and “CAD rules” in phase 1 of the roadmap) is complex as it requires a fine balance between data management processes and efficiency on CAD activities. However, the CAD skills set for this task are not very high and can be carried out by almost all CAD expert users.Product-oriented methodology is a more complex task as it requires close interaction with the design process as well as an understanding of all the tasks and input data that the designer has to cope with during the development of a product (see Fig. 7).The complexity of the design task in CAD is not so much related to the complexity of the product as to the design or product development process itself. The change of requirements during the development phase (conceptual, preliminary or detailed design phase) is one the most difficult problems that subsidiary companies in the automotive industry have to deal with. It requires them to define a precise associative CAD modeling strategy and methodologies. Research from Aleixos et al.  [22] gives some insights in this respect.The most common performance goals proposed by CAD managers in engineering departments during our study were:(1) to improve design changes in CAD models, to facilitate collaboration between designers, to enhance geometry, to reuse standards and to create a connection between CAD and downstream applications, and to improve performance failures due to shortcomings in information systems by working on the physical characteristics of CAD models (cf. reduce update time for complex parts or reduce model size for large assemblies).In addition to generic modeling procedures or methodology–which are mainly centered on the designer’s interests (designer-centric point of view)–the product-oriented methodology can be further improved by extending the level of requirements applied on CAD models to the whole product development process, such as integrating downstream processes like CAE simulations (design process-centric point of view) or for manufacturing.We propose another example of the application of the phase 2 on an Exhaust Gas Recirculation (EGR) product. The CAD model of the EGR casting (see Fig. 8) has to integrate requirements such as the internal volume for air flow optimization (CFD analysis) and the machined operations for manufacturing process (CAM). This casting body and its 3 sub-models could be designed as a single Part CAD model or as an Assembly, depending on PLM processes and CAD integration capability (cf. phase 1 of the roadmap).The same EGR product, serves two main functions–as an EGR valve and a by-pass function–developed by separate design teams, the casting body is designed by 2 designers in parallel with the first step of a detailed design phase.Here, the EGR product CAD methodology is highly complex and consequently requires the use of templates (see skeleton in Fig. 9) to start new projects, which will make it possible to decrease the complex standard models. Recent studies by Bergholz and Pierre  [28] on a German car manufacturer, confirm that “standardization is one possible way to reduce the complexity of the design process by providing uniform modeling methods and uniform structure start models or templates”.In this section, we review the existing research literature on methods for defining product-oriented CAD methodology. The aim is to find a standard method for the definition of product-oriented CAD methodology.Bracewell et al.  [39] propose a practical methodology for Computer-aided engineering (CaeD) tool research, a methodology that has many similarities with the process of CAD creation, especially because the former incorporates current software development and social science techniques for the successful development of CaeD methods. This contribution is not fully adapted to our purpose since it mainly deals with Computer-aided Engineering Design and is not directly targeted towards the definition of methods for CAD. It nevertheless corresponds to some future ideas for this roadmap as this practical methodology could be used and transposed for the development of advanced CAD methodology, even though it has not yet been formalized and tested.According to VDI 2209  [35], during the design process with parametric CAD systems, a certain “thinking process” is necessary, which includes a modeling approach for creating parametric models in a rigorous way. Preliminary reflection is indispensable to prepare and understand the further steps of the modeling process, a task which is analogous to the specification phase in product development. Furthermore, the authors suggest integrating all modeling procedures and tools into the design process. These methods however are too generic (i.e. top-down approach) without any clear indication as to how to apply them to the design process. It is also not central from a data management point of view (PLM system). We suggest placing it as the main factor of phase 1 of the roadmap.Aleixos et al.  [22] propose an integrated model with a top-down approach, in the context of subsidiary industries. This enables them to add high semantic/pragmatic quality to CAD models (also called design intent). They propose a generic methodology as a frame to help subsidiary industries in the creation of such modeling guides. Although this is based on a skeleton methodology, we do not accept that it is global enough for our objectives.Bluntzer et al. propose a methodology to define the CAD model geometry according to the modifications and the customer needs [40]   Error! Reference source not found. The particularity of their work is to implement functional parameters and rules in a PLM system so that they can be reused directly for another project. Although they do not handle the problem of the creation of methodology in itself, they also demonstrate how the reuse rate of sub-geometry inside CAD models can be increased with an automatic extraction of sub-geometry based on a functional subdivision of the solid (also called “functional geometry”), coupled with a case-based reasoning (CBR) algorithm  [41,40].Salehi and McMahon  [26] definitely offer the most successful method for identifying the parameters and the associative structure for associative parametric CAD systems. Whereby parameters in different organizational categories, such as CAD, CAE and CAM engineering, can be used. It also suggests how to clarify the identification and determination of associative relationships between the geometrical entities and parameters. Both steps of this method are based on the logic and structure of the Design Structure Matrix (DSM) approach  [42]. This approach is fully applicable to our purpose for all automotive industry product lines. Although it does not take into account modeling practices of parts, it is particularly useful for preparing and structuring the design model, but is of little interest for the process of product-oriented CAD methodology creation as a whole.The literature review gives some insights into solving our problem but does not deliver a complete answer to our question. We therefore have to deal with another question: what are the prerequisites for advanced CAD methodology?The following section offers a first answer to this question.CAD experts and designers, and product and process experts are involved in this second phase of standardization. The more complex the product development process, the greater the need for a product-oriented methodology. The number of components and the complexity of their topology are therefore two major vectors that enhance the product development process.From an organizational point of view, large design teams, multi-site development and the rate of external resources (turnover) on a project increase the need for a company to formalize and document its CAD methodology in order to be efficient.Products with a high level of maturity and standardization (routine design, i.e. product and process norms are established and formalized)—are concerned by this second phase.However, in the case of routine design the solution would be more semi-automated, using full parameterized CAD models or expert models with embedded explicit knowledge. This step corresponds to the third phase of the roadmap.According to Gardan  [43], “in the industrial world, there are two large types of applications to manage intrinsic knowledge. The first application is to set up an organization memory where a capitalization of knowledge is operated before being computerized (in PLM or KM software). The second application consists in being able to use this knowledge in an automatic way for the design, by inserting experts’ knowledge as soon as possible in numerical model design. This second application is also known as KBE domain”. For phases 3 and 4 of our roadmap, we consider only this second type of knowledge application.We will first illustrate these phases of our roadmap using the same case study as for phase 2: the design of an automotive exchanger product such a radiator.The aim of this case study is to reduce the time for the design of a radiator by providing the designers with objects embedding knowledge in line with the product-oriented methodology drawn up during the application of the second phase of the roadmap. Here, we illustrate the use of knowledge objects for the design of the assembly structure and, in a second step, the use of other knowledge objects for design of the radiator tank.Regarding the design of the assembly structure, a full parameterized assembly structure, including solid geometry for all components, is provided for the user (also called the expert model) that allows for the design of new variants of the product by changing some functional parameters. The assembly structure also contains checking rules that help the designer to know if the product obtained, based on various configurations of parameters, complies with the company’s standards. In addition to all the functional parameters, the company also integrates specific parameterization to protect its IP (Intellectual Property) when exchanging their CAD models with OEMs during the development phase. The geometry of some parts defined as “sensitive” to manufacturing process know-how, such as the geometry of the side plates, are associated to parameters and rules that give the possibility of changing the geometry from a high to a low level of detail (see Fig. 10).Here, the aim is not to develop technically the parameterization process or the rules embedded in the CAD models, but only to illustrate the third phase of the roadmap that consists in including knowledge in CAD models based on the capability of parametric CAD systems.As for the design of tank parts, the result of the product-oriented methodology (result of phase 2 of the roadmap) is a functional decomposition of the tank component enabling the designer to modify individually each function of the tank without any implicit and non-managed propagation with other functions. In order to help designers be more efficient by reusing tank functional geometry, and the company to deploy standards (based on the best technical solutions), specific CAD objects embedding knowledge for tank functional areas have been created. Here the solution is the creation of User Defined Features (UDF) like the design of a nozzle function (see Fig. 11).As a brief illustration of phase 4 of the roadmap: expert rules validation, parametric–associative CAD systems and the compliance of the product or parts with company rules can be checked. Fig. 12shows a radiator tank clip created as an UDF (same approach as for the nozzle) that includes the clip geometry to be added to the tank shape, and also a secondary definition, which is the external shape of the clip as well as a reserved space in which there should be no other geometry. It is easy with automation to check the validity of the clip function in the tank using geometric comparison and to check the proximity of the various inserted functions using UDFs.Automotive industry designs must sometimes comply with very strict regulations. The productivity gained by implementing phase 3 of our roadmap can therefore be significant. The next section introduces such an example.The context of this second case study is also an international company in the automotive industry (Rank-1). The aim is to reduce the time for the mandatory checking of an automotive seat.In the automotive industry, security elements have to comply with specific norms and regulations. The European regulation defines an ISOFIX top tether anchorage zone (European Regulations related to Crash Testing—ECE 14) in which the anchorage point must be included. If the anchorage point is outside this zone, the seat is rejected by the regulation commission. The main difficulty for designers is that the top tether anchorage zone is complex to define because several construction methods have to be computed depending on seat geometry, dimensions and implantation. Finally, the most restrictive construction methods must be chosen. This operation is time-consuming and can produce errors.The ISOFIX top tether anchorage zone corresponds to the green volume in the picture below (Fig. 13). The section of the seat is shown in blue (see also Fig. 14).The proposed solution for the previous issue is a CATIA V5 Document Template (Generic adaptive Part based on geometrical inputs) which designs the anchorage zone automatically and also computes the length of the strap according to the seat dimensions and implementation location. Here, the template is an intelligent CAD object that adapts the dimensions and construction methods of the anchorage zone to the seat (see Fig. 14). The mechanism of the template is basic and always the same for generic adaptive templates: geometrical inputs selected during the implementation of the template replace existing geometrical elements in the construction history of the CAD model. The most complex task is to define the right sequence of features that enable the robustness of the construction, irrespective of the configuration of geometrical input. Owing to knowledge objects that make it possible to create conditional geometry, it becomes easy to implement generic or adaptive templates.For the top tether case study, the main benefit of the proposed solution is to increase quality, because there are no more errors while checking the rules, while the second is the improvement of productivity during checking zone creation: it only takes one minute instead of more than one hour without the template. The user does not need to know the regulations, as the template gives clear and easy indications about conformity to the regulations.Before presenting the third and fourth phases of the roadmap in detail, the question of the form and representation of knowledge in CAD models is discussed in the next section.The implementation or reuse of explicit knowledge presented in CAD models can be observed from several points of view. According to questionnaires and interviews with designers, knowledge inside CAD models can have different forms such as:•a simple profile (sketch)—the construction method can be complex and is the result of sound know-howa sequence of feature (geometry)—the construction tree provides information about the intention of the designas parameters and rules between parameters—knowledge formalized using engineering and mathematical languageas full parameterized products (Expert models) or parameterized geometry (i.e. User Defined Features).In the third phase of the roadmap, we consider only the explicit implementation of knowledge inside CAD models using relations, rules, checks, scripts and other advanced objects based on mathematical and engineering language, including specific behavior to a geometry, constraints, parameters, or sequence of features to be defined. Even if we agree with the different forms of knowledge representation given by the designers during our interviews, the last phases of our parametric design strategy focus mostly on knowledge implementation with dedicated knowledge objects and features. An appropriate definition of what is meant by knowledge-based design is proposed by Vajna  [44]: “a concept for the computer-aided provision and application of different representations of knowledge along the product development process”.In the following section we detail the main ingredients available in contemporary CAD systems to implement knowledge.Many studies suggest the automation of design tasks based on knowledge with intelligent models (i.e. smart parts concept)  [15]   [32] or KBE applications  [13,29,30]. Our objective is not to offer a synthesis or classification of these studies, but rather to replace knowledge-based design and knowledge-based engineering (KBE) approaches in a global strategy by optimized design practices with CAD systems associated to the product development process. As shown (Fig. 15), only basic technical solutions constituting the foundation of all KBE applications are indicated. Currently in commercial CAD systems, knowledge dedicated functions and objects require the use of specific modules or workbenches such as Knowledge Ware in CATIA V5 or Knowledge Fusion in NX. In a previous study, we proposed a decisional model for the implementation of knowledge using either knowledge objects (i.e. rules, checks associated with geometry) or a script-based Application Programming Interface (API)  [45].The role of the CAD expert is to decide, in agreement with product experts and designers, which solution between advanced methodology (roadmap phase 2) or knowledge-based solutions (phase 3) best match the design performance goal. The main input for this decision is the presence of formalized knowledge for the product development, which involves high-level maturity on the product and process, as well as a real strategy on product knowledge management inside the company.The last phase of the roadmap (phase 4 on Fig. 16), called expert rules validation, corresponds to the assessment of expert and process rules in the numerical model. For each product, the aim of phase 2 and phase 3 of the roadmap is to use a precise framework to guide designers during all phases of the product development process. This framework has to standardize product design, structure information, and implement knowledge during design, so that it is possible to monitor compliance with business rules and processes directly in the digital model. A few cases encountered in the industry operate in the following way: the design is done using templates incorporating predefined structures and knowledge-based parameterization (e.g. expert models) to which other knowledge-based components can be added, depending on the requirements. In this way, the complete numerical model is composed of “predefined design blocks” that therefore allow design rules (product, process) to be checked. A first step in the direction of phase 4 is to ensure the application of CAD methodologies and the use of tools and models developed at phase 3. A good way of doing this in industry is to develop a real tracking system with numerical models. The aim is twofold: (i) ensure the deployment of CAD methods and tools, and (ii) identify which methods and tools are not adapted to the needs of designers, in order to improve them.If a company really wants to develop a knowledge-based design approach with CAD, it has to adapt its organization in order to create the appropriate environment to identify and prioritize work that can be carried out by knowledge-based template or automation in CAD. Actually, the main obstacle to the deployment of KBE solutions is related to the organization and the proximity between the R&D department and CAD support. Ideally, product experts should propose topics that could be covered by a generic or knowledge-based model. This situation requires that product and process experts on CAD capability are aware of knowledge exploitation as well as common goals, and use this to create a clear business strategy.A lot of research deals with knowledge acquisition, the first step to an exploitation of this knowledge in systems such as CAD, or expert systems. A review of the main methods for knowledge acquisition like CommonKADS, MOKA (Methodology for Knowledge Based Engineering Application), or DEKLAR (Design Knowledge Acquisition and Redesign Environment), is suggested by Preston et al.  [46]. An application of the MOKA methodology for the creation of generative model using CATIA V5 is described by Skarka  [47].For the moment, very few subsidiary companies investigated during our study have defined mature processes on how to manage knowledge objects such as templates, or User Defined Features (UDF) in their PLM systems. Our findings show that these knowledge objects are managed almost independently from PLM systems as the level of granularity inside the PLM system is too low and a minimum of granularity is essential. If they are part of PLM, they follow the same process and mechanism as for parts, which is inappropriate for an efficient search and re-use.Nevertheless, the question of knowledge management inside PLM systems is at the center of many research studies  [14,48,41,42].Apart from techniques and methods, the human aspect must also be taken into account in a KBE approach associated with CAD. This point is highlighted by Vajna  [44]. A study on psychological user acceptance for the use of knowledge-based templates made at Daimler Chrysler car manufacturer  [28], confirms that “only a comprehensive approach to the development process, template methodology and human behavior can lead this new technology to a reliable success”.Even if the deployment of the parametric design roadmap can be promising, some limits to our research on parametric–associative CAD exist.A significant limit is that the scope of the roadmap is limited to subsidiary companies in the automotive industry. The context of the automotive industry is quite special. These companies correspond to structured design activities and processes and are dedicated to a very large series of products. Automotive design is also characterized by a high rate of routine design (around 80% of design time). Moreover, development processes inside automotive supplier companies are driven by OEM requirements, which imply that the requirements could change frequently.It is therefore of primary importance to have a significant number of CAD designers in the Engineering and Design Department to ensure significant reductions in design time to compensate the financial outlay needed for the formalization of methodology, parametric models and training. The total investment in building the methodology is about 30 days of consultancy in order to draw up the specification and training path of the roadmap for a department. An average training period of 10 days per CAD designer is then needed to derive full advantage of the methodology. The financial effort for the company is therefore quite substantial for an SME for example. Nevertheless, considering that it can lead to a gain in productivity of 20%, the return on investment only takes a few years for a small department of 20 designers. The aim of our approach, focusing on CAD process improvement, has to be contextualized in larger studies as regards process improvement in the design process. In this area, the results of Wasmer et al.  [49] on engineering change management process improvement, demonstrate a design delivery lead time reduction of 20%–40%. By coupling optimized process for engineering change management with optimized CAD practices, the benefits may be even higher.In the specific context of the automotive industry, this roadmap is therefore completely appropriate for a company which wants to delocalize its low value-added products/designs to low-cost countries and focus on innovation and high value-added design tasks in developed countries.Besides, the automotive market is characterized by stiff competition that forces these companies to be highly efficient in the preliminary design phase if they want to win the market after a Request For Quotation (RFQ) design phase. The proposed models are therefore not applicable directly to other fields such as the machining industry, aeronautics, the steel industry, energy, and consumer goods, as the constraints and context differ from ours. Additionally, the roadmap does not cover all challenges handled by engineering departments, such as CAD data exchange (use of different CAD system), CAD data management, etc.Another problem in the implementation of the proposed roadmap is the strategic issue of knowledge integration into CAD systems. The main obstacle to this development is therefore the concern that companies have regarding the protection of their intellectual property (IP) rights. Even though some research suggests solutions for IP protection in product modeling  [23], it does not integrate the use of CAD object-embedding knowledge. Currently, in the automobile industry, most data is exchanged between OEMs and suppliers without the construction tree (dumb and non-parametric solid or shell), which is a positive point that can support the deployment of object-based CAD knowledge.Moreover, the absence of a neutral format for knowledge capitalization and exploitation in modern CAD systems is also an obstacle to development of the third phase of the roadmap; in case of strategy change for the choice of the CAD solution, models embedding knowledge cannot be reused. That is why some companies prefer to keep the knowledge outside CAD systems, such as in expert systems or PLM systems. This brings us to another impediment: current PLM systems and their inability to provide data models in standard for the management of generic and knowledge-based CAD objects.The last barriers to the implementation of the third proposition of our roadmap may be the lack of understanding that CAD managers and product experts have concerning the possibilities offered by CAD systems. An observation shared by Salehi and McMahon after many interviews in  [26] emphasize this assumption: “Nevertheless, according to CAD managers in the automotive industry, possibilities offered by current parametric–associative CAD systems are still fuzzy and obvious, whereas the accentuation of concurrent engineering practices increase the requirements on the 3D model and the complexity of CAD models and design tasks”.This lack of knowledge could be offset by new kinds of CAD training, today mainly oriented towards the learning of functions, proposing a better use of CAD tools in line with the product development process.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
