@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A cellular Potts model analyzing differentiated cell behavior during in vivo vascularization of a hypoxic tissue

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An in vivo angiogenic process is modeled by a suitable version of the Cellular Potts Model.Vascular cells undergo phenotypic differentiations (i.e., from quiescent to stalk or tip).A fundamental mechanism is the chemotactic movement of tip cells.Stalk cells are characterized by a directionally preferential mitosis.The size of the hypoxic tissue only affects the duration of the process.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multiscale model,Angiogenesis,Capillary network,Delta-notch signaling,Oxygenation of hypoxic tissues,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Angiogenesis, the formation of new blood vessel networks from existing capillary or post-capillary venules, is an intrinsically multiscale process occurring in several physio-pathological conditions. In particular, hypoxic tissue cells activate downstream cascades culminating in the secretion of a wide range of angiogenic factors, including VEGF isoforms. Such diffusive chemicals activate the endothelial cells (ECs) forming the external walls of the nearby vessels that chemotactically migrate toward the hypoxic areas of the tissue as multicellular sprouts. A functional network eventually emerges by further branching and anastomosis processes. We here propose a CPM-based approach reproducing selected features of the angiogenic progression necessary for the reoxygenation of a hypoxic tissue. Our model is able to span the different scale involved in the angiogenic progression as it incorporates reaction–diffusion equations for the description of the evolution of microenvironmental variables in a discrete mesoscopic cellular Potts model (CPM) that reproduces the dynamics of the vascular cells. A key feature of this work is the explicit phenotypic differentiation of the ECs themselves, distinguished in quiescent, stalk and tip. The simulation results allow identifying a set of key mechanisms underlying tissue vascularization. Further, we provide evidence that the nascent pattern is characterized by precise topological properties. Finally, we link abnormal sprouting angiogenesis with alteration in selected cell behavior.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Blood vessel formation and development involves two different mechanisms: vasculogenesis and angiogenesis (for comprehensive reviews, see [6,9,10]). Vasculogenesis consists of the de novo formation of a primitive vascular network that emerges from migration, aggregation and organization of typically dispersed populations of endothelial cells (ECs). Angiogenesis refers instead to the formation of new vessels from an existing capillary or post-capillary venule. Although angiogenesis intervenes at the embryonic stage to remodel the initial capillary network into a mature and functional vascular bed (composed of arteries, capillaries, and veins), its main role is played during adult life, when it is involved in many physiological processes, as the vascularization of hypoxic tissues, of ovary and uterus during the female cycle, of mammary gland during lactation, and of granulation tissue during wound healing. However, when the equilibrium of its underlying control mechanisms is disrupted, angiogenesis becomes pathological, as in the case of chronic inflammatory diseases, vasculopathies, degenerative disorders, and tissue injury occurring in ischemia. Finally, angiogenic progression is a pivotal transition phase in the development of cancer: in fact, by providing nutrition and oxygen, it allows malignant cells to grow and remain viable, and, eventually, to spread metastases through invasion of the circulatory system [9,10].Entering in more details, angiogenesis is a multiscale program which involves mechanisms at both the subcellular and the cellular level. The overall process starts when tissue cells, deprived of oxygen and/or nutrients, accumulate in the nucleus increasing amounts of hypoxic growth factor (HIF-1). By selected binding to DNA, HIF-1 is able to regulate the expression levels of numerous genes, which control the production of a wide range of angiogenic growth factors [13,29], including vascular endothelial growth factors (VEGFs), transforming growth factor β (TGF-β), basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF). Such diffusive chemicals in turn stimulate the endothelial cells forming the external walls of preexisting blood vessels, which loosen their adhesive connections, thereby reducing the vascular tonus and increasing both the permeability the interstitial pressure. The activated ECs are then able to migrate chemotactically towards the hypoxic areas of tissues (i.e., those releasing angiogenic factors) as multicellular strands. Collective EC movement is facilitated by the production of proteolytic enzymes (serine-proteins, iron-proteins, matrix metalloproteinases) which degrade the basal lamina and the extracellular matrix surrounding the growing branches. An optimal extension of new vascular sprouts is allowed by a phenotypic differentiation of the component ECs, which undergo the so-called tip cell selection and lateral inhibition, which is mediated by VEGF-induced delta-notch signaling pathways. This process occurs in the following stages: (i) activation of VEGFR-2 receptors in a tip individual leads to up-regulation of ligand Dll4 [36]; (ii) Dll4, in turn, is able to activate Notch1 receptors in the neighboring cells, whose VEGFR-2 expression is consequently down-regulated. The Notch1-overexpressing individuals are set to assume a stalk fate [51,72]. The notch–Dll4 lateral inhibition generates therefore an alternating pattern of cell phenotype, a salt and pepper pattern [8], where tip cells are separated by one or two stalk cells. During angiogenic progression, tip individuals lead the way through the extracellular space (also by producing matrix degrading enzymes) while stalk cells, forming the rear of the multicellular strands, sustain branch elongation by repeated divisions along the axis perpendicular to the direction of sprout extension. During growth, vascular sprouts undergo branching or they encounter and merge to form loops, a process called anastomosis. From these branches and loops more sprouts form. Eventually, the whole process repeats several times, resulting in the formation of a capillary-like network. In a subsequent maturation stage, the new born vessels are remodeled into a more elaborate and hierarchically spaced vascular tree by pruning events resulting in the loss of some physiologically useless capillaries. The last phase of the angiogenic programme involves the formation and size-adaptation of the capillary lumen, the formation of new perivascular ECM and the arrival of pericytes and sometimes of flat muscle cells.Experimental studies performed on in vivo systems have revealed the role of many different factors driving the formation of vascular networks via sprouting angiogenesis in physiological situations. However innumerable other processes, acting at different spatiotemporal scales, remain far from being completely understood. The complexity of the problem makes in fact it difficult and expensive to study using solely laboratory-based biological methods: indeed, the support and insight gained by using in silico approaches is vital. For the sake of completeness, we have to admit that although angiogenesis occurs in a wide range of physio-pathological circumstances and situations, the majority of the theoretical literature focuses on the tumor-induced angiogenesis, one of the most dangerous aspects, as reviewed in [58]. However, in this work, we propose a multilevel mathematical model reproducing an in vivo revascularization and reoxygenation of a hypoxic tissue. The endothelial cell population is described at the mesoscopic level with a discrete cellular Potts model (CPM), a lattice-based Monte Carlo technique which follows an energy minimization philosophy and preserves the identity and the behaviors of single individuals [21–24,55,61]. In particular, cell exploratory movements are implemented by stochastic acceptances of domain configuration updates, which depend on sets of cell physical and behavioral rules. Selected reaction–diffusion (RD) equations instead describe the evolution of molecular variables, i.e., angiogenic growth factors and oxygen. These two components are integrated and interfaced together, constituting a hybrid and multiscale simulation environment characterized by a constant flux of information from the different levels, as the kinetics of the microscopic variables strongly influence cell dynamics. Our model appears a possibly new and biologically interesting representative in the class of models of blood vessel development: we here in fact focus on the role played by the dynamical and self-emerging differentiation of phenotypes of both vascular cells (i.e., quiescent, tip, stalk) and of tissue cells (oxygenated, hypoxic). As we will see in the following, the model results will reproduce with good accuracy the emerging of a functional capillary network, able to provide the reoxygenation of the host tissue. Then, through different sets of numerical realizations, we will dissect selected component mechanisms of the angiogenic progression, in order to link altered newly formed vascular structures with abnormal cell behavior.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we clarify the assumptions on which our approach is based and present the model components. The simulation results are then shown in Section 3. Finally, a discussion on possible model improvements as well as a comparison with the existing theoretical literature on these topics is proposed in Section 4.Model assumptions: The major hypothesis of the model, which account both intracellular biochemical cascades and cell-level behavior, include: (1) we start with a tissue characterized by a preexisting, but insufficient, vasculature. In particular, we neglect the distinction between veins and arteries; (2) oxygen-depleted areas of a tissue become hypoxic by simple thresholding depending on the local partial pressure of oxygen; (3) hypoxic tissue starts to secrete a single long-diffusion-length isoform of VEGF-A, like VEGF-A120,121. The molecular HIF-1-dependent cascades resulting in VEGF-A production are not explicitly included in the model; (4) VEGF-A activity induces a dose-dependent activation of the ECs forming the external walls of the preexisting vessels; (5) we include tip cell selection and stalk cell lateral inhibition without explicitly modeling the delta-notch signaling pathways; (6) the tip cells respond to VEGF-A by polarizing and chemotactically migrating, while the stalk individuals respond by proliferating [13]; (7) the tip/stalk cell fate is reversible, in the sense that a tip cell can assume a stalk state after anastomosis and a stalk cell can acquire a tip fate if it is not surrounded by tip individuals. In this last case, we do not consider recovery delays, which are due to the time needed by stalk cell gene expression to return in a normal non-inhibited state; (8) both type of activated vascular endothelial cells secrete and chemotax towards a short-diffusion-length chemoattractant (which can represent for instance VEGF-A165[60]); (9) oxygen is assumed to be secreted both by the functional preexisting vasculature and by emerging loop structures.Extended cellular Potts model: The physiological angiogenic process is modeled at the mesoscopic level using an extended version of the cellular Potts model, a grid-based stochastic approach, which realistically preserves the identity of single cell-level individuals and describes their behavior and interactions with the environment in energetic terms and constraints. The simulation domain is a two-dimensional regular latticeΩ⊆R2, formed by identical closed grid sites that, with an abuse of notation, will be identified by their centerx∈R2. Each site is labeled by an integer number,σ(x)∈N, that can be interpreted as a degenerate spin originally coming from statistical physics [27,48]. As classically adopted in CPMs, a neighboring site of x is denoted byx′, while its overall neighborhood byΩx′, i.e.,Ωx′={x′∈Ω:x′is a neighbor ofx}. A vascular cell, identified byΣσ, consists of a subdomain of contiguous sites with identical spin (i.e.,Σσ¯={x∈Ω:σ(x)=σ¯}withσ¯=1,…,N(t), where N(t) is the total number of ECs at time t), and has an associated typeτ(Σσ). In particular, we here distinguish three types of vascular cells: quiescent,τ=Q, tip,τ=T, and stalk,τ=S. Both the tip and the stalk phenotype can be classified as activated. We further define a special, generalized cellΣσ=0representing the host tissue, which is indeed formed by the part of the domain not occupied by any endothelial cell. Such an extravasal space is assumed to be isotropically distributed, forming no large-scale structures: however, it can locally assume two different states: oxygenated,τ=O(i.e., normoxic), and hypoxic,τ=H. It is useful to remark that, in this case, the type attribute τ is defined for every site (i.e.,τ=τ(x)) whereas, in the case of vascular cells, it identifies the entire cluster of sites forming a single individual (i.e.,τ=τ(Σσ)).Cell movement results from an iterative and stochastic reduction of the energy of the overall system, given by a Hamiltonian H, whose expression will be clarified below. The core algorithm consists of elementary steps of a modified Metropolis method for Monte Carlo–Boltzmann dynamics [24,39]. This approach is particularly suitable to implement the natural exploratory behavior of biological individuals. Procedurally, at each step t of the algorithm, called Monte Carlo Step (MCS), a lattice sitexs(s for source) is selected at random and attempts to copy its spin,σ(xs), into one of its unlike neighbors,xt∈Ωxs′:xt∉Σσ(xs)(t for target), also randomly selected. In particular, ifτ(Σσ(xs))={Q,S,T}, the cellΣσ(xs)is protruding (i.e., extending its filopods towards another cell or in the extracellular space). Otherwise, ifσ(xs)=0(i.e.,τ(xs)={O,H}), the cellΣσ(xt)is retracting.Each trial spin update is accepted with a Boltzmann-like probability functionP(σ(xs)→σ(xt)), that involves both a symmetric minimization of the system free energy and an asymmetric bias relating to the specific behavior of tip individuals:(1)P(σ(xs)→σ(xt))(t)={tanh(TΣσ(xs)(t))min{1,exp(−ΔH+wpolTΣσ(xs)(t))}ifτ(Σσ(xs))=T;tanh(TΣσ(xs)(t))min{1,exp(−ΔHTΣσ(xs)(t))}ifτ(Σσ(xs))={Q,S};tanh(TΣσ(xt)(t))min{1,exp(−ΔHTΣσ(xt)(t))}ifσ(xs)=0,whereΔHis the net difference of the Hamiltonian due to the proposed change of domain configuration,wpoldescribes the directional persistent movement of polarized cells (see below), andTΣσ(x)(t)∈R+, wherex∈{xs,xt}, is a Boltzmann temperature. As commented in [55], the specific form of the transition probability (1) is identified so that it accounts also cells with a substantially null motility, i.e., individuals for which the probability of moving is negligible even in the presence of favorable energy gradients. In this respect,TΣσ(x)measures the agitation rate of moving (i.e., either retracting or extending) cellΣσ(x). In other words, it is a measure of the intrinsic cell motility, i.e., of the frequency of membrane ruffles which, on a molecular level, are determined by polarization/depolarization processes of the actin cytoskeleton, enhanced in a dose-dependent manner by the intracellular level of growth factors:(2)TΣσ(t)={TQifτ(Σσ)=Q;TQ[1+v(Σσ,t)1+hv(Σσ,t)1+c(Σσ,t)1+hc(Σσ,t)]ifτ(Σσ)=T;TQ[1+c(Σσ,t)1+hc(Σσ,t)]ifτ(Σσ)=S,where TQcorresponds to the basal motility typical of resting ECs. In particular,v(Σσ,t)=∑x∈Σσv(x,t)andc(Σσ,t)=∑x∈Σσc(x,t)measure the total amounts inside cellΣσof the tissue-secreted VEGF-A and of the EC-produced chemoattractant, respectively, asv(x,t)andc(x,t)are their local concentrations defined in Eqs. (12) and (13). In particular, in (2), we account the fact that the short-range autocrine chemical induces a migratory response in both tip and stalk cells, whereas the long-range VEGF-A only in tip ECs (due to the delta/notch-mediated lateral inhibition of VEGF-dependent motility in stalk individuals).The termwpol, previously introduced in CPMs describing formation and growth of elongated multicellular structures [66–68], accounts the polarization of tip vascular cells (i.e., their ability to differentiate in a leading and a trailing edge) and the resulting persistent directional migration, which alters the probability assigned to each spin update, as(3)wpol(σ(xs)→σ(xt))=PpΣσ(xs)|pΣσ(xs)|·(xt−xs),where P sets the magnitude of the cell persistent movement andpΣσ(xs)is the polarity vector of the extending tip cellΣσ(xs).pΣσ(xs)is updated by considering a spontaneous decay and reinforcement from cell displacements. In fact, for each MCS and for any tip cellΣσ(i.e.,τ(Σσ)=T), we have that(4)ΔpΣσ=−1tppΣσ+ΔxΣσCM,wheretpis a characteristic memory length of the polarization vector, which can be also defined as the inverse of a rate of spontaneous decay, andΔxΣσCMis the net displacement of the cell center of mass during the MCS considered.For any given step t of the algorithm, the energy of the biological environment, whose minimization, as seen, drives the evolution of the system, is determined by the sum of different contributions:(5)H(t)=Hshape(t)+Hadhesion(t)+Hchemotaxis(t).Hshapemodels the geometrical attributes of vascular cells, which are written as non-dimensional relative deformations in the following quadratic form (see [55] for a more detailed explanation):(6)Hshape(t)=Hsurface(t)+Hperimeter(t)=∑Σσ[κΣσ(t)(sΣσ(t)−SECsΣσ(t))2+νΣσ(t)(pΣσ(t)−PECpΣσ(t))2],which depend on their actual surface and perimeter (we recall that here the model is two-dimensional, but the 3D-extension is straightforward),sΣσ(t)andpΣσ(t), as well as on the same quantities in the relaxed state, SECand PEC, which correspond instead to their initial measures.κΣσ(t)andνΣσ(t)∈R+are mechanical moduli in units of energy: in particular,κΣσ(t)refers to cell surface changes, whileνΣσ(t)relates to cell deformability/elasticity, i.e., the ease with which an individual is able to remodel changing its perimeter. Assuming that all ECs have an adequate amount of intracellular nutrients and that they do not significantly grow during migration, the surface fluctuations are kept negligible with a high constant valueκΣσ(t)=κ⪢1, for any cellΣσregardless of its type. We instead establish specific elastic properties for each vascular cell phenotype. In particular, quiescent ECs have a constantly high rigidity, which is fundamental to preserve the structure and the functionality of mature vessels. On the opposite, cytoskeletal reorganizations of stalk and tip individuals are stimulated by autocrine and paracrine angiogenic factors. Following these considerations, we set(7)νΣσ(t)={νQifτ(Σσ)=Q;νQexp(−k[v(Σσ,t)+c(Σσ,t)])ifτ(Σσ)=T;νQexp(−kc(Σσ,t))ifτ(Σσ)=S,whereνQis the intrinsic cells’ resistance to compression andv(Σσ,t),c(Σσ,t)are defined as in Eq. (2). Also in this case, we account the notch-mediated stalk cell inhibition of VEGF-A migratory response. In particular, we use negative exponential functions because very high levels of motility factors promote continuous and dramatic actin-myosin interactions, resulting in quick changes in cell organization and shape, as widely provided in the experimental literature. Finally, it is useful to remark that the high rigidity of quiescent EC (i.e.,νQ⪢1) is fundamental to maintain a stable structure of the preexisting vasculature.Hadhesion, deriving from the Steinberg׳s Differential Adhesion Hypothesis (DAH) [24,64,65], measures the adhesive interactions between different cells or between a cell and the host tissue:(8)Hadhesion(t)=∑x∈Σσ,x′∈Σσ′Jτ(Σσ(x)),τ(Σσ′(x′))(t),wherexandx′are two neighboring sites andΣσandΣσ′, whereσ≠σ′, two neighboring elements. The coefficientsJτ(Σσ),τ(Σσ′)∈R+are binding forces per unit area and are obviously symmetric w.r.t. the indices. In particular, by setting constant and homogeneous values for such parameters, we here assume a uniform distribution of adhesion molecules on the cell surface and a homogenous density of ligands in the external microenvironment. In order to establish a consistent hierarchy of the cell adhesive forces, we first observe that vascular tonus and functionality are determined by strong intercellular connections. On the opposite, angiogenic processes are permitted, in the first stages, by the loosening of cell–cell adhesiveness occurring between VEGF-activated ECs (both stalk and tip), which allows them to reorganize and eventually migrate. We finally suppose that vascular cells (regardless of their phenotype) prefer to adhere to one another rather than to the host. The above considerations lead to the following relations:(9)JQ,Q<JQ,T=JQ,S<JS,S=JS,T=JT,T<JQ,O=JQ,H=JS,O=JS,H=JT,O=JT,H.Hchemotaxisreproduces the effect of cell preferential migration in the direction of zones with higher concentration of diffusing chemoattractants. In particular, we here account the tip cell movement along gradients of long-range diffusing VEGF-A and the migratory response of both tip and stalk individuals to the autocrine chemical field. Such energy contributions are implemented by local linear-type relations of the form used in [52] for the chemotactic processes in Dictyostelium Discoideum aggregation:(10)ΔHchemotaxis=µv,Σσxsvtxt,t–vtxs,t+µc,Σσxsctxt,t−ctxs,t,wherexsandxtare, respectively, the source and the final lattice site randomly selected during a trial update in a MCS, andvt(x,t)=v(x,t)+∑x′∈Ωx′v(x′,t)andct(x,t)=c(x,t)+∑x′∈Ωx′c(x′,t), wherex∈{xs,xt}, evaluate the local level of chemical factors sensed by the moving cell membrane site. Finally,μ∈R+represent the strength of chemotactic response: in particular,μv,Σσ(xs)=μvforτ(Σσ(xs))=T(and=0 else), whereasμc,Σσ(xs)=μc<μvforτ(Σσ(xs))={T,S}(and =0 else). We finally implement a contact-inhibition of chemotaxis by settingΔHchemotaxis=0at the cell–cell interfaces (see [37]).Stalk cell proliferation: As suggested by a number of experimental works as early as [63], the time between cell divisions has a stochastic distribution, which depends on both the internal state of each cell and on the time from its last mitotic process (i.e., except for extremely rapidly dividing cells, whose likelihood of reentering the S phase is extremely small, see [1]). In our case, the proliferation of stalk cells, fundamental for sprout elongation, is regulated by long-range diffusing VEGF-A activity (which, instead, do not influence their migratory response due to the delta/notch-mediated lateral inhibition, as previously seen). For each cellΣσsuch asτ(Σσ)=S, we therefore define the present probabilityPΣσfor cellΣσto undergo mitosis with the following functional form, which resembles that used in similar approaches [54,70]:(11)PΣσ(t)={0if(t−tΣσ)≤t0;v(Σσ,t)1+v(Σσ,t)(t−tΣσ)21+(t−tΣσ)2if(t−tΣσ)>t0.tΣσis the last time that cellΣσunderwent mitosis, while t0 is a dormant period during which the cells are prohibited to proliferate (i.e., it correspond to the G1 phase, during which the cells are metabolically active and grow). Procedurally, the mechanism of cell division is implemented by dividing the proliferating individual into two identical daughter cells with a halved area with respect to their parent: however, due to the shape constraints in Eq. (6), they will gradually “maturate” into full-size cells. We further assume that both daughter cells evenly inherit all the parent׳s biophysical properties, i.e., stalk phenotype, motility and elasticity. Finally, the newly formed individuals are placed symmetrically about the parent cell center of mass with the same orientation of the elongating sprout. This is of particular relevance, since the orientation of stalk cell division has been widely provided to be a critical factor for angiogenic processes [20].Transition between cell phenotypes: The host tissue can locally switch between the oxygenated (i.e., normoxic) and the hypoxic phenotype according to the local partial pressure of oxygen. In particular, a tissue site in the oxygenated state becomes hypoxic when the local oxygen partial pressure drops below a given thresholdopr,h. It can then return to the oxygenated state when the oxygen partial pressure increases again beyond this level. Quiescent vascular cells acquire an activated phenotype (i.e., either tip or stalk) in the presence of a level of tissue-secreted VEGF-A greater than the given threshold va. In particular, when a quiescent EC becomes tip, its first-nearer neighboring individuals receive the lateral inhibition and become stalk. Stalk cells can in turn acquire a tip fate as soon as they do not have any adjacent tip individuals. When two tip cells join together (i.e., with an anastomosis process), the tip individual with the higher level of VEGF-A does not undergo a phenotypic transition, whereas the other is inhibited and receives a stalk state. Finally, both tip and stalk cells stall and return back to a quiescent phenotype when their amount of VEGF-A drops below the activating level va. The proposed rules for transition between cell phenotypes give a further multiscale characteristic of our approach, as the cell mesoscopic phenotype is determined by specific microscopic events.Evolution of molecular variables: The microscopic level of the system is described by a set of reaction–diffusion (RD) equations. Long-range diffusing VEGF-A is secreted by hypoxic tissue at a constant rate, diffuses and decays homogeneously within the entire domain, and is uptaken by vascular cells. Its spatial profile therefore satisfies the following equation:(12)∂v(x,t)∂t=DvΔv(x,t)︸diffusion−λvv(x,t)︸decay−min{vm,χvv(x,t)}δτ(Σσ(x)),{Q,T,S}︸uptake+αvδτ(Σσ(x)),H︸production,whereδx,y={1,x=y;0,x≠y}is the Kronecker delta. The third term at the r.h.s. models the VEGF-A absorption by all type of vascular cells, which follows a piecewise-linear approximation of a Michaelis–Menten law (this simplification is realistic since cell capacity to absorb chemicals typically saturates to a limit established both by the density of membrane-bound receptors and by the rate at which the chemical substance can be internalized and the receptors recycled). In particular,λv⪡χv, as we assume that the VEGF-A natural decay is negligible compared to the EC uptake.The autocrine, short-diffusing angiogenic factor is secreted by both tip and stalk cells. It then degrades and diffuses at a constant rate everywhere and is finally absorbed by the activated vascular individuals themselves:(13)∂c(x,t)∂t=DcΔc(x,t)︸diffusion−λcc(x,t)︸decay−min{cm,χcc(x,t)}δτ(Σσ(x)),{T,S}︸uptake+αcδτ(Σσ(x)),{T,S}︸production.Also in this case we use an approximate version of a Michaelis–Menten law for chemical uptake, withλc⪡χc.The oxygen partial pressure at locationxis defined by a fieldopr(x,t). This implies that the local available concentration of oxygen is proportional to opr, i.e.,O2(x,t)=ξoopr(x,t), where ξois a solubility coefficient. Following [62], we assume that oxygen diffuses at a constant rate throughout the simulation domain and it is consumed by the tissue. Indeed, oxygen partial pressure locally evolves according to the following reaction–diffusion equation:(14)∂opr(x,t)∂t=ξoDoΔopr(x,t)︸diffusion−min{om,χoopr(x,t)}δτ(x),{O,H}︸consumption,where the oxygen consumption by the tissue is limited to a maximum rate (i.e., for the sake of simplicity we do not include oxygen absorption by the ECs themselves). Oxygen supply is assured at given partial pressures both from the preexisting vessels and from loop structures formed in the emerging network by anastomosis, as(15)opr(x,t)={soprifτ(Σσ(x))=Q;soprloopifτ(Σσ(x))={T,S}andΣσ(x)iswithinaloop;0otherwise.The assumption that only cell sprouts forming loops are able to supply oxygen is realistic, because they have the functional capacity of maturing and carrying a flow of blood. In particular, closed loops are identified by an imaging algorithm that, at each MCS, tracks contiguous paths connecting the center of mass of adjacent vascular cells. Finally, we setsopr>soprloopas biological evidence has widely provided that oxygen partial pressure in functional preexisting venules is higher than oxygen partial pressure in emerging capillaries [47].We can finally give some analytical results on the system of RD equations (Eqs. (12)–(14) equipped), as we will see in the following section by no flux (Neumann) boundary conditions:Proposition 2.1(i) The fieldsv,c,opr:Ω×[0,T]→R, where T is a final given time (possibly+∞), are continuous in time and piecewise continuously differentiable in space (i.e.,v,c,opr∈PC1(Ω,[0,T]); (ii) Eqs.(12)–(14)preserve positivity, i.e.,v(x,0),c(x,0),opr(x,0)≥0∀x∈Ω⟹v(x,t),c(x,t),opr(x,t)≥0∀(x,t)∈Ω×[0,T].Proof(i) It follows from the fact that the decay terms are continuous in time and space, while the uptake/consumption terms and the production terms are continuous in time and piecewise continuous in space (accounting, in particular, the possibility that secretion and/or uptake/consumption occur in specific regions of the domain and vanish elsewhere, as determined by the Kronecker deltas). (ii) From the theory of parabolic equations, an RD equation preserves the positivity if the production terms are positive semidefined functions and the decay terms go to zero as the corresponding variable goes to zero, which holds in the case of our interest. Further, the uptake functions are here linear for small values of the concentrations allowing the application of classical results.□

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
