@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Mendable consistent orientation of point clouds

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An orientation-benefit normal estimation method is proposed.We use multi-sources normal propagation to achieve more consistent orientation.Propagation sources are extracted automatically to alleviate the manual work.A considerable amount of comparisons with state-of-the-art are provided.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Point cloud,Orientation,Surface reconstruction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Consistent normal orientation is challenging in the presence of noise, non-uniformities and thin sharp features. None of any existing local or global methods is capable of orienting all point cloud models consistently, and none of them offers a mechanism to rectify the inconsistent normals. In this paper, we present a new normal orientation method based on the multi-source propagation technique with two insights: faithful normals respecting sharp features tend to cause incorrect orientation propagation, and propagation orientation just using one source is problematic. It includes a novel orientation-benefit normal estimation algorithm for reducing wrong normal propagation near sharp features, and a multi-source orientation propagation algorithm for orientation improvement. The results of any orientation methods can be corrected by adding more credible sources, interactively or automatically, then propagating. To alleviate the manual work of interactive orientation, we devise an automatic propagation source extraction method by visibility voting. It can be applied directly to find multiple credible sources, combining with our orientation-benefit normals and multi-source propagation technique, to generate a consistent orientation, or to rectify an inconsistent orientation. The experimental results show that our methods generate consistent orientation more or as faithful as those global methods with far less computational cost. Hence it is more pragmatic and suitable to handle large point cloud models.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Surface reconstruction from raw points is a fundamental problem in computer vision and computer graphics  [1–8]. Consistently oriented normals are critical for surface reconstruction. The state-of-the-art reconstruction algorithms  [1,9,2,10] may produce poor quality results without consistent orientation  [11,12]. Although some advanced 3D scanning devices are capable of generating some additional properties, such as color and normal, when acquiring point positions, more general digitizing devices and computer vision algorithms do not provide such properties. Hence consistent orientation of raw points has drawn increasing attention recently  [13,14,11,12,15–17].As pointed out in  [4,7], robust orientation is as difficult as reconstructing the whole surface itself. Furthermore the acquired point sets are inevitably ridden with noise, outliers, non-uniformities and holes  [7], which challenges the traditional local orientation methods. Hence, more attention is paid to global approaches [15–17], since they are robust to these defects. In addition, sharp features also bring changes to both local approaches (see (b) and (d) of Fig. 1) and global approaches (see (c) of Fig. 1). Many feature-preserving methods, such as  [18], generate faithful normals which benefit consistent orientation. However, normals preserving features may lead to incorrect orientation as illustrated in Fig. 2. Thus we design an orientation-benefit normal estimation algorithm for reducing wrong normal propagation across sharp features. Finally, as far as we know, none of any local, even global methods is capable of achieving consistent orientation for all point clouds and none of them offers a mechanism or strategy to identify and make right the inconsistent normals. The inconsistent orientation is hard to detect just from the surface itself, because they tend to be surrounded by sharp features and satisfy the geometry constraints of the algorithm generating them.To address the above issues, we present a mendable local orientation propagation method, since it generates comparable results as the global approaches and has the potentiality of rectifying inconsistent orientation faster for huge point cloud data. We have to mention that not all the local or global methods can exploit the inconsistent orientation identified to correct their results. Detailed descriptions can be found in Section  2. Our method consists of a novel orientation-benefit normal estimation algorithm (OBNE) for reducing wrong normal propagation across sharp features, a multi-source orientation propagation algorithm (MMST) for orientation improvement, and visibility voting process to identify multiple credible sources. It involves four main steps. Taking a raw point set as input, its initial normals are estimated by weighted principal component analysis (WPCA). Based on the initial normals, we apply OBNE to generate new normals which benefit the orientation propagation near sharp features. Then, multiple propagation sources are identified automatically by visibility voting. At last, our MMST is applied to compute a consistent orientation. If the result is not faithful, we pick points with incorrect orientations interactively or using our automatic propagation sources extraction method again, invert the orientation of them, and apply MMST to generate more a faithful orientation until there is no incorrect region left. In our experiments, the automatically identified sources are enough to generate a consistent orientation and no further rectification is needed.Our approach is straightforward yet effective without resorting to any complicated data structures and advanced solvers. The experimental results show that it generates consistent orientations as faithful as those global methods with far less computational cost, which makes it suitable to handle large point cloud models with millions of points. Our method is also more robust against noise, non-uniformities, sparsity and thin sharp features than previous local methods  [13,14,11,12]. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method by reconstructing high-quality surfaces using our consistent orientation result. Fig. 3shows the normal orientation result of a noisy scan data with our method.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
