@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Combined heart rate variability and dynamic measures for quantitatively characterizing the cardiac stress status during cycling exercise

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We seek for different ways of measuring cardiac stress that occurs when exercising.Both the SDNN and fractal exponent α produced a decrease during the cycling exercise.Both the SDNN and fractal exponent α were negatively correlated with the Borg index.A time-varying index CSM was devised for quantitatively measuring the cardiac stress.The study may be used in sports medicine or stress tests for heart stress monitoring.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cardiac stress status,Detrended fluctuation analysis (DFA),Fractal,Heart rate variability (HRV),Cycling exercise,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this study, we aimed to seek for different ways of measuring cardiac stress in terms of heart rate variability (HRV) and heart rate (HR) dynamics, and to develop a novel index that can effectively summarize the information reflected by these measures to continuously and quantitatively characterize the cardiac stress status during physical exercise. Standard deviation, spectral measure of HRV as well as a nonlinear detrended fluctuation analysis (DFA) based fractal-like behavior measure of HR dynamics were all evaluated on the RR time series derived from windowed electrocardiogram (ECG) data for the subjects undergoing cycling exercise. We recruited eleven young healthy subjects in our tests. Each subject was asked to maintain a fixed speed under a constant load during the pedaling test. We obtained the running estimates of the standard deviation of the normal-to-normal interval (SDNN), the high-fidelity power spectral density (PSD) of HRV, and the DFA scaling exponent α, respectively. A trend analysis and a multivariate linear regression analysis of these measures were then performed. Numerical experimental results produced by our analyses showed that a decrease in both SDNN and α was seen during the cycling exercise, while there was no significant correlation between the standard lower frequency to higher frequency (LF-to-HF) spectral power ratio of HRV and the exercise intensity. In addition, while the SDNN and α were both negatively correlated with the Borg rating of perceived exertion (RPE) scale value, it seemed that the LF-to-HF power ratio might not have substantial impact on the Borg value, suggesting that the SDNN and α may be further used as features to detect the cardiac stress status during the physical exercise. We further approached this detection problem by applying a linear discriminant analysis (LDA) to both feature candidates for the task of cardiac stress stratification. As a result, a time-varying parameter, referred to as the cardiac stress measure (CSM), is developed for quantitatively on-line measuring and stratifying cardiac stress status.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
It is worth noting that we have developed a cycling based ergometer system for real-time fatigue monitoring and analysis [1]. Although using such a system to perform on-line fatigue progression analysis is of importance to many aspects of applications and has been considered unprecedented, people may feel even more interested in exploring the effects of physical exercise training on the progression of cardiac stress status based on the same ergometer we developed, in such a way that this can be used in sports medicine, and may also be of interest to the cardiologists who carry out stress tests for monitoring the heart condition in patients with heart diseases.In general, heart rate (HR) usually increases when one is undergoing physical exercise. In this aspect, the Borg rating of perceived exertion (RPE) scale may provide a useful way to reflect how hard one feels about the work while undergoing physical exercise [2]. With ranging from 6 to 20, the Borg RPE scale has been commonly used as a typical and convenient index for monitoring subjective perceived exercise intensity. In fact, the idea of a relationship between HR and exercise in terms of RPE is not original. For example, a previous study in literature reported that the increase in RPE was related to both the cardiovascular status monitored by heart rate (HR), and the local muscle factors monitored by the median frequency of electromyogram (EMG) during fatigue induced by stepping exercise [3]. Another work in literature also indicated that there might exist a linear relationship between RPE and HR during progressively increasing workloads and submaximal constant load, obtaining correlations ranging from 0.71 to 0.91 [4]. Moreover, Borg also suggested that a high correlation exists between ten times of a person׳s RPE value and his actual HR during physical activity and this may provide as a good estimate of actual HR during exercise. However, Chang et al. argued that the estimation of HR (i.e., HR=10×RPE) might be invalid for exercise at constant workload when exhaustion occurred and suggested that weighting of other factors, such as the factors that influence HR dynamics, should be considered [3].According to the review of previous works as presented as above, we may see that although the RPE scale has been commonly used for exercise study, exercise itself is a more complex activity which involves cardiovascular factors and hence may not be solely related to a subjective RPE value. Therefore, developing a novel index other than RPE and seeking for its applicability for objectively and quantitatively assessing cardiac stress status during physical exercise are essentially needed. With this in mind, the scientific question of this work is “how can we find an effective way to objectively and quantitatively measure the cardiac stress during the physical exercise?” Seeking for the answers to such a question actually motivated this work. Since greater RPE values resulting from exercise should be related to incremented sympathetic tone and reduced parasympathetic tone, it is nature to speculate that heart rate variability (HRV), rather HR, may provide a more effective and reliable way for figuring out the relationship between cardiac stress and physical exercise. In this aspect, some previous researches in literature, for instance, have also reported that HRV may and does show influence of mental and physical stress [5,6].However, since variation in HR could be also attributed to a variety of factors, different aspects of HRV analysis may be needed for measuring cardiac stress. Among HRV applications, there are a number of measures derived from the beat-to-beat fluctuations having been widely used as indices of cardiac autonomic control [7–9]. These measures were simply developed using the time- and/or frequency-domain analyses, such as the calculation of the standard deviation and the power spectral density (PSD) of the HR fluctuations. In the time-domain analysis, it has been widely accepted that the standard deviation of the normal-to-normal interval (SDNN) or its related quantities may serve as diagnostically useful HRV indices. As for the frequency-domain analysis, the conventional fast Fourier transform (FFT) is usually applied for PSD calculation. It should be noted that since a uniformly resampling process on the original RR data is required for FFT-based PSD calculation, a low-pass filtering effect due to resampling might undesirably cause a distortion on the PSD of HRV [10]. In order to avoid such a problem, instead of using FFT a compressed sensing (CS) based algorithm for spectral estimation of HRV incorporating the integral pulse frequency modulation (IPFM) model has been developed in previous works [11,12]. Knowing as a novel sensing/sampling paradigm, the theory of CS asserts certain signals that are considered sparse or compressible can be possibly reconstructed from substantially fewer measurements than those required by traditional methods. Using the IPFM model, an ℓ1-minimization based CS framework was developed for deriving the amplitude spectrum of the modulating signal for HRV assessments in our previous works [11,12]. Since the CS method actually can provide more accurate, robust and high-fidelity spectral estimates of HRV than the conventional approaches, such as the Lomb or FFT methods, in this study we thus used it to estimate the PSD of HRV directly from unevenly sampled RR data.In addition, HR dynamics were also studied with a nonlinear detrended fluctuation analysis (DFA) based fractal measure. In this aspect, some researchers employed the fractal measures to quantitatively characterize the HR dynamics, and concluded that these measures might be well suited for non-stationary situations, such as incremental exercise, as mentioned previously [13,14]. Moreover, it has been also demonstrated that fractal-like characteristics of HR can be considered as an indication of a normal and healthy heart since fractal measure of HR has manifested itself to change towards uncorrelated randomness for those who were suffering from different heart diseases or in the aging population [14–16]. Therefore, we may speculate that using the fractal scaling exponent, it may be possible to seek a way to effectively quantify the cardiac stress status during exercise.In this study, we started from examining the effects of physical exercise on HR dynamics and then made a possible link between cardiac stress status and a variety of HRV measures. Time-, frequency-domain measures of HRV and DFA based fractal measure of HR dynamics, as stated above, were all considered as candidates in our investigations. In short, our study aimed to seek for different ways of measuring cardiac stress in terms of HR dynamics first and then to devise a novel index, called the cardiac stress measure (CSM), which can effectively summarize the information reflected by these measures to continuously and quantitatively characterize the cardiac stress status during physical exercise. With CSM, both the cardiac stress status and onset of cardiac stress “overload” can be detected, and thus, designing feasible training programs for patients with heart diseases would become more efficient and easier. Furthermore, since an exercise bicycle can provide a convenient, safe, and effective cardiovascular exercise the patients may need, our CSM index can be incorporated into an exercise bicycle-based ergometer system so the system may have possible applications in many areas. For example, such a system can be used in sports medicine, or applied to stress tests conducted by the cardiologists for monitoring the heart condition in patients with heart diseases, which is considered novel and unprecedented, thus representing a significant benefit and value from our study.In this research, a stationary bicycle based ergometer system equipped with peripheral components (including an optical encoder and a resistor-based load control device), a set of wireless ECG sensors with the sensor interfacing system, and a personal computer (PC) based control and computational unit was used. Eleven young healthy adults were recruited for undergoing the bipedal cycling test. All the participants were free of heart diseases. The procedures of the experiment and the characteristics of the bicycle ergometer system were clearly explained to them before proceeding. At the beginning, each subject was asked to do one-minute low intensity cycling exercise to warm up body to prevent sports injuries. Then, the experiment started and each subject was asked to sit in an upright position and perform cycling exercise at a constant load and maintain a constant cycling speed of 60 RPM, as best as he could, throughout the entire course of experiment.When cycling started, the wearable sensors synchronously collected and digitized the ECG data from the subjects and then wirelessly transmitted the digital data into the system PC for the subsequent numerical experimental analysis. In addition, with ranging from 6 to 20, the Borg scale value was also synchronously recorded and updated every minute during the test. For each subject, the experiment was terminated immediately once the Borg scale value reached the maximal value of 20.A time-domain index of HRV measured by analyzing the standard deviation of the normal to normal RR intervals (SDNN) was employed in our study. In general, the SDNN is known as a very simple and basic HRV index which is easy to measure, given the data are of good quality. As for the frequency-domain HRV analysis, first it should be noted that since the conventional fast Fourier transform (FFT) based PSD computation involves a resampling process on the RR data, this would unavoidably cause an undesired low-pass filtering effect on the PSD [10]. Therefore, the spectral estimation method that is capable of accurately and robustly estimating HRV spectra directly from unevenly sampled RR data is thus desired. Since it has been widely accepted that major characteristics of a standard HRV spectrum are determined by the amplitudes of three main lobes only (two are located at the frequency <0.15Hz; while one is at that >0.15Hz) and the side lobes can be ignored, we hypothesized that the HRV spectrum may be viewed as a compressible signal in our previous studies [11,12]. As described in detail previously, the integral pulse frequency modulation (IPFM) model provides a functional description of the mechanism by which the ANS modulates HR. According to the model, we have(1)∫0ti[1+m(t)]dt=iTR,where tiis the occurrence time of the ith heartbeat, m(t) is the modulating signal and TR is an IPFM threshold. When the integral value reaches to the threshold, an impulse is emitted and the integrator is then reset to zero. Next, we assume(2)m(t)=∑k=1Kmk(t)and(3)mk(t)=akcos(ωkt)+bksin(ωkt),where ωk=2πk/T, T is the signal length of m(t) while akand bkare real coefficients of cosine wave and sine wave at frequency ωk, respectively. As a result, (1) becomes(4)∑k=1K[akksin(ωkti)+bkk(1−cos(ωkti))]=2πT(iTR−ti).Given L RR intervals, denoted as RRi, where i=1,…, L and t0=0. As indicated previously, the length of m(t) is actually equal to the available time length of m(t), i.e., T=tL. Thus, when i=L we can compute(5)TR=tLL=1L∑i=1LRRi.Therefore, ti, T and TR can be easily computed, and there are still L−1 equations in (4) left, which can be then formulated in the matrix expression as y=Ax, where(6)y=2πT[1⋅TR−t1⋮(L−1)⋅TR−tL−1],(7)A=[sin(ω1t1)1−cos(ω1t1)⋯sin(ωKt1)1−cos(ωKt1)⋮⋮⋮⋮⋮sin(ω1tL−1)1−cos(ω1tL−1)⋯sin(ωKtL−1)1−cos(ωKtL−1)],and(8)x=[a1/1,b1/1,⋯,aK/K,bK/K]T.By taking the advantage of the sparsity of the HRV spectrum, we have shown that the spectrum of HRV can be solved in the underdetermined case using the ℓ1-minimization under the CS framework in our previous works [11,12]. Such an improved signal estimation method can robustly provide high-fidelity HRV spectral estimates directly from unevenly sampled RR data, even under the situation of a degree of incompleteness in the RR data caused by ectopic or missing beats.In general, it has been commonly accepted that while the higher frequency (HF) band of the HRV spectrum, ranging from 0.15Hz to 0.4Hz, is used to reflect the vagal activity, the lower frequency (LF), ranging from 0.04Hz to 0.15Hz, is attributed to the modulation of both the sympathetic and vagal activities [8,9]. In our study, we evaluated the relative spectral power ratio, denoted as LHR (i.e., LF/HF ratio), and used it as a feature for stratifying the cardiac stress status in a variety of cycling exercise stages.In this study, a fractal scaling analysis, referred to as the detrended fluctuation analysis (DFA), was also used to characterize HR dynamics. First proposed by Peng et al. [13], DFA is an algorithm that has proven useful in measuring the long-term autocorrelation of non-stationary time series. It can quantitatively characterize the complexity of time series using the fractal theory [13,17]. In fact, some previous research in literature indicated that the DFA scaling exponent, denoted as α, can be used for classifying biomedical signals into the healthy and unhealthy classes [18].In general, DFA analyzes the mean square deviation of a signal from its local trend line on a variety of scales. First, given a time series of interest x(i) with signal length N (here, x(i) is the RR interval time series), an integrated signal y(k) is defined as(9)y(k)=∑i=1k[x(i)−x¯],wherex¯represents the mean of x(i). Next, y(k) is divided into a number of equal-length segments with segmental length n, a least squares line is fit to the data, where the least squares line representing the “trend” in that segment. Then, y(k) is detrended simply by subtracting the local trend (i.e., the y coordinate of the least squares line segments), denoted as yn(k), from each segment separately. The root-mean-square based fluctuation, denoted as F(n), of this detrended time series is calculated by(10)F(n)=1N∑k=1N[y(k)−yn(k)]2.In order to characterize the relationship between F(n) and the time scale n (i.e., segmental length), the calculation in (10) is repeated until all possible values of n are applied. In general, a linear relationship is seen on a log–log plot and the fluctuations can be then characterized by the slope of the line relating log F(n) to log n.In addition, to validate the use of the DFA exponent α as a fractal scaling exponent, here a robustness test was further performed as follows. First, we took an RR interval time series obtained from a subject during the exercise tests and randomly shuffled the RR data for 100 times, thus obtaining 100 realizations of the shuffled time series. Then, the DFA scaling exponent was evaluated for each of these 100 shuffled time series.Fig. 1 provides a profile of the robustness test as described above, including the original RR data (as depicted in Fig. 1a), an example realization of the shuffled time series (as depicted in Fig. 1b), and the logarithmic graph of log F(n) vs. log n for the realization (as depicted in Fig. 1c). In this case, the DFA scaling exponent α is 0.5004. Furthermore, the average of all the scaling exponent α values derived from the 100 realizations of shuffled time series was 0.5088, which was also perfectly close to 0.5.In fact, according to [13], the scaling exponent α represents the correlation properties of the signal, and α≈0.5 indicated uncorrelated signal (white noise). It is revealed from our numerical experimental results that α≈0.5 was actually seen in the randomly shuffled time series, thus indicating that the DFA-based fractal scaling exponent should be able to robustly describe the correlation properties of the HR signals.As mentioned previously, we collected the raw ECG data from eleven subjects during the cycling tests and evaluated the overall performance of all the feature candidates on the task of cardiac stress assessment. Surface ECG signals measured from subjects were digitized and acquired by the system via a wirelessly telemetric procedure. The sampling rate was set to 200Hz and the raw ECG was preprocessed by bandpass filtering. After detecting the time locations of the R waves for an ECG signal using a template-match technique that involves a correlation coefficient based similarity calculation, we may obtain the interbeat interval (i.e., the RR interval) data sequence corresponding to that ECG. Note further that in our study we actually performed a short-time analysis on all the measures in order to keep tracking and updating the HR dynamics during the tests. The SDNN, CS-based PSD of HRV, and DFA scaling exponent α were all evaluated on a 1-minute windowed RR segment. We then obtained the running estimates of SDNN, PSD, and α by shifting the one-minute window, without overlapping, throughout the entire RR time series, and hence all these three measures can be synchronously updated every minute during the tests.Since each time the HR dynamics were monitored on a 1-minute RR time series data, there were definitely more than one α values obtained for describing the HR dynamics of correlations during the tests. Each α value was calculated within the 1-minute short RR time series by evaluating the slope of the line relating log F(n) to log n, where n ranging from 4 to 64 (4≤n≤64).Fig. 2 further provides a set of plots of log F(n) vs. log n for an example RR time series (obtained during physical exercise).First, observing a logarithmic graph of log F(n) vs. log n derived from the entire RR time series as depicted in Fig. 2a, we may see there seems some crossovers, but not apparent, exhibited in this plot. In fact, the appearance of crossovers in the logarithmic graph of log F(n) vs. log n in the DFA method has been noticed and reported in a number of previous researches in the literature [13,19–21]. For example, Chen et al. indicated that such crossovers could be due to the effect of signal nonstationarities [19]. In this aspect, instead of only calculating one α value for the entire several-minute RR time series, a short-time analysis on α should be needed to describe the dynamics of correlations in HR. As a result, evaluating α within the 1-minute short RR time series at the beginning, the middle, and the final stage of the exercise for this case, we obtained α values as 1.3716, 0.8721, and 0.6514, respectively, showing a decrease in the dynamics of correlations in terms of the DFA scaling exponent. Therefore, observations gathered from Fig. 2 actually provide evidence validating that the short-time analysis of the scaling exponent α should be able to describe and track the dynamics of correlations in HR during the tests.Moreover,Fig. 3a, b, and c further provide a typical bandpass filtered ECG segment, an RR interval data segmental and its corresponding high-fidelity CS-based PSD estimate of HRV, respectively. Numerical analysis results and discussions presented in this section will be focused on the performance evaluation of all the three features.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
