@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An extended Cellular Potts Model analyzing a wound healing assay

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A wound healing assay is modeled by a suitable version of the Cellular Potts Model.Cells are represented as compartmentalized elements.Phenotypic differentiations occur among cells sited in distinct areas of the mass.The invasiveness of the culture depends on cell elasticity and adhesiveness.The healing process depends on topological properties of matrix fibrous component.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cellular Potts Model,Cell compartmentalization,Cell migration,Extracellular matrix,Invasion front,Wound healing assay,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A suitable Cellular Potts Model is developed to reproduce and analyze an in vitro wound-healing assay. The proposed approach is able both to quantify the invasive capacity of the overall cell population and to evaluate selected determinants of single cell movement (velocity, directional movement, and final displacement). In this respect, the present CPM allows us to capture differences and correlations in the migratory behavior of cells initially located at different distances from the wound edge. In the case of an undifferentiated extracellular matrix, the model then predicts that a maximal healing can be obtained by a chemically induced increment of cell elasticity and not by a chemically induced downregulation of intercellular adhesive contacts. Moreover, in the case of two-component substrates (formed by a mesh of collagenous-like threads and by a homogeneous medium), CPM simulations show that both fiber number and cell–fiber adhesiveness influence cell speed and wound closure rate in a biphasic fashion. On the contrary, the topology of the fibrous network affects the healing process by mediating the productive directional cell movement. The paper, also equipped with comments on the computational cost of the CPM algorithm, ends with a throughout discussion of the pertinent experimental and theoretical literature.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Cell migration is a fundamental process occurring in a wide range of physio-pathological situations, both in embryogenesis and in adult life. Cells can move individually or collectively, i.e., as multicellular aggregates. Single cell migration is mainly regulated by cellular and subcellular mechanisms, including actin filaments polymerization [91,99,104], focal adhesion point turnovers [65] and proteolytic activity [138,139]. Mechanotransduction and inside-out signal exchange with the extracellular environment are important as well [126]. Collective migration involves instead multicellular dynamics, mainly coordinated via cell–cell junctions [45,66,128]. Functional and phenotypical differentiations of individuals within the same aggregate also occur during multicellular movement [66]. Samples of collective cell migration can be found in morphogenesis, cancer growth and development, and tissue repair after lesions [45].Coordinated movement of cell populations has been analyzed by a wide range of in vitro models (see [3,53,63,64,67,113] for relevant examples). In particular, one of the most commonly employed experimental systems is the in vitro wound healing assay[11,13,15,41,84,101,128,141]. It is based on a cell monolayer first grown to confluence and then artificially scraped using a sharp object (such as pipette tip), see Fig. 1. Wounded areas can be created with other procedures as well [44,92]. The wound healing assay can be considered the laboratory counterpart of an in vivo heal of a lesion. The rate of advance of the wound edge, i.e., the quantification of the area recolonized, gives a measure of the migratory capacity of the population of interest. In this respect, this technique is widely used to compare the invasive potential of specific cell lines either in “resting conditions” (in serum-deprived medium, i.e., in low concentration of growth factors and hormones) or in response to (i) specific chemical stimulations, (ii) modifications of the expression of molecules putatively involved in migratory processes and (iii) topological and structural variations of the matrix-like coating substrates. This last aspect is particularly exploited by biomedical sciences, with the aim of producing and testing bioengineered scaffolds which can provide optimal extracellular environments for regrowth and regeneration of tissues, for example skin, peripheral nerves, bones or cartilage (the literature on this topic is very large, the reader can refer for instance to [19,122,142] and references therein).In this paper, an experimental wound healing assay is reproduced by a suitable version of the Cellular Potts Model (CPM), a lattice-based Monte Carlo technique which employs a stochastic energy minimization to display the evolution over time of cell systems [6,57,58,60,83]. The proposed model integrates a series of previous works that, based on the CPM extensions presented in [116,117], deal with different aspects of cell migration within selected matrix environments [118–120]. However, with respect to those papers, the focus here is the analysis of the collective invasive ability of an entire cell population rather than the study of the migratory capacity of single or isolated cells. From this perspective, this paper aims at investigating not only the effect on wound recovering of variations in cell and matrix determinants, but also the role played by a spontaneous phenotypical differentiation (i.e., not prescribed a priori by the model) occurring between individuals located in specific areas of the cell culture (i.e., at different distances from the wound edge).The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 clarifies the assumptions on which the proposed approach is based. As a relevant model feature, each virtual cell is represented as a discrete compartmentalized object (differentiated in nucleus, cytosol and plasma membrane) with individual properties. Different types of substrate, which differ for homogeneity, topology and density of fibrous component, are employed as well. Selected numerical results are shown in Section 3. The end of Section 3 focuses on a study of the computational cost of the CPM algorithm. The simulation outcomes are finally discussed in Section 4, where comparisons with proper results from both the experimental and the pertinent computational literature are provided as well.In vitro wound healing is simulated using an extended Cellular Potts Model, a grid-based stochastic approach, which describes the evolution of the cell culture in energetic terms and elastic constraints. The simulation domain is a bidimensional lattice (i.e., a regular numerical repeated graph)Ω⊂R2, coherently with the planarity of most healing processes. Ω is partitioned by disjoint close sites that, with an abuse of notation, are identified by their center pointx∈R2. Following, for consistency, the same notation adopted in [116,117], a neighboring site of x is here denoted byx′and its overall neighborhood byΩx′, i.e.,Ωx′={x′∈Ω:x′is a neighbor ofx}. Each sitex∈Ωis then labeled by an integer number,σ(x)∈N, which can be interpreted as a degenerate spin originally coming from statistical physics [69,100]. Subdomains of contiguous sites with identical spin form discrete standard objects, which are characterized by an object type, τ. The virtual cells, identified by an integerη=1,…,Nwhere N is their total number, are here defined as compartmentalized objects. They are in fact composed of three subunits which, in turn, are standard CPM objects: the nucleus, a central more or less round cluster of typeτ=N, the surrounding cytosol,τ=C, and the plasma membrane (PM),τ=M, which is one-site wide and encloses the entire cell, see Fig. 2. Each subcellular compartment is obviously characterized, as an off-lattice additional attribute, by the cluster id η to identify the cell it belongs to. The nuclear membrane is not explicitly modeled, as it is defined as the interface between the cytosolic compartment and the nuclear region.Terminological remark: Compartmentalized objects indicate CPM elements (in this case, cells) composed by a set of standard CPM objects which, in turn, indicate simple lattice subdomains sharing the same spin (in this case, cell nuclei, cytosolic regions, and plasma membranes).The cell population is seeded on a matrix substrate, which is differentiated in a homogeneous medium-like state,τ=Q, and an inhomogeneous collagen-like state,τ=F. The medium-like state simulates a gelatinous substrate, which is composed by a mixture of soluble components (among others, long carbohydrate polymers, and non-proteoglycan polysaccharides) and water solvent. It is assumed to be isotropically distributed throughout the simulation domain, forming no large-scale structures. Instead the collagen-like state represents fixed assemblies of insoluble macromolecules, such as collagens, laminin and elastin, that associate into fibers. Each fiber is here individually modeled by a standard non-compartmentalized CPM object. Distribution and number of fibrous structures will be specified in Section 3 and will reproduce different types of matrix substrates typically employed for in vitro assays. The inclusion of an explicit two-component extracellular environment is already present in some CPM applications focused on tumor growth [56,107] and single cell migration [118]. It is also a fundamental aspect of this work because it allows a detailed analysis of the relationship between selected determinants of the matrix substrate (i.e., density and topology) and the healing properties of the cell culture.Cell dynamics are determined by an energy minimization principle. In more detail, the simulated system evolves to iteratively and stochastically reduce its free energy, given by an Hamiltonian H, whose expression will be clarified below. The core algorithm is a modified version of the classical Metropolis method for Monte Carlo–Boltzmann thermodynamics [60,89]. It is particularly suitable to implement the natural exploratory behavior of cells, reproducing their cytoskeletally driven membrane fluctuations and extensions of pseudopods through repeated probabilistic updates of the site identification spins σ.Procedurally, in every step t of the algorithm, called Monte Carlo Step (MCS), a lattice site,xsource, is selected at random and assigns its spin,σ(xsource), to one of its unlike neighbors,xtarget∈Ωxsource′, also randomly selected. The net energy difference due to the proposed change of domain configurationΔH|σ(xsource)→σ(xtarget)=H(afterspincopy)−H(beforespincopy),is then evaluated. The trial spin update is finally accepted with a Boltzmann-like probability function:(1)P(σ(xsource)→σ(xtarget))(t)=tanh(Tσ(xsource)(t))min{e−ΔH|σ(xsource)→σ(xtarget)/Tσ(xsource)(t),1},whereTσ(xsource)(t)∈R+is a Boltzmann temperature which, in this context, measures the agitation rate of moving compartmentσ(xsource). The specific form of (1) is identified so that it is possible to account also for cells with substantially null motility, i.e., for which the probability of moving is negligible even in the presence of favorable energy gradients, as commented in [116]. Specifically, for any cell η and forτ(σ(xsource))=N,Tσ(xsource)(t)=TNis a constant low value mimicking the passive motion of the nucleus, which is dragged by the surrounding cytosolic region via actin filaments and microtubules (see [115] for a specific mechanical explanation). For any cell η and forτ(σ(xsource))=C,M,Tσ(xsource)(t)gives a measure of the cell intrinsic motility, representing the agitation of the cell cytoskeleton and the frequency of PM ruffles, respectively. Both are assumed to be chemically stimulated in a dose-dependent manner:(2)Tσ(xsource):τ(σ)=C,M(t)=T0[cη(t)c0η+h(cη(t)−c0η)].In (2), for any MCS t,cη(t)=∑x∈ηc(x,t)gives the total amount of chemical within η, the cell to which the moving compartmentσ(xsource)belongs to. In fact,c(x,t)indicates the present concentration of the substance (see Eq. (6) below). Insteadc0η=∑x∈ηc0is the basal level of the chemical, as c0 indicates the initial intracellular concentration, a characteristic of the cell line of interest. In this respect, T0 corresponds to the basal motility of the cells (assumed to be substantially low), whileT0/his the asymptotic motility for a saturating concentration of the chemical. For the sake of clarity, it is useful to recall that hereafter the simplified notationx∈ηis used to identify a site x belonging to the compartmentalized cell η, even if the exact expression would bex∈σ(x)⊂η.During wound invasion, cells can only temporarily occupy, but not permanently modify, the position or the original content of a matrix site. For example, if a cell moves from a site previously occupied by a fiber, the site is restored to its previous collagenous-like state. In this respect, the virtual substrate is assumed passive and conserved, as matrix digestion and/or deposition are neglected.For any given MCS t, the system free energy, whose minimization, as seen, drives the evolution of the cell culture, is(3)H(t)=Hshape(t)+Hadhesion(t).Hshapemodels the geometrical attributes of all cell subunits. They are written as non-dimensional relative deformations in the following quadratic form:(4)Hshape(t)=Hvolume(t)+Hsurface(t)=∑η,σ[κη,σ(t)(vη,σ(t)−Vτ(σ)vη,σ(t))2+νη,σ(t)(sη,σ(t)−Sτ(σ)sη,σ(t))2].vη,σ(t)(sη,σ(t), respectively) is the actual volume (surface, respectively) of compartment σ of cell η, whileVτ(σ)(Sτ(σ), respectively) is the corresponding initial measure. The specific formulation of (4) allows us to have finite energetic contributions, as well as a blow up in the case ofvη,σ(t),sη,σ(t)→0(see again [116]).κη,σ(t),νη,σ(t)∈R+are mechanical moduli in units of energy. In particular,κη,σ(t)refer to volume changes of subcellular units, whileνη,σ(t)relate to their elasticity, the ease with which they are allowed to remodel. Assuming that cells do not significantly grow during the healing process (here nutrients are not taken into account), the fluctuations of their volumes are kept negligible with high constant values ofκη,σ=κ, for any couple η, σ. Moreover, cell nuclei typically have a low compressibility: therefore, for all η and forσ:τ(σ)=N,νη,σ=νis another high constant quantity. In a first approximation, the chemical substance is not assumed to induce a dramatic reorganizations of cell cytoskeleton and plasma membrane. In this respect, for any cell η, it is reasonable to setνη,σ=νalso forτ(σ)=C,M. This way cells are forced to remain in the initial round morphology. However, selected simulations in Section 3 will study how the invasive behavior of the cell culture is affected by the introduction of a chemically induced remodeling of cell morphology.Hadhesionis the general extension of Steinberg׳s Differential Adhesion Hypothesis (DAH) [60,123,124]. In particular, it is differentiated in the contributions due to either the generalized contact between subunits belonging to the same cell, or to the effective adhesion between membranes of different cells, see Fig. 2 (and refer to [116] for details):(5)Hadhesion(t)=Hadhesionint(t)+Hadhesionext(t)=∑x∈Ω,x′∈Ωx′[Jτ(σ(x)),τ(σ(x′))intδη(x),η(x′)(t)(1−δσ(x),σ(x′)(t))]+∑x∈Ω,x′∈Ωx′[Jτ(σ(x)),τ(σ(x′))ext(1−δη(x),η(x′)(t))],where x,x′represent two neighboring lattice sites,δx,y={1,x=y;0,x≠y}is the Kronecker delta, and the Js are symmetric binding energies per unit of area. In particular,Jτ(σ(x)),τ(σ(x′))int, where(τ(σ(x)),τ(σ(x′)))=(C,N)or (C,M), are constant high tensions which prevent cells from fragmenting (unrealistic contacts between the nucleus and the PM within same individual are not accounted for).Jτ(σ(x)),τ(σ(x′))ext, for(τ(σ(x)),τ(σ(x′)))=(M,M), represents instead the local adhesive strength between the membranes of two different cells. It is indeed a measure of the local quantity of active exposed cadherins. Finally,Jτ(σ(x)),τ(σ(x′))ext, for(τ(σ(x)),τ(σ(x′)))=(M,Q)and (M,F), evaluate the adhesive interactions of the cells with the gelatinous medium and the collagen-like fibers, respectively. In this respect,JM,QextandJM,Fextare a measure of the affinity between cell surface adhesion complexes (i.e., sugar-binding receptors or integrins) to either non-solid (i.e., glycosaminoglycans in medium) or solid (i.e., fibrillar collagen) extracellular ligands [112]. As given in Table 1, and explained in the section on Material and Methods, external and internal contact energies are set constant in time and homogeneous in space. However, a set of simulations will dissect the role in the healing process of an agent-induced downregulation of cell–cell adhesive interactions, which is observed in a wide range of cell lines stimulated by several substances.At any given MCS t, the spatial profile of the chemical,c(x,t), satisfies the following reaction–diffusion (RD) equation:(6)∂c(x,t)∂t=D∇2c(x,t)︸diffusion−λc(x,t)︸degradation−min{β,kc(x,t)}δτ(σ(x)),{N,C,M}︸consumption+S(t)︸addition,where D and λare the characteristic diffusion coefficient and degradation rate of the chemical substance, respectively. Both are assumed constant and homogeneous throughout the simulated domain. S(t) describes the addition of the chemical at a constant saturating rate scoutside the cells. The third term at the right-hand side of Eq. (6) models instead the amount of chemical molecules absorbed by the cells, i.e., it is not null ifτ(σ(x))=N,C, or M. It follows a piecewise-linear approximation of a Michaelis–Menten law. This simplification is realistic since the capacity of a cell to absorb chemicals typically saturates to a limit, which is established both by the density of membrane-bound receptors and by the rate at which the chemical substance can be internalized and the receptors recycled, see also [8,79]. In particular,λ<k, as the chemical natural decay is assumed to be negligible compared to the cell uptake.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
