@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A correction method using a support vector machine to minimize hematocrit interference in blood glucose measurements

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A decrease in hematocrit levels increases glucose concentrations.An increase in hematocrit levels decreases glucose concentrations.We develop hematocrit compensation method that minimizes the effects of hematocrit on glucose measurements.Glucose concentrations were calculated with linear fitting prediction and a support vector machine.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Hematocrit,Glucose concentration,Adaptive calibration curve,Chronoamperometry,Linear fitting prediction,Support vector machine,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Point-of-care testing glucose meters are widely used, important tools for determining the blood glucose levels of people with diabetes, patients in intensive care units, pregnant women, and newborn infants. However, a number of studies have concluded that a change in hematocrit (Hct) levels can seriously affect the accuracy of glucose measurements. The aim of this study was to develop an algorithm for glucose calculation with improved accuracy using the Hct compensation method that minimizes the effects of Hct on glucose measurements. The glucose concentrations in this study were calculated with an adaptive calibration curve using linear fitting prediction and a support vector machine, which minimized the bias in the glucose concentrations caused by the Hct interference. This was followed by an evaluation of performance according to the international organization for standardization (ISO) 15197:2013 based on bias with respect to the reference method, the coefficient of variation, and the valid blood samples/total blood samples within the ±20% and 15% error grids. Chronoamperometry was performed to verify the effect of Hct variation and to compare the proposed method. As a result, the average coefficients of variation for chronoamperometry and the Hct compensation method were 2.43% and 3.71%, respectively, while the average biases (%) for these methods were 12.08% and 5.69%, respectively. The results of chronoamperometry demonstrated that a decrease in Hct levels increases glucose concentrations, whereas an increase in Hct levels reduces glucose concentrations. Finally, the proposed method has improved the accuracy of glucose measurements compared to existing chronoamperometry methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
According to the World Health Organization (WHO), there are approximately 347 million people with diabetes globally, and the disease is one of the main causes of death in developing countries. The WHO predicted that the number of deaths due to diabetes would increase two-fold by 2030 compared to the current levels [1]. Point-of-care testing (POCT) glucose meters are important tools for diabetics and are widely used because they are relatively inexpensive and easy to use. It is strongly recommended that people with diabetes check their blood glucose levels regularly using glucose meters. Knowledge of their blood glucose levels helps people manage their diabetes and prevent future complications.Although POCT glucose meters are widely used, many factors cause inaccurate measurement results, such as the varying blood sample volumes applied to the cell of the biosensors, poor peripheral circulation, oxygen tension, temperature, user errors, and widely different hematocrit (Hct) levels [2–9]. Research has shown that a change in Hct levels significantly affects the accuracy of blood glucose measurement [5]. Hct represents the volume percentage of solid particles in whole blood, including red blood cells (RBC). It is measured by separating the whole blood collected in a test tube (or capillary) into plasma and solid particles by centrifugation. The normal range of Hct levels for men is 41–50% and 36–44% for women [10]. However, the levels in anemic patients, pregnant women, and newborns may differ widely from the normal range [11–13]. In the case of a patient with anemia who normally has a low Hct level, a glucose concentration measured with a commercial glucose meter will appear higher than the actual level. On the other hand, in case of a patient with erythrocytosis, the reading may be lower than the actual glucose concentration. Depending on the manufacturer of the glucose meter, the measured glucose levels at various Hct levels may be biased by 4–40% from the value of 42% Hct, the normal mean Hct level recommended by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 15197, to a higher or lower value [3–5,14,15].This phenomenon can be explained by blood viscosity [16–19]. The relationship between Hct and the logarithm of blood viscosity is expressed by a linear equation [16]. In other words, the blood viscosity increases at higher Hct levels, and the blood diffusion rate slows by the increased viscosity. Therefore, the ion transfer rate between the blood sample and the reagent layer of the test strip becomes slower in the electrochemical method, which decreases the current in the working electrode and leads to underestimation of the actual glucose concentration. On the other hand, the opposite phenomenon appears at low Hct levels. Therefore, an appropriate correcting method for the effect of Hct on blood glucose level measurements is one of the most important factors that can improve the accuracy of POCT glucose meters.Many blood glucose meters measure the glucose level from whole blood or plasma (the fluid part of the blood). However, the glucose level in the plasma is usually 12–15% higher than in the whole blood because the glucose content in the whole blood is lower than the glucose content in plasma alone. The whole blood glucose level results were multiplied by 1.12 to convert plasma equivalent values [20]. Home blood glucose meters measure the glucose in whole blood, whereas most lab tests measure the glucose in the plasma. In the study, the glucose level was converted from the whole blood glucose to the plasma glucose values.POCT glucose meters often use electrochemical test strip sensors [21,22]. To extract the Hct compensation parameters from the current/time curve and to calculate glucose concentrations, a mathematical model is created by applying a variety of potential waveforms, including alternating current (AC) and direct current (DC). This compensation method is based on the measurement of electrical characteristics, such as impedance, resistivity, and conductivity [4,23].The aim of the current study was to develop an easy-to-use POCT glucose meter with improved accuracy using simple DC amperometry with algorithms that minimize the Hct effect bias. We attempted the Hct compensation method, which consists of a prediction of the current curve and an adaptive calibration method based on a support vector machine (SVM), to reduce the Hct level-dependent bias. The prediction of the current curve involved calculating glucose concentrations by estimating the values outside the range of the current curve measured at the working electrode. To estimate the current curve profile outside the time-interval range, a slope at a specific interval was used. The point that minimized the bias and was less sensitive to the Hct effect was found from the estimated current curve, and the glucose concentration was calculated from that estimated current point value. The adaptive calibration method used an SVM to classify the Hct level such as low, mid, and high. A specific feature to classify the Hct level from the amperometry-based current curve was extracted, and a calibration curve was applied according to the classified Hct level. Simple electrochemistry-based chronoamperometry was performed to verify the effect of variation by the Hct. The present study also compared a simple chronoamperometry method with the results of the proposed method to evaluate the latter׳s performance. Finally, the results of the proposed method were analyzed to verify their strengths and limitations.In this study, we used electrochemical test strips, analog and digital circuits, and a PC for signal measurements.Fig. 1 shows the structure of the glucose sensor used in this paper (CareSens N test strip, i-SENS Inc., Seoul, Republic of Korea). The sensor consists of working, counter, and third electrodes. The glucose concentration is determined by the current at the interface between the working electrode and the counter electrode, and the counter electrode is connected to ground in the glucose meter system. However, the third electrode is distinct from the working electrode in terms of area and the position of the electrode (as shown in Fig. 1), and measures the electrical current against the counter electrode, such as the working electrode. The working and third electrodes in the sensor are located in the path of the sample flow and are distance, d (mm), apart. In this system, the glucose in the blood first reacts with the enzymes of the working electrode and then with the third electrode when the blood sample travels distance, d. The time interval of the reaction between the working and third electrodes is calculated to determine the injection time.The currents of the working and third electrodes were connected to a microcontroller unit via a current-to-voltage converter circuit to conduct an analog-to-digital conversion (ADC). The resolution of the ADC was 12-bit, and full-scale was 2500mV. The AD-converted data were sent to the PC, and the current curve of each blood sample was stored.Venous whole blood samples collected from a donor were centrifuged to separate the plasma and RBC. The blood samples were reconstituted with five different Hct levels (20%, 30%, 40%, 50%, and 60%) to verify the changes in glucose concentrations according to their Hct levels. The Hct levels of the reconstituted blood samples were confirmed by a reference method (centrifugation). Each Hct level was spiked using a stock solution of 20,000mg/dL to produce four different target glucose concentrations (80, 150, 300, and 600mg/dL).Each of the blood samples was measured 20 times as follows: n=G×H×N=4×5×20=400, where G is the glucose concentration, H is the Hct level, and N is the number of measurements. All the glucose measurements were conducted by a skilled researcher made using lots of the same test strip under the same environmental conditions. Half of the samples, i.e., 200 of the 400 samples, were used for the training datasets, and the other half were used in the testing datasets. The measurement was performed at a temperature of 23±5°C according to the ISO 15197 standard. The temperature was maintained within a range of ±2°C. To validate the methods proposed in this paper, YSI 2300 (Yellow Springs Instruments Inc., Yellow Springs, OH, USA) was used as the reference method for the glucose meter system. The measurement results from the reference method were converted from whole blood glucose concentrations to plasma-equivalent blood glucose concentrations as follows [20]:(1)Plasmaglucose=Wholebloodglucose[1−(0.0024×Hctlevel(%))](mg/dL).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
