@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A flexible and effective NC machining process reuse approach for similar subparts

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A feature-based parameter-driven model to guide NC process reuse is established.The NC process parameter-driven characteristic of similar feature is revealed.An NC process reusability assessment approach of similar pocket/subpart is proposed.We extend feature-based NC process reuse to a greater granularity of subpart.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Feature-based machining,Reusability assessment,Inheritance mechanism,NC machining process reuse,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
NC machining process reuse is widely accepted as an effective strategy for engineers to generate the process plan with less time and lower cost. However, there has been very little research on how to reuse the NC machining process of similar subparts. As a result, most reusable NC machining process still has to remain in the repository as tacit knowledge, which can easily get lost due to oblivion. This paper proposes a novel NC machining process reuse approach for similar subparts in which existing NC machining process cases are described in association with machining features. First, a feature-based parameter-driven model is established to formalize the links between information imbedded in the machining feature and the parameters of cutting tools, drive geometries, and machining strategies. Then, the NC process parameter-driven characteristic of similar feature is revealed from the perspective of machining geometry, machining precision of the feature, and cutter geometry. Moreover, an NC process reusability assessment approach of similar pocket/subpart is presented using the pocket’s medial axis transform. Finally, the NC machining process inheritance mechanisms are explored to implement the NC machining process reuse automatically and efficiently. A prototype system based on CATIA has been developed to verify the effectiveness of the proposed approach.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With increasingly competitive environment for manufacturing enterprises, engineers are often challenged to design the NC machining process (called NC process for simplicity) of a part with less time and lower cost  [1]. To deal with this challenge, a feasible strategy is to reuse the NC process of similar subparts in the repository as effectively as possible  [2]. Here, a subpart of a 3D CAD model is composed of a set of machining features on a part model, which may appear in different 3D CAD models. In matured manufacturing enterprises, similar subparts are usually machined with similar NC processes, which indicate that there exists a large amount of NC processes that can be reused. In recent years, the content-based 3D CAD model retrieval has become an active research topic and a lot of work has been done  [3,4], which provides a novel enabling tool to locate the similar subparts for reusing their NC processes in finer manner. However, most of the related works have focused on searching the similar subparts, not dealing with how to reuse the existing NC process of the retrieved similar subpart. Consequently, current NC process reuse approaches still rest on the level of similar subparts discovering, and the retrieved similar subparts are primarily taken as a reference for NC process reuse, which relies heavily on the experience and knowledge of engineers.Today, computer-aided design (CAD), computer-aided manufacturing (CAM), and computerized numerical control (CNC) technologies have been widely used in machining complex parts, and a huge number of 3D CAD models with NC processes (also called CAM model) are generated in the repository. However, since the CAM models generated by CAM software (e.g. CATIA, UG) are always structured based on machining operations instead of machining features, they cannot be handled directly by computers for NC process reuse without transformation. Recently, we developed a feature-based machining process model (FMPM) for the CAM model to realize its feature-based structured representation  [5], and then each machining feature of the CAM model case in the repository is associated with a machining operation sequence. The FMPM would be helpful to speed up the NC process planning by reusing the NC process of similar machining feature. However, some critical issues are still not addressed: (1) whether the machining operations associated with the similar feature can be reused by the query feature from a new part, (2) how to assess the reusability of multiple feasible NC process solutions from CAM model repository for the query feature, and (3) how to establish the inheritance mechanisms for the selected feasible NC process solution to implement the NC process reuse. Consequently, the NC process of the similar feature cannot be reused automatically and efficiently for the engineers. As a result, many successful NC processes containing machining know-how of skilled engineers, which often hide behind the geometrical models, still have to remain in the repository as tacit knowledge and can easily get lost due to oblivion  [6], which lead to a huge waste for the enterprise, and hence the motivation of this research.In this paper, a novel NC process reuse approach for similar subparts is presented to overcome the above-mentioned problems, in which NC process cases in the repository are described in association with machining features based on FMPM to generate the machining know-how database automatically. In particular, a feature-based parameter-driven model is proposed to formalize the links between information imbedded in the machining feature and the parameters of cutting tools, drive geometries, and machining strategies first. Then, the NC process parameter-driven characteristic of similar feature is revealed from the perspective of machining geometry, machining precision of the feature, and cutter geometry. Moreover, an NC process reusability assessment approach of similar pocket/subpart is presented based on the medial axis transform of the pocket. Finally, the NC process inheritance mechanisms are explored to implement the NC process reuse automatically and efficiently. The work presented in this paper is dedicated to NC process reuse for the parts machined with 2 1/2-axis CNC milling.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section  2, we review the related works. In Section  3, some basic concepts and an overview of our approach are provided. Section  4 gives the details of the NC process reusability assessment approach of similar subpart, and Section  5 describes various inheritance mechanisms for NC process reuse. Then in Sections  6 and 7, the experiments and discussion are provided. Finally, we conclude the paper and present the future work in Section  8.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
