@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Modeling of high sodium intake effects on left ventricular hypertrophy

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A system-level computer simulation of chronic high sodium intake effects is conducted.The current model couples a cardiovascular hemodynamics model and a renal system model.Left ventricular (LV) wall stress is modeled to compute the changes of the LV wall thickness.Modeling results suggest high sodium intake alters the body-fluid homeostasis and increases the LV work load and relative wall thickness.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Mathematical modeling,Cardiovascular hemodynamics,Renal system model,High sodium intake,Left ventricular hypertrophy,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Many clinical studies suggest that chronic high sodium intake contributes to the development of essential hypertension and left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy. In the present study, a system-level computer model has been developed to simulate the long-term effects of increased sodium intake on the LV mechanical functions and the body-fluid homeostasis. The new model couples a cardiovascular hemodynamics function model with an explicit account of the LV wall thickness variation and a long-term renal system model. The present model is validated with published results of clinical studies. The results suggest that, with increased sodium intake, the renal system function, the plasma hormone concentrations, and the blood pressure adapt to new levels of equilibrium. The LV work output and the relative wall thickness increase due to the increase of sodium intake. The results of the present model match well with the patient data.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH), manifested by an enlargement of myocardium tissue, is a predisposing factor for many cardiovascular diseases [1]. During the past decades, numerous studies have demonstrated a strong correlation between chronic hypertension and LVH [2–5]. A physiologic adaptation of the left ventricular structure to the chronic pressure loading is generally considered the main reason for hypertrophy [4,6]. Following the Laplace׳s law, this adaptation allows the wall stress and the pumping function to remain relatively unchanged by increase in the left ventricle (LV) tissue volume and LV wall thickness [7].As a major contributor to the prevalence of essential hypertension [8,9], high sodium intake has been demonstrated to cause LVH by inducing chronically elevated blood pressure [10–12]. Meanwhile, some studies also suggest that high sodium intake can also contribute to LVH through a different route, independent of or in addition to the hypertensive effect [13–18]. In patients with essential hypertension and high sodium intake, an insufficiently down-regulated Angiotensin II concentration was found to correlate with cardiac hypertrophy [19]. Animal experiments also suggest that high sodium intake facilitates the activation of the local (cardiac) renin-angiotensin system (RAS) [20], increases the synthesis of cardiac aldosterone [21], and induces higher concentration of Angiotensin II in myocardium [22]. Based on these clinical findings, sodium restriction [23] and angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor [24] have been used with positive effects on the regression of LVH and therefore successfully prescribed as treatments for LVH [6].In the present study, a computer model has been developed to link high sodium intake to LVH based upon the existing clinical evidences. A long-term renal system model developed by Karaaslan et al. [25] is adapted and used to simulate the chronic effects of high sodium intake on body-fluid homeostasis. To account for the LV pressure loading, we used an open-source hemodynamics model of human cardiovascular system, i.e. CVSim [26]. A model for the response of the LV wall thickness to the pressure overload is developed. By combining and modifying the renal system model and the CVSim model, the new model is capable of simulating both the long-term effects of body-fluid homeostasis and the detailed structural properties of the human cardiac chambers. Since clinical studies are often restricted with test subjects and other medical issues, computer modeling will be particularly helpful for an enhanced understanding of the system-level response of the LV wall thickness to high sodium intake. The details of the model will be described in the following section.CVSim is based on a closed-loop circulation model for hemodynamic responses of cardiovascular system, the total blood volume is kept constant and the body-fluid homeostasis is not simulated. For the purpose of the present study, we couple a long-term renal system model to the existing CVSim model. The hybrid model then has the capability of simulating both the short-term response of hemodynamics and the long-term fluid-electrolyte homeostasis.An open-source model, named CVSim, has been adapted and used for the hemodynamic simulation in the present study. Since 1984, CVSim has been developed and successfully utilized in teaching [26] and research [27–28]. This model is a closed-loop, lumped-parameter model based on electrical circuitry analogy. As shown inFig. 1, each unit of the model consists of resistors and capacitors, representing the afferent/efferent resistance and reservoir functions of a modeled compartment in human body. Voltage and currents mimic blood pressure and blood flow rate, respectively.According to Kirchhoff׳s current law, a first order ordinary differential equation can be written for a compartment:(1)Pn−1−PnRn−1+Pn+1−PnRn+d[Cn(Pref−Pn)]dt=0In the present study, the reference pressure in the interstitial spacePrefis assumed to be constant. Hence this equation becomes:(2)dPndt=Pn−1−PnRn−1Cn+Pn+1−PnRnCn+(Pref−Pn)CndCndtThe capacitance is assumed to be constant in most of the compartments, except for the four cardiac chambers. Therefore, the equation is further simplified,(3)dPndt=Pn−1−PnRn−1Cn+Pn+1−PnRnCnTherefore, by solving a system of first-order ordinary differential equations (ODE), the hemodynamics of the circulation system can be simulated. In the present study, a 21-comparment version of CVSim is adopted. The model includes the four cardiac chambers, pulmonary artery and vein, and other systemic arteries, veins, and micro-circulations, as shown inFig. 2.The pumping function of heart is simulated by varying the elastance of the four cardiac chambers, based on the following function:(4)E(t)Ees={EdEes+Ees−Ed2Ees[1−cos(πtTs)],0≤t≤TsEdEes+Ees−Ed2Ees[1+cos(2πt−TsTs)],Ts≤t≤32TsEdEes,t≥32Tswhere E(t) is the time-dependent elastance; Ed, Eesare diastolic and end-systolic elastance, respectively; Tsis the systolic time interval for each chamber. The modeled elastance is shown inFig. 3. The time-varying capacitances of the cardiac chambers are then calculated asC(t)=1/E(t). The validity of this model relationship has been verified by comparing the simulated curve with those found in clinical study, as can be found in [29]. The values of the resistance, capacitance, and initial volume of each compartment are assigned based on clinical studies. The system of ODE has been solved using fourth-order Runge-Kutta methods with a fixed time step of 0.001s. A sample waveform of the left ventricular, aortic, and systemic venous pressures are shown inFig. 4. The parameter assignments and details in model implementations can be found in [28].To study the LV hypertrophy, the LV wall thickness is linked to LV pressure and volume by using the Laplace׳s law in the present study. The shape of LV is assumed to be a sphere and the stress acting on the mid-plane cross-section can be calculated as:(5)σ=PπR2π[(R+h)2−R2]where σ is the wall stress, P the LV blood pressure, R the LV internal radius, and h LV wall thickness. By re-arranging the equation, the LV wall thickness can be written as a function of the LV pressure and radius:(6)hR=1+Pσ−1The parameter h/R, which can be referred as a relative wall thickness at the end-systolic state of LV, varies with the LV pressure. According to Grossman et al. [7], the LV wall stress does not change significantly in hypertrophic patients, as the LV tissues appear to adapt to the mechanical overloads and restore the wall stress. In the present study, the LV wall stress as a function of time is modeled using a similar function as the time-varying elastance. The equations are given as follows:(7)σ(t)σps={σedσps+σps−σed2σps[1−cos(πt0.5Ts)],0≤t≤12Tsσminσps+σps−σmin2σps[1+cos(2πt−0.5Ts0.5Ts)],12Ts≤t≤32Tsσed−σminτ−1.5Tst,t≥32Tswhereσps,σed,σminare the peak-systolic wall stress, end-diastolic wall stress, and minimum wall stress during early diastole, respectively.τrepresents the time for a heartbeat and the inverse of the current heart rate. The time to reach the peak-systolic stress is reported shorter than the systolic time, as shown in Grossman et al. [7], and is assumed to be one half of the systolic time in the present study. As shown inFig. 5, the time-dependent LV wall stress calculated by the equations matches reasonably well with in vivo results of Grossman et al. [7].Fig. 6 shows the simulated behaviors of the LV pressure, wall stress, and thickness in a typical cardiac cycle. Data from Grossman et al. [7] are also included for comparison. Note that the LV wall stress and pressure have been normalized by the maximum LV pressure during systole, while the LV wall thickness by the maximum thickness. The simulated results agree reasonably well with the data. It can be seen that the LV wall stress reaches the peak value before the end of systole and then decreases, while the LV pressure remains at high level during systole. The LV wall thickness increases to its maximum when the LV pressure decreases sharply after the end of diastole. The capturing of these features in the simulations provides a validation of the present modeling of the LV wall thickness based on the clinical hemodynamic information.Since 1970, several renal system models have been developed [30–32] and most of them are built following the pioneering effort described in Guyton et al. [33]. Guyton׳s model, which consists of 354 blocks, more than 400 equations, and 18 different functioning subsystems, is comprehensive and complicated. Karaaslan et al. [25] integrated parts of a simplified Guyton׳s model with two renal system models [31,32] and studied long-term cardiovascular responses to the changes of sodium balance and renal sympathetic nerve activity (RSNA). This model incorporates the merits of the previous three models and includes the recent experimental findings, such as the effects of RSNA on the tubular sodium reabsorption and the renin secretion in the renal system [34] and the effects of Atrial Natriuretic Peptide (ANP) on the right atrial pressure and sodium excretion [35]. This model considers not only the sophisticated renal system, but also the effects of the hormonal and renal sympathetic reflex on detailed renal functions. The renal system is simulated as a single nephron. Water and sodium in the plasma go through a sequential process, including the glomerular filtration, tubular reabsorption, and urinary excretion, which are controlled by RSNA and the plasma renin-angiotensin-aldosterone (RAS) system. The structure of the model will be shown later (Fig. 8). In the system control part of the model, the hormone concentrations are updated based on a simple rate equation of the form:(8)dCidt=1τi(Si−Ci)whereCiis the concentration of a specific hormone,Siits secretion rate, andτithe time constant for each hormone to reach a stabilized state. Other functional blocks normally consist of one or several equations that are either based on a curve fitting of clinical data or a re-adaption from the Guyton׳s model. Detailed equations and parametric assignments can be found in Karaaslan et al. [25]. The entire renal system model includes eight first-order ODE (dependent variables) and 61 additional independent, non-linear equations.The current implementation of the renal system model is illustrated inFig. 7. First, the sodium and hormone concentrations are calculated based on the values of the dependent variables (including the normal concentrations of hormones, extracellular fluid volume, total sodium amount, and baroreceptor reflex parameters) at the current time step. Second, the renal water and sodium filtration and reabsorption at each segment of the tubular system are updated. Third, water and sodium intake and hormone secretion rate are calculated. Fourth, the first-order derivatives of the dependent variables are calculated using Eq. (8). At the conclusion of the current time step, the dependent variables are updated using the fourth-order Runge-Kutta method. The simulation continues to the next time by going to the step one described above.The effects of the cardiovascular system, such as the arterial mean pressure, in the renal system model of Karaaslan et al. [25] have been modeled based on a simplified relationship among the cardiac output, mean filling pressure and mean arterial pressure. In the present study, we use the 21-component CVSim described above to model the functions of the cardiovascular system. The interactions between the renal system model and the CVSim model are through physiological parameters of the systems and are shown by the red arrowed lines inFig. 8. Specifically, the mean (renal) arterial pressure and the mean right atrial pressure are calculated in CVSim and are transmitted to the renal system model on a beat-by-beat basis. Meanwhile, the renal system model provides the changes in blood volume and the renal arteriole resistance to the CVSim model for the calculation in the ensuing heartbeat. With this strong coupling between the two system-level models, the effects of water and sodium intakes on the hemodynamic properties of each of the modeled cardiovascular compartments, such as pressure, flow rate, and volume, can be calculated. The parameters assigned to the CVSim model and the renal system model are based on the clinical data of healthy human subjects. The hybrid model is, therefore, developed to simulate the dynamic responses of a healthy subject in normal conditions.In the validation of their renal function model, Karaaslan et al. [25] compared the simulation results with the clinical data reported in [36]. The clinical study has been designed to investigate the blood pressure and renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system responses of both hypertensive and normotensive subjects by giving them high sodium diets (200%, 350mmol/day) for a 5-day period and low sodium diets (6%, 20mmol/day) for the following 5-day period. InFig. 9, the present simulation results are compared with the clinical data for the normotensive healthy subjects in He et al. [36]. For comparison, the results obtained by using the renal system model of Karaaslan et al. [25] are also included. The results shown are normalized to the values at day 0 in the simulation and the clinical data, respectively. It should be noted that, in the present work, we first develop a computer code for the renal system model of Karaaslan et al. [25]. The new computer code has been written using the C++ language in order to facilitate the need for the renal function model to interface with the cardiovascular system model in CVSim. The results of our implementation agree with those reported in Karaaslan et al. [25]. It can be seen from Fig. 9 that, in response to the high sodium intake, the urinary sodium flow rate increases quickly to match the sodium intake rate, and eventually establishes a sodium balance at elevated level within one day. As a result, the plasma sodium concentration increases by about 1.2mmol/L. The plasma renin and aldosterone concentration decrease dramatically, indicating that the RAS is inhibited by the high sodium intake. After day 5, a sharp reduction of sodium intake induces a reversed effect on above-mentioned parameters. The simulated transient response and equilibrium level of some parameters are slightly different between the present model and Karaaslan et al. [25] model, but agree well with the clinical data. The results suggest that the new model is valid for the simulation of long-term fluid and electrolyte homeostasis.The CVSim model has been integrated with the renal system model. Therefore, in Case 2, we seek to validate the coupling by examining the effects of the sodium intake on the cardiovascular system. The study of Sacks et al. [37] is chosen for the validation. In this study, 412 participants were randomly assigned into two large groups and given two kinds of diets. In each diet group, foods with high, intermediate and low sodium contents were provided for 30 consecutive days. The reduction of sodium intake has been shown to result in a substantial decrease in the blood pressure in both groups. In the present study, we simulate the three levels of sodium intake in the control diet group of Sacks et al. [37], i.e. 141 mmol/day (high), 106mmol/day (intermediate), and 64mmol/day (low). Since the sodium balance is generally reached within a day, we ran the simulation for each of the sodium intake level for two days to assure equilibrium. The blood pressure at the end of the 30th day is therefore represented by the stabilized value. As shown inFig. 10, the mean arterial pressure decreases and stabilizes with the long-term reduction of the sodium intake level. The reduction in mean arterial pressure predicted by the current model matches well with the average value given in Sacks et al. [37].The current hybrid model generates reasonable results of fluid-electrolyte homeostasis and blood pressures in response to the elevated sodium intakes. With the model features that couple the renal system and the cardiovascular system, the current hybrid model could be used to investigate the sodium intake effects on both the long-term systems response and the beat-by-beat hemodynamics in modeled target compartments. In the following section, we apply the present model to study the high sodium intake effects on the hemodynamics of the left ventricle. The possible link between high sodium intake and LVH will be discussed.It is well known that, with its infinite feedback gain to blood pressure changes, the kidney plays a central role in the long-term pressure control [38]. In the present model, this feature is considered in the long-term renal system model. As is shown in the model validation Case 1, for a given amount of sodium intake, both the actual and the modeled systems eventually follow with an equal amount of sodium output to maintain a zero net increase. During this process, other properties of the system adapt and change as well. Therefore, a chronic change in sodium intake will induce chronic changes in blood pressure, hormonal activities, and body-fluid homeostasis, which may eventually alter the structural and mechanical functions of the cardiovascular system. To study the effects of sodium intake levels on the system-wise responses and its possible contribution to LVH, we have performed simulations with five different sodium intake amounts. They include the three levels that have been used in the validation Case 2 (64, 106, 141mmol/day) and two additional sodium intake amounts that are higher (200 and 300mmol/day). For each of the simulation cases, the system parameters have been recorded when the systems have stabilized. The resulting data are plotted inFig. 11 (a)-(f).Fig. 11(a) & (b) show the model predicts an increased amount of sodium intake increase the total extracellular fluid volume (EXFV) through an elevated amount of thirst-driven water intake controlled by the plasma anti-diuretic hormone (ADH). The increase in EXFV is not significant, particularly at the higher end of the sodium intake, reflecting the powerful infinite gain in the long-term control of the renal system. As both a cause and a consequence of the body-fluid balance, the RAS system also adapts to the increase of the sodium intake and the different hormones changes to regulate the function of different parts of the renal system. In Fig. 11(b), all the concentrations have been normalized to those of the intermediate sodium intake case (107mmol/day). The results suggest that with the increased sodium intake:.1)the anti-diuretic hormone (ADH) concentration increases, promoting water reabsorption in the renal tubular system;Renin, angiotensin II (ANG-II), and aldosterone concentrations decrease as a result of increased sodium flow rate in macula densa and plasma sodium concentration. Angiotensin II and aldosterone act to reduce sodium reabsorption in the proximal tubule and the distal tubule of the nephron;Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) increases slightly due to the elevated right atrial pressure, acting to increase sodium reabsorption in the collecting duct of the nephron.As a result of these changes in the hormone concentrations and the increased renal blood flow, the model predicts the glomerular filtration rate (GFR) and total tubular reabsorption of both water and sodium to establish new levels of stabilization chronically [Fig. 11(c) & (d)]. It can be seen that although the reabsorption rate also increases with the increase of sodium intake, the percentage of reabsorption decreases. This ensures the excretion rates of both water and sodium matches exactly with the water and sodium intake rates. Due to the powerful regulation of the renal system, the plasma sodium concentration only increases slightly [Fig. 11(e)], even though the amount of sodium intake increases more than fourfold. Finally, as shown in Fig. 11(f), the increased amount of sodium intake from 64mmol/day to 300mmol/day causes a chronic increase of about 9mmHg in the mean renal arterial pressure.By elevating the blood pressure and re-adjustment of body-fluid homeostasis, increased sodium intake may indirectly affect the pressure and volume loads on a cardiovascular compartment.Fig. 12(a) shows the stabilized pressure-volume (P-V) loops of the left ventricle under the five different amounts of sodium intake. It can be seen that increasing the sodium intake from 64mmol/day to 300mmol/day enlarges the P-V loops of the LV and causes a shift toward higher volume. Particularly, the changes of pressure and volume are more pronounced during the isovolumetric contraction and systole. Fig. 12(b) shows the work done by the left ventricular during a cardiac cycle by calculating the areas enclosed by the P-V loops shown in Fig. 12(a). As the sodium intake increases from 64mmol/day to 300mmol/day, the LV work per heartbeat increases by approximately 19%, indicating a chronically increased work load of the LV as an adaptation to the long-term increase of the sodium intake.The chronically elevated work load, as has been simulated and shown in Fig. 12, may affect the mechanical properties of the LV tissue and eventually cause LVH. The increase of LV wall thickness is considered in the current model by applying the Laplace׳s Law.Fig. 13(a) shows the computational results of the relative wall thickness (h/R) as a function of the urinary sodium and their comparisons with the clinical data [19]. Since the results are obtained when the system is stabilized, the predicted urinary sodium excretion is exactly equal to the sodium intake amount in the current model. In the clinical study, the non-dimensionalized LV relative wall thickness is usually calculated using the end-diastolic wall thickness and the LV diameter. Therefore, the modeling results shown in this figure are recorded at the end of diastole of the LV. As suggested by the clinical data, the simulated LV relative wall thickness increases as the sodium intake increases. The calculated results lie within the range of the raw patient data, indicating the thickening of the LV wall with elevated sodium intakes. At very high sodium intake, the model results show less significant increase of LV wall thickness, suggesting some included cases of LVH are possibly caused by factors other than sodium-induced hypertension.Fig. 13(b) shows a comparison of the simulated normalized ANG-II concentration as a function of urinary sodium excretion with the raw patient data. It can be seen that the trend shown by the modeling results fits well with the raw clinical data, indicating that our model works well in predicting the relative ANG-II concentration with a normal functioning hormone system (averaged among large population of patients). Note that the distribution of ANG-II concentration of real patients shows a scattered pattern in the clinical study. Schmieder et al. [19] concluded that the patients with abnormally high ANG-II concentrations associated with a normal urinary sodium excretion tend to suffer more serious LVH. Based on their analysis, the patients in the “high” ANG-II concentration group (12.9±1.1pg/mL vs 3.9±1.3pg/ml in the “low” group) have a higher LV relative wall thickness than patients in the “low” ANG-II concentration group (0.49±0.08 vs 0.44±0.05). Since our model does not include the pathology of the impaired ANG-II responses, the ANG-II-regulated LVH is not simulated in the present study, which may account for the less significant increase in the predicted LV wall thickness.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Left ventricular hypertrophy has been recognized as an active adaptation of left ventricular wall tissues to chronic hemodynamic loads. Chronic high sodium intake may induce hypertension and therefore is closely related to left ventricular hypertrophy. In the present study, a mathematical model has been developed to study the effects of high sodium intake on the cardiovascular hemodynamics and the body-fluid homeostasis. The new hybrid model couples and modifies a cardiovascular model and a long-term renal system model. The model has been validated using clinical data. The results indicate that the new model is effective in the simulation of the long-term adaptations of hemodynamic and homeostasis parameters.The simulation results suggest that with an increase of the sodium intake, body fluid volume, blood pressure, and different hormone concentrations adapt to new levels of balances. As the sodium intake increases, the left ventricular pressure and volume increase, particularly during systole. The left ventricle work load increases considerably. The left ventricle relative wall thickness increases as the sodium intake increases. There is evidence that the impaired down-regulation of ANG-II, which is not simulated in the current model, is also correlated to the left ventricle wall thickness in left ventricular hypertrophy patients. As the exact mechanism of ANG-II-regulated left ventricular hypertrophy becomes clear in the future, mathematical modeling of the ANG-II effects on left ventricle wall thickness can be developed.In summary, the current model can reasonably simulate the long-term response of the cardiovascular and the renal systems parameters under different chronic sodium intakes examined. With an explicit modeling of the long-term hemodynamics changes, the model can be used for the estimation of the increase of left ventricle wall thickness due to pressure and volume loading induced by the increase of sodium intake.None declared.