@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimum force system for intrusion and extrusion of maxillary central incisor in labial and lingual orthodontics

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Force system for intrusion and extrusion of incisor in LaO and LiO is proposed.Mathematical model of maxillary central incisor with normal inclination is developed.Different cases of heights of bracket slot from incisal edge are considered.The devised force system is validated with finite element analysis.Mathematical model can form the basis for future technological innovation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Intrusion,Extrusion,Maxillary central incisor,LaO,LiO,Mathematical model,Finite element analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundThe objective of the present study was to specify an optimum force system for intrusion and extrusion of maxillary central incisor and to compare the effects of bracket positioning at different heights from the incisal edge in Labial Orthodontics (LaO) and Lingual Orthodontics (LiO).MethodsA mathematical model of maxillary central incisor with normal inclination was developed. Four cases of heights of bracket slot from incisal edge were considered both in LaO and LiO viz. 3mm, 4mm, 5mm and 6mm. Based on a mathematical model, an optimum force system consisting of an intrusive or extrusive force (F) and a moment (M) was devised and moment (M) to force (F) ratio (M:F ratio) was estimated in each case. Then, three-dimensional Computer Aided Design (CAD) models of incisor and surrounding structures were prepared. To validate an optimum force system, finite element analysis was carried out and force system with derived M:F ratio was applied in each case.ResultsIn finite element analysis, results were shown in the form of vector graph of nodal displacements along with undeformed and deformed models. The desired intrusion or extrusion of incisor was observed. Thus, force system devised from a mathematical model was validated with finite element analysis in each case.ConclusionTo achieve intrusion or extrusion, M:F ratios required in LaO were same i.e. 8:1 for aforementioned heights of bracket slot from incisal edge but different in LiO i.e. 0:1, 1:1, 2:1 and 3:1 for the heights of 3mm, 4mm, 5mm and 6mm respectively.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Tooth displacement is an outcome of continuous orthodontic force system due to remodeling of the surrounding bone structure. For the best orthodontic treatment, an optimal external force system should be determined so that tooth movement can be estimated and controlled [1–4]. Accurate application of basic biomechanical principles in orthodontic treatment simplifies the force system. It improves the efficiency of the orthodontic appliance and obviates any side effects. Thus, more predictable tooth movement can be achieved [1].Emphasis should be given to the significance of tooth morphology. Accurate position and orientation of the maxillary and mandibular incisors is a crucial factor for stability, function and esthetics purpose [5–9]. The most discernible teeth in the oral cavity are the maxillary central incisors that can be easily distinguished from the other teeth [10,11].Biomechanical principles of Lingual Orthodontics (LiO) are different from Labial Orthodontics (LaO). If a particular force system produces bodily displacement of tooth in LaO, crown tipping will occur in LiO and vice-versa [12]. Further, LiO is more esthetic orthodontic technique than LaO [13]. In case of vertical forces, the Center of Resistance (Cres) of the tooth is closer in LiO. Besides providing good esthetics, this biomechanical advantage demands lesser force or moment values, which will be more within the biological limit.Finite element analysis has been established as an effective tool for the simulation and analysis of tooth structures [11–20]. It is a quick, accurate and inexpensive method to apply biomechanical forces and analyze results. The main steps in finite element analysis are pre-processing, processing and post-processing [15]. Pre-processing involves three-dimensional geometric modeling of a structure, meshing i.e. discretization into smaller elements connected by nodes, assigning appropriate material properties, loads and boundary conditions. Processing involves solving a set of simultaneous equations with numerous variables to converge the solution. The last step post-processing involves graphical representation of analysis results to compare the stress–strain variations, undeformed and deformed structure at nodes and elements.Application of simply intrusive or extrusive force causes uncontrolled crown tipping of tooth. This uncontrolled tipping should be prevented so that intrusion or extrusion of tooth will occur. Clinically, application of labial and lingual appliances has different effects on tooth movement. However, very few studies have compared intrusion and extrusion of incisors between LaO and LiO [1,2].For this study, maxillary central incisor was considered as it is the most prominent tooth in the oral cavity. In this study, a mathematical model of maxillary central incisor was developed taking various factors into consideration i.e. normal inclination of incisor, position of center of resistance (Cres), distance of labial bracket slot from tooth surface, distance of lingual bracket slot from tooth surface and height of bracket slot from incisal edge. Four cases of height of bracket slot were considered, i.e. 3mm, 4mm, 5mm and 6mm. If any of the above factors is not considered, then it will affect the calculated value of distance (D) between point of force application (Pf) on bracket slot and Cres. Hence, it will alter the values of required force system. So, consideration of all these factors is necessary to devise an optimum force system. To the best of our knowledge, no study has been performed to establish an optimum force system for intrusion and extrusion of maxillary central incisor both in LaO and LiO considering the aforementioned factors. Thus, this study provides a unique optimum force system.The aim of the present study was to specify an optimum force system for intrusion and extrusion of maxillary central incisor and to compare the effects of bracket positioning at different heights from the incisal edge in LaO and LiO. The force system devised from a mathematical model was compared and validated with finite element analysis in each case.There are two permanent maxillary central incisors viz. right and left. The maxillary central incisors are the neighboring teeth in the maxilla with their mesial surfaces in contact with each other. Anatomically, these teeth are identical. Hence, they perform similar functions. In this study, right maxillary central incisor was selected.The equivalent force system at Cres due to single intrusive or extrusive force (F) i.e. at a distance (D) from Cres is a force and a moment developed due to force. Hence, single intrusive or extrusive force (F) produces intrusion or extrusion respectively along with uncontrolled crown tipping. To prevent this tipping, counter-acting moment (M) along with force (F) was applied on the bracket slot so that equivalent force system at the Cres was only single intrusive or extrusive force. Thus, the force system at the bracket slot was a single intrusive or extrusive force (F) and a moment (M) i.e. clockwise or counter-clockwise. This force system was applied in a proper Moment to Force (M:F) ratio according to the position of brackets in LaO and LiO to obtain intrusion or extrusion of tooth. To calculate M:F ratio, a mathematical model of maxillary central incisor was developed. The point on bracket slot where force was applied is also called as point of force application (Pf).The basic anatomic and geometric features of the right permanent maxillary central incisor were taken from Wheeler׳s dental anatomy; physiology and occlusion [21]. The cervico-incisal length of crown and root were 10.5mm and 13mm respectively. The normal inclination of long axis of maxillary central incisor was taken as 22.5° with respect to vertical plane [3]. The position of Cres was taken approximately 0.77 of the root length from the apex on the long axis [22]. The force system was applied on the bracket slot. So, the horizontal distance between the bracket slot and tooth surface was considered to be 1.2mm for labial and 3mm for lingual side respectively [1]. The height of bracket slot from the incisal edge (I) i.e. perpendicular to Occlusal Plane (OP) was varied from 3 to 6mm at an interval of 1mm. In this way, a mathematical model of maxillary central incisor was developed (Fig. 1).Several points were defined on the model i.e. points along the long axis of tooth and points along a line parallel to the OP that passes through the labial and lingual bracket slots. The points defined on the long axis of the tooth were, I=incisal edge, Cres=center of resistance, J=point joining crown and root on long axis of tooth, A=root apex. The points on the lines parallel to OP are shown inTable 1.In mathematical model,Length of Crown,Lcrown=IJ=10.5mmLength of Root,Lroot=AJ=13mmThe horizontal distance between bracket slot and tooth surface was considered as 1.2mm and 3mm in LaO and LiO respectively.In LaO,ɑɑ’=bb’=cc’=dd’=1.2mmIn LiO,ee’=ff’=gg’=hh’=3mmThe horizontal distances within tooth i.e. between tooth surface and long axis of tooth at different heights of bracket slot were determined graphically with enlarged scale as,ɑ′x3=2.9mm,b′x4=3.3mm,c′x5=3.7mm,d′x6=4.1mm,e′x3=0.9mm,f′x4=1.5mm,g′x5=2.1mm,h′x6=2.7mmThe basic trigonometric equations were applied to calculate M:F ratio.(1)Ix3=3cos(22.5°),Ix4=4cos(22.5°),Ix5=5cos(22.5°),Ix6=6cos(22.5°)(2)ACres=0.77×Lroot(3)ICres=(IJ+AJ)−ACres(4)x3Cres=ICres−Ix3,x4Cres=ICres−Ix4,x5Cres=ICres−Ix5,x6Cres=ICres−Ix6Horizontal distance between x3 and Cres, x4 and Cres, x5 and Cres,x6 and Cres are given respectively as:(5)x3Z3=x3Cres×sin(22.5°),x4Z4=x4Cres×sin(22.5°),x5Z5=x5Cres×sin(22.5°),x6Z6=x6Cres×sin(22.5°)In LaO, horizontal distance between ɑ and Cres, b and Cres,c and Cres,d and Cres are given respectively as:(6)D=az3=x3z3×a′x3+aa′,D=bz4=x4z4×b′x4+bb′,D=cz5=x5z5×c′x5+cc′,D=dz6=x6z6×a′x6+dd′In LiO, horizontal distance between e and Cres, f and Cres, g and Cres, h and Cres are given respectively as:(7)D=ez3=(ee′+e′x3)−x3z3,D=fz4=(ff′+f′x4)−x4z4,D=gz5=(gg′+g′x5)−x5z5,D=hz6=(hh′+h′x6)−x6z6In both the cases of LaO and LiO,(8)M=F×Dwhere F=Intrusive or Extrusive Force applied on the bracket slot in g,M=Moment (M) applied on the bracket slot in g-mm,D=Horizontal distance between Cres and bracket slot in mm.M and F were unknown quantities and the distance D was known for various cases.(9)Hence,MF=Di.e.M:F=D:1Thus, M:F ratio required for intrusion or extrusion was the horizontal distance (D) between Cres and bracket slot. The direction of applied moment (M) was dependent on the direction of applied force (F) and the side on which force system was applied viz. labial or lingual.From a mathematical model of maxillary central incisor, distance (D) was calculated from Eqs. (6) and (7).InLaO,D=ɑz3=bz4=cz5=dz6≈8mmInLiO,D=ez3≈0,D=fz4≈1mm,D=gz5≈2mm,D=hz6≈3mmM:F ratio was then estimated from Eq. (9).Table 2 presents M:F ratios required along with direction of moment and force to be applied in case of different bracket slot heights from incisal edge in LaO and LiO. In Table 2, the directions of Moment (M) and Force (F) as viewed from the distal side are, CW – clockwise, CCW – counter-clockwise, UP – upward, DOWN – downward.For intrusion using a labial bracket, the M:F ratio required in all the four cases of bracket slot height was 8:1 with direction of Moment (M) as clockwise (CW) and Force (F) as upward (UP).For intrusion using a lingual bracket, the M:F ratio required in all the four cases of bracket slot height was different. The line through Cres and perpendicular to Occlusal Plane (OP) passes through the bracket slot at 3mm height from incisal edge. Hence, no Moment (M) was required for intrusion and direction of Force (F) was upward (UP) with M:F ratio equal to 0:1 in this case. For other cases of 4, 5 and 6mm height from incisal edge, the M:F ratio required was 1:1, 2:1 and 3:1 respectively with direction of Moment (M) as counter-clockwise (CCW) and Force (F) as upward (UP).For extrusion using a labial bracket, the M:F ratio required in all the four cases of bracket slot height was 8:1 with direction of Moment (M) as counter-clockwise (CCW) and Force (F) as downward (DOWN).For extrusion using a lingual bracket, the M:F ratio required in all the four cases of bracket slot height was different. Similarly as intrusion, no Moment (M) was required for extrusion at 3mm bracket slot height from incisal edge and direction of Force (F) was downward (DOWN) with M:F ratio equal to 0:1 in this case. For other cases of 4, 5 and 6mm height from incisal edge, the M:F ratio required was 1:1, 2:1 and 3:1 respectively with direction of Moment (M) as clockwise (CW) and Force (F) as downward (DOWN).Fig. 2 shows bar charts of proportion of M and F values to be selected for intrusion and extrusion in LaO and LiO. For example, M:F ratio was 8:1 for 3mm bracket slot height for intrusion in LaO, so Moment (M) and Force (F) bars reached to the scale factor of 8 and 1 respectively. It means if F value is selected as 10g, then M value should be taken as (10×8)=80g-mm in the aforesaid case. In Fig. 2, positive values represent upward (UP) force and clockwise (CW) moment, while negative values represent downward (DOWN) force and counter-clockwise (CCW) moment.Three-dimensional CAD models of maxillary central incisor and surrounding tissue structures viz. Periodontal Ligament (PDL) and alveolar bone were prepared. Moreover, labial and lingual brackets were also modeled.First, maxillary central incisor was scanned with the high resolution Cone Beam Computed Tomography i.e. CBCT scan machine (Kodak 9000 extra-oral imaging system with 3D module V2.2, Carestream Dental LLC, Atlanta, GA). CT-scan data consisted of a stack of numerous CT-scan images. Second, CAD model was generated by volume rendering of CT-scan images with the MIMICS software (version 10.1, Materialise NV, Leuven, Belgium). To obtain accurate geometry of tooth, customized thresholding was done under segmentation function in MIMICS. Tooth surface was then smoothed using smoothening function in MIMICS. Tooth model generated here consisted of too many triangular surfaces. In MIMICS, the REMESH module was therefore used to reduce the amount of triangular surfaces while maintaining the quality of geometry. As a result, highly smoothed and geometrically accurate tooth model was generated. The other structures were prepared using CREO software.CREO is Computer Aided Design (CAD) software. CREO Parametric (version 2.0, Parametric Technology Corporation-PTC, Needham, Massachusetts, USA) was used in this study. The tooth modeled using MIMICS was imported in CREO. The CAD models of PDL, Alveolar Bone and brackets were prepared with the reference of tooth model in CREO.Fig. 3 shows all the CAD models. The thickness of PDL was considered to be uniform and equal to 0.2mm [12]. In CREO, the assemblies of bracket, incisor, PDL and bone were then created for various cases.Fig. 4 shows cross-section of assembly of incisor, PDL and bone with labial and lingual brackets for a particular height from incisal edge. The assemblies in CREO were saved in STEP (STandard for the Exchange of Product model data) file format and imported into ANSYS.ANSYS is computer-aided analysis software which enables finite element analysis. ANSYS Workbench (version 14.5, ANSYS Inc., Canonsburg, Pennsylvania, USA) was used for this purpose. In ANSYS, each assembly model was meshed by 10-node tetrahedron and 20-node hexahedron elements connected by nodes. To get more accurate results, mesh refinement was applied on the incisor. One assembly model consisted of 1,08,508 nodes and 57,853 elements on average. Force system was applied to the bracket slot of each assembly which was devised from a mathematical model in each case. The main purpose of taking bracket into consideration was to apply the force system at an offset from the tooth surface. Hence, the force application site was selected solely on anatomical basis, without considering variables such as the type of bracket or slot size. The force system on bracket slot consisting of a force and a moment is shown for a particular case inFig. 5. The value of force was kept fixed i.e. 40g and moment was varied according to M:F ratios derived from a mathematical model. For the boundary conditions, the upper and lateral surfaces of the simulated bone region holding the maxillary incisor were kept fixed. Then, solution command was executed to get the results of finite element analysis. Thus, MIMICS, CREO and ANSYS Workbench were sequentially used for preprocessing and only ANSYS Workbench was used for processing and post-processing.Brackets were considered to be made of stainless steel. All of the materials were considered to be isotropic and linearly elastic, with their respective properties as reported inTable 3.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
