@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Breast cancer diagnosis in digitized mammograms using curvelet moments

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Mammogram analysis based on curvelet moments, with particular attention to the choice of curvelet subband and moment order.A feature selection step to keep the most discriminative moments.An empirical comparison against state-of-the-art curvelet-based methods on two mammogram databases.The effectiveness and the superiority of curvelet moment for abnormality and malignancy detection.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Curvelet moments,Mammography,Feature reduction,Breast cancer diagnosis,Curvelet transform,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Background: Feature extraction is a key issue in designing a computer aided diagnosis system. Recent researches on breast cancer diagnosis have reported the effectiveness of multiscale transforms (wavelets and curvelets) for mammogram analysis and have shown the superiority of curvelet transform. However, the curse of dimensionality problem arises when using the curvelet coefficients and therefore a reduction method is required to extract a reduced set of discriminative features.Methods: This paper deals with this problem and proposes a feature extraction method based on curvelet transform and moment theory for mammogram description. First, we performed discrete curvelet transform and we computed the four first-order moments from curvelet coefficients distribution. Hence, two feature sets can be obtained: moments from each band and moments from each level. In this work, both sets are studied. Then, the t-test ranking technique was applied to select the best features from each set. Finally, a k-nearest neighbor classifier was used to distinguish between normal and abnormal breast tissues and to classify tumors as malignant or benign. Experiments were performed on 252 mammograms from the Mammographic Image Analysis Society (mini-MIAS) database using the leave-one-out cross validation as well as on 11553 mammograms from the Digital Database for Screening Mammography (DDSM) database using 2×5-fold cross validation.Results: Experimental results prove the effectiveness and the superiority of curvelet moments for mammogram analysis. Indeed, results on the mini-MIAS database show that curvelet moments yield an accuracy of 91.27% (resp. 81.35 %) with 10 (resp. 8) features for abnormality (resp. malignancy) detection. In addition, empirical comparisons of the proposed method against state-of-the-art curvelet-based methods on the DDSM database show that the suggested method does not only lead to a more reduced feature set, but it also statistically outperforms all the compared methods in terms of accuracy.Conclusions: In summary, curvelet moments are an efficient and effective way to extract a reduced set of discriminative features for breast cancer diagnosis.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Breast cancer is the most common female cancer and the leading cause of cancer-related deaths among women worldwide. It affected 1.67 million new cases (25% of all cancers) and killed 522,000 women (14.71% of cancer-related deaths) worldwide in 2012 [1]. Early detection of breast cancer increases treatment options and recovery rates [2]. So far, mammography is the best available tool and the gold standard for screening. For instance, nationwide mammogram screening programs decreased breast cancer mortality in many developed countries [3,4]. However, the difficulty of mammogram interpretation leads to high rates of missed cancers and misinterpreted non-cancerous lesions. Therefore, a second opinion is usually required to reduce false positive and false negative rates [5].However, even though it is effective clinically, double reading is not practicable because of the huge amount of mammograms to be analyzed and the limited number of qualified radiologists [5]. Thus, computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) systems can be used to reduce the expense and to assist radiologists in mammogram interpretation [6]. Typically, a CAD system is composed of three steps: preprocessing, feature extraction and classification. In particular, extraction of a representative feature set is a key step that can greatly enhance the diagnosis performance. The feature set must be compact and discriminative to improve the speed and the accuracy of CAD systems [7].This paper deals with the problem of extracting a reduced set of discriminative features from curvelet transform for breast cancer diagnosis. We propose a method that uses moment theory to characterize the distribution of curvelet coefficients. After decomposing the mammogram into subbands using curvelet transform, moments can be computed from the distribution of coefficients either at each level or at each band. Both techniques were investigated in this paper. Then, we performed a ranking step to select optimal subsets from curvelet moment sets. Thereafter, a k-nearest neighbor (k-NN) classifier was used to distinguish between normal and abnormal tissues and to classify tumors as malignant or benign. To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method, comparison was made with other feature sets extracted from curvelet transform. Experimental results have shown that the proposed method does not only lead to a far more reduced sets but it also achieves better performance and the difference is statistically significant. Note that the idea of using curvelet moments was previously studied in [8] for aggregate mixture grading. This idea is extended here not only by adapting it for breast cancer diagnosis but also by investigating two techniques to compute curvelet moments: from each level (Curvelet Level Moments-CLM) vs. from each band (Curvelet Band Moments-CBM). As far as we know, this is the first work that suggests the use of curvelet moments to analyze mammograms, with particular attention to the choice of curvelet subband and moment order. Besides, a feature selection step was used to select the most discriminative moments. In fact, selected moments from curvelet levels allow the smaller and the more discriminative feature set for mammogram classification. The contributions of this work are as follows:•A new method for extracting a reduced set of features for mammogram analysis based on curvelet moments, while investigating two techniques to compute curvelet moments: from each level vs. from each band.A statistical analysis of the distribution of curvelet coefficients of mammograms in order to justify the use of higher order moments, and a feature selection step to keep the most discriminative moments.An experimental evaluation of the proposed method on mammograms from the mini-MIAS database.An empirical comparison of this method against state-of-the-art curvelet-based methods for mammogram analysis on a large database of 11,553 mammograms from the challenging DDSM dataset, demonstrating the superiority of the suggested method.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
