@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Computer modelling integrated with micro-CT and material testing provides additional insight to evaluate bone treatments: Application to a beta-glycan derived whey protein mice model

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Computer prediction of a whey protein bone treatment on bone strength.Comparison of 3-point bending, micro/nano-indentation and CT material estimates.Evaluation of bone strength from geometry independent of material properties.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Micro-FE,Micro-CT,Nanoindentation,Murine bone,Computer modelling,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The primary aim of this study was to evaluate the influence of a whey protein diet on computationally predicted mechanical strength of murine bones in both trabecular and cortical regions of the femur. There was no significant influence on mechanical strength in cortical bone observed with increasing whey protein treatment, consistent with cortical tissue mineral density (TMD) and bone volume changes observed. Trabecular bone showed a significant decline in strength with increasing whey protein treatment when nanoindentation derived Young׳s moduli were used in the model. When microindentation, micro-CT phantom density or normalised Young׳s moduli were included in the model a non-significant decline in strength was exhibited. These results for trabecular bone were consistent with both trabecular bone mineral density (BMD) and micro-CT indices obtained independently. The secondary aim of this study was to characterise the influence of different sources of Young׳s moduli on computational prediction. This study aimed to quantify the predicted mechanical strength in 3D from these sources and evaluate if trends and conclusions remained consistent. For cortical bone, predicted mechanical strength behaviour was consistent across all sources of Young׳s moduli. There was no difference in treatment trend observed when Young׳s moduli were normalised. In contrast, trabecular strength due to whey protein treatment significantly reduced when material properties from nanoindentation were introduced. Other material property sources were not significant but emphasised the strength trend over normalised material properties. This shows strength at the trabecular level was attributed to both changes in bone architecture and material properties.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Micro-finite element (FE) techniques based on high resolution images allow for the modelling of trabecular and cortical bone in detail. This process uses images from micro-CT scans and converts voxels into elements to produce meshes suitable for FE analysis [1,2]. Computational modelling is able to non-destructively and rapidly evaluate the quality of bone in response to various treatments. This is advantageous as it is less costly, can reduce sample numbers in large clinical studies and leaves the bone available for future histological and mechanical testing. Computational modelling has been shown to achieve precision comparable to densitometry data and is able to predict fracture loads up to an accuracy of 60% [3]. Additionally, destructive compressive tests on the radius have shown strong correlations with equivalent FE models [4]. There have been studies that have used micro-FE models to assess bone strength in response to treatments [5–7]. Those studies revealed that modelling isolates strength changes in cortical and trabecular bone separately, that subject-specific variations within groups are important and that modelling reveals whole strength measures that may be different from surrogate measures of strength (like micro-CT indices). The current study demonstrates all 3 aspects.While FE modelling has been shown to play a useful role in evaluating bone, there are few studies in the literature that compare computer predictions of bone strength against experiment using a double blinded design. In this study we evaluate computational predictions of strength against traditional micro-CT surrogates and see if the conclusions drawn are consistent. Secondly, while it is known that material properties derived from different sources and scales produce different Young׳s modulus estimates, it is of interest to know how much this influences computational predictions and conclusions drawn as a result.At the macro-scale, bone is simply divided into cortical and trabecular bone. Cortical bone is the hard, outer layer whereas trabecular bone is porous and predominantly fills the ends of long bones. Fundamentally, trabecular and cortical bone are made up of the same constituents; however mechanically, the homogenised mechanical response of trabecular and cortical bone vary greatly due to their site specific architecture and material properties. Homogenised Young׳s modulus of cortical bone can be anywhere from 14 to 29GPa [8,9], while homogenised Young׳s modulus of trabecular can be 100MPa to 4GPa [9,10]. Mechanical properties of bone are determined not only by bone mineral composition but also the structural organisation at different sub scales (microstructural and nanostructural). Therefore, measurement of material properties at different scales incorporates different levels of porosity and homogenised underlying structure. Within bone tissue exists a complex hierarchical system. In humans, the Haversian systems, osteons and individual trabeculae are found in the microstructural layer, which contribute to homogenised material properties at the macro-level [11]. It should be noted that while human bone consists of a Haversian system, mice lack one [12]. The lamellae are found in the sub-microstructural layer. At the nanostructural level is where fibrillar collagen and embedded minerals are found and the sub-nanostructure contains the molecular structure such as the collagenous and non-collagenous organic proteins [8,13]. These structures contribute to properties measured through nanoindentation. Microindentation and nanoindentation tests are used to determine the hardness of bone tissue at different structural levels [14], which are used to inform micro-FE models. Three point bending tests can also provide an indication of the axial mechanical strength of cortical bone [15]. As treatment effects manifest at different levels of bone, using material properties derived from different scales may highlight the treatment effect that may otherwise be hidden.The mechanical properties of bone are dependent on several diverse factors which can include but are not limited to age, diet, exercise and disease [16]. Bone can also be affected by treatments differently in trabecular and cortical zones. This is the reason why computational models that isolate cortical and trabecular behaviour provide insight into compartmentalised bone response. It is also known that bone strength is dominated by the cortical response but still needs trabecular support to prevent internal buckling. Endocortical thinning is usually the last stage of bone degradation, following trabecular resorption [17], hence, while net bone strength may not be compromised, evaluation of trabecular bone strength is an early indicator of future mechanical failure.In order to test the use of computational modelling as an informative tool in bone treatment studies, we conducted a variable whey protein controlled murine study. Twenty nine mice were fed a varied cheese diet (with whey protein), later euthanised and their femurs obtained for testing. This study integrated micro-architectural indices from micro-CT, mechanically derived material properties and micro-FE modelling. Specifically, the objectives of this study were to determine (i) whether computer modelling can predict trends in treatment outcomes locally within cortical and trabecular bone by assessing the geometrical architecture alone (with normalised material properties) in a double blinded design; and (ii) are computational predictions of strength across treatments consistent when material properties are normalised and derived from nanoindentation, microindentation, three point bending and micro-CT phantom derived grey scale values.12 week old, female, C3H mice were divided into three groups: placebo=9, 0.1% whey protein=9 and 1% whey protein=11. Animals were fed to the point of sacrifice with either the control diet (AIM-93M including 180g of soy protein per kg), or a diet in which 10g of soy was replaced by 0.1% or 1% of beta-glycan derived whey-protein. At 26 weeks, the mice were anaesthetised with isoflurane and morphine was administered to avoid pain. Whole blood was collected by cardiac puncture, mice were then euthanised and femurs were excised, cleaned of the surrounding soft tissue and fixed in 70% ethanol. The distal end of the femurs was scanned using a SkyScan 1172 micro-CT scanner (X-ray voltage 50kV, 0.5mm aluminium filter, voxel size 5µm). Standardised reconstructions were carried out using SkyScan NRecon software and the datasets were analyed using SkyScan micro-CT analyser software, CTAn (version 1.14.4.1).Fig. 1 shows where the volumes of interest (VOIs) of trabecular and cortical bone were selected from: the trabecular region of bone was 0.4mm proximal to the growth plate and extended 1.5mm in the proximal direction and the cortical region of bone was 3.25mm proximal to the growth plate and extended 0.5mm in the proximal direction. BMD and TMD values were obtained from calcium hydroxyapatite micro-CT phantoms and were averaged for the VOI. Each dataset was binarised using global thresholding (90–255). Using CTAn, 3D micro-CT indices were measured which included percentage bone volume (BV/TV), trabecular thickness (TbTh), trabecular separation (TbSp) and trabecular number (TbN) for trabecular bone; and mean total cross sectional tissue area (T.Ar), mean total cross sectional bone area (B.Ar), mean medullary area (Ma.Ar), mean cortical area fraction (B.Ar/T.Ar) and mean cross sectional thickness (Cs.Th) for cortical bone for all 29 femur samples.The raw digital data in StereoLithography (STL) format was digitally cleaned and this process removed any bone fragments (any part of the bone not attached to the main body) and redundant polygons. The mesh was decimated (reduced in size) for computational efficiency without affecting the overall quality of the bone geometry, using Rapid Form (Inus Technology Inc.). The solution time to fit a FE voxel mesh to the STL triangle mesh was dependent on the number of triangles present. The process was optimised by finding the minimum density of triangles in the STL mesh so that the resulting voxel mesh varied by less than 0.1% when computing strain compared to the original mesh density. A reduction of 30% in the triangle number did not affect bone geometry difference by more than 0.02mm. Following from this, a hexahedral voxel mesh was created for each bone sample using a mesh generation package, Hypermesh (Altair Engineering Inc.). Voxel cubes were chosen as they have a robust and stable behaviour for elastic mechanics compared to tetrahedral meshes in FE simulations. On average, trabecular bone had between 300,000 and 400,000 elements and cortical bone had between 11,000 and 13,000 elements. Aspects of this framework are shown inFig. 2.A previous validation study (seeFig. 3) using a 3D printed trabecular bone model with a Young׳s modulus of 1.4GPa and Poisson׳s ratio of 0.3 was subjected to an Instron compression test and subsequently, replicating the Instron test as an FE simulation resulted in a von Mises failure criteria for the bone models. Three bone samples were scaled 10 times and printed out in 3D (Dimension Elite 3D printers) using ABS thermoplastic with a resolution of 100μm. The models were loaded in an Instron (Instron 5800 series) at a rate of 0.01mm/s. The models started to yield at around 2000μm, with a linear region of approximately 1000N/μm. In the failure regions, the von Mises strain was approximately 0.8% which had an equivalent stress of approximately 3MPa. This was the value chosen as the failure criteria for this work and was used in Eq. (1). For further details, see [18].Following this, the voxel meshed bone samples were imported into Abaqus (Simulia Dassault Systemes Pty. Ltd.) for FE analysis. Twenty nine models were then computationally loaded to failure under a compression loading mode according to the average von Mises damage criteria, determined from the Instron test. Von Mises stress determines whether the principal stress combination at a given point will cause yield and gives the scalar combination of three principal stresses which is then compared to the yield von Mises stress of the material, obtained from the validation test. If the von Mises stress of the bone exceeded the von Mises yield stress then bone is considered to have failed in compression. Von Mises stress in 3D is defined in Eq. (1):(1)συ=12[(σ1−σ2)2+(σ1−σ3)2+(σ2−σ3)2]where συis the von Mises stress, σ1 is the principal stress in the x-direction, σ2 is the principal stress in the y-direction andσ3is the principal stress in the z–direction. The models were solved quasi-statically, with each increment in force leading to a new homogenised von Mises stress. Two von Mises yield criteria were used, (i) a yield stress determined from the average von Mises of the whole bone at failure, defined as the average yield stress and (ii) yield stress determined from the peak von Mises values at the sites of micro-failure only, defined as the peak yield stress. Post-analysis then identified the failure forces that were associated with an average and peak von Mises stress that exceeded the yield value.All 29 models (trabecular and cortical were solved separately) were computationally loaded to failure under a compression load according to the average von Mises damage criteria which was determined from the Instron test. In total there were 58 (29 trabecular and 29 cortical) computational simulations that took on average 6h per simulation on a standard PC. Failure force was then normalised by the finite element computed cross-sectional area of the specimen to assess the yield strength attributed to the architecture of the bone model, independent of the size of the sample. All samples had the same height. The first set of simulations used a normalised Young׳s modulus of 1GPa to predict the influence of architecture on the mechanical strength of the sample. This permitted the use of a yield criteria determined from Instron tests on a 3D printed bone that also had a Young׳s modulus close to 1GPa (1.4GPa according to the manufacturer). To evaluate the influence of material properties, BMD and TMD values were obtained from the micro-CT phantom scans and were used to estimate the BMD and TMD derived Young׳s modulus of the bones. This density was included in the model using the adapted Carter and Hayes, 1977 power law [19] which relates elastic modulus to the apparent bone density. The power law was chosen as it naturally represents the experimental trends observed between density and Young׳s modulus, provides a better transition between trabecular and cortical bone and also has been shown to distribute the residual errors better [20]. For this study we related apparent density from trabecular bone using the reported trabecular (cancellous) power law [21], and the version for cortical (compact) bone [20]. A piecewise power law function was adapted for the two ranges of densities for trabecular (1050e−6ρ2) and cortical bone (3.0e−6ρ3) as shown in Eq. (2):(2)E={1050e−6ρ2forρ≤350kgm−33.0e−6ρ3for350<ρ≤1800kgm−3where E represents Young׳s modulus of the bone and ρ is the apparent density of trabecular and cortical bone.Three point bending was also used to determine the material properties of cortical bone by fracturing the mice bone samples. A rig was built to hold the femur in place at two constant points ensuring the sample did not roll while a two-sided wedge shaped tip was pushed in the centre of the femur (anterior side up) at a constant loading rate of 1mm/min (see Fig. 1iii), which was chosen after initial trials on test specimens. The forces and displacements were recorded during testing and were used to determine whole axial bone material properties. Appendix Fig. A1 is a representation of a load vs displacement curve which was generated from three point bending of the mice femurs. This graph shows the bone reaching peak load at approximately 17N. All 29 bones underwent three point bending.Following the three point bending tests, a number of measurements were taken in order to calculate the flexural elastic modulus for each sample using the following Euler–Bernoulli equation [22]:(3)E=FL348dlwhere E (Pa) is the flexural elastic modulus, F (N) is the peak load (maximum load for each sample), L (m) is the support span distance (15mm), d (m) is the displacement at the peak load and l (m4) is the elliptical moment of inertia.The bones were prepared for both microindentation and nanoindentation testing in exactly the same way. The trabecular and cortical VOIs were marked on the bone and the samples were mounted in low temperature curing epoxy resin (EpoFix cold setting resin, Struers) and were left to set for 24h. Once the samples had set, the curing blocks were put through a series of silicon carbide grinders; P120 and P220 coarse grinding, followed by finer grinding with P500 and P1200. The cured blocks included a layer which was an uneven and rough surface present due to the sample preparation. After coarse grinding (using the P120 grade silicon carbide paper), the layer was approximately 120µm thick. The P220 grinders further reduced the layer to 60µm. After finer grinding (P500 and P1200) only 15µm remained. Diamond polishing further reduced it to 1µm, which is the surface upon which indentation tests were performed. The process of diamond polishing involved a diamond bead solution (a solution consisting of fine particles of diamond in a suspension) deposited onto polishing cloths to smooth out the surface of the samples. The fine diamond particles in the solution filled in the irregularities on the surface of the samples in order to create a smoother surface for indentation. Between polishing, the diamond beads that remained on the samples were removed using regular household detergent and 70% ethanol. Any remnants of the diamond beads would not have affected the indentation tests as they were easily visualised under the microscope and were avoided during testing. The Hysitron TI-950 TriboIndenter and MTS Nano-indenter XP both equipped with a diamond Berkovich tip and using the Oliver and Pharr method of analysis [23] were used for indentation. The bones were tested using the Hysitron TI-950 TriboIndenter using force control with a peak force at 2000µN with a linear loading time of 5s. Indents were performed on a cross section of the trabecular and cortical bone surfaces. Peak load was held for 3 second to monitor creep and a linear unload of 5s. A representation of a load vs displacement curve, generated from one cycle of nanoindentation is shown in Appendix Fig. A2.Microindentation utilised the MTS Nano-indenter XP but with a peak load of 20mN which is 10× the force applied by the nanoindentation tests. Both nanoindentation and microindentation tests were carried out in the longitudinal direction (perpendicular to the structures within the bone sample). Reduced modulus values were obtained from the nanoindentation tests and were converted into Young׳s Modulus values using the following equation:(4)E=(1−ν2)[1Er−1−νi2Ei]where Er(GPa) is the reduced modulus of the bone sample (sample specific), Eiis Young׳s modulus of the diamond nanoindenter tip (1140GPa), v, Poisson׳s ratio of the bone is 0.3 [24] and vi, Poisson׳s ratio of the indenter tip is 0.3. Formula obtained from [25]. Reduced modulus values obtained from the microindentation tests were converted into Young׳s modulus values using Eq. (4). Young׳s modulus of the diamond microindenter tip was 1141GPa and Poisson׳s ratio of the indenter tip was 0.07.Following material testing, Young׳s moduli from the nanoindentation and microindentation tests were applied to the model for both trabecular and cortical bone. Flexural elastic moduli from the three point bending were applied only to the cortical bone models.Data was expressed as the mean value ±1 standard deviation. One-way Anova was performed using Microsoft Excel. A p-value of <0.05 was considered statistically significant and <0.01 was considered strongly statistically significant.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
