@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Robust reconstruction of 2D curves from scattered noisy point data

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a robust 2D reconstruction method from unorganized noisy point data.The outliers and noise of data can be effectively detected and smoothed.Sharp corners are preserved properly in the output curves with our method.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
2D curve reconstruction,Noisy point data,Feature-preserving,Normal-based smoothing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, a robust algorithm is proposed for reconstructing 2D curve from unorganized point data with a high level of noise and outliers. By constructing the quadtree of the input point data, we extract the “grid-like” boundaries of the quadtree, and smooth the boundaries using a modified Laplacian method. The skeleton of the smoothed boundaries is computed and thereby the initial curve is generated by circular neighboring projection. Subsequently, a normal-based processing method is applied to the initial curve to smooth jagged features at low curvatures areas, and recover sharp features at high curvature areas. As a result, the curve is reconstructed accurately with small details and sharp features well preserved. A variety of experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness and robustness of our method.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Curve reconstruction from 2D point data is a fundamental problem in geometric modeling, reverse engineering, computational geometry, computer graphics and image processing, computer vision. For instance, in reverse engineering, one of the effective methods to model point data for fabrication using rapid prototyping techniques is to adaptively slice the data points, along a specific direction, into a series of layers and the points in each layer are treated as planar. By reconstructing the planar curve of each layer, the final model can be created using sweep or loft modeling operations  [1,2].Generally, curve reconstruction can be defined to compute curves to approximate the boundary point data as closely as possible. Over the past two decades, a number of curve reconstruction algorithms have been proposed  [3–11]. In spite of considerable advances, there are still some problems with those methods, especially when the input point data contain a high level of noise and outliers. Furthermore, if sharp features (e.g. corners) exist within the curve, the requirement of being resilient to noise is particularly challenging since noise and sharp features are ambiguous, and most current techniques tend to blur out those sharp features or even amplify noisy samples.In this paper, we present an effective curve reconstruction algorithm, where the input point data consist of a set of unorganized points around curve boundaries, ridden by a high level of outliers and noise. Specifically, by constructing the quadtree of the input point data, we extract the “grid-like” boundaries of the quadtree, followed by applying a modified Laplacian method to smooth the boundaries. The skeleton is computed and thereby the initial curves are constructed by circular neighboring projection. The projection method may produce some jagged edges. Therefore, we exploit a normal-based processing method on the initial curves to smooth out bumpy features at low curvatures areas, and to recover sharp features at high curvature areas. In contrast to previous works, our method is capable of handling a high level of noise and outliers. Small details of the original curve can be recovered satisfactorily; meanwhile, sharp features (e.g. corners) are also nicely preserved. The pipeline is demonstrated in Fig. 1.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We have presented a novel and robust reconstruction algorithm for 2D curves with sharp features which takes as input the unorganized, scattered point data with noise and outliers. The median axis is extracted from the boundaries of the input data, where the main skeleton, as well as small branches, are obtained respectively. Consequently, the main features, as well as small features, are reconstructed via circular neighboring projection. The normal-based processing method is exploited to smooth jagged features and recover sharp features.The main value of our approach is the ability to robustly deal with feature preservation, such as sharp corners. In addition, our method is capable of handling the point data with a high level of noise. Even though the noisy point data vary in terms of width, namely with non-uniformly sampling, our algorithm still has good performance.The quadtree is used in our method, and the subdivision depth needs to be set, which essentially determines the size of the node grid. Since the density of the input point data varies a lot, it is not easy to automatically determine the size of the grid. If the size is too large, the skeleton may not represent the best approximation curve of the point data, while if it is too small, it is possible for the point data to be partitioned into several different components. In our implementation, we scale the point data into an unit bounding rectangle. The uniform scaling, together with the circular neighboring projection, alleviates this problem to some degree; however, it is still worthwhile to find a way to automatically determine the depth of quadtree subdivision in the future work.