@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A mathematical model for simulating and manufacturing ball end mill

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new mathematical model for grinding the ball end mill is proposed.The rake face of ball end mill is modeled as a developable surface.The conditions of engagement between wheel and the rake face are established.The configuration of the flute surface was directly computed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Modeling,Ball end mill,CNC grinding,Rake face,Cutting simulation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The performance of ball end mill cutters in cutting operations is influenced by the configuration of the rake and clearance faces in the ball component. From the mathematical design of a cutting edge curve, the rake face can be defined by the rake angle and the width of the rake face at each cross section along the cutting edge. We propose the fundamental conditions that must govern the engagement between the grinding wheel and the designed rake face in order to avoid interference while machining a ball end mill. As a result, a new mathematical model for determining the wheel location and a software program for simulating the generation of the rake face of a ball end mill are proposed. In addition, methods for grinding the clearance face in both concave and flat-shapes are introduced. The flute surface generated by a disk wheel during the grinding process is determined on the basis of a tangency condition. The results of the experiment and the simulation are compared to validate the proposed model.(13)NˆLi=∂SR(φ,v)∂φ×∂SR(φ,v)∂v‖∂SR(φ,v)∂φ×∂SR(φ,v)∂v‖={‖ṙ‖Tˆi−vhi(‖ṙ‖RcosγTˆi+knsinγ(Nˆi×NˆFi))}×{−hi(cosγNˆi+sinγBˆi)}|{‖ṙ‖−vhi(‖ṙ‖Rcosγ+knsinγsinψ)}|hi=cosγBˆi−sinγNˆiin whichNˆFi,knandψare the principal normal vector, normal curvature and the angle between the principal normal vectorNˆFiand the normal of the sphereNˆiat pointCion the cutting edge, respectively.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The helical flute, which located in both the cylindrical part and the ball part of a ball end mill, plays an important role in machining a sculptured surface. Many mathematical models have been developed to machine different kinds of end mills.For a cylindrical end mill, two basic approaches for determining the wheel location and profile were developed to achieve a desired end mill. In the first approach, a CAD model and an algorithm were proposed to determine the relative positions of the wheel the workpiece to grind an end mill according to certain design factors such as the rake angle and the core radius  [1–3]. The second approach aims to generate a wheel profile for a prescribed workpiece cross-section on the basis of the fundamental condition of engagement between the wheel and the helical groove  [4,5].The basic geometrical components of the ball part of a ball end mill are depicted in workpiece coordinates, OXYZ, as shown in Fig. 1(a). The ball part is machined using a grinding wheel, as shown in Fig. 1(b) and (c). The rake face and the flute surface are generated by the side face and the revolution surface of the grinding wheel, respectively (Fig. 1(b)). The cutting edge is the intersection curve between the rake face and the clearance face; the bottom curve is the intersection curve between the rake face and the flute surface. The spiral rake face with a constant lead and rake angle is usually required to improve the cutting performance. This requirement complicates the ball end mill machining process. To machine a ball end mill, the equation of the cutting edge is derived first, and then the wheel location is determined along the cutting edge. Several optimal cutting edges were presented  [6,7]. The second approach mentioned above  [4,5] was used in combination with a cutting edge equation to generate a grinding wheel profile for a given cross-section of the ball end mill  [8–10]. Namely, the grinding wheel was predicted to grind a ball end mill with a constant helix angle cutting edge  [8], circular-arc ball end mill  [9], and concave-arc ball end mill  [10]. However, researchers demonstrated that the resulting manufactured grinding wheels still generate residual surfaces on the workpiece and produce a side cutting edge strip  [8,9]. The rake face of a taper ball end mill was produced using special grinding wheels such as those with a toroidal or spherical shape  [11,12]; this method produces a smooth cutting edge and maintains a normal rake angle along the cutting edge. However, the wheel location was chosen to grind a maximum cutting depth without using the tangency condition between the surface of the wheel and the defined rake face. Therefore, for this case, the maximum depth of the cut differs from the designed depth. In addition, the unconventional shape of the wheels (torus or sphere) prevents widespread application in industry.The limitations of previous works were due to their exclusive focus on the cutting edge design and dynamic behavior analysis [6,7]. Additionally, to obtain a precise rake angle, the rake face was machined with specific wheel shapes (torus or sphere)  [11,12]. The rake face and flute were produced with a predicted wheel using the second approach  [8–10], but still there is a deviation between the designed and the produced ball end mill.In this paper, a new mathematical model for manufacturing the ball part of a ball end mill, including the rake and clearance faces, will be presented in continuation of the studies on the cylindrical part  [1,2]. The rake face is modeled as a developable surface using a cutting edge equation and a proposed bottom curve, as shown in Fig. 1(a). The rake face can thus be generated by using the side face (flat face) of the grinding wheel shown in Fig. 1(b). A cutting edge with a constant lead and normal rake angle is employed in the proposed model. First, the equation for the cutting edge curve is derived in Section  2. In Section  3.1.1, we propose the bottom curve of the rake face, which is obtained by determining the width of the rake face for each cross-section where the normal rake angle is measured. On the basis of the suggested fundamental conditions for avoiding interference between the grinding wheel with the designed rake face, the location of the wheel center and the orientation of the wheel axis are determined in Section  3.1.2. Section  3.2 presents the two designs for grinding the clearance face: concave and flat. The rake face is ground by the side face of the grinding wheel, whereas the flute surface is generated by the revolution surface of the grinding wheel (Fig. 1(b)). This flute surface is determined in Section  4 by using the tangency condition between the wheel and flute surfaces. Finally, in Section  5, the results of the model will be verified on the basis of both simulation and experimental results.The geometrical accuracy of the cutting edge determines the precision of the product that is machined by a ball end milling cutter. For this reason, the cutting edge must be precisely designed and machined. The aim of this section is to establish the equation of a constant lead helix cutting edge for a ball end mill.The cutting edge of a ball end mill is located in both the ball and cylindrical parts. A coordinate system, OXYZ, is applied to a workpiece in which the originOis placed at ball center and the OX-axis coincides with the longitudinal axis of the workpiece. In this paper all derivations are carried out in this coordinate system (OXYZ). The cutting edge in the ball part is modeled in Fig. 2. A general position vector of a pointCi, along the cutting edge is presented in the workpiece coordinate system OXYZ as follows:(1)r=[x,R2−x2sinφ,R2−x2cosφ]whereRis the radius of the ball head andφis the lag angle between the tool tip(x=R)and the current pointCion the cutting edge. The definition of a helix angle is the angle between the tangent vector of the helix,Tˆi, and the tangent vector of the longitudinal axis,Tˆi′. The anglesβandβbare defined as the helix angles in the cylindrical and in the ball parts, respectively.A mathematical model of the cutting edge with a constant lead or a constant helix was previously published  [7]. Our model considers the case of the cutting edge with a constant lead, which is preferred by the cutter grinders to save the material during the regrinding operation. Eq. (2) can be applied to both the ball and cylindrical parts to obtain a constant lead cutting edge curve:(2)dφ=−tanβRdx.In addition, the lag angle is zero at the tool tip(φ=0,atx=R); therefore, the lag angle can be determined along the cutting edge as follows:(3)φ=−tanβR(x−R).The variable helix angle along the cutting edge curve in the ball part can be represented as follows:(4)βb=tan−1(R2−x2R2tanβ).The equation of the cutting edge in the ball part is obtained by substituting Eq. (3) into Eq. (1):(5){x=R(1−φtanβ)y=R1−(1−φtanβ)2sinφz=R1−(1−φtanβ)2cosφ.In this section, the tangent and normal vectors to the spherical surface along the cutting edge are introduced as the basic components of the cutting edge. On the basis of these components and the designed depth of the cut in the normal plane of the rake face, a bottom curve of the rake face is proposed, which is the key point for determining the wheel location along the cutting edge in Section  3.1.2.The tangent vector of the cutting edgeTˆi, the normal vector of the ball surfaceNˆi, and vectorBˆithat is the cross product of the vectorsNˆiandTˆiat a pointCiin the cutting edge curve are described in Fig. 3. Considering the position vectorr=[x,y,z]of a point along the cutting edge, the vectorsTˆi,Nˆi, andBˆiare expressed by Eq. (6):(6){Tˆi=ṙ‖ṙ‖=[Txi,Tyi,Tzi]Nˆi=r‖r‖=[Nxi,Nyi,Nzi]Bˆi=Nˆi×Tˆi=[Bxi,Byi,Bzi].The normal rake angle,γ, is measured in the so-called normal planePn, which is normal to the elementary cutting edge. The rake face is modeled as a developable surface, with a cross-section at the normal plane that consists of the line segmentCiKi, as shown in Fig. 3. Corresponding to a point on the cutting edge, the radial depth‖CiKi‖=hiis given; this depth is zero at the tip and increases in the negative direction of theX-axis. The dotted curve in Fig. 3 represents the bottom curve of the rake face. In this paper, the following equation of radial depth was utilized for the results of the simulation and the experiment:(7)‖CiKi‖=hi=(c1+c2x/R)R2−x2where0≤x≤R. The two coefficientsc1andc2can be adjusted to yield a suitable bottom curve. For instance, the rake faces are illustrated in Fig. 4using the cutting edge described in Eq. (5) for ball radius ofR=6mm, a helix angle ofβ=25°, a rake angle ofγ=0°and coefficients of radial depth ofc1=0.25,c2=0.15andc1=0.4,c2=0for Fig. 4(a) and (b), respectively.Our goal is to precisely machine the rake face of a ball end mill with a constant normal rake angle and a designed cut depth. Therefore, the equation of the bottom curve, which is formed by the designed cut depth in normal plane, is required to determine the wheel location. Moreover, both the principal normal vector of the bottom curve and normal vector of the rake face along the line segment in normal plane are derived in this section. These derivations are used in the next section to ensure that the condition of engagement sufficiently avoids interference.The position vector of pointKion the bottom curve to the pointCion the cutting edge is described in Fig. 3. It is calculated in the OXYZ coordinate system as follows:(8)rOKi=rOCi+CiKi=[xki,yki,zki]where,(9)CiKi=−hicosγNˆi−hisinγBˆi.The bottom curve of the rake face is defined uniquely in Eq. (8), and it can be parameterized as follows:(10)rOKi=rOK(φ)=[xk(φ),yk(φ),zk(φ)].Eq. (11) represents the principal normal vector of the bottom curve of the rake face,NˆKiat pointKi, which will be used in the next section:(11)NˆKi=drOKi2/dφ2‖drOKi2/dφ2‖=[NKxi,NKyi,NKzi].The parameterized equation of the rake face can be determined using the cutting edge and bottom curves as follows:(12)SR(φ,v)=(1−v)rOCi+vrOKi=rOCi−vhi(cosγNˆi+sinγBˆi)with0≤v≤1.The modeled rake face has an important property: the normal vector to the rake face is constant (free from the variablev) along the line segmentCiKi. Later, this property will be implemented in the tangency condition between the side face of the grinding wheel and the rake face. To prove this property exists, a pointLiis assumed to lie on the segmentCiKisuch that‖CiLi‖=v‖CiKi‖with0≤v≤1. The normal of the rake face at pointLiis given in Box I.In this section, the conditions of engagement between the grinding wheel and the rake face are proposed, which allows precise machining of the rake face using the side face of the grinding wheel. As a consequence, the wheel center location and the orientation of wheel axis are determined along the cutting edge to machine the rake face.The rake face is machined by grinding each line,CiKi, using the side face of the grinding wheel with a radius ofRw, as shown in Figs. 1(b) and 5. The side face of the grinding wheel with center position ofGiis the outer face of the wheel and perpendicular to wheel’s axis. To grind the segmentCiKion the rake face without interfering with the defined cutting edge, the side face of the grinding wheel must contain the tangent vector,Tˆi, of the cutting edge curve at the current grinding pointCi. Many potential locations of the wheel exist that allow the lineCiKito be ground without interference with the cutting edge, as shown in Fig. 5; however, the grinding wheel at the location-2 exhibits interference with the defined bottom curve of the rake face. Therefore, only location-1 of the grinding wheel can grind the defined rake face without interference. Thus, to avoid interference between the grinding wheel and the defined bottom curve, the direction of the vector,NˆKi′, must pass through the center of the wheel’s side face,Gi. The vectorNˆKi′is the projection of the principal normal vector of the bottom curve,NˆKi, at pointKiinto the plane of the wheel’s side-face. The fundamental conditions to avoid interference while grinding the rake face are summarized as follows:Condition  1: The side face of the grinding wheel must pass through the lineCiKiand contain the tangent vector of the cutting edge,Tˆi, at the current grinding pointCi.Condition  2: The center of the wheel’s side face,Gi, must be contained in the projection of the normal vector of the bottom curve to the side-face of the grinding wheel,NˆKi′.Note that the principle normal vector of the bottom curve,NˆKi, intersects the wheel axis,Iˆi, as shown in Fig. 6when conditions 1 and 2 are satisfied. This characteristic will be utilized for the calculation of the location of the wheel center.On the basis of the condition  1, the wheel axis,Ii, can be represented by Eq. (14):(14)Iˆi=Tˆi×KiCi‖Tˆi×KiCi‖=cosγBˆi−sinγNˆi.Using the condition  1 and condition  2 regarding the proposed engagement, the position of the wheel center in workpiece coordinates is determined by Eq. (15):(15)rOGi=rOKi+NˆKi′Rw.Eq. (15) guarantees having only one common point,Ki, between the grinding wheel and the bottom curve of rake face. In addition, from the condition  2 vectorsIˆi,NˆKiare intersected, therefore the three vectorsIˆi,NˆKi′,NˆKiare coplanar. Thus, the vectorNˆKi′in Eq. (15) can be determined as:(16)NˆKi′=(Iˆi×NˆKi)×Iˆi‖(Iˆi×NˆKi)×Iˆi‖.The normal of the rake face is proven to be constant along the line segmentCiKi, as indicated by Eq. (13). Therefore when the side face of the grinding wheel contains the line segmentCiKi, the wheel axis orientation is assigned to be equivalent to the normal of the rake face at pointCi. Then the contact line between the designed rake face and the side face of the grinding wheel is this line segment (CiKi). The position of the wheel center and the orientation of wheel axis that are required for precise machining of the rake face are determined by Eqs. (14) and (15), respectively.In the case of machining, the clearance angle of a ball end mill directly affects the cutting performance and the tool life. The shape of the clearance face is also an important factor for a cutter, and it varies depending on the grinding method. In this paper, models for grinding the clearance face of a ball end mill into flat and concave shapes will be introduced.The clearance angle,α0, is defined as the angle between the tangent vector at pointCiand the extension of the vectorBˆiin the normal plane. The clearance face is formed by the outer circle of the cup wheel in the concave method and by the side face of the cup wheel in the flat method; the outer circle of the cup wheel has a radius ofRc, as shown in Fig. 1(c).In this section, the cutting edge and its basic components are used to determine the wheel center location and the wheel axis orientation in order to generate a concave-shaped clearance face with a constant clearance angle along the cutting edge.The model for grinding a concave-shaped clearance face is shown in Fig. 7. Here, the clearance face formed in grinding process is represented by the segmentCiDi, which is a segment on the outer circle of the grinding wheel along the cutting edge. To grind a clearance face with clearance angleα0, the vectorCiGi, must make the angleα0with the normal vectorNˆi, as shown in Fig. 7(a). Therefore, the relative position of the wheel center to the workpiece and the orientation of wheel axis are determined as follows:(17)rOGi=rOCi+CiGiwhere,(18)CiGi=Rccosα0Nˆi−Rcsinα0Bˆi.The orientation of the wheel axis can be obtained as follows:(19)Iˆi=Bˆi×Nˆi=Tˆi.In this section, the cutting edge and its basic components are used to determine the wheel center location and the wheel axis orientation in order to generate a flat-shaped clearance face with a constant clearance angle along the cutting edge.The model for grinding a flat-shaped clearance face is shown in Fig. 8. The clearance face is formed by the side-face of the cup wheel when the wheel moves along the cutting edge. In this model, the formed clearance face is a developable surface and its cross-section in the normal plane is a straight lineCiDi, as shown in Fig. 8(a). The clearance angle is defined as the angle between the vectorCiDiand the extension of the vectorBˆi. The outer circle of the side face is positioned to pass through pointsCiandDi. The side face of the cup wheel is perpendicular to the normal plane; therefore, it will contain the vectorCiDiand the tangent vector of the cutting edgeTˆias shown in the model in Fig. 8. Thus, the position of the wheel center is calculated as follows:(20){rOGi=rOCi+CiGiCiGi=−Rsinα0(sinα0Nˆi+cosα0Bˆi)−Rc2−(Rsinα0)2Tˆi.The orientation of the wheel axis is calculated as follows:(21)Iˆi=Tˆi×(sinα0Nˆi+cosα0Bˆi).The NC-code is generated from the position of the wheel center,rGi, and its axis orientation,Ii. This NC code is used for a 5-axis CNC grinder for fabricating the rake and clearance face of ball end mill  [11].When the cutting edge equation, normal rake angle and designed cut depth are given, the rake face can be modeled. Additionally, the wheel center location and the wheel axis orientation to machine this rake face can be determined, as explained in the previous section. However, the generated surface also consists of a flute surface, which is ground by the revolution surface of the grinding wheel when the wheel moves along the cutting edge. The aim of this section is to calculate the generated surface for the purpose of visualization and simulation. The generated flute surface of a ball end mill will be calculated by using the tangency condition at any point of the wheel surface.It is important to determine the flute surface (Fig. 1(a)) of a ball end mill because the flute of the ball component determines the stiffness and the chip evacuation capability of the cutter. It is helpful to calculate and optimize the grinding wheel profile to obtain a suitable flute. Although the flute surface can be obtained by carrying out a simulation with commercial software, this paper will instead present a direct calculation for the points of the flute surface. For a designed rake face and a given grinding wheel geometry, the formation of the flute surface during the grinding process for the rake face of a ball end mill will be presented.The flute surface of the ball part is determined by enveloping the surface generated by the grinding wheel’s movement along the cutting edge, and it is limited by the ball surface of the workpiece. This flute surface consists of three components (1) rear surface of the grinding wheel at the initial position, (2) swept surface generated during the motion of the grinding wheel and (3) the front surface of the grinding wheel at the final position as shown in Fig. 9.The points on the swept surface (2) are determined on the basis of the key idea that, the grinding wheel is tangent at all times to the swept envelope along a sweeping profile, as shown in Fig. 9. Therefore, at any point P along the swept surface (2), the unit normal vector,N(P), is parallel to the vector normal to the swept surface at that instant. In addition, the velocity vector,V(P), of pointPmust be tangent to the swept surface. Therefore, the swept surface (2) can be determined based on the tangency condition  [13,14]:(22)N(P)⋅V(P)=0.However, the rear surface (1) is a part of the wheel surface, which is limited by the ball surface of the workpiece at the initial position, and satisfiesN(P)⋅V(P)<0. The front surface (3) is a part of the wheel surface at the final position, which satisfiesN(P)⋅V(P)>0.The location of the wheel center and the unit vector(‖I‖=1)of the wheel axis orientation in Eqs. (14) and (15)in workpiece coordinates can be parameterized as follows:(23)rG(t)=(rOGix,rOGiy,rOGiz)(24)Iˆ(t)=(Iix,Iiy,Iiz).The movement of the grinding wheel can be defined using the trajectory of the wheel center,rG(t), and the tool axis orientation,I(t), as shown in Fig. 10(b). A local coordinate systemXLYLZLis located at the wheel center, and it is established as follows:(25)ZˆL=IˆXˆL=İ/‖İ‖YˆL=ZˆL×XˆL.The axial cross-section of the grinding wheel with the width,L, in theXLZLplane of the local coordinate system is modeled, as in Fig. 10(a). The parametric equations of the revolution surface of the wheel can be obtained by rotating a curve along theZL-axis, as described in Eq. (26):(26)SW(u,θ,t)=rG(t)+r(u)cosθXˆL+r(u)sinθYˆL+uZˆL.Eq. (22) was written for the general case  [12]. Finding the expression ofV(P)andN(P)is difficult, as previously stated  [13]. However, the expressions ofV(P)andN(P)in Eq. (22) can be determined by following the procedures given below.In the cross section of the wheel surface that is normal to the wheel axisI, offset from the wheel center a distanceuin theZLaxis, taking a point P in that cross-section at an angle,θ, measured from the axisXLas shown in Fig. 10(a). The velocity of pointPand the normal of wheel surface at point P are determined in workpiece coordinates as follows:(27)V(P)=V(G)+ΩG×rGP=ṙG+‖İ‖YˆL×(r(u)cosθXˆL+r(u)sinθYˆL+uZˆL)where,ΩG=I×İ‖I‖2=‖İ‖YˆL, is the instantaneous angular velocity of the wheel about point G. Thus:(28)V(P)=ṙG+u‖İ‖XˆL−‖İ‖r(u)cosθZˆL.The normal of the wheel surface at pointPcan be calculated as follows:(29)N(P)=∂SW(u,θ,t)∂θ×∂SW(u,θ,t)∂u‖∂SW(u,θ,t)∂θ×∂SW(u,θ,t)∂u‖=cosθXˆL+sinθYˆL−ṙ(u)ZˆL1+ṙ2(u).By applyingV(P)⋅N(P)=0to Eqs. (28) and (29) we obtain the following:(30)(ṙG⋅XˆL+‖İ‖r(u)ṙ(u)+‖İ‖u)cosθ+ṙG⋅YˆLsinθ−ṙ(u)ṙG⋅ZˆL=0.By solving Eq. (30), the contact line between the wheel surface and the swept surface is obtained. The points on the generated surface (2) in Fig. 9 are determined byθ(u,t), which is obtained from Eq. (30). The generated surface types (1) and (3) made by the moving wheel when it moves from the initial position(t=0)to the final position(t=tf)can be easily calculated. The generated surface (1) is a part of the wheel surface that satisfies(31)V(P)⋅N(P)<0.For type (3), it satisfies(32)V(P)⋅N(P)>0.The flute surface generated by moving wheel in Eq. (31) can be determined through the results of Eqs. (30)–(32). Moreover, this surface is limited by the ball surface in the positive direction of theX-axis in workpiece coordinates; thus, Eqs. (33)(b) and (c) must be added to determine the points in the generated surface of a ball end mill.(33){r(θ,u,t)=rG(t)+uZˆL+r(u)(XˆLcosθ+YˆLsinθ)(a)‖r(θ,u,t)‖≤R(b)rx(θ,u,t)≥0.(c)In addition, the rake face is designed to be a developable surface with a constant normal vector along the line segmentCiKias established in Eq. (13) and a wheel location determined by Eqs. (14) and (15). Then, the contact line of the side face of the wheel is always the line segmentCiKias shown in Appendix A. There is also one portion of the contact line that lies in the edge part of the grinding wheel. In this paper, we will consider only the contact line in the edge of the side face that directly generates the rake face because the width of the wheel(L)is chosen to be large enough so that only the edge part of the side face is involved in the material removal process. This portion of the contact line is the transition contact line between the side face and the revolution surface. The ends of this portion of the contact line areKiat the bottom line andKi1which can be obtained from Eq. (30) atu=0.To verify the model of ball end mill manufacturing, a simulation of the grinding process to fabricate the ball part of a ball end mill was performed. Additionally, a ball end mill was manufactured under the same conditions as those used in the simulation, thus enabling a comparison between the two. A target ball end mill was made with a radius ofR=6mm, a normal rake angle ofγn=0°, a helix angle ofβ=25°, clearance angle,α0=11°. The cutting edge was determined by Eq. (5) and it is shown in Fig. 11(a). The equation of the bottom curve is described by Eq. (34) (c1=0.25,c2=0.15):(34)CiKi=(0.25+0.15x/R)R2−x2where,0≤x≤R.Fig. 11(c) and (d) show simulation results of the generated helical flute of the ball part with a given wheel profile, which is described in theXLZLplane via wheel coordinates, as shown in Fig. 11(b). Fig. 11(c) was generated using the commercial software VERICUT for rake face generation and Fig. 11(d) is the result of the calculation of the flute surface using Eqs. (30)–(33).Fig. 11(d) was created using the simulation program that was implemented using MATLAB version 7.9; the program was executed on a PC with the following components: processor: Intel(R) Core(TM) 2 Duo; CPU: 2.2 GHz; and 2 GB of RAM equipped with an Intel graphics card of 256 MB. First, the cutting edge and grinding wheel are divided into 180 points each (Ciin Fig. 11(d)) and 100 points along the wheel profile (Δu=L/100). Then, the contact lines are calculated and depicted as a black line for the revolution part and a pink line for the side face. The transition contact line along the edge of the side face of the grinding wheel is also calculated. The contact lines are shown at pointsCi(i=30, 60, 90, 120, 150) in Fig. 11(d), in which the two end pointsKiandKi1of the transition contact line are too close to be observed distinctly in the figure. The generated flute surface (Fig. 11(d)) is rendered by tiling the contact lines with the Patch-Function in MATLAB to be compared with Fig. 11(c). The computation time of our program is approximately 4 s, and the computation time of VERICUT is approximately 4 s for the lowest resolution and 12 s for the highest resolution; however, the computation time depends heavily on the number of divided points in the cutting edge and wheel profile. The simulation results in Fig. 11(c) and (d) are well matched which means that carrying out analytical calculation is faster and more economical than using commercial software (VERICUT).To validate the mathematical analysis developed in the previous sections, simulations were performed with the designed ball end mill using VERICUT as shown in Fig. 12. The ball end mill was manufactured with a 5-axis CNC grinding machine on the basis of the model developed in this paper, as shown in Fig. 13.To simulate the grinding process, the machine parameters of the 5-axis CNC grinding machine are measured. The parameters of the wheel geometry and the value of the machine setup are given as inputs. The wheel locations are calculated and transformed into NC code to be used in VERICUT and the 5-axis CNC grinding machine. The geometry of the ball end mill generated by the mathematical model shown in Fig. 13 agrees well with the simulation result shown in Fig. 12. Detailed comparisons of the results from experiments and simulations show that the rake and clearance faces of the designed ball end mill were reasonably fabricated on the basis of the results of the experiment, simulation, and design, as shown in Figs. 14 and 15. In this section, all the figures are attached with grids to show the matching between Figs. 11–14. With this grid, the results of experiment and simulation can be compared quantitatively.The rake face is designed according to the geometry of the cutting edge and bottom curves, which are given by Eqs. (5) and (33)(b), respectively, as shown in Fig. 14(c). The machined rake face (Fig. 14(a)) agrees well with the simulated (Fig. 14(b)) and designed (Fig. 14(c)) rake face. The direct measurement of the generated sample that is shown in Fig. 13 is complicated; thus, a cross section of the simulation result that is perpendicular to the cutting edge at the connection point between the ball and the cylinder parts is analyzed. The result shows that the measured design factors such as the rake angle, clearance angle, radial depth of the rake face, and the width of the clearance match well with the designed one, as shown in Fig. 15.In the experiment, CNC grinder (Maker: TIC) that consists of 5-axes with two rotational motions (A, W) and three linear motions (X, Y, Z) is used, as shown in Fig. 16. The wheel center location and the wheel axis orientation required for grinding the ball part of a ball end mill are calculated in the workpiece coordinate system using Eqs. (14) and (15). Then, the inverse kinematic problem for the CNC grinder is solved to convert this data into an NC program on the basis of the method that was presented in previous study  [11]. The machine measurements, wheel positions in workpiece coordinates and the corresponding NC program in absolute mode (G90) for grinding the rake face are provided in a supplemental file.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
