@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Biological activity of Pinus nigra terpenes—Evaluation of FtsZ inhibition by selected compounds as contribution to their antimicrobial activity

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Biological activity of the essential oils of P. nigra taxa from Serbia was analyzed.The black pine essential oils showed weak DPPH and ABTS scavenging effects.One fungal and two bacterial strains showed sensitivity against oils of all three taxa.Germacrene D-4-ol interacts with FtsZ binding pocket.Synergistic activity between major and minor compounds in the tested oils is proposed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Pinus nigra,Needle terpenes,Biological activity,Bacillus cereus,Molecular docking,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstractSurface diagram showing docked molecules A) germacrene D-4-ol and B) germacrene D with FtsZ.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Pinus (Pinaceae), with more than 200 generally recognized species, is the largest extant genus of Pinopsida [1]. Economically, pines are one of the most important tree species valued for wood, paper, resins, charcoal, food (particularly seeds), and ornamentals [2]. Moreover, most pines are considered as significant source of structurally diverse, bioactive compounds, and have provided contributions to the discovery of pharmaceutical agents and other biomedical applications [3]. For instance, turpentine have a long tradition of remedial utilization as topical rubefacient for the treatment of rheumatic diseases while pine bark extract is used in anti-aging cosmetics [4]. However, essential oils from Pinus species have been reported to have a variety of therapeutic properties. According to Dervendzi [5] pine needle oils are mostly used in folk medicine for the healing of respiratory infections accompanied by cough, bronchitis, bronchial asthma, emphysema, tracheitis, sinusitis, laryngitis, pharyngitis, and influenza. Moreover, pine oils are widely used as flavoring additives for food and beverages. In various household cleaning products they are well known as scenting and disinfectant agents. Also, these oils are used in the pharmaceutical industry as aroma or natural source of intermediates in the synthesis of perfume components [6].The European black pine (Pinus nigra J.F.Arnold) is a tertiary relict belonging to the group of Mediterranean pines [7]. It is one of the most widespread and polymorphic conifers in Europe with highly fragmented distribution range that extends from North Africa through the northern Mediterranean and eastwards to the Black Sea. In the Flora of Serbia [8], two subspecies of black pine (ssp. nigra and ssp. pallasiana) are distinguished and within them several varieties (var. nigra, var. zlatiborica, var. gocensis, and var. banatica). However, recent studies on the chemotaxonomy of P. nigra in Serbia, based on both the n-alkane [9] and terpene [10] variability, recognized only three distinct chemotypes (nigra, pallasiana i banatica) within Serbian black pine populations. According to Šarac et al. [10], the major components in the needle essential oils of the infraspecific taxa of P. nigra from Serbia were α-pinene, germacrene D, (E)-caryophyllene, and β-pinene as nonpolar and germacrene D-4-ol as polar compound (Table 1).One of the most studied properties of essential oils are their antimicrobial and antioxidant activity, important for both food preservation and control of human and animal diseases of microbial origin. Although the chemical composition and variability of the essential oils of black pine have been intensively studied in many parts of its habitat [10–15],etc., there is little information about biological activities of P. nigra oils. According to the literature data, antimicrobial and antioxidant properties of P. nigra essential oils have been examined only for endemic Dalmatian black pine (P. nigra ssp. dalmatica) [3,16] and Crimean black pine (P. nigra ssp. pallasiana) from Turkey [17,18].It is well known that essential oils possess antimicrobial activity owing to their lipophylicity and, thus, easy incorporation into bacterial membranes. For this reason, the most common mode of their action is membrane permeability alteration, which leads to changes in membrane electrochemical potential and functionality. There are also other mechanisms of antimicrobial action reported for essential oils, such as RNA synthesis [19], inhibition of enzymes [20,21] where one of the promising ones is inhibition of different enzymes, especially those specific only for bacteria and widespread in bacterial kingdom. Recently, FtsZ (filamenting temperature sensitive strain Z), a 40-kDa protein became a highly promising target for new antibacterial drugs because of its central role in bacterial cell division [22]. The inhibition of FtsZ can lead to antibacterial activity which would be non-selective against bacteria (wide spectrum of activity). At the same time, the active compound would not disturb the structure of eucaryotic tubulin due to its evolutionary distance from FtsZ [23].The aim of the present study was to define and compare the in vitro antibacterial, antifungal, and antioxidant activities of the essential oils isolated from needles of three infraspecific taxa of P. nigra (ssp. nigra, ssp. pallasiana, and var. banatica) from Serbia and to relate them with their chemical properties. Also, molecular docking studies were performed in order to evaluate whether some essential oil’s components can inhibit FtsZ and in this way contribute to antimicrobial activity.For this research three infraspecies taxa of P. nigra Arn. from Serbia were selected: ssp. nigra, ssp. pallasiana, and var. banatica. Twigs with needles from the lowest third of the tree crown were collected in late summer to early fall 2009 from three native populations: I—Mt. Tara (Zmajevački potok) (P. nigra ssp. nigra), II—Mt. Crnook (Jarešnik) (P. nigra ssp. pallasiana), and III—Lazareva reka (P. nigra var. banatica). The needles were stored in labeled (sample plot, date of collection, and age of the needles) polyethylene bags and samples were put into a fridge immediately after collection, and then stored at −20°. Voucher specimens are deposited with the Institute for Biological Research “Siniša Stanković”, University of Belgrade, Serbia.Two-year-old needles, stored until extraction in a freezer at −20°C, were cut into pieces of 2–3mm length, and extracted with pentane (1g of needles per ml of solvent). The extracts were kept at 4–6°C for 24h and then filtered. After evaporation of the solvent, the obtained essential oil samples were subjected to subsequent analysis.The antioxidant activity of the essential oils was studied using 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) radical scavenging method as described by Blois [24] with some modifications. Namely, 300μL of a methanolic solution of investigated oils (the oils concentrations are between 1.00 and 30.00mg/mL) were mixed with 2700μL methanolic solution of DPPH radical (concentration of 0.04mg/mL). After 30min incubation in the dark at room temperature, the decrease in absorbance of the remaining DPPH radical was measured at 517nm (A1) on a Shimadzu, UV–Visible PC 1650 spectrophotometer. Methanol (A0) was used as a blank solution, while Vitamin C and BHA were tested as standards. Each experiment was carried out in triplicate. Reduction of absorption of the DPPH solution was calculated in the following way:Percentage of absorption decrease (517nm)=(A0−A1)×100/A0Sample concentrations necessary to decrease the absorbance of DPPH by 50% (IC50) were obtained from the absorption of curves DPPH solution at 517nm for each compound and standard antioxidant. Data analysis was performed with Origin 7.0 software.The radical-scavenging activity of essential oils for the ABTS (2,2′-azinobis-3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulphonate) radical cation was determined according to the method of Miller and Rice-Evans with some modifications [25]. The ABTS•+ radical cation was generated by mixing 19.2mg of ABTS with 5mL of potassium persulfate (2.46mM) and kept for 12–16h in the dark at room temperature. The ABTS•+ solution (1mL) was diluted with 100–110mL water to give an absorbance of 0.7±0.02 units at 734nm using spectrophotometer (Shimadzu, UV–Visible PC 1650). New ABTS•+ solution was prepared for each analysis. Antioxidant or standard solutions, 75μL, were mixed with 3mL of diluted ABTS•+ solution. After 30min incubation at 30°C, the absorbance was measured at 734nm. Modifications of the method are the following: instead of ethanol (95%), water was used as a blank and instead of Trolox, Vitamin C was used for obtaining calibration curve. ABTS radical scavenging activity in essential oils was calculated from the Vitamin C (VitC) calibration curve (0–2mg/L) and expressed as Vitamin C (VitC)/g of dry extract. All measurements were performed in triplicate and were expressed as average of three analyses±standard deviation.The antimicrobial activity was evaluated against a panel of microorganisms, including Gram-positive Staphylococcus aureus (ATCC 6538), Sarcina lutea (ATCC 9431), Bacillus cereus (ATCC 10876), Gram-negative Proteus mirabilis (ATCC 12453), Pseudomonas aeruginosa (ATCC 9027), Escherichia coli (ATCC 8739), yeast Candida albicans (ATCC 10231) and mold Aspergillus niger (ATCC 16404). Cultures of bacterial species were maintained on Nutrient agar and fungal cultures on Sabouraud dextrose agar at appropriate optimal temperature (37 and 30°C, respectively).Antimicrobial activity was tested using broth microdilution method, where minimum inhibitory concentrations (MIC) determination was performed by a serial dilution method in 96 well microtitre plates. Bacterial species were cultured at 37°C in Mueller Hinton agar for bacteria and Sabouraud dextrose agar for fungi (30C). After 18h of cultivation, bacterial suspensions were made in Mueller Hinton broth and their turbidity was standardized using McFarland Densitometer (DEN-1B, Biosan). The final density of bacterial and yeast’s inoculi were 5×105. Suspension of the mold was made in Sabouraud dextrose broth and its turbidity was confirmed by viable counting in a Thoma chamber. Final size of the fungal inoculum was 1×104. Stock solutions of the essential oils were made in dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO, 10%) and than serially diluted (the diluting factor 2). The final concentration of the tested oils in the media ranged from 20.00 to 0.009mg/mL. The highest concentration of the solvent (DMSO) in any well was 5% (v/v), which was previously confirmed as concentration which does not affect the growth of the tested cells. After making dilutions of the essential oils, the inoculum was added to all wells and the plates were incubated at 37°C during 24h (bacteria) or at 30°C for 48h (fungal strains). Chloramphenicol and nystatin served as positive controls, while the solvent (5% DMSO) was used as a negative control. To ensure medium sterility, each plate contained one non-inoculated well without antimicrobial agent. MIC was defined as the lowest concentration of the oil that inhibited visible growth of the cell cultures. All experiments were done in duplicate.3D structures of the compounds for docking simulation were constructed using MarvinSketch 6.1.0, 2013, ChemAxon (http://www.chemaxon.com). Geometry optimization was carried out by employing MMFF94 molecular force field [26]. E. coli FtsZ homology model, built from the X-ray crystal structure of M. jannaschii (PDB:1FSZ, 2.8Å) [27] was used as target enzyme. The compounds were docked into enzyme binding sites using the MolegroVirtual Docker (MVD) [28]. The Molegro Virtual Docker (MVD v. 2013.6.0.1.) software was employed for docking ligands to the rigid enzyme model for identification of hydrogen bonds and hydrophobic interactions between residues at the active site. The binding site was computed with a grid resolution of 0.3Å. The MolDock SE as a search algorithm was used with the number of runs was set to 100. The parameters of docking procedure were: population size 50, maximum number of iterations 1500, energy threshold 100.00 and maximum number of steps 300. The number of generated poses was 10. The estimation of ligand–receptor interactions was described by the MVD-related scoring functions: MolDock Score, Rerank Score, Hbond Score, Similarity Score, Docking Score. The ligand was docked into computed cavity instead ligand from 1FSZ using the MolDock Optimizer algorithm and its interactions were monitored using detailed energy estimates. A maximum population of 100 and maximum interactions of 10,000 were used for each run and the 5 best poses were retained.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
