@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
FPGA-based design and implementation of arterial pulse wave generator using piecewise Gaussian–cosine fitting

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An arterial pulse wave generator has been designed and implemented based on FPGA.Proposed a method to reconstruct pulse wave from the feature points set by users.The function for adding baseline drift and three types of noises is integrated.It has good performance such as efficiency, portability, and re-configurability.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
FPGA,SOPC,Piecewise fitting,Pulse wave,Signal generator,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Because arterial pulse waves contain vital information related to the condition of the cardiovascular system, considerable attention has been devoted to the study of pulse waves in recent years. Accurate acquisition is essential to investigate arterial pulse waves. However, at the stage of developing equipment for acquiring and analyzing arterial pulse waves, specific pulse signals may be unavailable for debugging and evaluating the system under development. To produce test signals that reflect specific physiological conditions, in this paper, an arterial pulse wave generator has been designed and implemented using a field programmable gate array (FPGA), which can produce the desired pulse waves according to the feature points set by users. To reconstruct a periodic pulse wave from the given feature points, a method known as piecewise Gaussian–cosine fitting is also proposed in this paper. Using a test database that contains four types of typical pulse waves with each type containing 25 pulse wave signals, the maximum residual error of each sampling point of the fitted pulse wave in comparison with the real pulse wave is within 8%. In addition, the function for adding baseline drift and three types of noises is integrated into the developed system because the baseline occasionally wanders, and noise needs to be added for testing the performance of the designed circuits and the analysis algorithms. The proposed arterial pulse wave generator can be considered as a special signal generator with a simple structure, low cost and compact size, which can also provide flexible solutions for many other related research purposes.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A large amount of research work has confirmed that human pulse waves are intimately associated with the status of cardiovascular systems. Changes in physiological parameters such as peripheral vascular resistance, vascular wall elasticity and blood viscosity can be reflected on the morphology of pulse waves [1–3].Pulse waves have been widely studied in many research works for their relationship to the physiology and pathology of cardiovascular systems [4,5]. Because the key to these studies is to make a correct diagnosis from acquired pulse waves accurately, developing high performance pulse wave acquisition equipment and analysis algorithms are important. At the developing stage of these devices, it is usually necessary to input standard testing signals for debugging and evaluation.An arbitrary waveform generator (AWG) is a type of electronic test equipment used to generate standard waveforms that can be input into a device for testing and evaluation [6,7]. However, AWGs can only produce predefined signals such as the sine wave, triangular wave, and square wave but cannot produce specific physiological signals corresponding to different physiological and pathological conditions accurately [8]. These user-defined signals still need to be saved or loaded to AWG. In most cases, the arterial pulse signal that represents specific physiological conditions of the human body is needed for developing and testing the diagnosis equipment based on the arterial pulse wave, especially for supporting education or training [9].A specific physiological signal generator that can produce different types of physiological waveforms as the input test signal has been used for several decades by medical instrumentation servicemen, technicians, and clinical engineers [10]. In 1967, Ivison and Weinman designed electronic simulators to replace the human body as a pulse wave signal source using analog shaping circuits [11,12]. To provide flexible pulse signals, Li et al. designed a pulse signal generator based on C8051 that can generate the pulse signals stored in the generator, and the stored pulse signals can be updated through the USB interface connected to a computer where several predefined pulse signals were saved [13]. However, these studies lack the flexibility of allowing users to change individual components of the pulse waveform.Currently, factors such as convenient usage and cost consideration call for new methods for safety control, quality assurance and performance evaluation of medical devices. Recently, many programmable electrocardiogram generators, which can be used for the testing, calibration and maintenance of electrocardiograph devices, were designed using mathematical function fitting methods and programmable logic devices [14–17].It is reported that a real pulse wave can be approximated and decomposed into several Gaussian functions [18,19]. Actually, the parameters of the decomposed Gaussian functions can be deduced from the feature points of the pulse wave such as the crests, troughs, and periods of the pulse wave [5,20–22]. Therefore, it could be better if a user can simply and freely set several feature points through an independent embedded system and let this portable system generate the simulated pulse wave that can meet the user׳s requirement and approximate the realistic pulse wave with high accuracy [23].To generate different types of pulse waves according to the feature points set by the user, this paper designed an arterial pulse wave generator using Gaussian and cosine functions as the templates to fit pulse waves. In the proposed generator, users only need to choose or define several feature points and parameters such as the crests, troughs and period of the pulse wave. Actually, a physiological signal may also contain some noise, which is introduced in the acquisition procedure. Therefore, the proposed generator also provides a function for generating noise signals to approximate the noise introduced during acquisition. The proposed generator can produce the pulse wave with specified noise, whose type and signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) can be set by users. Furthermore, to simulate an actual pulse wave more accurately, the amplitude of baseline drifts can also be set by the user and can be added to the pulse wave to mimic the baseline drifts introduced due to the respiration and motion artifacts of the subject.With the improvements of integrated circuit technology in the form of low-cost and high density, field programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) with reduced package sizes have broadened the selection range of microprocessors and digital interfacing solutions. An FPGA is an electronic technology that essentially implements very large-scale custom digital circuits by using software to reconfigure a large integrated array composed of identical configurable logic blocks. The FPGA platform provides an environment for the rapid prototyping of systems for biomedical applications with numerous advantages such as the flexibility to allow a designer to quickly produce a low-cost, modular system and to add some additional features to the system [24,25].The proposed pulse signal generator is based on the technology of system on a programmable chip (SOPC), and the Altera Cyclone FPGA device EP1C12Q240C8N is selected as the design target. A programmable system with a Nios II processor is set up in this device. Liquid crystal displays (LCD) and touch screens are integrated into the user interface. In addition, the generated digital signal will be converted to an analog output signal as the standardized test signal of the pulse wave.Our work in this study has the following contributions. First, the existing pulse wave generators are limited to specific pulse waveforms saved in memory, while the proposed pulse wave generator is able to generate four types of pulse waveforms whose feature points were set by users. A piecewise Gaussian–cosine fitting method is also proposed to reconstruct a periodic pulse wave from the given feature points. Second, as we know, it is the first time that the pulse wave generator is implemented with a field programmable gate array (FPGA), which has good performance for several aspects such as efficiency, portability, scalability, and re-configurability [26].The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the basic characteristics of pulse waves, the piecewise Gaussian–cosine fitting method and the SOPC technology. Section 3 describes the implementation of this system, including the design of hardware and the implementation of software. Section 4 illustrates the final outputs of the pulse wave generator and the performance of the designed system. Section 5 discusses the advantages and disadvantages of the developed system and presents the concluding remarks.In this section, the characteristics of pulse waves are first introduced. Then, the proposed piecewise Gaussian–cosine fitting method is described. After that, the related technologies of SOPC are presented.A pulse wave is a result of complex interactions between the left ventricle and the systemic circulation [2,5]. A typical single-period pulse wave shown inFig. 1 usually exhibits an early systolic peak, which is formed due to the ejection of the left ventricular (B in Fig. 1), an incisura-backflow reflected from the arterial branch (C in Fig. 1), and a dicrotic notch that is caused by the closure of the aortic valve (D in Fig. 1) [2,4,5]. A dicrotic wave (DW) is a reflected wave from the recoil of the blood column against the closed aortic valve [27].The single-period pulse wave in Fig. 1 can be described by four feature points, where A is the starting point of a period of the pulse wave, B is the systolic peak, C refers to the incisura, D is the trough of DW, and E is the peak of the DW. The relative positions of these four feature points reflect specific physiological conditions of cardiovascular systems [4].In this paper, curve fitting is conducted to simulate four types of pulse waves demonstrated inFig. 2. When the peripheral vascular resistance becomes higher, the vascular wall elasticity will become smaller. Therefore, the positions of the incisura and the DW will become considerably higher and closer to the systolic peak from the first type to the fourth type of arterial pulse waveforms shown in Fig. 2[4].To model the arterial pulse wave, some researchers have tried to fit a pulse wave with several Gaussian pulses [18–20]. Their findings confirm that the pulse wave is similar to the Gaussian pulse in shape. Unfortunately, these approaches are time consuming.To reconstruct the pulse wave according to its feature points introduced above, a method named piecewise Gaussian–cosine fitting is proposed in this paper. This method uses the Gaussian function and cosine function as a template to fit the segment between every two continuous feature points through interception, zooming and transformation [28]. The Gaussian function is given as follows:(1)G(x)=he−(x−μ)22α2,where h is the amplitude of the peak of the Gaussian pulse, μ is the mean value and x-axis location of the Gaussian pulse peak, and α is the factor that determines the width of a Gaussian pulse. The cosine function is given as follows:(2)C(x)=hcosxIt is notable that for all Gaussian curves, the coordinate of the inflexion (i.e., the point whose second-order derivative is zero) on each shoulder of a Gaussian curve is atx=μ±α, which is derived from the following equation:(3)d2G(x)dx2=he−(x−μ)22α2[(x−μ)2α4−1α2]=0When the feature points are given, if we have a general knowledge of an inflexion׳s relative position to its two adjacent extrema, a proper parameter α for each segment can be set. For example, if the inflexion is at the middle of two continuous feature points (x1, y1) and (x2, y2) on the x-axis, α can be set as (x2−x1)/2.According to the morphologies of different types of pulse waves, the smooth pulse without incisura (Type 1 in Fig. 2) can be divided into four segments. For other types of pulse waves, five segments are needed. To guarantee the continuity of the fitted curve, we require the last point value of the previous segment to be equal to the first point value of the later segment.To further guarantee the smoothness of the fitted curve at the break points, the first-order derivative needs to be studied because when the first-order derivative of a wave is continuous, the wave is smooth. The first-order derivative of the Gaussian function is given as follows:(4)d(G(x))dx=−h(x−μ)α2e−(x−μ)22α2At the peaks of the pulse wave, the first-order derivative satisfies the conditions:(5){d(G(x))/dx|x=μ−=0d(G(x))/dx|x=μ+=0However, at the troughs of the pulse wave (such as point D in Fig. 1) and the points of inflexion (such as point C in Fig. 1), the Gaussian segment cannot easily gain ideal smoothness. Because the first-order derivative of the cosine wave atnπis zero and it shows a similar morphology with the pulse wave piece, the cosine curve is chosen to fit these pieces.The function for fitting the pulse wave in Fig. 1 can be defined as:(6)Pfit(x)={y1e−(x−x1)22α12(x0≤x<x1)y1+y2−y12−y2−y12cos((x−x1)(x2−x1)π)(x1≤x<x2)y2+y3−y22−y3−y22cos((x−x2)(x3−x2)π)(x2≤x<x3)y3+y4−y32−y4−y32cos((x−x3)(x4−x3)π)(x3≤x<x4)y4e−(x−x4)22α52(x4≤x<x5)where (x1, y1), (x2, y2), (x3, y3), (x4, y4), and (x5, y5) are the coordinates corresponding to the feature points B, C, D, E, and F, respectively. The parameter α for each piece of the Gaussian pieces is set by analyzing waveforms of different pulse types. Thus, each specific parameter α is calculated automatically for a specific type of pulse wave.The technology of SOPC provides a solution for the flexible customization of hardware based on a programmable chip. Developers can build their own hardware using languages such as the hardware description language and the C language. In addition, a reusable unit of logic, cell, or chip layout design can be packaged as an intellectual property core (IP core). Altera, a Silicon Valley manufacturer of programmable logic devices (PLDs) and reconfigurable complex digital circuits, provides a large amount of IP cores including the Nios II embedded processor and some compatible interfaces and peripheral device controllers, which can meet nearly all of the requirements for the research and development of a system.The SOPC design procedure includes both hardware design and software implementation. The hardware design is mainly conducted in the development environment, i.e., Quartus II and SOPC Builder, while the software development is based on the Nios II IDE.In the hardware development environment Quartus II, users can build their own chip layout design using hardware description languages (such as Verilog and VHDL) or a schematic diagram. SOPC Builder can automatically connect soft–hardware components to create a complete computer system that runs on various FPGA chips. With the aid of SOPC Builder, developers can build a system based on the Nios II embedded processor, and the software of the system can be developed within the Nios II IDE.The implementation of the proposed system includes hardware design and software implementation. The whole system is developed on the Quartus II and Nios II IDE development platforms, and the related modules are illustrated inFig. 3.In this paper, the Altera Cyclone FPGA device EP1C12Q240C8N is selected as the design target, and the design is conducted on a development board produced by R&C, Inc. [29,30]. The hardware design contains five main modules, namely, the LCD controller, touch screen controller, D/A converter (DAC), A/D converter (ADC) and power controller.The programmable system is developed based on several IP cores offered by Altera. An LCD controller IP is designed separately based on hardware logic and is imported into the system as a lower layer design.A TFT-LCD produced by Sharp Inc. (LQ080V3DG01) is selected as the monitor because of its low price and high reliability. An LCD controller is designed on an FPGA according to the timing described in its datasheet [31]. The IP core for the LCD controller generates the timing of the LCD display using a phase locked loop (PLL), and SDRAM is used as the display memory of the LCD by integrating an SDRAM controller in the LCD IP core.In this design, a resistive film touch screen is selected, and the corresponding controller is ADS7843 [32]. The digital interface of ADS7843 is connected with the general FPGA IOs that provide the working timing for ADS7843. A measurement of the current Y position of the pointing device is made by connecting the X+ input to the ADC, by turning on the Y+ and Y– drivers, and by digitizing the voltage on X+ [32]. The location of X can also be obtained in the same way. ADS7843 supports two reference voltage input modes: one mode is the single-ended reference mode, and the other mode is the differential mode. In this paper, the differential mode is chosen because it can eliminate the voltage drop impact during switch conduction.To output an analog pulse wave signal that meets the user׳s requirement, a D/A converter named DAC7513 is selected [33]. The CPU communicates with the DAC through the SPI interface. The sampling rate of the pulse waves in this database is 1KHz. DAC7513 is a low-power, single, 12-bit buffered voltage output digital-to-analog converter. The current limitation, voltage range and output impedance is 50mA, 0–5V and 1Ω, respectively.Different circuitries of this proposed system demands three voltages: +12V, +5V, and +3.3V. The chip LM2940CT-5.0 was selected to transfer 12V to 5V for providing power to the LCD screen, and the chip LM1085IT-3.3 was selected to transfer 5V to 3.3V for providing power to the A/D and D/A converters ADS7843 and DAC7513. The reference voltage input is 3.3V.The software of the proposed arterial pulse waveform generator is developed in the Nios II IDE on which all software development tasks of the design were implemented. Nios II IDE provides the software drivers with all of the IP cores supplied by Altera. The developer can visit the registers of the IP cores by including a system hardware library in the programs, to manipulate the peripheral hardware.The software mainly contains the following components:1)the algorithm of the Gaussian piecewise fitting method;generating three types of noises;obtaining user command from the touch screen;displaying the generated pulse wave;user׳s manipulation on the DAC.The whole procedure of the software is demonstrated inFig. 4. The generator provides four interfaces, which are marked with the corresponding numbers. The functions of the four interfaces are as follows:1)the module for selecting the pulse wave type: four typical pulse wave types illustrated in Fig. 2 can be selected;the module for adding noise and baseline drift: three types of noise can be selected, i.e., white Gaussian noise, 50-Hz power line noise and uniform white noise; the user can include noise or baseline drift, set the SNR of the output pulse wave, change the amplitude of baseline drifts, and start or stop the D/A conversion;the module for setting the feature points of the output pulse wave: each of the four types of pulse waves has five or six feature points, as demonstrated in Fig. 2; users can use the default setting or change the feature point׳s coordinate by touching the initial point position and then dragging it to the expected position;the module of Gaussian–cosine fitting method: with the selected type of pulse wave and the specified feature points, the pulse wave will be generated by using the proposed Gaussian–cosine method.The operation conducted on the analog resistive film touch screen is measured by the digital output of an A/D converter of the x-channel and the y-channel. To map the digital output of an A/D converter onto pixel coordinates of an LCD, 4-points correction is conducted in the software to obtain the minimum and maximum A/D converted values of the x-channel and the y-channel.As shown inFig. 5, four points A, B, C, and D are drawn on the LCD screen to define the screen coordinate for displaying the pulse wave signal. Touching this screen will generate four pairs of D/A converter outputs, namely, (Vax, Vay), (Vbx, Vby), (Vcx, Vcy), and (Vdx, Vdy). With these four pairs of values, any point that is touched can be mapped into the LCD pixel coordinate according to the following equation:(7){x=(Vx−(Vax+Vbx)2)LCD_W(Vcx+Vdx)2−(Vax+Vbx)2y=(Vy−(Vay+Vdy)2)LCD_H(Vby+Vcy)2−(Vay+Vdy)2where LCD_W and LCD_H are the width and height of the LCD, respectively. Due to the existence of a disturbance during the touch of the screen, this paper takes advantage of software counting to eliminate jitters. When a user has touched the screen, the corresponding coordinates will be calculated and saved. When the user clicks the screen again, the corresponding coordinates will be calculated and saved as well. Then, the coordinates of the two clicks will be compared. If the difference is less than five pixels, the average of the coordinate values will be regarded as the inputs.In the acquisition procedure, noise can be unavoidably introduced. Therefore, it is important to design a filter when pulse wave acquisition and analysis equipment is being designed. To facilitate the evaluation of the acquisition/analysis system׳s performance on de-noising, signals with noise need to be generated. In our design, three types of noise can be added, i.e.,1)white Gaussian noise;50-Hz power line noise;uniform distributed white noise.Generally, noise is measured by the index of SNR, which is calculated by(8)SNR=10log(∑i=1L|S(i)−μs|2∑i=1L|N(i)−μn|2)where L is the length of the signal and noise and S and N are the signal and noise, respectively.μsandμnare the mean value of the signal and noise, respectively. With the noise type and the SNR value specified by a user, the amplitude of noise will be calculated according to the amplitude of the pulse wave. Then, the pulse wave with the required noise level can be generated.The 50-Hz power line noise is modeled with a 50-Hz sine function. A random signal could be considered white noise if it has a flat spectrum over the widest possible bandwidth. In this paper, the rand() function defined in the C library “stdlib” was employed to generate a uniformly distributed white noise. For the generation of white Gaussian noise, Box and Muller proposed a method to generate a normal distributed sequence with two independent random variables from the same rectangular density function on the interval [0, 1] in [34]. Because white Gaussian noise has a constant spectral density and a Gaussian distribution of amplitude, the process of generating white Gaussian noise consists of two steps. First, two random signals varA and varB on interval (0, 1) were generated using the function rand(). Second, a white Gaussian noise sequence with a mean value of zero and a standard deviation of one was generated by formula (9)[34], where x and y are the intermediate variables and z is the Gaussian noise.(9){x=2log(1.0/(1−varA))y=2πvarBz=xcos(y)In the acquisition procedure, the respiration and body motion artifacts of the subject might be introduced [35,36]. Therefore, to simulate the realistic conditions, the pulse waveforms with baseline drifts at different amplitudes can be generated if users need them. The respiration and body motion artifacts are generated as described in [36] according to the pulse rate specified by the user.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
To design an arterial pulse wave generator that can produce different types of pulse waves based on the feature points set by users for debugging and testing various pulse wave monitoring or analysis systems instead of acquiring a real pulse wave through pulse sensors, in this paper, a pulse wave generator system based on an FPGA is designed and implemented. Furthermore, a method to realize pulse wave fitting, namely, the piecewise Gaussian–cosine fitting method, is proposed. Using the proposed system, simulated pulse waves with different types of baseline drifts and SNRs can be produced without using any pulse sensors.The proposed generator has a simple structure and compact size. The integrated touch screen and LCD provide a convenient user interface and prompt response. Because the fitting method does not need any optimization, the computational time is less than one second, and the size area of the proposed system is 110mm×80mm, which is slightly larger than the touch screen. The pulse wave generator can generate relatively accurate and controllable real-condition human body pulse waves, which is of great practical significance for research on pulse wave and cardiovascular systems.The piecewise Gaussian–cosine fitting method can restore the pulse wave according to its feature points and gain a smooth fitting. The accuracy of fitting at the start and end part of the pulse wave needs to be improved in the future. However, because this method can produce diverse pulse waves based on only five or six feature points, the feasibility of the proposed pulse wave generator increases. In the future, additional types of pulse waves still need to be studied and generated.This paper reports the design and implementation of a precision pulse signal generator for testing and calibrating the pulse wave monitor and analysis devices and the pulse signal processing systems and provides a cardiovascular teaching tool. The signal generator outputs a precision differential signal via a digital-to-analog stage, which has been designed using low noise techniques to produce accurate signals. The results demonstrated that this tester, due to its simplicity in construction and easiness of use, could be a practical, reliable and economical solution for testing the pulse wave monitor and analysis systems and for training hospital personnel.We certify that there is no conflict of interest with any financial organization regarding the material discussed in the following manuscript.This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant nos. 61374015 and 61202258), the Ph.D. Programs Foundation of the Ministry of Education of China (No.20110042120037), the Liaoning Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 201102067), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (nos. N110219001 and N130404016).