@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Knitted fabrics design and manufacture: A novel CAD system for qualifying bagging performance based on geometric-mechanical models

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Develop a novel CAD system to evaluate and qualify the bagging performance of knitted fabrics.Simulate the bagging rheological behaviors in knitted fabrics by a set of geometric-mechanical models.Characterize the parameters of fibers, yarns and fabrics provided with available measurement methods.Rapidly achieve the knitted fabric products with desirable mechanical functions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Knitted fabrics,Bagging performance,CAD system,Industrial applications,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Knitted fabrics have excellent formability and tensile ability and are widely used in textile-related products and industrial applications. The traditional quality control on fabric’s performance is undertaken by repeated measurement and testing which is very time-consuming and has great expense. There are urgent requirements for the designers and manufacturers to validate and control the mechanical performance of knitted fabrics. In this paper, we present a novel simulation-based CAD system for evaluating and qualifying the bagging performance of knitted fabrics. A set of geometric-mechanical models are developed with characterization of the fibers/yarns and fabrics for available inputs, which make it feasible for practical applications. Through encapsulating the models and presenting with a series of friendly interfaces, the CAD system offers users the abilities of data management, numerical design, bagging simulation and performance preview of knitted fabrics. The simulation capability of the models is validated by comparing the predicted results with measured data from experiments under same bagging testing conditions. The potential industrial applications of this system is demonstrated, and the designers and manufacturers can achieve the knitted fabric products with desirable mechanical functions effectively and economically.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Today, the increasing demands for functions, comfort and durability on the products of apparels, sports wears, uniforms and also many industrial applications have created the need of high quality control on the fabrics [1]. As the basic material for textile-related products, the fabrics should be designed and manufactured to ensure to meet with the final products’ specification and desired functions. Traditionally, the common quality control on fabrics’ performance, such as tensile ability, stiffness, surface rubbing, thermal resistance, is undertaken by repeated measurement and testing and then marks the performance on the labels  [2]. This process, however, is very time-consuming and usually has great expense.Bagging is a kind of three-dimensional residual deformation, which comes from a perception of people about bagged dome shape and specially happens in elbows, knees pockets, hips and heels parts during wearing. Different from the other kinds of deformation, the prolonged and repeated deformation caused by bagging greatly reduce the durability and damage appearance of the fabric. Thus it is an important performance criteria for the fabric designers and manufacturers to evaluate and control their products’ quality.In literature, there are many research studied the bagging fatigue behaviors and proposed different methods to evaluate the residual bagging height of woven fabrics. Zhang et al. proposed a mathematical model for woven fabric bagging behavior  [3]. Several international standards including Chinese standard (FJ 552), British Standards(BBS 4294) and Turkish Standard (TS 6071) addressed the testing methods related to bagging  [4–6]. Yeung and Zhang proposed an image-processing method by testing and comparing visual features  [7]. A alternative method is using KES-FB apparatus which evaluate the tensile, bending and shearing by some readable variables on the apparatus  [8].However, due to the different structure from that of woven fabrics, knitted fabrics have different mechanisms in bagging behaviors but generally have excellent formability and drape ability. They are required to have a dimensional stability under exerted force which may cause fabric fatigue. Thus, bagging phenomenon is an important research problem of knitted fabrics. Uçar et al. studied the bagging behaviors height of knitted fabrics using a similar mechanism of woven fabrics  [9]. de Araújo et al. used FEA (finite element analyses) model to calculate the deformation of planar knitted fabric  [10]. Hasani et al. predicted the bagging fatigue of viscose/polyester blended knitted fabrics with different blend ratios and structural stitch lengths  [11]. Ajeli et al. proposed an energy model for the bending behavior of warp-knitted fabrics based the measurement using a Kawabata evaluation system  [12]. These work explored different methods to measure and simulate the deformation of knitted fabrics, however, few of them systematically developed bagging models based on rheological mechanisms and accessible inputs of the fibers and fabrics’ structure and properties, which are rather useful for practical application.In engineering design, the most challenge for the designers and manufactures is that they need to deal with functional behaviors of the fabric and map them onto a set of parameters of realizable structure, properties and manufacturing methods. In fact, there are only a few experts who are capable to handle this problem  [13]. However, the computer-aided design approach can help the common users to achieve it with a basis for structural mechanics, data availability and functional prediction  [14]. Researchers had paid many efforts from the earlier application of 2D design tools to the recently growing usage of 3D modeling system, such as geometric 2D/3D pattern modeling by Charlie Wang et al. [15–17], 3D cloth virtual modeling and trying by Magnenat-Thalmann et al.  [18–20], CAD systems for clothing functional design by Mao et al.  [21–23].This paper presents a novel CAD system for designers and manufactures to evaluate and qualify the bagging performance of knitted fabrics. Different from previous work on investigation of the bagging behavior of knitted fabrics, we develop a set of mathematical models systematically for simulating the bagging performance of knitted fabrics based on their rheological mechanism, geometric structure and mechanical properties. These geometric-mechanical models can provide accurate simulation capacity, which are validated through comparison with experimental data. Furthermore, the parameters of the fibers/yarns and fabrics are characterized, provided with available measurement and calculation methods. The CAD system are developed with encapsulation of the models and presents friendly interfaces to numerically design and simulation. Thus, a feasible strategy oriented to the designers and manufactures to evaluate knitted fabrics’ bagging performance is realized with basis of available data input, scientific model-based simulation and friendly virtual analysis. This CAD system is beneficial in shortening design cycles and reducing design cost and also demonstrates many potentials in industrial applications.When the finished fabric in plane form is applied a force perpendicular to its plane, the force which maybe static or dynamic is distributed planar in the fabric, and the planar continuous structure of fabric is deformed by the spatial stress. This imposes a difference in the material and causes spatial deformation in the fabric, which is called bagging  [24]. Almost every fabric shows some degree of elongation when being exerted upon an external force, if it can fully recover after the force is removed, which is said the fabric is elastic. However, if the recovery is not full in the fabric, the viscoelastic behaviors take place, where the strain is determined by the change in shape and also the differential time equation  [25]. In this situation, the Young’s modulus, which measures the force needed to stretch a material sample, begins to change and the strain is subject to superposition principles  [26]. In theory, creep increases in elongation under constant force, and relaxation decreases in force at constant elongation  [27]. Meantime, during bagging deformation, the bagging force may induces internal stress of the fabric at three directional ways  [28].In structure, the knitted fabric is an aggregate of fibers linked to each other at varying compactness, varying degree and type of order and varying degree of extension, curl and twist. Generally the linkage is due to frictional forces that is dependent on frictional coefficient, normal pressure and effective contact areas  [29]. Kawabata pointed out that textile materials can be very easily distorted and be extremely resistant to the application of high loads to prevent fiber redistribution during fabric extension, which leads to a kind of self-locking mechanisms among the fibers within the fabric  [30]. This suggests that frictional restraint to fabric deformation exists during the whole process of fabric deformation.Due to these reasons, when to derive a mathematical model to describe the rheological mechanism involved in the knitted fabric bagging deformation, there is a need to compromise between theoretical investigation and practical utilization. A key issue is the assumptions, which determine on the one hand the degree of realism of the model and on the other hand the practicality of the model for achieving a numerical solution. Before the model development, here are some terms and definitions of knitted fabrics will be used in the following sections. The fabrics are specified as warp knitted which is knitted by multiple sets of yarns and can be very complex and intricate in structure, as shown in Fig. 1.Course and course density: course is a row of loops across the width of the fabric, which determines the length of the fabric, and are measured as courses per centimeter or inch. The number of the knitted loops per 50 mm length in the course direction is defined as course density.Wale and wale density: wale is a column of loops along the length of the fabric, which determine the width of the fabric, and are measured as wales per centimeter or inch. The number of the knitted loops per 50 mm length in the wale direction is defined as wale density.Bagging residual: the bagging residual reflects the growth of fabric in the bagging process. After the first bagging cycle, the growth of fabric measured at the beginning of each bagging cycle is called bagging residual.Elastic modulus(E1): the elastic modulus describes the tensile elasticity, or the tendency of fiber/fabric to deform along an axis when opposing forces are applied along that axis; it is defined as the ratio of tensile stress to tensile strain.Viscoelastic modulus(E2): the viscoelastic module describes the fiber/fabric that exhibit both viscous and elastic characteristics which can be modeled as linear combinations of springs and dashpots, respectively.Viscosity of fiber/fabric(η): the viscosity of fiber/fabric(η)is measured as the friction coefficient of the dashpot which models the viscosity property of the fiber/fabric.Relaxation time(τ): the relaxation time is the time for the fiber/fabric to reach equilibrium after they are deformed. It can be calculated by the relationshipτ=η/E2.Yarn Specific work(Ywork): yarn specific work describes the tensile property of the yarns taken from the fabric, which can be obtained byYwork=loadingworkoffirstcircle/yarncount(kg-mm/tex)Though the relationships between strain and stress of woven fabrics have been studied  [24], they cannot be directly applied for knitted fabrics due to the different structures and rheological mechanisms. In this paper, we investigate the rheological mechanisms of knitted fabrics and develop the bagging mathematical models concerning the knitting geometric structure and mechanical properties. The models consist of three essential components: elastic and viscoelastic deformation of fibers/yarns, and the friction between fibers/yarns within the fabric structure. In these three components, the elastic stress are fully recoverable during the bagging cycle, while the viscoelastic and frictional force results in hysteresis and are unrecoverable.The rheological mechanism of knitted fabrics’ bagging can be analyzed qualitatively by separating into different stages to describe the deformation process. As shown in Fig. 2, Fig. 2(a) is the initial stage of bagging, during which the elastic stretch of yarns and frictional resistance are the main components. Fig. 2(b) describes the stage of bagging in progress, which consists of the elastic and viscoelastic deformation of fibers/yarns(E1,E2,η)and the frictional force between composed fibers/yarns. Fig. 2(c) describes the ending stage of bagging, during which the elasticity deformation of fibers/yarns becomes negligible. However, in practice most of the knitted fabrics’ bagging behaviors can be described by Fig. 2(b) through experimental observation. For the development of mathematical models, we assume the stress–strain relations for elastic and viscoelastic components are linear.TheE1,E2.ηof each component fibers/yarns of the fabric can be evaluated by the creep mechanical model shown in Fig. 3. In Fig. 3(a), at the beginning when the loadPis applied, the springE1will extend immediately, while the springE2and the viscous damper at the downside will not move at that moment. In Fig. 3(b), with the time going, the springE1will gradually reach its maximum extents and be fixed at the maximum position, meanwhile the viscous damper will commence to slip and the springE2will commence to extend. This movement will continue to the moment when they reach their maximum extent, as shown in Fig. 3(c). In Fig. 3(a), we can measure the spring extentε1and the load force ofP, thusE1can be obtained by the equationE1=P/ε1. In Fig. 3(b), at the beginning momentΔt(Δt→0), the extent of springE2is close to 0, and the load of the viscous damper can be calculated byPf=ηdεdt. Whendεdtgoes to a fixed value with the moving velocity leveling off, the increased load forceΔPcan be considered as the load caused by the springE2, and the increased heightε2is considered as the extent of springE2, thenE2can be obtained by the equationE2=ΔPε2.From the rheological models above, it can see that the elastic and viscoelastic elements are linear, thus the fiber stress output at any timeσfib(t)can be described by:(1)σfib(t)=σe(t)+ση(t)where,σe(t)is elastic force andση(t)is viscoelastic force.According to Hooke’s law about the relationship between stress and strain [31],σe(t)can be calculated as:(2)σe(t)=E1εfib(t)where,E1is the integrated elastic modulus of all involved fibers/yarns (aandb) in the fabric, and can be counted byE1a+E1b,εfib(t)is the average strain of fibers/yarns, which varies with bagging height and is determined by the structure of the fiber/yarn and fabric:(3)εfib=Y1×εfab/C1whereY1is fiber/yarn strain coefficient which reflects the influence of the fiber/yarn structures on the strain,εfabis the fabric extension calculated based on the geometry equation  [32]:By using Boltzmann superposition principle and Maxwell model  [33],ση(t)is calculated according to the integration of the fiber/yarn strain history:(4)ση(t)=∫0tE2e−(t−ξ)τdεfib(ξ)dξdξwhereE2is the integrated elastic modulus of involved fibers/yarns (aandb), and can be counted byE2a+E2b.τis the relaxation time calculated byη/E2, andηis the integrated viscous coefficient of involved fibers/yarns (aandb) in the knitted fabric and can be counted byηa+ηb.After having a partial integration on Eq. (4), Eq. (1) can be updated as:(5)σfib(t)=E1εfib(t)+E2εfib(t)−E21τ∫0te−(t−ξ)τεfib(ξ)dξ.Considering a knitted fabric with stitch densityC3, the fabric internal force in unit width(pfab)can be calculated by:(6)pfab(t)=Y2×C3×C2×σfib(t)whereY2is a fabric tensile force coefficient as an estimation of the effect of fabric anisotropy on fabric force  [32],C2is the count of a yarn. Thus, the fabric internal elastic and viscoelastic force can be expressed as :(7)pfab(t)=Y2×C3×C2Y1C1{E1εfab(t)+E2[εfab(t)−1τ∫0te−(t−ξ)τεfab(ξ)dξ]}.Frictional restraint to fabric deformation is closely related to the fabric structural features. Friction arisen from loop junction points should be the major component of frictional resistance to knitted fabric deformation. Fig. 4shows the unit structure of a typical knitted fabric.At a loop junction, the friction stressσfrat any timetcan be represented as:(8)σfr(t)=μ×Fc(t)whereFc(t)is the total normal stress imposed on the junction point,μis the mean frictional coefficient of the fibers/yarns. During bagging deformations, the normal force at any specific loop junction is equal to the tensile force along the surface according to the structure of knitted fabric shown in Fig. 4, the normal force in course direction can be written as follows:(9)Fc(t)=Fnormal_force×ntAcrosssection×Nloopwhere,Fnormal_forceis the tensile force on the fabric along the surface, which can be estimated from the bagging force byFnormal_force=Fbagging×sinα0, as shown in Fig. 5.Acrosssectionis the cross-session area of fabric sample and can be estimated byAcrosssection=hf×2×π×r, wherehfis the fabric thickness, andris the radius of fabric sample at conical section of a specific bagging height.Nloopis the number of loops in the fabric sample. Thus, the friction distribution at a hoop circle(r)can be expressed as:(10)σfr(t)=μ×Fc(t)=μ×Fbagging×6×sinα0hf×2×π×r×Nloop.The frictional force at any segment(dA)is(11)dFf(t)=Zdσfr(t)drdAwhere,Zis the loop density of unit area, anddA=rdθ×dL(0≤θ≤2π,dL=dr/cosα(t))Thus, the total frictional force in the fabric sample(Pfric)is(12)Pfric(t)=Z×∫rdθ⋅∫dLdσfr(t)dr=Z×μ×Fbagging×6hf×Nloop×r0tanα0(t)×lnr0R0.In the bagging testing, a fabric sample is generally clamped in a circular sample holder and deformed repeatedly from the center by a steal ball. To derive the relationship between fabric internal forces and the external bagging force, we imagine to cut the fabric sample along the hoop circle(r)that is the intersection between conical section and spherical corona. The sum of all internal forces projected at the vertical direction shall equal to an external bagging force. Thus, the smooth bagging forcePs(without internal friction) can be expressed by:(13)Ps(t)=2πr0sin2α0(t)×pfab(t)where,α0(t)is a bagging angle that changes with bagging height(h).For a warp knitted fabric, the friction between fibers plays an important role to hold the fibers together in a spun yarn and the interlacing loops in the fabric. On the basis of detailed analysis of the frictional restraint to the bagging deformation, the internal friction to resist bagging deformation is a function of fabric tensile deformation and arisen from the inter-yarns at interlacing points of fabric  [32]. That means the total bagging force for the fabric should consist of elastic and viscoelastic force and also frictional force. Considering that the fiber/yarn deformation may happen in elastic stage or viscoelastic stage, and the possible shearing–bending frictional moments in the friction process, we introduce three coefficientsk3,k4andk5to represent the relative contributions of elastic and viscoelastic stresses, and frictional force.Thus, the total bagging forcePbto against the internal and frictional forces of knitted fabric can be written as:(14){Pb(t)=Ps(t)+Pfric(t)loading processPb(t)=Ps(t)−Pfric(t)unloading process .Combining Eqs. (7), (12) and (14), the total bagging forcePbfor the knitted fabric sample is:(15)Pb(t)=2πr0sin2α0(t)×Y2×C3×C2Y1C1{k3E1εfab(t)+k4E2[εfab(t)−1τ∫0te−(t−ξ)τεfab(ξ)dξ]}±k5×Z×μ×6Pbhf×Nloop×r0tanα0(t)×lnrhR0.To obtain all related properties of fibers/yarns and fabrics that are needed for mathematical modeling and simulating the knitted fabric bagging performance, we conducted testing experiments on a series of warp knitted fabrics samples to figure out available measurements and calculation methods to determine their properties. In literature, Jeddi et al. carried out significant work on analysis of warp knitted fabric structure from models and experiments  [12,34]. In order to have accessible inputs in an effective way, the characterization of the structure and properties in this paper is based on the testing data by popular instruments and geometric observation.In all the testing in this paper, there involves six types of fabrics (F1, F2, F3, F4, F5, F6) and three types of yarns (T1, T2, H1) coming from manufacturing industry. As to the yarns, two of them (T1, T2) are tensile and another one (H1) is hard. Each type of fabric includes two types of yarns, namely one is tensile while the other is hard. The fabrics (F1, F2 and F3) are composed by the yarns (T1 and H1), and the fabrics (F4, F5 and F6) are composed by the yarns (T2 and H1). All these six warp knitted fabrics have the same schematic diagram of construction, as shown in Fig. 6. They are warp knitted with two-guide-bar locknit stitch, and have different run-in on front guide bar and back guide bar.The characterization includes the tensile and frictional parameters of fibers/yarns and the structural parameters of knitted fabrics. Tensile parameters are important input for the bagging force model and are calculated with the measured data, for which the instrument (Instron) connected with the computer recorded the load force with the time and distance continuously. Frictional coefficient between the fibers/yarns is one of inputting parameters of the models. However, due to the complex structure of the warp knitted fabrics, it is difficult to draw the yarn out of the fabric to measure the frictional coefficient. We designed the experimental method to measure the frictional coefficient of fibers/yarns. Fabric structure also plays an important influence on the fabric bagging behavior and are considered into the models. Some basic structure properties can be directly measured, but some structural parameters cannot be measured by the existing measurement methods. After analysis of the knitting structural features, we propose new measurement or calculation methods to determine the density (C3), the interlacing density per unit area(Z)and the thread-spacing of wale direction(y01)of knitted fabrics. The detail characterization of the parameters of fibers/yarns and knitted fabrics are listed in the Appendix.Based on the mathematical models described in Section  3, we develop a software package with simulation capability, data management and friendly graphic interfaces for the users to carry out numerical design with the characterized properties, bagging simulation and performance preview of knitted fabrics. As a simulation-based CAD tool, this system encapsulates the complex mathematical models and provides with the functionalities in the flow of preprocess, simulation and results visualization.Fig. 7shows the architecture of this CAD system, from which it can be observed that the preprocess stage is responsible to receive the information about the fibers/yarns, fabric mechanical properties, bagging test conditions in the virtual environment, as well includes the project management helping the users to record and re-use the simulation cases; the simulation stage is the capability to solve the bagging models and simulate the bagging behaviors for the knitted fabrics with specified fibers/yarns under the virtual bagging test conditions; the results visualization stage is to analyze the simulation results and translate the digital solution data into visual expression, in which the user can predict the bagging performance by viewing various graphs for the bagging force, elastic force, viscoelastic force and friction force and also the animated bagging process in the knitted fabric. In order to facilitate the users to manage the project information, fibers/yarns and fabrics properties and also the simulation results, the database is designed assistant to the system and provides connection ports on the user interfaces. With the database, the users not only can save the finished project information, also can administer the mechanical specification of the raw material, semi and final products of knitted fabrics.The data flow in the main modules of the CAD system is illustrated in Fig. 8. Initially, the input data to this system can be either directly input by the users manually, or load the various kinds of data from the database which is constructed by different components entitled with the ID of project, test, fabric and fiber/yarn. When receiving the specification information of the fibers/yarns, fabrics and bagging test conditions from the user input or database, it will transfer the information and initialize the objects defined by Classes in the computational simulation module. The initialized Class then can drive the computation solver to implement the simulation under specified test conditions. During the computation, the Classes need update their values according to the newly generated results in different time steps. Finally, the simulation results are delivered to the module of data visualization, and meantime to be stored to the database with the project ID.In the computational solver, the simulation algorithm is enabled by the initialization of fibers/yarns, fabrics and bagging testing. It firstly calculates the parameters which are needed for inputting into the mathematical models, such as the structural parameters of fabrics(Y2,y01,Z)and the tensile parameters of fibers/yarns(E1,E2,η). Under the conditions of virtual bagging testing cycles, bagging height, cross-head speed and radius of the steel ball, the simulation starts to solve the mathematical models and works out the solutions of elastic deformation(σe(t)),(ση(t)), frictional force(Pfric(t)), internal force(σfib(t),pfab(t),Ps(t))and total bagging force(Pb(t)).Fig. 9shows the structure of the numerical algorithm in this virtual system. The simulation algorithm repeats the models solving and generates numerical solutions iteratively with the time step(Δt)until all the bagging cycles are over. In each iteration, the variables changing with the time in the bagging process, such as bagging height(h), bagging angle(α0(t)), fiber/yarn strain(εfib), fabric strain(εfab)will be renewed firstly and then be taken account into the solution for the elastic deformation, viscoelastic deformation and bagging force models.After the simulation finishes, the solution results saved to the database are meantime visualized for better preview and analysis for the fibers/yarns and fabrics’ mechanical performance during the virtual bagging testing. The fiber/yarn’s strain and stress relationship reflected by the elastic and viscoelastic behaviors, the fabric’s non-linear deformation during loading and unloading process, as well as the change of bagging force with cycles can be analyzed through the series of visualized plots for the simulation solutions on the time axis. Therefore, the users can analyze and evaluate the bagging performance of the fabric under the specified material and structures.The developed CAD system presents a series of graphic interfaces for the user to implement the functionalities of different modules. Fig. 10shows the main interface of this system, and also the value of coefficients(k3,k4,k5), which are the adjustable weights for the relative contributions of three components (elasticity, viscoelasticity and internal friction) on bagging force. They cannot be measured nor calculated through known parameters and are estimated from computational experiments.Figs. 11 and 12show the interfaces for the users to input the specification information for testing condition, fabric and fiber/yarn mechanical and structure properties. When the fiber/yarn and fabric are numerically designed and the testing conditions is specified, the bagging simulation are performed and the user can preview the results in the form of visualization graphs. Fig. 13shows the interfaces for visualized simulation results, including elastic component vs. time, viscoelastic component vs. time, frictional component vs. time and bagging load vs. time. Fig. 14shows the interfaces for bagging performance analysis, such as bagging load vs. height, residual bagging height vs. cycles.The simulation capacity of the CAD system is developed by the geometric-mechanical models. In order to validate the mathematical models and the simulation capacity, we carry out the bagging simulation and testing experiments at the same time under the same conditions(as shown in Fig. 15). All the six types of fabrics and their composed yarns reported in Section  4 are used for the testing experiments. Some basic input parameters which are not explained above are listed in Table 1with the calculation methods. The fabric samples are prepared with 22.5 mm radius strip, and are bagged with 12.7 mm radius steel ball. The bagging process is repeated five times and the bagging speed is 25 mm/min.For each type of fabric, three samples are tested in the repeated bagging experiment. The simulation results and averaged experimental results are compared in terms of bagging load change with the time, the max bagging load at each bagging cycle. Fig. 16shows the predictions of the bagging load during the five loading cycles in comparison with the experimental results. It can be seen that the trends of both predicted and experimental results match well and there is good agreement between them. The compared max bagging load and bagging residual in each cycle of the fabrics (F1 and F2) are shown in Figs. 17 and 18respectively. In Fig. 17, the max loading in each cycle has small deviation between the predicted and simulated results but is less than 8% percentage, which could be caused by measurements errors or models parameters. In Fig. 18, the max bagging residual in each cycle between the predicted and simulated results comes to be very close with the time going. These comparisons indicate the presented models and simulation algorithm are able to well predict the stress and strain behaviors of knitted fabric during repeated bagging processes.Since knitted fabrics have a variety of applications from sports products, architecture, transportation to medical materials, mechanical performance is an essential criteria for the fabric designers and manufactures to control the quality of their products. However, as shown in Fig. 19, the traditional design approach requires iterative sample trial, testing and improvement to achieve the function specification from the end users. With this CAD software package, the fabrics and their composed yarns can be designed in the virtual system by inputting their characterized mechanical and structural parameters as measured in Section  4. The fabrics bagging behaviors can be simulated to preview and analyze their bagging performance without real samples. The designers and manufactures can thus rapidly achieve the knitted fabric products with desirable mechanical functions with short design cycles and low design cost in the industrial manufacturing. In order to demonstrate the benefits of this system, we present some potential applications in followings. For the sake of data availability, we still take the examples of the six fabrics listed in Section  4.As discussed in Section  1, in engineering design it is a challenge to map the functions of the fabric onto a set of measurable material properties for common users. With this CAD system, the designers and manufactures are helped to investigate and understand the influence of fiber/yarn, knitted fabric structural features on the bagging performance even they have no domain knowledge.Computational experiment is a direct and cost-effective way to establish such ability. Endowed with the virtual simulation capacity, the designers and manufactures can numerically design the knitted fabrics through the interfaces shown in Figs. 11 and 12, and preview the bagging performance with given properties and structure. Through quantitative comparison of predicted results, they are capable to have comprehensive understanding on the influence of material properties on the final bagging performance. For instance, the two groups of knitted fabrics used in this paper, namely the G1 fabrics (F1, F2 and F3) composed by the yarns (T1 and H1), and the G2 fabrics (F4, F5 and F6) composed by the yarns (T2 and H1), may have some group features and individual features during the bagging process.Figs. 20 and 21shows the predicted bagging load in the first cycle of both G1 fabrics (F1, F2) and G2 fabrics (F4, F5) respectively. Due to the yarn T1 has higher elastic modulus and viscoelastic modulus than those of the yarn T2, and the elastic and viscoelastic components have mainly weight contribution to the bagging force, thus the G1 fabrics have greater loading force during the bagging process than those of the G2 fabrics, that means the first group of fabrics are less elastic and have inferior bagging resistance than that of the second group. On the other hand, within the same group, such as F1 and F2, or F4 and F5, they have the same yarns components while with different fabric structures. It can see that the fabric F2 (or F5) has greater fabric density than that of the fabric F1 (or F4), which undertakes greater loading force during the bagging process. That reveals the density of knitted fabrics is another properties which may influence the tensile ability addition to the elastic and viscoelastic modulus.When the designers and manufactures have a scientific understanding of the relationship between the bagging performance and available fiber/yarn parameters and fabric structure, they are prospective to determine the design scheme for expected products with this CAD system.For instance of a design case for high performance cycling sportswear, the knitted fabrics for the different body parts may have different structures and functions corresponding to the different requirements. Such as, the fabric used for the trunk especially for the back should have excellent deformability since the back part frequently bends during the cycling sport. The good tensile elasticity and bagging resistance not only helps to allow the body have great freedom in motion but also can generate additional pressure on the skin to provoke the muscle. Meanwhile, consider the functions of breathability for this part, the denser fabric obviously is not expected. Thus the knitted fabric can be designed with excellent elastic fibers/yarns and comparatively sparse dense structure. However, for the upper buttocks, which is less active but more easy to have friction with the seat of bicycle, it should have the ability of deformability and also better density to provide protection for this skin. Thus the knitted fabric may be designed with fiber/yarns with higher elastic modulus and a denser structure, which may offer skin protection and improve the tensile elasticity in some degree.With the design scheme, the designers and manufacturers are easy to specify the material parameters and rightly test them in the virtual environment. The preview of bagging performance of the designed fabrics could feedback them quickly and effectively. Fig. 22shows the predicted bagging performance of two designed fabrics respectively for the back and the upper buttocks, in which the knitted fabrics for the back has less bagging force and more residual bagging height in bagging process, reflecting their different tensile elasticity for the corresponding requirements. Furthermore, the designers and manufacturers can still adjust the key property parameters in the design scheme to refine for the practical requirements.In addition to the main applications above, this CAD system can also help the different people the chain of designers, manufacturers, distributors and end users to validate the bagging performance of available knitted fabric products and mark their quality levels for distinguishing them. On the current knitted fabric market, there are a great deal of products which are full of different functions and performance. However, people just can judge and choose them with their past experience and existing knowledge through looking and touching, even further measurement and testing if necessary. There is lack of a scientific tool for them to quickly validate performance, make judgment and have wise decisions. This CAD system can offer them an effective and economical solution by mixing necessary physical measurements of the materials and virtual simulation on the computers. The quick preview of mechanical performance of the knitted fabric products in virtual bagging testing may help them to choose the best ones for their specific requirements scientifically but economically.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper proposed a novel CAD system for evaluating and qualifying bagging performance of the knitted fabrics oriented to industrial design and manufacture. Based on systematic investigation of the bagging mechanisms, a set of geometric-mechanical models mainly consisting of elastic, viscoelastic and frictional components have been developed to describe and simulate the bagging rheological behaviors in the knitted fabrics. By characterizing the properties of fibers/yarns and knitted fabrics with available measurement and calculation methods, the models are able to predict knitted fabric bagging performance during the loading and unloading processes. The CAD system was developed with the model-based simulation capability and provides with friendly interfaces for the user to carry out data management, numerical design and simulation, results analysis and performance preview of knitted fabrics through various data graphs. The simulation capability of the geometric-mechanical models has been validated through comparing the predicted results with measured data from experiments under same bagging testing conditions. Finally, the potentials of this system in industrial applications also has been discussed. It is prospected to help the designers and manufactures in engineering process to understand the relationship between available material properties and final bagging performance, to achieve reasonable design scheme accordant with practical requirements, and to distinguish bagging quality for existing knitted fabric products for their best choice.