@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Numerical simulation of airflow and micro-particle deposition in human nasal airway pre- and post-virtual sphenoidotomy surgery

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Transient airflow pattern during a full breathing cycle were simulated numerically.Unsteady particle tracking during the inhalation phase was performed.Virtual ethmoidotomy and sphenoidotomy surgery was performed.Sphenoidotomy operation increases the airflow into the sphenoid sinus.After sphenoidotomy deposition of micro-particles in the sphenoid sinus increases.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Nasal airway,Sphenoid sinus,Sphenoidotomy,CFD,Micro-particle,Unsteady flow,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In the present study, the effects of endoscopic sphenoidotomy surgery on the flow patterns and deposition of micro-particles in the human nasal airway and sphenoid sinus were investigated. A realistic model of a human nasal passage including nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses was constructed using a series of CT scan images of a healthy subject. Then, a virtual sphenoidotomy by endoscopic sinus surgery was performed in the left nasal passage and sphenoid sinus. Transient airflow patterns pre- and post-surgery during a full breathing cycle (inhalation and exhalation) were simulated numerically under cyclic flow condition. The Lagrangian approach was used for evaluating the transport and deposition of inhaled micro-particles. An unsteady particle tracking was performed for the inhalation phase of the breathing cycle for the case that particles were continuously entering into the nasal airway. The total deposition pattern and sphenoid deposition fraction of micro-particles were evaluated and compared for pre- and post-surgery cases. The presented results show that sphenoidotomy increased the airflow into the sphenoid sinus, which led to increased deposition of micro-particles in this region. Particles up to 25μm were able to penetrate into the sphenoid in the post-operation case, and the highest deposition in the sphenoid for the resting breathing rate occurred for 10μm particles at about 1.5%.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Rhinosinusitis is one of the most common diseases that cause suffering for many patients. In order to treat those patients who do not respond to pharmaceutical medications, Endoscopic Sinus Surgery (ESS) is prescribed. Sphenoidotomy is used to relieve the infections, polyps, or tumors in the sphenoid sinus. The sphenoid sinus is one of the deepest and largest sinuses in the nasal passage. Sphenoidotomy is performed without resection of the turbinate and by creating an opening into the anterior wall of the sphenoid sinus or enlarging the natural ostium of the sphenoid sinus. If the surgeon approaches the sphenoid sinus through removal of ethmoid sinuses, then the procedure is called transethmoidal sphenoidotomy [1]. This procedure requires dissection of the uncinate process in order to visualize the natural ostium of the maxillary sinus. After identification of the anterior ethmoid area, its cells are dissected. Then posterior ethmoid sinuses are identified and dissected. Finally, the sphenoid is opened inferiorly and medially, and the ostium is enlarged laterally. Sphenoidotomy causes some alteration in the nasal airway structure. This leads to changes in airflow and deposition patterns of the inhaled particles in the nasal airway.Before an actual surgery, a virtual surgery can be helpful for specialists and surgeons to assess the potential changes in both the nasal airflow and deposition of the aerosol particles. In addition, the virtual surgery would allow for testing various alternatives and for optimal surgical planning [2]. Recently, due to the rapid growth in computer technology, researchers have been able to prepare accurate 3-D computational models from CT scan images. Moreover, these nasal models can be virtually modified to reflect the predicted results of the proposed surgical techniques [3]. In contrast to experimental approaches, Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) techniques provide a powerful research tool to investigate the airflow in the human nasal airway [4–9], as well as transport and deposition of aerosol particles [10–15]. Even more complex transport processes such as elongated fiber deposition and stochastic effects of turbulence on particle motion can be studied numerically [16–19]. There have been several CFD studies of nasal airway models with surgical modifications. Lindemann et al. [20] simulated the airflow in the nasal cavity after a virtual radical sinus surgery during inhalation. They showed that aggressive turbinectomy leads to disturbed intranasal air conditioning caused by reduction of the surface area. Chen et al. [21] and Na et al. [22] investigated the effect of surgical turbinate resection on airflow characteristics. Surgical correction of septal deviation has been one of the common procedures in otolaryngology. Ozlugedik et al. [23] and Garcia et al. [24] carried out CFD studies on airflow in a nasal cavity model with septal deviation. Moghadas et al. investigated the impact of septal deviation on the deposition of nano/micro-particles in a human nasal passage using a computational modeling approach. Their results suggested that there would be marked changes in the deposition pattern of particles after septoplasty, surgery to straighten the nasal septum [25].A number of numerical investigations of sinus-flow changes with surgical modifications have been reported in the literature [20,26,27]. Hood et al. studied the gas exchange in the maxillary sinus and scrutinized the effects of ostium size and the accessory ostium on the sinus ventilation rate [28]. Rennie et al. investigated sinus ventilation experimentally and numerically for single- and double-ostium sinuses [29]. Abouali et al. [2] constructed realistic 3-D computational models of the human nasal passage for pre- and post-virtual uncinectomy and Middle Meatal Antrostomy (MMA). They showed that after maxillary sinus endoscopic surgery, the maxillary sinus ventilation changes dramatically and the deposition of inhaled nano/micro-particles in the sinus increases.In earlier studies of the human sinus-nasal flow, steady air and particle flow conditions have been assumed to simplify the computational modeling effort and cost. The significance of the transient nature of respiratory flows has already been pointed out by Shi et al. [12], Lee et al. [30], Zhu et al. [31,32] and Chung et al. [33], among others. The motion and deposition of inhaled particles during cyclic breathing, however, have been rarely studied. The exceptions are the studies of Zhang et al. [34] in a triple bifurcation lung airway model, the Takano et al. [35] analysis of the human larynx region, and the Inthavong et al. [36] simulations of micro-particle deposition in a tracheobronchial airway model. It is worth mentioning that only Häußermann et al. [37] experimentally investigated micro-particle deposition in the nasal airway using human breathing patterns. An unsteady model of nano-particle transport was also performed by Zhang and Kleinstreuer [38] and Shi et al. [12].The presented literature survey shows that the numerical investigation of micro-particle transport and deposition in a nasal airway under unsteady condition (cyclic inhalation and exhalation) has not been reported in the literature. In addition, computational modeling of the ethmoidotomy and sphenoidotomy effects on the nasal airflow and deposition of inhaled pollutants and particles is missing. In the present study, a realistic human airway model was constructed, and a virtual sphenoidotomy operation was performed on the left nasal passage and sphenoid sinus. In order to capture the time-dependent characteristics of transport processes and the features of transient airflow structures, the full breathing cycles were simulated numerically under cyclic flow condition and the particle deposition pattern was investigated in the inhalation phase.To create a three-dimensional model of the nasal cavity including paranasal sinuses for the pre- and post-operative cases, coronal cross sections for the left side of the nasal cavity and sinuses obtained by computed tomography (CT) scan images of a healthy adult male were used in this study. The scans consisted of coronal cross sections spaced 0.625mm apart with a spatial resolution of 512×512 pixels from the tip of the nostrils to the beginning of the nasopharynx. The images were acquired as a part of the routine clinical procedure.The boundary between the airway mucosa and air in the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses was determined in each CT scan׳s slice under the supervision of a specialist. To reconstruct the 3-D model consisting of the nasal cavity and sinuses, the boundaries were connected to each other to create a smooth surface, and form the volume using commercial software. Finally, the model was exported as STL (Stereolithography) file format into ANSYS-ICEM software for meshing. Details of the modeling process of the human nose may also be found in the works of Zubair et al. [39,40].Fig. 1 shows different views of the constructed model including the description of different parts. To produce the post-surgery model, the uncinectomy, ethmoidotomy and sphenoidotomy were performed virtually by the otolaryngologist through resecting the uncinate process and removing ethmoid cells and a part of the anterior wall of the sphenoid sinus on the coronal cross sections.Fig. 2 shows the lateral view of the computational model with locations of several cross sections corresponding to an area that has undergone surgery. Comparison between cross sections pre- and post-operation is also shown.Fig. 3 compares the variations of the cross-sectional areas of the nasal passage with the distance from the nostril for pre- and post-operation cases. It is seen that after surgery the nasal cross-section area has been enlarged compared with that before the surgery. The enlargement of the nasal passage was initiated from the uncinate process near the maxillary ostium at a distance of 52mm from the nostril and continued to the sphenoid sinus region at a distance of 88mm from the nostril.Fig. 4 shows the shape of the sphenoid for pre- and post-operative cases. It is seen that a portion of the anterior wall of the sphenoid around the sinus ostium has been removed.The computational grid was generated by the grid-generating software ICEM-CFDTMANSYS (Canonsburg, PA). Because of the complexity of the nasal geometry, an unstructured computational grid, with a hybrid mesh consisting of four-prismatic boundary layers along the walls with an inner core of tetrahedral elements, was used. The maximum computational cell element size was 0.53mm and the worst cell element had equiangle skewness of about 0.8. The total number of the tetrahedral and prism elements in the computational grid was approximately 2,400,000 and 2,800,000, respectively, for pre and post-operative cases. Thickness of the first prism layer and the total thickness of four layers growing exponentially were, respectively, 0.05mm and 0.27mm. In Fig. 1(b) a cross section of the hybrid mesh is shown. The prism layer placed at the nasal airway walls was necessary for accurate prediction of the near-wall particle trajectories and the deposition flux and viscous effect. A grid sensitivity examination was carried out, and the grid cell size was selected so that the simulation results were independent of the number of grid elements. The meshes were then imported into Fluent14.0 (ANSYS, Canonsburg, PA, USA) to simulate the airflow, and the associated particle transport and deposition. All calculations were performed in a PC with a 3.4GHz, Core (TM) i7 CPU, and 8GB RAM. Typical run times for cyclic and steady inhalation conditions were, respectively, about 192 and 2h.Due to the significant geometry variations in the nasal airways, the critical flow rate and/or the critical Reynolds number for transitions from laminar to turbulent regime cannot be specified with certainty. Hahn et al. reported that the flow is laminar in a single nasal passage for a flow rate less than 12L/min [41]. More recent studies of realistic nasal airways indicated that the laminar flow is maintained for flow rates less than 10L/min in a single nasal passage [42,43]. Doorly et al. noted instability in the airflow for a breathing rate of 12L/min in a half-nasal model, but they reported relatively undisturbed laminar flows within much of the cavity [44].In this study, simulations for a nasal airway model were presented under unsteady flow condition with the maximum breathing rates of 5, 7.5 and 10L/min. Therefore, it is assumed that the flow is in the laminar regime. The Reynolds numbers, based on the inlet average velocity and hydraulic diameter of the nostril, are 599, 899, and 1196, respectively, for maximum inspiratory flow rates of 5, 7.5, and 10L/min. A one-way coupling assumption for the gas–solid flow was used since the volume fraction of particles is very low. This means that the airflow transports the particles, but the effects of particle motion on the flow, which are negligibly small, are neglected.The governing equations for the airflow are continuity and balance of momentum. For unsteady and incompressible laminar flows these are(1)∇⋅u→=0(2)∂u→∂t+(u→⋅∇)u→=−1ρ∇P+υ∇2u→In Eqs. (1) and (2),u→is the velocity vector, t is the time, P is the fluid pressure, ρ is the constant fluid density, andυis the kinematic viscosity.The governing equations were integrated over each control volume to acquire a set of algebraic equations. These equations were resolved using the SIMPLE algorithm. The convective and diffusive terms were discretized, respectively, by the upwind and the central difference schemes.The particle transport and deposition calculations were evaluated by the Lagrangian trajectory analysis approach. Under the one-way coupling assumption, the airflow field was first simulated, and then the trajectories of particles were determined by solving the particle equation of motion. Trajectories of particles can be tracked by integrating a force balance equation consisting of drag, inertia and gravity force acting on the particle. Accordingly(3)du→pdt=3μCDRep4ρpdp2(u→−u→p)+gIn Eq. (3),u→pis the particle velocity vector,dpis the particle diameter,ρpis the particle density, μ is the fluid viscosity, g is the acceleration gravity, andRep(Rep=ρ|u→−u→p|d/μ) is the particle Reynolds number. The drag coefficientCDis given by [45](4)CD=24RepCslip(1+0.15Rep0.687)Here,Cslipis the Cunningham slip correction factor given as(5)Cslip=1+2λdp[1.257+0.4exp(−1.1dp2λ)]where λ is the air mean free path.To simulate a more realistic full-respiration cycle, including inhalation and exhalation breathing conditions, a time-dependent computational model with time-varying boundary condition was used. Specifically, the flow rate at the outlet of the computational domain which ends at the beginning of the nasopharynx was prescribed as a sinusoidal function of time as shown inFig. 5. That is, in the first half-period of the breathing cycle, the airflow from nostril to nasopharynx simulates the inhalation phase; in the second half-period, the flow is reversed and moves from the nasopharynx toward the nostril and simulates the exhalation phase. Three different sinusoidal flow rates, with peak values of 5, 7.5 and 10L/min were used in these simulations. Two breathing cycles were evaluated, and the data for the second cycle were used for the analysis to reduce the effect of initial conditions. The duration of each breathing cycle was 4s in which the first 2s were considered for the inhalation phase and the last 2s were for the exhalation phase. It should be emphasized that the real time variation of the inhalation/exhalation flow rate is not quite sinusoidal. For example, Lee et al. reported the time variation of the human nasal airway flow rate for the average breathing rate of 35L/min [30]. Unfortunately, the time variation of the flow pattern for lower breathing rates is not available in the literature, and earlier studies typically used a sinusoidal form similar to the one used in the present work [31,32].The airway walls were considered to be rigid and the no-slip (zero velocity) condition was assumed. Zero gauge pressure was set at the nostril. Time steps of 0.1s, 0.05s and 0.02s in the numerical integration were used to test the solution independence of the time steps. Approximately the same results for time steps less than 0.05s were observed; therefore, 0.05s was selected as the flow time step in the present study.In the earlier computational studies for steady inhalation conditions, the injection of particles was typically performed only once. Here in order to simulate the continuous entering of particles into the nasal airway in the inhalation phase, 2000 micro-particles were injected uniformly into the nostrils at each time step of 0.1s. Thus, in the inhalation period, a total of 38,000 (2000×19) particles were injected into the nasal cavity. To select the appropriate injection time step, a sensitivity study was performed. The time step was decreased up to a point for which the deposition results were independent of the time step. The number of injected particles was also selected in such a way to ensure the independence of the simulation results from the number of injected particles within an error of about 0.5%. The step-by-step injection of particles provides a more realistic representation of particle inhalation at the nostril for evaluating the transient particle deposition during the breathing cycle. It should be emphasized that this type of injection corresponds to the inhalation of pollutants and suspended particles in the surrounding atmosphere, which are inhaled during the entire inhalation phase. Therapeutic drug particles are typically introduced during specific periods within the inhalation phase; hence, extending the results of the present study for inhalation drug delivery should be taken with caution.Initial particle velocities were assumed to be equal to the average fluid velocity at the nostril at each time. The micro-particles that passed through the nasopharynx were assumed to deposit in the lower region of respiratory system and not to return to the upper airways during the exhalation. The particle rebounding from the surfaces was neglected, and the particle was assumed to deposit when the distance between the particle center and the adjacent surface was less than or equal to the particle radius. Deposition fraction (DF) was also specified as the ratio of the number of trapped particles to the number of particles entering the nostril during inhalation.Micro-particles with aerodynamic diameters in the range of 1–30μm were simulated to examine a wide range of nasal deposition efficiencies. While particles greater than 20μm are typically not inhalable by the human nose, the simulations were performed up to 30μm for completeness.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In the present study, a numerical simulation of cyclic breathing for a model of the human nasal airway and paranasal sinuses before and after endoscopic sphenoidotomy (transantral-ethmoidectomy) was used, and the time variation of airflow during the inhalation and exhalation phases and micro-particle deposition during the inhalation were analyzed. The main conclusions of this study are the followings:1.The simulations show that a very small amount of airflow enters the normal sphenoid sinus during inhalation. A sphenoidotomy operation along with associated modifications noticeably changes the airflow pattern in the ethmoid area and inside the sphenoid sinus, and as a result a part of the main airflow through the nasal passage enters the sphenoid during inhalation. In addition, a sphenoidotomy significantly decreases the nasal resistance to airflow and therefore the pressure drop across the nose decreases.Increased airflow into the sinus after an endoscopic sphenoidotomy causes deposition of micro-particles in the sphenoid sinus. Almost all the deposited particles settle on the lower half of the sinus cavity. Before the operation almost no particles could enter this sinus.Particles up to 25μm are able to penetrate into the sphenoid in the post-operation case. Furthermore, for the resting breathing rate, the highest deposition fraction of 1.5% in the sphenoid occurs for the 10μm particles.The significant increase in the deposition of inhaled particles in the sphenoid after the sphenoidotomy (transantral-ethmoidectomy) has important consequences for optimizing not only inhalation drug delivery to the sphenoid sinus but also the adverse effect of inhaled bioaerosols and allergens entering the sinus.Virtual sinus surgery can simulate various surgical modification scenarios and predict their outcomes. Virtual sinus surgery will assist surgeons to understand the consequences of their surgical interventions on the sinus ventilation and the change in inhaled aerosol deposition and to evaluate drug delivery to the sinus.It should be emphasized that this study was focused on the effects of virtual surgery and some details of the unsteady flow particle deposition in the nasal airway was not discussed. The important features of the unsteady flow effects on flow in the upper respiratory tract and the associated particle transport and deposition will be discussed in a forthcoming paper.All the authors declare that there is no potential conflict of interest including any financial, personal or other relationships with other people or organizations within that could inappropriately influence (bias) this work.