@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Neonatal brain MRI segmentation: A review

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present a review of state-of-the-art techniques in neonatal brain MRI segmentation.Both intracranial and brain tissue segmentation algorithms are included.Brain tissue segmentation methods are classified based on their level of atlas use.Research gaps in the existing literature are highlighted.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Neonatal brain,Magnetic resonance imaging,Automatic segmentation algorithms,Intracranial segmentation,Tissue classification,Brain atlas,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This review paper focuses on the neonatal brain segmentation algorithms in the literature. It provides an overview of clinical magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the newborn brain and the challenges in automated tissue classification of neonatal brain MRI. It presents a complete survey of the existing segmentation methods and their salient features. The different approaches are categorized into intracranial and brain tissue segmentation algorithms based on their level of tissue classification. Further, the brain tissue segmentation techniques are grouped based on their atlas usage into atlas-based, augmented atlas-based and atlas-free methods. In addition, the research gaps and lacunae in literature are also identified.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The use of MRI in neuroimaging has revolutionized healthcare with its potential to obtain non-invasive sectional images of the brain without using ionizing radiations. Brain MRI is used to investigate seizures, strokes, infections and injuries of the brain, hemorrhages, brain tumors, multiple sclerosis, neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s, and others [52,57]. A fast emerging subspecialty is pediatric neuroimaging with special emphasis on imaging the neonatal brain. MRI of the newborn brain helps identify anomalies such as hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy, hydrocephalus, congenital malformations, infarction and infections [70]. Thus brain MRI forms a vital part in diagnostic neuroradiology, particularly in the neonatal stage.Currently, tissue segmentation and clinical interpretation of brain scans is the onus of neuroradiologists with computers being used only to enhance the visualization. Since MR data is voluminous, a completely manual analysis is tedious and time-consuming; it is also very subjective and prone to user variability [102]. Automating the segmentation process will favor faster and reproducible results and be the first step towards a volumetric analysis of the brain tissues. Though automated brain extraction and segmentation of the adult brain is a well researched area with plenty of supporting literature [6,42,122,123,30,98,99,15], these approaches cannot be extended to the neonatal brain due to its inverted Gray Matter (GM)–White Matter (WM) contrast [119]. This has led to the development of techniques devoted to segmenting the neonatal brain in the last decade.The research on neonatal brain MRI segmentation is highly diversified in intent, design, implementation and outcome. While a few algorithms merely skull strip the brain images [29,36,58], most of them are capable of identifying the prominent brain portions such as GM, WM and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) [100]; some are adept at further segmenting the brain into eight tissue classes [5,32] while a recent research has been successful in parcellating the brain into as many as 50 regions [40]. Given the vast difference in the degree of tissue segmentation, the algorithms also vary in level and complexity. A majority of the techniques are the conventional atlas-based approaches [77,114], whereby the test image is registered onto a neonatal brain atlas. Subsequently, the segmentation labels of the atlas are transferred onto the registered brain image. However, a small number of segmentation approaches also rely on other viable alternates including longitudinal subject-specific atlases [91] and morphology-guided brain segmentation [43]. Moreover, the developed algorithms are often tested on locally acquired brain MR datasets and validated against manually delineated brain tissue portions due to the lack of a single standard publicly available neonatal brain database. Such vastness in scope, method, performance and direction in the literature necessitates the comparison of these techniques on common grounds.This paper provides a review of the existing algorithms for neonatal brain MRI segmentation based on the literature collected using Google search engine. Since an unfiltered Google search for the key words ‘neonatal brain MRI segmentation’ yielded voluminous results (over 2-lakh results), the search operator ‘allintitle:’ was used to refine the obtained results. This paper includes both intracranial segmentation (i.e. skull stripping) and brain tissue segmentation algorithms; so, the literature was collected using the key words “allintitle: neonatal skull MRI (segmentation OR stripping)” and “allintitle: neonatal brain MRI segmentation” in two separate Google searches. Earlier or subsequent works by the same research groups, wherever available, were also included for the sake of completeness. In addition, the following references were added at the request of one reviewer: Shi et al. [93,95], Wang et al. [107,110,111], Dai et al. [28]. The paper is structured as follows. The next section presents an overview of imaging the neonatal brain, followed by the constraints in automatically segmenting the obtained MR images. The subsequent part is a survey of the different segmentation algorithms. This is followed by a discussion on the lacunae in the current approaches and closing remarks that present an essence of the review.A ‘neonate’ or a newborn is defined by the World Health Organization as a baby that is less than 28 days old [47]. MRI is the preferred modality for imaging the neonatal brain because it is safe, non-invasive and provides cross-sectional views of the brain in multiple contrasts. However, MR imaging the neonates is harder than that of adults. In the absence of sedatives most small babies are uncooperative and do not remain still during the lengthy scan procedure. Since MRI is highly sensitive to patient movement, this causes blurring and ghosting artifacts in the obtained images [31]. Besides, the anatomical structures are much smaller in size and not fully developed in babies, particularly in the brain [27]. The difference between a neonatal brain and adult brain is illustrated inFig. 1.Moreover, there is distinction between a baby that is born at the end of the normal gestation period (normally from 37 to 42 weeks for humans) and one that is born several weeks ahead of the full gestation period. The newborn is categorized based on its gestational age (GA) into preterm (GA<37 weeks), full term (GA between 37 and 42 weeks) and post term (GA>42 weeks) [80]; preterm babies can be further classified into extremely preterm (GA less than 28 weeks), very preterm (GA between 28 and 32 weeks) and moderate to late preterm (GA between 32 and 37 weeks) [81]. Since preterm birth reduces the time for intra-uterine brain development of the fetus, a preterm brain at birth is not as developed as its full term counterpart at birth. Nevertheless, the preterm’s brain matures ex utero and its development from 24 weeks GA to term has been studied [10]. The changes in the preterm brain at different gestational ages and the associated challenges in segmentation are described in Section 3.2. The developmental changes in the preterm brain also imply that scanning the preterm neonate right after birth i.e. at preterm gestation is different from scanning the preterm baby at its term equivalent age (TEA). Since different segmentation algorithms in the literature employed locally available neonatal datasets, some approaches utilized images of preterm brains scanned at term [71,33] whereas few others included images of preterm brains scanned at preterm gestation as well as at term [59,64]; yet others worked only on brain images of term neonates [100]. Further, the GA of the subjects at birth and their age at the time of scan for the various segmentation algorithms can be found inTable 1.Usually, a combination of T1 and T2 weighted images is used to assess the neonatal brain; in addition, Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) and Fluid Attenuated Inversion Recovery (FLAIR) images are also employed.Fig. 2 shows axial T1, axial T2 and coronal T2 brain MR slices of two neonates.Cowan [25] has observed that the baby’s brain at term i.e. GA between 37 and 42 weeks resembles the adult brain in cortical folding. Besides, Barkovich [8] has stated that several structures in the cerebellum, brain stem and deep cerebral regions could be identified on neonatal brain MR scans; this includes deep cerebral nuclei, nuclei of brain stem, median longitudinal fasciculus, medial and lateral lemnisci, posterior limbs of the internal capsules (PLIC), optic tracts, superior and inferior cerebellar peduncles [8].A major part of WM in the neonatal brain is not myelinated at birth. Prager and Roychowdhury [76] have stated that myelination at term is limited to corona radiata, primary motor and sensory cortex, ventroposterolateral nuclei of thalami, medial lemnisci, medial longitudinal fasciculus, gracile and cuneate nuclei [104]; in addition, they have pointed out that the superior and inferior cerebellar peduncles and parts of the vermis also appear myelinated at term. However, the formed myelin sheaths are not continuous throughout the axon; myelin segments are separated by small portions of uncovered axon that are referred to as nodes of Ranvier [51]. The myelin sheaths have an increased resistance and reduced capacitance compared to axonal membrane [51]. Due to the larger resistance, a propagated nerve impulse does not pass through the myelin but rather ‘jumps’ to the subsequent node of Ranvier; this is termed as saltatory conduction. This conduction conserves energy as well as speeds up impulse transmission. Apart from its role in signal synchronization, myelin is also believed to have a symbiotic relationship with axon [9,13] have also stated that normal myelin formation is essential for proper maturation of axonal cytoskeleton.In addition to the function of myelin, the MR signal pattern of myelination also deserves mention. Welker and Patton [117] have stated that in unmyelinated parts of neonatal brain, WM appears hypointense on T1 images and hyperintense on T2 images compared to the cortex while the appearance is reversed for fully myelinated brain. However, it is believed that a number of factors are responsible for the MR signal alterations. The T1 signal change is thought to be caused by rising cholesterol and galactocerebroside in oligodendrocyte myelin processes, which interact with free water resulting in T1 shortening [9,117]. On the other hand, the T2 signal change is believed to be because of decrease in free water in WM caused by tightening of myelin around axon that replaces the interstitial water [117]. Moreover, the lengthening of hydrocarbon chains of myelin membrane and their rising number of double bonds are also thought to add to the fall in T2 times [117].Segmentation of neonatal brain MR images serves as the first step towards volumetric studies and quantitative analyses. Apart from simple volume estimation to gauge total brain volume, WM and GM volumes, segmentation also facilitates an objective analysis that is not possible by mere visual inspection. This includes quantification of the complex cortical folding patterns in the baby’s brain and computation of regional and temporal volume changes across different gestational ages. Further, segmentation and subsequent quantitative analyses can be extended to abnormal or diseased brains; this includes instances of ventriculomegaly, abnormal brain development caused by congenital malformations, injuries and infections. In such cases, a quantitative study helps gauge the extent of brain damage or abnormality; moreover, it can also be used to closely monitor and analyze high risk babies (including those with genetic predispositions). In general, tissue segmentation and volumetric studies for neonates are important because they can pick up cues that are not visually obvious and thereby help in early intervention and diagnosis. Thus segmentation plays a vital role in neuroradiology. However, manual brain segmentation by radiologists is based on vast clinical experience and inherent knowledge of the tissues and their characteristics. Replicating the intricacies of manual delineation by an automated approach is difficult given the high levels of accuracy necessary for clinical implementation. Following are some of the impediments to automatic segmentation of the neonatal brain.Due to the smaller head size and shorter scanning duration, neonatal brain images have a low Contrast-to-Noise Ratio (CNR), only half as that of adult brain images [79]. The Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) and spatial resolution of neonatal scans are also lower than that of adults [120]. The other issues are significant intensity inhomogeneities due to RF coils and motion artifacts caused by the baby’s movements during scan time [79]. Motion artifacts can manifest in the form of ghosting, blurring, contrast changes or signal voids [61]. Some of the other artifacts that are possible include susceptibility and metal artifacts [34], flow artifacts [69], etc.Fig. 3 depicts a neonatal brain scan degraded by motion artifacts.A major challenge in automated segmentation is the structural variation in the brains of different subjects. This variation is more pronounced in deviants such as diseased brains. The inherent differences between the brain of preterm neonates and that of term-born neonates also contribute to the variability between subjects, particularly in a heterogeneous population; the difference is apparent in extremely preterm babies that lack important cortical anatomical landmarks [40].The effects of growth at different gestational ages also need to be accounted for in neonatal brain segmentation since significant changes occur in the baby’s brain almost every week. Huppi et al. [46] performed a quantitative volumetric study of brain development in 78 babies at postconceptional age11The term ‘postconceptional age’ is employed here because of its use in Huppi et al. [46] to describe brain development in newborns. However, readers must make note that gestational age is a more common way of representing the age of neonates than postconceptional age. The American Academy of Pediatrics also does not recommend the use of postconceptional age in clinical pediatrics [1].29 to 41 weeks. The study population included both preterm and full term babies. Huppi et al. [46] have stated that total brain volume (comprising of cerebral hemispheres, cerebellum and brainstem, without CSF) demonstrated a linear rise from 29 weeks postconceptional age to full term at a rate of nearly 22cm3 each week. They have also found that total GM (comprising of cortical and subcortical GM) exhibited a linear rise in relative intracranial volume at nearly 1.4% each week; however, this rise in total GM was based mainly on the rise in cortical GM while subcortical GM (comprising of basal ganglia and thalami) did not display any considerable increase in volume between 29 and 41 weeks postconceptional age [46] In addition, Huppi et al. [46] have also stated that unmyelinated WM (UWM) occupied nearly 48% of total intracranial volume at 29 to 30 weeks and there was a drop in the relative volume of UWM around term. Moreover, it was also found that myelinated WM (MWM) formed only 1–2% of relative intracranial volume from 29 to 34 weeks; but there was a rise in the volume of MWM about 35–36 weeks and it became 5% at 41 weeks [46]. Apart from this quantitative analysis based on preterm and full term babies, Battin and Rutherford [10] have also described the changes in the preterm brain from 24 weeks gestation until term.It is vital for segmentation algorithms to be validated against the ground truth in order to gauge its accuracy. Since the ground truth for neonatal brain scans is usually not available, manual reference annotations done by neuroradiologists are often considered as the ‘gold standard’ in validation. Reliance on manual segmentations for validation stems from the dearth of publicly available brain segmentation tools focused on the neonatal brain. The lack of generic segmentation tools can be attributed to the breadth of conditions investigated in the neonatal brain, including hypoxic-ischemic injury, cerebral infarction, infections like bacterial meningitis and injuries of prematurity like WM injuries of prematurity, germinal matrix and intraventricular hemorrhage, periventricular hemorrhagic infarction, etc. [76,22].Apart from these specific challenges in segmenting the neonatal brain, another issue that hampers progress in the field is the difficulty in comparing the different techniques. This is largely due to the paucity of universal neonatal brain datasets which compels researchers to train and test their approaches on locally available datasets. To alleviate this lack of universality and facilitate comparison between the different techniques, the ‘MICCAI Grand Challenge: Neonatal Brain Segmentation 2012’ (NeoBrainS12)22Details of the NeoBrainS12 challenge are available at http://neobrains12.isi.uu.nl/.was organized. The challenge was open to researchers across the globe working on neonatal brain segmentation. Three sets of scans of preterm born babies, namely coronal scans and axial scans obtained at 40 weeks corrected age33‘Corrected age’ is used so as to be consistent with the description of the image sets in NeoBrainS12 challenge at http://neobrains12.isi.uu.nl/details.php.and coronal scans obtained at 30 weeks corrected age were made available to the registered teams. The segmentation objective was to demarcate the following eight classes, namely, cortical GM, MWM, UWM, basal ganglia and thalami, cerebellum, brainstem, ventricles and extracerebral CSF. The segmentation outcomes of the different groups were compared to manual reference annotations and the results44Results of the challenge are found at http://neobrains12.isi.uu.nl/mainResults.php.were published. Apart from the web-based challenge, an on-site challenge was also held. The quantitative segmentation results of both the web-based and on-site events can be found in Isgum et al. [48]. The works of Makropoulos et al. [59] and Melbourne et al. [64], corresponding to methods A and C55All method labels are consistent with the usage in Isgum et al. [48].of the NeobrainS12 challenge, are described in Section 4.2.2. In instances where follow-up papers have been published by the participating groups, namely Gui et al. [43], Egekher et al. [33] and Anbeek et al. [5] corresponding to methods E, F and G of the challenge, the extended studies are described.This section provides an overview of the neonatal brain MRI segmentation techniques available in the literature. Several algorithms have been proposed in the last decade; but there are considerable differences in each with respect to the datasets used, segmentation objectives, levels of algorithmic complexity and validation. A summary of the different approaches and their features is presented in Table 1. An algorithm’s relevance depends largely on its extent of brain tissue segmentation and the level of prior knowledge incorporated. Based on these criteria, the segmentation approaches can be classified into low-level and higher-level algorithms. While the low-level approaches are capable of mere intracranial segmentation i.e. skull-stripping the brain, the higher-level techniques can further segment the brain into its constituent tissues. The higher end algorithms are subdivided, based on their dependence on prior atlases, into atlas-based, augmented atlas-based and atlas-free. The atlas-based techniques are further classified, based on the kind of atlas used, into those that employ manually derived atlases and tissue maps, methods based on probabilistic atlases and spatial priors and others that utilize tailor made atlases. Similarly, the augmented atlas-based algorithms are subcategorized into approaches that use longitudinal data for segmentation and those that are driven by patch-based level sets. The stratification of the different segmentation algorithms is presented inFig. 4.Intracranial segmentation, better known as ‘skull stripping’ [124], refers to the exclusion of skull, scalp and other non-brain portions of the MR image. While the removal of skull and other extraneous portion is the first step in any brain segmentation algorithm [59,64,32], some algorithms focus exclusively on skull stripping [29,58]. Such approaches are limited in the sense that they cannot segment brain tissues such as the GM, WM and CSF. However, they can be used as stand-alone preprocessing tools in neonatal brain segmentation. Since most of the current publicly available software for preprocessing and brain extraction including Brain Surface Extractor (BSE) [89], Brain Extraction Tool (BET) [97], etc. are aimed at the adult brain, the role of these neonatal skull stripping algorithms is non-trivial.A variety of techniques ranging from neural networks to graph cuts have been employed for skull segmentation. Ghadimi et al. [36] used a two-step process for scalp and skull segmentation from T1-weighted MRI. First, the scalp and skull points were detected using a probabilistic atlas and constrained knowledge-based search. This was followed by a level set based reconstruction to obtain closed surfaces. One other work that employed a probabilistic atlas for skull segmentation is that of Daliri et al. [29]. This approach proposed an adaptive algorithm using Bayesian classifier to weight local features of the MR image against those of the atlas. The weighted features were then fed to a Hopfield Neural Net (HNN) to obtain the skull.Shape information was used by Mahapatra [58] for skull segmentation. Prior shape and gradient information were integrated with graph cut based optimization for skull stripping the neonatal images. Conversely, an atlas-free skull stripping approach was advocated by Peporte et al. [71]. It involved the creation of a binary mask, region of interest (ROI) segmentation by region growing and a final edge refinement.The skull stripping approaches were evaluated by a quantitative comparison of the algorithmic segmentation result with corresponding expert manual segmentation. The quantitative validation metrics used by different works can be found inTable 2. Of these, the Dice similarity metric is the most common. It is computed from the ratio of number of voxels in the intersection of the algorithmic and manual segmentations to their mean label volume [26].However, a direct comparison of the results based on these quantitative metrics is not possible because the algorithms had been applied on different sets of data. Nevertheless most algorithms have reported good results on par or better than previously published works. In particular, Daliri et al. [29] have shown an improvement in SI values compared to Ghadimi et al. [36]; Peporte et al. [71] have also reported better performance of their approach compared to four publicly available brain extraction tools, namely, BrainSuite66BrainSuite software is available at www.brainsuite.org., SPM8—Statistical Parametric Mapping77SPM8 is found at http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/software/spm8/, FMRIB Software Library (FSL)88FSL is available at http://www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/.and MRIcron99MRIcron software is available at http://www.mccauslandcenter.sc.edu/mricro/mricron/.. Likewise, Mahapatra [58] has demonstrated better accuracy of his results in relation to the graph cut approach of Sadananthan et al. [83] and other publicly available software like BET [97], BSE [89] and Hybrid Watershed Algorithm (HWA) [86] that is a part of FreeSurfer Software Suite1010FreeSurfer software package is found at http://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/..Brain tissue segmentation usually refers to the delineation of the brain into its three prominent parts, namely the GM, WM and CSF. Some algorithms are adept at further segmenting the tissues into MWM, UWM, CSF at extra cerebral space, ventricles, etc. Few algorithms also identify brain portions such as the cerebellum, brainstem, basal ganglia and thalami. Since the algorithms differ largely in their extent of brain tissue segmentation, their complexity and dependence on prior information also vary considerably. In general, the algorithms which aim to delineate a larger number of tissues rely more on brain atlases and probabilistic models. This section provides an overview of the different tissue segmentation techniques.Though there is considerable variation in the segmentation strategies of the algorithms, their initial pre-processing steps are largely the same. The commonly employed techniques include correction of intensity inhomogeneities, noise reduction and elimination of non-brain portions from the image. Atlas-based segmentation techniques involve an additional registration step whereby the subject image is aligned with the atlas or a common stereotaxic space.Intensity inhomogeneity refers to the smoothly varying signal intensity across an image [45], caused by radio-frequency coil non-uniformity, magnetic field inhomogeneities, eddy currents, patient positioning and anatomy, etc. [56]. A detailed review of the different inhomogeneity correction techniques for MRI can be found in Belaroussi et al. [11]. Most neonatal brain segmentation algorithms involve bias correction at the pre-processing stage prior to actual segmentation [119,4,116,59,43,109]. A brief summary of these techniques is presented inTable 3. Apart from this, inhomogeneity correction may also be found as part of an iterative segmentation process [78,91,64]. For example, the segmentation framework of Prastawa et al. [78] alternates between inhomogeneity correction and parametric classification in an iterative fashion. Similarly, the unified segmentation–registration scheme of Shi et al. [91] incorporates iterative atlas alignment, bias correction and tissue classification. Melbourne et al. [64] also perform non-uniformity correction as part of their Maximum a Posteriori Expectation Maximization (MAP-EM) segmentation framework. Nevertheless segmentation techniques that omit bias correction also exist in the literature [19].Since neonatal brain MR images have lower contrast-to-noise ratios [79] and SNR [120], noise reduction forms a vital part of pre-processing. Using a low-pass or averaging filter aids noise reduction but results in image blurring and loss of fine edge details. So, the use of nonlinear anisotropic diffusion filter is advocated. Anisotropic diffusion, proposed by Perona and Malik [72], promotes within-region smoothing compared to across-region smoothing. Gerig et al. [35] showed that the anisotropic diffusion filter causes efficient noise reduction as well as preserves and enhances edges like object contours and tissue boundaries. Since then, nonlinear anisotropic diffusion filters have been applied to MR images, particularly to brain MRI [7]. The neonatal brain segmentation algorithms of Prastawa et al. [78], Song [100], Weisenfeld and Warfield [116], Yu et al. [120] and Gui et al. [43] also incorporate the anisotropic diffusion filter.Prior to actual segmentation, the skull and other extraneous parts of the brain are removed. Most algorithms make use of publicly available tools like the BET [97], BSE [89] and Brainvisa [21] for the purpose. BET has been widely employed by several algorithms for constructing suitable brain masks [59,32,4]. Few approaches use a combination of software tools and expert intervention for removing the non-brain parts. For instance, Shi et al. [91] removed the skull portion by integrating BSE, BET and manual editing; this was followed by a manual exclusion of the cerebellum and brainstem. Similarly, Leroy et al. [54] employed the Brainvisa software for skull stripping and a manually adjusted hysteresis thresholding for CSF removal. Besides, Leroy et al. [54] also performed a manual segmentation of the cerebellum.Some algorithms remove non-brain areas using pre-segmented templates or masks [119,64,109]. Xue et al. [119] skull stripped multiple atlases by BET and manually labeled the brainstem, cerebellum, corpus callosum and deep GM i.e. basal ganglia and thalami. A subsequent non-rigid registration and transfer of tissue labels from the atlas enabled brain extraction in the subject images. Similarly, Melbourne et al. [64] derived brain masks from sample manual segmentations which were then registered onto the test data. Wang et al. [109] also performed a template-based masking of the brainstem and cerebellum using nonlinear registration.Apart from the above standard pre-processing phases, an additional registration step is required when the algorithm incorporates multi-channel images or brain atlases. Both T1 and T2 contrast MR images are valuable in assessing the neonatal brain, as discussed in Section 2.2. Several segmentation algorithms make use of both the image contrasts [112,118,43,32,4,19]. Multi-channel images require registration to make up for the possible movement of babies between different scan sequences. The T1 and T2 images are brought into correspondence either by rigid registration based on maximization of Mutual Information (MI) [43,116] or elastic registration [4]. Some techniques also employ affine transformation based on the MI metric [78,118].Contrary to the single-step registration used for T1 and T2 images, the atlas to subject image registration is highly structured and often involves a sequence of transformations. Anbeek et al. [4] utilized affine and elastic registrations while the multi-atlas-segmentation of Egekher et al. [32] employed successive MI-based affine and non-rigid registrations. On the other hand, Weisenfeld and Warfield [116] advocated the use of rigid registration in the beginning, followed by affine transformation and non-rigid free form deformation.Different segmentation approaches are applied on the pre-processed brain images to yield the final tissue classification. The focus of segmentation has shifted from semi-automated and user-involved approaches to fully automated techniques with minimal human interaction. Algorithms have also evolved from being a simple three-tissue classifier (namely, GM, WM and CSF) into advanced tools that can segment several anatomical regions of the brain. For this, most algorithms incorporate prior knowledge by way of brain atlases in the segmentation. Since the extent of atlas-dependence and type of atlas is a decisive factor in segmentation, the neonatal brain segmentation algorithms are categorized based on their atlas usage.Most of the techniques available for neonatal brain tissue segmentation rely on pre-segmented brain atlases. The popularity of atlases stems from their widespread utility; they guide the segmentation process in areas of poor contrast and help in distinguishing between tissues of similar intensities. Atlases, aided by image warping strategies, also help in bringing images of different subjects into correspondence with one another. Though there are many adult brain atlases [15], atlases for children, particularly for neonates and infants, are few in number. Some of the publicly available brain atlases for children less than two years of age are given inTable 4. Despite this, several authors have preferred to create their own brain atlases from locally available MRI datasets using manual or semi-automated approaches [78,119,100,116,120,5,33]. This section provides an impression of the different atlases used and the corresponding segmentation strategies.Constructing a brain atlas solely based on reference manual segmentations requires a great deal of human effort and time. But a manually derived atlas is more reliable as it is closer to the ground truth. It also comes in handy when the focus is on identifying the various anatomical structures of the brain. One classic instance of manual atlas based segmentation is the work of Gousias et al. [40]. Their atlas ‘ALBERT’ (i.e. a label-based encephalic region-of-interest (ROI) template) was constructed by manually segmenting the brain MR scans of 15 pre-term and 5 term-born neonates into 50 regions [38]. The created ALBERTs have been made publicly available1111ALBERTs are available at www.brain-development.org.for use by other researchers. These atlases were used in automatic segmentation of neonatal brain MR images by Gousias et al. [40] in two ways. First, multiple ALBERTs were used for label propagation, followed by a voxel-wise label determination that was achieved by a consensus decision based on Kittler et al. [50]. The next method involved structure label propagation from a constructed maximum probability neonatal ALBERT (MPNA) which was analogous to the maximum probability pediatric atlas employed in Gousias et al. [39]. The two approaches were compared and the results were validated against manual gold standards. In a subsequent work, Makropoulos et al. [60], proposed a modified EM scheme that incorporated intensity based hierarchical modeling of the brain and knowledge based constraints for partial volume correction. The significant aspects of the work are its improved accuracy over the earlier study [40] and its application to neonates with gestational age spanning from 24 weeks up to term equivalent age.The adaptive eight class segmentation of Melbourne et al. [64] is also based on prior knowledge obtained from manual segmentation. Brain masks and tissue priors were derived from manually annotated training datasets; these were warped onto the subject images by employing affine and free-form deformations based on Modat et al. [65] so as to obtain specific priors. The ensuing tissue segmentation involved a MAP-EM algorithm with Markov Random Field (MRF) for spatial smoothness, followed by partial volume correction employed in Cardoso et al. [16]. The salient feature of the approach is its extraction of MWM and segregation of ventricles from CSF.The work of Egekher et al. [33] also used reference manual segmentations as atlases; but the difference was in the use of multiple atlases for each subject based on the leave-one-out principle. This practice provided the necessary prior information for segmentation without requiring very large databases. The use of multiple atlases combined with label fusion yielded quasi-probabilistic maps for every tissue. Each tissue map was combined with the result of supervised classification based on k-nearest neighbor (k-NN) classifier. A Bayes classifier was then utilized to resolve voxels with multiple or no tissue assignment and all individual tissue segmentations were integrated.Another work that relies on extensive prior manual segmentation is that of Yu et al. [120]. This approach employed manual segmentation of subcortical structures, that was built on works published earlier [67,68]. The manual annotation delineated nine structures, namely the cerebellum, brain stem, amygdalae, hippocampus, accumbens, corpus callosum, thalamus, caudate and lenticular nuclei. Additionally, a semi-automated segmentation of the GM, WM and CSF was carried out. Tissue categorization was based on a 2-D feature map derived from manually annotated training data and further optimized by hidden MRF- EM scheme; this was adapted from the unified approach of Sajja et al. [84] which was meant for adult brain MRI. Eventually, the manual tissue map and semi-automated results were integrated. The usage of manual annotation makes this approach more reliable but less reproducible compared to automatic techniques.The next class of algorithms incorporates probabilistic brain atlas and spatial tissue priors. These atlases present a voxel-wise a priori probability of the different brain tissues that guide the segmentation. The work of Prastawa et al. [78] is one such instance of segmentation based on probabilistic neonatal brain atlas. Their atlas was constructed as an average of three registered, semi-automated classifications. The obtained spatial priors were blurred to account for the variation in neonatal population. The segmentation comprised of graph clustering from Cocosco et al. [20], initial parameter estimation based on Rousseeuw and Driessen [82] and inhomogeneity correction of Leemput et al. [53]. Subsequently, the segmentation results were refined by non-parametric density estimation of Girolami and He [37].The algorithm of Weisenfeld and Warfield [116] also employed an atlas of spatial priors which was created by a semi-automated segmentation [113]. The obtained classifications were aligned by an affine transformation [115] and prior probability maps were constructed based on the frequency of appearance of tissue labels at a particular voxel. These priors played a pivotal role in differentiating tissues of overlapping intensities but distinct spatial locations. The distinctive feature of the segmentation was its use of tissue prototypes. These prototypes were characteristic tissue points chosen from a library of templates; they were used for training a supervised classification to obtain independent candidate segmentations of the image. The individual segmentations were then combined and prototypes were refined; the procedure was iterated until convergence.Another instance of the use of probabilistic priors for tissue segmentation is the approach of Makropoulos et al. [59]. The work utilized the high-definition spatio-temporal atlas of Serag et al. [87]. The atlas priors were manually altered to suit the requirements of the study. In addition to this, tissue priors for each subject were derived by k-means clustering and successive blurring with Gaussian kernel. Finally, the subject’s tissue prior was integrated with its age-appropriate atlas prior. The segmentation was based on an MRF incorporated EM algorithm and partial volume correction of Cardoso et al. [16]. The salient aspect of this approach is its combined use of atlas and subject specific priors for better initialization of EM scheme.Most of the atlas-based segmentation techniques employ either manually derived atlases or probabilistic brain atlases. However, a few algorithms employ other tailor made atlases that are constructed by integrating manual and automated approaches. This is best illustrated in the work of Xue et al. [119]. Neonates were categorized based on their gestational age and multiple atlases were utilized for extracting the brain and masking deep central portions. The atlases were randomly chosen subject images from each set, which were manually annotated and subjected to skull stripping by BET [97]. The segmentation was based on EM-MRF framework with provision for correcting mislabeled partial volume effects. However, the EM scheme was initialized based on a blurred k-means clustering. Conventional probabilistic atlases were not utilized because a single atlas would be insufficient to map all the growth changes happening in the neonatal brain. The noteworthy feature of the algorithm was its neonatal cortical reconstruction adopted from Han et al. [44] and subsequent computation of parameters such as cortical surface area, volume, mean curvature and thickness.The work of Anbeek et al. [5] involved the creation of an average brain image that was used as a common coordinate system for transferring all subject images. For this, an iterative registration and summation of all subject scans was done. Then, the subject images were registered onto the created average brain. This was followed by averaging of the registered images to form a new average brain. The procedure was iterated until a stable average was got. The tissue segmentation, which was an extension of the previous work by Anbeek et al. [4], employed a supervised classification based on k-NN technique. The features used included intensities of aligned T1 and T2 images and spatial coordinates obtained by registering the subject’s T2 image onto the average brain. The significant aspect of the algorithm is its differentiation of ventricular and extra cerebral CSF.The statistical tissue segmentation of Song [100] is another custom made approach that involves the use of probability maps only in specific parts of the brain. The segmentation was based on a supervised learning of intensity based nonparametric Markov (NPM) model. Additional tissue probability maps (TPM) were used to aid the NPM model only in regions of low contrast, such as sub-cortical portions. The TPMs were created based on a voxel-wise average of several registered manual segmentations. The advantage of the algorithm is the limited use of TPMs; so, they can be constructed within a fraction of the time and labor required for generating an atlas of the entire brain.Conventional atlas-based algorithms hold a prominent place in neonatal brain segmentation. But the performance of these techniques depends on the quality of atlas used and its correspondence with the subject images [91]. Moreover, a pre-defined atlas may not be able to account for the structural differences between subjects. In this context, Shi et al. [91] have proposed the use of longitudinal data in segmentation while a recent approach by Wang et al. [109] has laid emphasis on patch-based sparse representation to obtain subject-specific atlases. These approaches do not eliminate the use of atlases but instead employ atlases which are augmented to alleviate some of the problems associated with traditional atlases.Longitudinal data of a neonate refers to the scan images of the same subject acquired at a later time, i.e. a follow-up scan of the baby done at the age of 1 or 2 years. Some approaches, including those of Shi et al. [91] and Wang et al. [108], have utilized longitudinal data for guiding the segmentation of neonatal brain scans. Shi et al. [91] applied fuzzy segmentation [74] on the longitudinal data to obtain probability priors of WM, GM and CSF and thereby formed a subject-specific atlas. This was followed by a unified registration–segmentation scheme adopted from Pohl et al. [75]; the nonlinear registration approach HAMMER [90] and Gaussian model based EM framework for segmentation [6,75] were used. It was also shown that segmentation outcomes obtained by the subject-specific atlas were better than other population-specific atlases such as a constructed neonatal atlas and infant brain templates of Altaye et al. [3]. The longitudinal segmentation framework of Shi et al. [91] was also used to pre-segment neonatal scans to create an average shape atlas in their subsequent work [92]; the average shape atlas was subjected to further brain parcellation and exemplar based clustering to create the multi-region-multi-reference atlas used in Shi et al. [92]. The tissue probability maps from Shi et al. [91] were also used in the creation of a similarity weighted population atlas which was integrated with subject specific cortical features to build the hybrid atlas used in Shi et al. [93].The work of Wang et al. [108] also utilized longitudinal information. A fuzzy segmentation [74] of the older images was done, followed by fast marching algorithm [88] to construct the WM–GM and GM–CSF surfaces. Besides, the neonatal images were segmented by a coupled level-set framework that incorporated knowledge of local intensities, spatial priors and cortical thickness [106]. Then, the constructed cortical surfaces from older images were warped onto the neonatal space using HAMMER [90]. Subsequently, the initial neonatal segmentation was further refined by the use of longitudinally steered level sets.The limited availability of longitudinal data has prompted researchers to work on other alternatives. One such development is the patch-based level set segmentation proposed by Wang et al. [109]. This algorithm involved creation of a subject-specific atlas based on patch-driven sparse representation. It was followed by refinement of the probability maps to remove spatial inconsistency and use of level set scheme to obtain final results. The segmentation results were also compared to other approaches like majority voting, coupled level sets [106] and conventional patch based method [23].Although atlases and tissue maps are commonly used for segmentation, they are prone to over fitting and bias especially if they have been derived from a lesser number of training samples [100]. Moreover, their construction and proper registration onto the test image are not easy, given the large variability of the neonatal brain. Hence, the need for atlas-free segmentation algorithms has risen. One such approach was proposed by Leroy et al. [54] to segment the GM–WM interface of the baby’s brain. The algorithm utilized local contrast and geometric traits to obtain the feature field. For this, morphological top hats were used to identify the constant thickness and lower intensity of cortex on T2 images whereas WM ridges were perceived based on curvature minima [103]. Subsequently, the cortical surface was reconstructed by employing the deformation scheme of Mangin et al. [63] to the two surfaces that were initially positioned at both sides to the interface. It was shown that good results were obtained for babies less than two months of age.Another atlas-free segmentation that was driven entirely by brain morphology and tissue connectivity was advocated by Gui et al. [43]. The algorithm employed marker-based watersheds [12,41,24] and region based active contour segmentation [18]. Cerebral hemispheres, cerebellum and brainstem were detected at the macro scale while cortical GM, subcortical GM, MWM, UWM and CSF were identified at tissue scale. The algorithm was also applied to deviations from normal anatomy, such as pre-terms with dilated ventricles. The advantage of atlas-free techniques is that they can be extended to cases of anatomical variability since they are not bound by atlas constraints.Qualitative validation of the segmentation outcomes is based on visual inspection by experienced neuroradiologists. In addition, most algorithms also perform a quantitative evaluation of the results. Since the ground truth for neonatal brain images is generally not available, the quantitative validation is based on expert manual segmentations. However, obtaining the required manual segmentation involves considerable time and skilled labor. So, a majority of the algorithms perform only a limited numeric evaluation of their results. For instance, Anbeek et al. [5] performed manual annotation and subsequent quantitative validation only on seven of the total 108 neonates in the study. Some approaches also use selective slices per subject for the validation. While a single coronal slice (usually the mid slice) was employed by Prastawa et al. [78], Weisenfeld and Warfield [116] and Gui et al. [43], Xue et al. [119] utilized three orthogonal slices per subject. On the other hand, Shi et al. [91] selected two sagittal, three coronal and three axial slices for every subject. In general, the slices were chosen in such a way to adequately represent all the tissues segmented.Usually the manual segmentation is done by more than one expert. Some approaches take advantage of the annotation by multiple experts and validated their algorithmic results individually with each of these manual segmentations [78,91]. On the other hand, few approaches obtained a consensus of the multiple manual annotations and validated their automatic tissue classification with the consensus segmentation [43]. Nevertheless, both the cases compared the variability of automatic vs. manual/consensus segmentation with the variability between expert segmentations. Sometimes, the manual raters re-segmented the images after a specific time gap and the resulting intra-rater variability was also assessed [119,120].A variety of metrics are in use for quantitative validation of the segmentation results, as presented inTable 5. This includes the Dice coefficient, Cohen’s kappa (κ) coefficient, Hausdorff distance, false positives, false negatives, sensitivity, specificity, etc. Of these, the Dice similarity coefficient is the most popular metric for evaluation of results.Thus, the different quantitative metrics indicate the performance of a given approach against a set standard, usually manual segmentation. In addition, they also provide a general idea of the overall performance capability of a particular algorithm relative to other published works. However, a one-to-one comparison of the different approaches based on their Dice coefficients or other quantitative metrics is not really useful. This is because each method employs different neonatal datasets that are often acquired by different protocols and scanning parameters. Moreover, the lack of ground truth and gold standards necessitates the use of expert manual segmentation for validation of results; since a uniform manual segmentation protocol is not followed throughout, there exists substantial variation in the manual annotations obtained by different works. Considering the above factors, this paper does not evaluate the available segmentation algorithms against one another based on their reported results. Besides, a thorough quantitative comparison requires all the segmentation approaches to be made publicly available, in addition to the need for a large standard neonatal brain dataset. Since this review is not aimed at supporting a particular work or a specific kind of segmentation as superior to the others, a quantitative evaluation of the various segmentation algorithms is not done.Apart from these segmentation methods that are focused on neonatal brain segmentation, algorithms that are aimed at segmenting brain images of older infants and pediatric subjects are also available. Since the changes and challenges associated with different age groups of pediatric subjects are substantial, these algorithms may be considered beyond the scope of the present review; nevertheless, a brief account of these approaches is provided to serve as a starting point for readers who may also be interested in infant and pediatric brain segmentation in addition to neonatal brain segmentation. Moreover, some of these works have included both neonatal and older infant/pediatric subjects in their studies; thus, such works also need to be included for the sake of completeness of the review. For instance, the ‘LABEL’ approach i.e. Learning Algorithm for Brain Extraction and Labeling put forth by Shi et al. [95] involved brain extraction of pediatric cases in the following three age groups, namely neonates (of postnatal age 0.8±0.3 months), infants (of postnatal age 1.6±0.5 years) and children (of postnatal age 11.1±3.5 years). Likewise, the work of Wang et al. [112] incorporated longitudinally steered level set segmentation on images obtained from 2 weeks until 1.5 years; the babies were imaged at five time instances, namely, at 2 weeks, 3 months, 6 months, 9 months and 12 months (or older). Similarly, the cortical surface reconstruction approach of Li et al. [55] utilized longitudinal images that were obtained by scanning the babies at 0, 3, 6, 9, 12 or 18 months. On the other hand, the brain extraction algorithm of Alansary et al. [2] that combined both stochastic and geometric models was applied to images obtained between 5 to 9 months of age.Besides, Wang et al. [111] have categorized brain MR images acquired during the first year of life into infantile phase (up to 5 months), isointense phase (from 6 to 8 months) and early adult-like phase (starting from 9 months) based on their differing GM–WM contrast. They have also stated that the isointense phase is characterized by similar intensity range for WM and GM on both T1 and T2 images and this leads to reduced tissue contrast, thereby making their segmentation a challenging proposition [111] Hence, the approach of Wang et al. [110], based on sparse multimodal representation and anatomical constraints, was focused on the isointense phase with subject images obtained at nearly 6 months (postnatal age 27±0.9 weeks). Likewise, the ‘LINKS’ approach i.e. Learning-based multi-source IntegratioN frameworK for Segmentation put forth by Wang et al. [111] also focused primarily on the segmentation at isointense phase (around 6 months), though it was also validated on other time periods, namely 0 months, 3 months, 9 months and 12 months. In addition to these segmentation algorithms, a publicly available software iBEAT i.e. Infant Brain Extraction and Analysis Toolbox1212iBEAT software is available for download at http://www.nitrc.org/projects/ibeat.has been developed with focus on infant brain MRI [28]; iBEAT is capable of brain extraction, segmentation and labeling of single time point and longitudinal images [28].Automatic segmentation of the neonatal brain images is an evolving discipline that has gained research attention only in the last decade or so. The existing algorithms have limitations and inaccuracies that need to be addressed by further research. Isgum et al. [48] have outlined some possible directions for future work, based on the NeoBrainS12 challenge; this includes extending the segmentation algorithms to involve patients with diseases, incorporating images obtained at various gestational ages in neonatal phase and including images obtained by different MR scanners and protocols [48]. The research gaps in the available literature are presented below.Majority of the segmentation algorithms employ priori brain atlases or templates [36,29,78,119,116,59,40,91,108,109]. However, the performance of the atlas-based strategies is determined by the atlas quality and its correspondence with the subject [91]. Moreover, using a single template or a statistically obtained template based on a different population will not suitably reflect the structure of the population under study [101]. This is a major issue for neonates because there is considerable variation of the brain among babies. The structural dissimilarity is amplified for pathological conditions and premature births. So, using a predetermined atlas for brain segmentation is not preferable especially if the test population is heterogeneous or contains unknown samples. To mitigate the bias arising from a population-based atlas, some authors have advocated the creation of a longitudinal, subject-specific atlas [91]. But such techniques are of little help in the clinical setup because normal neonates are not generally subjected to longitudinal follow-up MRI. Besides, the accuracy of all atlas-based segmentation approaches is affected by inadvertent errors during atlas creation and atlas-subject registration.In the light of this, the atlas-free segmentation techniques of Leroy et al. [54] and Gui et al. [43] are significant. These approaches are not essentially always superior to conventional atlas-based algorithms; they are found wanting in certain aspects like accuracy of surface reconstruction in older babies [54], proper delineation of MWM class [43], etc. Nevertheless, they mark the need for further research in a new direction, namely, atlas-free segmentation of the neonatal brain.One other issue in the segmentation of the neonatal brain, atlas-based or otherwise, is the demarcation of MWM. Several factors affect the segmentation results of myelin. First, the definition of myelin class in the neonatal brain MR image needs to be considered. Often, the myelination described is the MR visible myelination or ‘apparent’ myelination, that is, myelination as seen on the T1 and T2 images [51]. The MR signal pattern of myelination and the changes in myelin content that are believed to cause the signal alterations are described in Section 2.2. Besides, myelination is a continuous process and making a binary choice of whether a certain point is myelinated or non-myelinated at any specific time is hard [14]. In addition, there exists a substantial level of normal variation in the sequence of myelination [51] and the boundary segregating fully-myelinated portions from non-myelinated ones is usually ambiguous [79]. Thus, myelination must be determined on a subject-to-subject basis and even manual raters find it arduous to precisely delineate MWM from total WM.Consequently, many of the automated algorithms cannot tell apart the myelinated and non-myelinated portions of WM [100,91,108,109]. Even if they do, the accuracy of segmentation of MWM is well below that of other tissues, as evident from its lower Dice values and larger outliers [116,5,33]. Isgum et al. [48], based on their evaluation of the segmentation approaches that participated in the NeoBrainS12 challenge, have also stated that MWM was poorly segmented and suffered from large mean surface distance errors. The low Dice values can be explained to some extent by the relatively low volume of myelin in the neonatal brain; this makes the Dice metric sensitive to even small differences between the segmented and reference volumes [5] Nevertheless, the need to accurately segment MWM can never be overlooked. This is because assessing the quantum of WM myelination in the baby’s brain is important from the clinical perspective to identify under-myelination (hypomyelination), delay in myelination (retarded myelination) or abnormal myelination (dysmyelination), as these may be seen in many disease conditions including metabolic abnormalities and infections. Thus, the biggest lacuna in the existing literature is the need for proper segmentation of MWM.Volumetric studies and quantitative analysis are some of the important applications of segmentation since they can pick up slight alterations that are not obvious to the observer’s eye. Volumetric analysis of the neonatal brain includes computation of intracranial and tissue volumes, quantification of cortical folding patterns, assessment of regional and temporal volume changes in the brain across different gestational ages, etc. Studies also suggest that a premature baby’s regional brain volumes around term are potential indicators to foretell problems in cognitive outcomes of the child [73]. Currently, some of the approaches have utilized their neonatal brain segmentation algorithms for further volumetric and quantitative studies; these include the works of Huppi et al. [46], Prastawa et al. [78], Zacharia et al. [121], Xue et al. [119], Song [100], Yu et al. [120] and Anbeek et al. [5]. However, most of the other segmentation methods have limited quantitative and volumetric capabilities. Since volumetric studies enable an objective analysis that aids visual inspection by radiologists, it is necessary to augment the volumetric aspects of the segmentation algorithms to improve their utility in the clinical sense.Only a few of the available segmentation algorithms are capable of dealing with structural abnormalities of the brain such as enlarged ventricles in ventriculomegaly [43,17] or impaired brain maturation related to congenital heart defects (CHD) [100]. For instance, Gui et al. [43] applied their algorithm to pre-terms with dilated ventricles and the adaptive approach of Cardoso et al. [17] included subjects with enlarged ventricles or cystic and diffuse WM injury. Besides, the work of Song [100] employed cases of anomalous brain development linked to CHD. Leroy et al. [54] have also stated that their atlas-free approach can be extended to brains with malformation or lesions. However, most of the other segmentation algorithms have been developed and tested only on brains without any structural deviations. This is detrimental to the efficacy of segmentation in a mixed population that comprises of both normal brains and cases with structural anomalies; thus, it is imperative to refine the segmentation strategies to accommodate structural abnormalities.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
