@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Isogeometric analysis on triangulations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Isogeometric analysis on triangulation of a domain bounded by NURBS curves.Geometry and solution represented by bivariate splines in Bernstein–Bézier form.Approach to construct parametric domain and constructCr-smooth basis functions.Applicable to complex topologies and allow highly localized refinement.Isogeometric analysis of linear elasticity and advection–diffusion demonstrated.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Isogeometric analysis,Rational triangular Bézier,Bivariate splines,NURBS,Bernstein–Bézier form,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We present a method for isogeometric analysis on the triangulation of a domain bounded by NURBS curves. In this method, both the geometry and the physical field are represented by bivariate splines in Bernstein–Bézier form over the triangulation. We describe a set of procedures to construct a parametric domain and its triangulation from a given physical domain, constructCr-smooth basis functions over the domain, and establish a rational Triangular Bézier Spline (rTBS) based geometric mapping thatCr-smoothly maps the parametric domain to the physical domain and exactly recovers the NURBS boundaries at the domain boundary. As a result, this approach can achieve automated meshing of objects with complex topologies and allow highly localized refinement. Isogeometric analysis of problems from linear elasticity and advection–diffusion analysis is demonstrated.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Isogeometric analysis is a technique of numerical analysis that uses basis functions commonly found in CAD geometries to represent both geometry and physical fields in the solution of problems governed by partial differential equations (PDE)  [1,2]. Non-uniform rationalB-splines (NURBS) are the de facto standard for geometric representation in CAD systems. The use of a NURBS-compatible basis in the solution of physical problems therefore leads to the elimination of geometric-approximation error in even the coarsest mesh. The increased continuity of the NURBS basis has led to significant numerical advantages over traditional Lagrange polynomials and otherC0inter-element continuity based finite element analysis, e.g. improved convergence rate on a per degree-of-freedom (DOF) basis  [2]. However, NURBS-based isogeometric analysis also faces challenges. For example, it is challenging to automatically construct NURBS-based volumetric representation of a complex physical domain since CAD geometries only contain boundary representation of the domain; Further, the tensor-product structure of NURBS makes it harder to perform local mesh refinement as is commonly desired during analysis.Recently, significant progress has been made in addressing these challenges. For example, the swept volume  [3], harmonic functions  [4], multi-block  [5], and Coons patch  [6] techniques have recently been developed to construct NURBS representations of volumetric domains. To extend NURBS representation to complex topologies while also allowing for adaptive refinement,T-splines [7] have been used in isogeometric analysis  [8–10]. Methods for constructingT-spline based parametrization of the domain are being developed  [11,12]. Among alternate isogeometric representation and analysis techniques under development, a technique based on subdivision solids has recently been proposed  [13]. Further, boundary-integral based isogeometric analysis techniques [14,15] seek to effectively bypass the need for volumetric parametrization.We present an alternative approach to isogeometric analysis with the goal of achieving automatic discretization of the physical domain while eliminating geometric approximation error, allowing local refinement of the discretization and making it applicable to complex topologies. Our approach is based on triangulations of physical domains where both the geometry and physical field are represented byCr-continuous multivariate splines in their Bernstein–Bézier form. In this paper, we restrict our attention to two-dimensional problems and bivariate splines. In our method, we first construct a polygonal parametric domainΩ̂that mimics the NURBS-bounded physical domainΩ. We then obtain a triangulationTofΩ̂, on which a Bernstein–Bézier form of aCrbivariate spline basis is constructed. We use this basis to construct globallyCr-smooth geometric mapping that maps the parametric domainΩ̂to the physical domainΩwith exact recovery of the NURBS boundary. When exceptional vertices/edges are allowed, this approach also ensures global bijectivity of the mapping. We demonstrate our analysis results for linear elasticity and advection–diffusion problems on problems which are characteristically non-trivial to mesh by other methods. Since robust technologies for automatic triangulation with local refinement are currently available, our approach is fully automated, is applicable to objects of complex topologies and allows for local refinement during in the course of analysis.Our work differs from prior work on multivariate-spline based analysis  [16,17] in that we explicitly constructCr-smooth bases and use rational Triangular Bézier Splines (rTBS) to ensure the exact recovery of the NURBS boundary. Our work also differs from the recent developed non-uniform rational Powell–Sabin splines for isogeometric analysis  [18,19]. Our approach is more general since generalCrspline spaces are considered. Further, we use Bézier ordinates and the corresponding basis functions to represent PDE solutions. Therefore, our Béizer ordinates based representation has direct geometric interpretation. In contrast, the approach [18,19] uses Powell–Sabin triangles and the corresponding normalized Powell–SabinB-splines to represent the solutions. However, Powell–Sabin triangles are not unique for a given triangulation although the normalized Powell–SabinB-splines have nice computational properties such as negativity. Further, our approach is applicable to macroelements or non-macroelements alike and the approach in  [18,19] is an macroelement based approach.Fig. 1gives a schematic overview of our proposed approach. ACrcontinuous basisψ(ξ)is constructed over the parametric domainΩ̂. The basis is used to construct an rTBS based geometric mapG(ξ)so that it maps a pointξ∈R2in parametric domainΩ̂to a pointx∈R2in the physical domainΩ. The same basis is also used to approximate physical fieldu(ξ). Composing the inverse of geometric map and the field approximation,u∘G−1, defines a field on the physical domain. Quadrature in analysis integration is performed via local barycentric coordinates on the parent triangle.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section  2 introduces necessary background concepts; Section  3 presents our discretization method—smooth rTBS-based discretization of the physical domain; Section  4 discusses the details of smooth rTBS-based isogeometric analysis; Section  5 contains our numerical results; In Section  6 we present our conclusions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We have presented a new isogeometric analysis approach based on rational Triangular Bézier Splines (rTBS). The rTBS parametrization of a NURBS-bounded domain can be fully automated. This approach is applicable to complex topologies. Various local refinement schemes can be readily implemented. We have presented a set of procedures for constructing a globallyCr-continuous basis for representing both physical field and the domain geometry with exact recovery of its NURBS boundary. We have also introduced the concept of exceptional vertices/edges where a reduced set of continuity constraints is imposed at boundary vertices. The reduced continuity at exceptional vertices and edges leads to global bijectivity and improved mesh quality and analysis results. Unlike tensor-product NURBS, such reduced continuity becomes highly localized with mesh refinement. This rTBS-based isogeometric analysis has been shown to be convergent with mesh refinement on linear elasticity and advection–diffusion problems.Future work will focus on improving rTBS element quality to achieve optimal convergence rate, studying the nestedness of spline space, and extending this approach to three-dimensional problems.