@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Morphometric analysis of calcification and fibrous layer thickness in carotid endarterectomy tissues

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Calcification is abundant in carotid endarterectomy (CEA) tissues.Calcification is located predominantly in the bulb/bifurcation segments of CEAs.Histologically determined calcified patch sizes span across 4-orders of magnitude.Morphology of calcified patches changes significantly with patch size.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Carotid endarterectomy,Calcification,Image analysis,Carotid bifurcation,Fibrous layer,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundAdvanced atherosclerotic lesions are commonly characterized by the presence of calcification. Several studies indicate that extensive calcification is associated with plaque stability, yet recent studies suggest that calcification morphology and location may adversely affect the mechanical stability of atherosclerotic plaques. The underlying cause of atherosclerotic calcification and the importance of intra-plaque calcium distribution remains poorly understood.MethodThe goal of this study was the characterization of calcification morphology based on histological features in 20 human carotid endarterectomy (CEA) specimens. Representative frozen sections (10μm thick) were cut from the common, bulb, internal and external segments of CEA tissues and stained with von Kossa׳s reagent for calcium phosphate. The morphology of calcification (calcified patches) and fibrous layer thickness were quantified in 135 histological sections.ResultsIntra-plaque calcification was distributed heterogeneously (calcification %-area: bulb segment: 14.2±2.1%; internal segment: 12.9±2.8%; common segment: 4.6±1.1%; p=0.001). Calcified patches were found in 20 CEAs (patch size: <0.1mm2 to >1.0mm2). Calcified patches were most abundant in the bulb and least in the common segment (bulb n=7.30±1.08; internal n=4.81±1.17; common n=2.56±0.56; p=0.0007). Calcified patch circularity decreased with increasing size (<0.1mm2: 0.77±0.01, 0.1–1mm2: 0.62±0.01, >1.0mm2: 0.51±0.02; p=0.0001). A reduced fibrous layer thickness was associated with increased calcium patch size (p<0.0001).ConclusionsIn advanced carotid atherosclerosis, calcification appears to be a heterogeneous and dynamic atherosclerotic plaque component, as indicated by the simultaneous presence of few large stabilizing calcified patches and numerous small calcific patches. Future studies are needed to elucidate the associations of intra-plaque calcification size and distribution with atherothrombotic events.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The presence of arterial calcification is a prominent feature in advanced atherosclerotic lesions. Calcified plaques have been located in multiple arterial beds and the strength of the association with mortality depends on the vascular bed [1]. In particular, coronary calcifications have been identified as an independent and additive predictor of incident nonfatal and fatal cardiovascular events and stroke [2–4]. However, fewer studies have assessed calcified plaques in the carotids, including the Diabetes Heart Study that identified carotid artery calcification as a significant predictor of cardiovascular events [5]. Although patients with arterial calcifications have an increased risk of cardiovascular events, the exact role that calcification plays in atherosclerosis remains incompletely characterized and controversial with respect to plaque stability. It is believed that atherogenic growth factors and cytokines induce among other changes, vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) migration and proliferation. Over time a subset of VSMCs may transdifferentiate into calcified vascular cells (CVCs), an osteogenic phenotype that contributes to plaque calcification [6–8]. In our previous studies, lysophosphatidylcholine, a product of oxidized phosphatidylcholine hydrolysis has been found in carotid endarterectomy (CEA) atheroma and was identified as a candidate for stimulating VSMCs to transdifferentiate into CVCs [9,10]. However, the current understanding of the atherosclerotic calcification process does not account for the observed heterogeneous distribution of intra-plaque calcification [11]. Moreover, sites of calcification have been implicated in biomechanical changes of the arterial wall. Although previous analyses have associated calcified atherosclerotic lesions with plaque stability [12,13], recent studies indicate that calcification size and location are important determinants of plaque rupture risk [14,15]. However, the exact mechanism of atherosclerotic calcification including the spatial distribution and size of calcific regions within atherosclerotic lesions remains incompletely understood [16].The underlying hypothesis of this study was that the characterization of calcification morphology will lead to a clearer understanding of the mechanism of plaque formation and stability. The aim of this study was to provide a detailed characterization of calcification morphology based on histological features in human CEA specimens. Emphasis has been focused on calcified patch size and shape, particularly their relation to tissue anatomical locations, lumen morphologies and fibrous layer thickness.CEA tissues were collected from patients undergoing surgery at the Houston Methodist Hospital. The tissues were obtained 3–6h after resection and immediately immersed in PBS/glycerol [50:50] and stored at −20°C until use. This study complied with local institutional human research review board and established ethical guidelines.Twenty CEA tissues, 13 right (Rt) and 7 left (Lt) were scanned with a high-resolution micro-computed tomography (CT) (Inveon PET/Spect/CT, Siemens, PA, USA) using Inveon Research Workplace software (Siemens, Malvern, PA; additional details can be found elsewhere [11]). The tissues were frozen in OCT compound (Sakura Finetek, Torrance, CA). The micro-CT images were used to guide the selection of frozen sections (10μm thick). Representative locations (internal/external, bulb and common segments) of the CEA tissues were collected. Depending on the size and extent of calcification, 5–10 different representative locations were selected along each tissue. Serial cross sections in that particular location were cut and stained with von Kossa׳s reagent for calcium phosphate, Masson׳s trichrome reagent to distinguish collagen from fibrin, and Oil Red O reagent for lipids (Fig. 1).Microphotographs of whole slide tissue images were acquired using a Pathscan Enabler IV microscope slide scanner (Meyer Instruments, Houston, TX) at 7200dpi. The digitized images of sections were warped when necessary to achieve closure of the surgical slit on the vessel wall (MorphAge, Creaceed Inc., Mons, Belgium). The histological images were arranged in a panel in the order of their relative positions along the tissue (Fig. 1). For high magnification studies, the histological slides were examined under a bright field microscope (Leica, Buffalo Grove, IL). In one CEA tissue, the slides were scanned with a high-end whole slide scanner (Panoramic 250, PerkinElmer, Waltham, MA) in order to document very small calcium particles on the microscale.The morphological analysis was performed on a Macintosh MacBook Air (Apple Computer, Cupertino, CA) using the public domain ImageJ software (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD). von Kossa stained sections representing the transverse area of the tissues were subjected to image analysis. The captured image was calibrated with a 2mm stage micrometer. The outline of the entire tissue, the lumen, and visualized calcium patches were traced carefully (Fig. 2). Calcified patches were identified as the area of calcification. Cross-sectional tissue and lumen area, perimeter of lumen and area of calcium deposit were determined. In addition, shape descriptors including [circularity=4π(area/perimeter2)], [aspect ratio=major axis/minor axis], and [roundness=4×area/π×(major axis2)] were obtained for each calcified patch (Supplemental Table 1). From the measured lumen perimeter, the radius was calculated from the equation [perimeter=2πr]. Hypothetical lumen, representing a patent circular lumen was constructed using the radius value from the equation [area=πr2]. The true lumen area was compared to the hypothetical circular lumen and expressed as a percentage ratio to describe shape deviation. The total calcium phosphate burden per tissue section was reported as a percentage of calcification area per tissue area. Using the lumen center of mass as a reference point, a line was drawn through the mid-point of each calcium patch to the outer surface of the CEA tissue. The thickness of the fibrous layer was measured along a line from the lumen surface to the edge of the calcium boundary.To study the very small calcified particles, the scanned image data set was viewed in Panoramic Viewer software (3DHistech, Budapest, Hungary). The area of interest was converted to TIFF format. The image was then imported into ImageJ and the region of interest was delineated. The very small calcified particles were selected by applying a color density threshold then their circularity values were determined.For the 9 CEA tissues containing both internal and external branches that display visible histology, the calcified patch angle occupations were morphed into a 360° clock. The centroids, defined as the center points of the internal and external lumens, were determined in their x and y coordinates. A line connecting the centroids of the two lumens was used as a reference line to measure locations of calcifications in degrees. Angular occupation by the calcified patches was measured from lumen centroid using the reference line as 0°. This was represented by an arc around the concentric circle (Omni Graffle Pro, Seattle, WA). The arcs in the same concentric circle represented the calcified patches located on the same tissue section. The outer rim represents the proximal side, and the inner rim the distal side. A perpendicular line intersects the reference line at the internal lumen centroid that divides the tissue into two halves, an inner half facing the external segment and an outer half facing away from the external segment. Calcification in each half was expressed as a percentage of total calcification area.Three out of 20 frozen CEA tissues and 1 additional paraffin-embedded CEA tissue were selected for study. Tissue sections first underwent an antigen retrieval process. Sections were heated to 95°C in citric acid (0.01M, pH 6.0) prior to antibody detection. A standard two level antibody labeling system plus diaminobenzidine as the chromagen was used. Sections were pretreated with 1% hydrogen peroxide in PBS solution to inhibit endogenous peroxidase activities. Mouse anti-human monoclonal antibodies against α-smooth muscle actin (DAKO N-1584, Carpinteria, CA), CD 68 (DAKO N1577, Carpinteria, CA), osteopontin (R&D MAB-1433, Minneapolis, MN), osteocalcin (R&D MAB-1419, Minneapolis, MN) and osteonectin/SPARC (R&D MAB-941, Minneapolis, MN) were applied to the tissue sections at concentrations recommended by the suppliers for immunohistochemistry identification (Supplemental Fig. 1). Biotinylated antibodies (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA) against mouse IgG were applied as secondary antibodies. An avidin-biotin peroxidase system was used according to supplier׳s recommendation (ABC kit, Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA). Sections were counterstained with Mayer׳s hematoxylin.Three CEA samples were used: one frozen and two paraffin-embedded. The technique utilized the collagen-specific Sirius Red stain and non-collagen protein Fast Green stains. The procedure was performed in accord with the supplier׳s recommendation (Chondrex Inc., Redmond, WA, USA). Essentially, the dye solution was applied to the tissue sections and the excess dye was rinsed off with water. The bound dye was then extracted and its OD reading was taken at 540nm and 605nm by spectrophotometry (NanoDrop 100, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA). The amount of collagen and non-collagen protein were calculated from the formulae provided by the supplier.The calcified patch number and calcification area were normalized to section numbers for each segment. In calcified particle shape analysis, the calcified patches were grouped according to their sizes: small (<0.1mm2), medium (0.1–1mm2) and large (>1.0mm2). The fibrous layer thickness was expressed as a fraction of the vessel wall thickness, in order to normalize for inter-sample comparisons. Correlation was determined from a bivariate plot with the best line fit option using Prism statistical software (GraphPad Prism V.5, La Jolla, CA). Fisher׳s exact test was used to analyze categorical data. The inferential statistical analysis involved one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) testing. The results were presented as mean±standard error (SE). The significance of any difference was then checked with the non-parametric Wilcoxon/Kruskal–Willis ranked sum test, with a p-value <0.05 considered statistically significant. Where ANOVA detected significant difference, inter-group differences were compared using the post-hoc Tukey-Kramer pairwise analysis (JMP version 8.0.2, SAS, Cary, NC). In a section with three visible calcium patches, all measurements were performed in triplicate to assess reproducibility. Intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) analysis was used to assess reproducibility of calcified patch measurements (SPSS, IBM, Armonk, NY).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
