@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimal barrel cutter selection for the CNC machining of blisk

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Geometric properties and location of four types of barrel cutters are introduced.Optimal tool flute size selection of barrel cutter to avoid the local gouges.Optimization of tool shaft diameter to avoid the global interferences.Numerical examples for proving the validity of the proposed method.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Barrel cutter,Tool selection,Flank milling,Freeform surface,Blisk,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Barrel cutters have been widely used in the flank milling of blisk. In this paper, a new method is proposed to select an optimal barrel cutter in the interest of the high productivity in the CNC machining of blisk. The geometric properties and location of four types of barrel cutters are firstly introduced. Then the optimal size of the tool flute with a greater barrel radius is determined. Meanwhile, the local gouges and kinematic constraints of the CNC machine tool are also taken into account. Furthermore, in order to avoid the global interferences between the tool shaft and the blade in process, the center point of circular arc generatrix is adjusted. Finally, the tool shaft diameter is optimized to improve tool rigidity and avoid the global interferences between the tool shaft and the adjacent blades. The numerical examples prove that a feasible barrel cutter with the higher productivity can be obtained by the proposed method in this paper. Therefore, this method can be directly applied in the CNC machining of blisk or centrifugal impeller.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The Barrel cutter, also called drum cutter, is important in the flank milling of freeform surfaces. And the various barrel cutters have been widely used in the CNC machining of aviation components such as blisks and centrifugal impellers in order to meet the increasing requirements on the productivity and quality.In the interest of reducing the machining costs and improving the machining quality, tool selection has attracted much attention in recent years  [1]. Compared to the researches  [1–23] on the optimal selection of cylindrical cutter, conical cutter and toric cutter, the publications  [24–30] on the optimal barrel cutter selection are not enough.The current investigations about the optimal barrel cutter selection generally focus on the size selection of tool flute, which includes the barrel radius and the maximum gyration radius of tool flute. But the center point of circular arc generatrix and the tool shaft diameter are not taken into account. It means that only the avoidance of local gouges is considered while the global interferences probably occur in the CNC machining of blisk. Furthermore, the tool flute size is selected according to the maximum of the maximum principal curvature on the freeform surface in the traditional method, which is too conservative to fully exploit the capability of barrel cutter and not applicable to a ruled surface.The mathematical descriptions and curvature properties of four types of barrel cutters are studied as the preparation in this paper. A new method of the optimal barrel cutter selection is presented for the flank milling of blisk. Firstly, the barrel radius is selected according to the maximum of the minimum principal curvature, which is useful for selecting a barrel cutter with the greater strip-width. And the kinematic constraints of the CNC machine tool must be taken into account in this method. Secondly, the center point of circular arc generatrix is adjusted for avoiding the interferences between the tool shaft and the blade in process. Finally, the tool shaft diameter can be optimized to improve the tool rigidity while there is no interference between the tool shaft and the adjacent blades.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Firstly, the overview of tool selection is introduced in Section  2. Then the geometric properties and location of four types of barrel cutters are described in Section  3. In particular, the optimal selection method of the barrel cutter is proposed for the CNC machining of blisk in Section  4. Next, numerical examples are implemented in Section  5 for proving the validity of the concept in this paper. Finally, conclusions are provided in Section  6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
(1) The mathematical descriptions of four types of barrel cutters and the curvature properties of tool surface are presented as the preparation for the optimal barrel cutter selection.(2) Themax(kmin)on the blade surface is used to select a greaterRewhile kinematic constraints of the CNC machine tool are considered, which are different from that in the traditional method. And the center pointC(a,c)of circular arc generatrix is adjusted to avoid the global interferences between the tool shaft and the blade in process. So the feasible tool flute size with a high productivity can be obtained by the proposed method, which is beneficial to reduce the machining costs of blisk.(3) The tool shaft diameter is optimized to improve the tool rigidity while there is no global interference between the tool shaft and the adjacent blades. A barrel cutter with the better tool rigidity selected by the new method is helpful to the machining precision of blades.In the future work, the size of barrel radius could be further optimized for the better strip-width by calculating themax(kmin′)in the different motion ranges ofB-axis. However, it would take more time due to a large quantity of data.