@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Network-based approach reveals Y chromosome influences prostate cancer susceptibility

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We developed an integrative network-based framework for prostate cancer.We examined the role of Y-chromosome genes through different states.The new definition of modulation score is proposed for detecting novel pathways and processes.Candidate genes are introduced for future research in the field of cancer studies as key factors.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Co-expression networks,Expression data,Prostate cancer,Reverse engineering approach,Y-chromosome genes,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The human Y chromosome contains a small number of genes that play a critical role in the determination of male-specific organs. Today’s advances have provided valuable resources for defining the functions of this chromosome in both normal and cancerous prostates. Despite the fact that generation of high-throughput expression data is becoming usual; the systematic methods of data analysis in a biological context are still an impediment.Here we have shown that constructing co-expression networks using Y-chromosome genes provides an alternative strategy for the detection of new candidate genes involved in prostate cancer. In our approach, independent co-expression networks from normal and cancerous stages are reconstructed using a reverse engineering approach. We then highlight crucial pathways, biological processes, and genes involved in the prostate cancer by analyzing each network individually and in concert. Thus, we have identified 18 critical pathways and processes related to prostate cancer, many of which have previously been shown to be involved in cancer. In particular, we identify 22 Y-chromosome genes putatively linked to prostate cancer, 13 of which have been already verified experimentally.Our novel network-based approach is useful for accurate inference of processes and essential regulators that mediate molecular changes during cancer progression.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The complexity of cancer has prompted various genome-wide studies to achieve a systems-level understanding of the key genetic mediators involved in different types of cancer [1]. Although recent studies have recognized a number of variants, gene fusions, and expression signatures affiliated with prostate cancer, identification and characterization of genes involved in this type of cancer, has still remained as a formidable challenge [2]. One focal point in cancer analysis is reconstruction of co-expression networks, which represents the key mediators that are involved in a specific process. The availability of genome-wide gene expression data has helped the development of various state-of-the-art co-expression networks reconstruction methods [3–5].In the past decades, using high-throughput technologies, cancer researchers have collected a huge amount of data on the differences between cancer cells and their healthy counterparts, with the ultimate purpose of identifying therapeutic targets. Many systems biology methods have been developed to infer the complexity of gene regulation using this high-throughput data. This has led to the identification of genes casually involved in human cancer [6,7].Prostate cancer, in particular, is a complex polygenic disorder which is a one of the most known cause of mortality in men [8]. The identification of critical molecular markers of prostate cancer may direct us towards better and earlier diagnosis of this type of cancer. Moreover, better understanding of the molecular process affecting prostate cancer progression may lead to the introduction of new drugs and tools for the prevention of this very common disease [9]. Previous work on prostate cancer, totally ignores the contribution of the Y chromosome, which is the male-specific chromosome in the human genome and contains genes that play critical roles in vital functions in male-specific organs, such as the testis and prostate gland [10]. In this paper, we approach this problem by identifying candidate genes on the Y chromosome involved in prostate cancer.Taking a systems-wide approach, we have reconstructed two stage-specific co-expression networks from a comprehensive prostate cancer gene expression dataset, consisting of 171 different samples representing gene expression in two different cell states. Our analysis has led to recognition of 18 both well-established and novel pathways and processes involved in prostate cancer. Additionally, we have identified 22 genes that putatively contribute to prostate cancer. Through extensive literature search, we have found that for 13 out of the 22 candidate genes (~59%), there is experimental evidence suggesting a role in prostate cancer. This level of experimental confirmation reflects the high accuracy of our proposed approach.We have used a network-based approach to seek systems-level perturbations during cancer progression. We have applied three different workflows for regulatory perturbation inference to cancerous and normal networks. These workflows are presented schematically in a flowchart (Fig. 1).Reverse engineering of co-expression networks based on whole genome data is an approach that attempts to discover the underlying gene regulatory circuits by observing changes in gene expression profiles. With advances in high-throughput technologies, several computational reverse-engineering approaches have been developed using different statistical measurements [11–14], including information-theoretic network inference methods, which identify connections between genes by approximating the quantity of information common to any pair of genes. We employed the context likelihood relevance (CLR) algorithm by Faith et al. [3] as it had the best performance among information theory-based approaches in the Dialogue on Reverse Engineering Assessment and Methods 5 (DREAM5) challenge [15].Briefly, CLR evaluates an interaction between two genes as significant by considering their mutual information (MI) value against a background distribution of the MI values of every other pair involving one of the two genes of interest. In this way, the significance level is dynamically determined for each interacting pair according to their expression profiles. Given a gene expression dataset and the significance scores calculated by the CLR algorithm, the corresponding empirical false discovery rate (FDR) can be estimated by running the algorithm on randomly shuffled datasets. In this study, we have reconstructed two co-expression networks using CLR with an FDR threshold of 0.05.In the initial phase of this study, through a series of expression studies conducted on all 60 genes (loci) on the human Y chromosome [10], we have retrieved all genes that interact with Y-chromosome genes from the Information Hyperlinked over Proteins (iHOPE) database [16]. Overall, we identified 471 genes (in addition to genes on the Y chromosome) in the entire human genome that interact with genes on the Y chromosome.Prostate cancer microarray data were downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database (accession number GDS2545) [17]. This dataset contains 171 samples, including prostate tissue free of any pathology (Normal, 18 samples), normal prostate tissue adjacent to tumors (Adjacent, 63 samples), primary prostate tumor tissue (Tumor, 65 samples), and metastatic prostate cancer (Metastasis, 25 samples). For this study, we grouped Normal and Adjacent samples as normal prostate tissue and Tumor and Metastasis samples as cancerous prostate tissue. Microarray data were preprocessed and analyzed using the LIMMA package in R [18].It has been demonstrated that functionally related genes tend to have coherent expression patterns [19]. Our goal is to identify pathways and biological processes (BP) with altered regulation using the prostate cell expression data in two stages. First, we have constructed co-expression networks for each stage, independently. Next, for each co-expression network, we queried whether genes in a particular BP or pathway are significantly interconnected (reasoning that the density of connections among genes involved in an active process will be significantly higher than a random selection of genes). To formulate this idea, we developed a modulation score based on the concept of cohesiveness from the network topology analysis [20]. For convenience, we refer to an interaction between two genes in the same pathway or BP as intra-interactions. Similarly, we refer to an interaction between a gene in a pathway or BP with another gene not in that pathway or BP as an inter-interaction. Then, we defined the modulation score as follows:(1)modulationscore=numberofintra-interactionsnumberofintra-interactions+numberofinter-interactionsTo assess the significance state of a calculated modulation score for a gene set composed of n genes, we have observed the distribution pattern of 1000 modulation scores obtained from randomly selected gene sets with the same size from the network. Assuming a normal distribution for the random modulation scores, the Z-score is:(2)Z-score=m−m0sdwhere m is the modulation score for a particular set of n genes, m0 is the expected modulation score for random selection of n genes in the network, and sd is the standard deviation for the distribution of modulation scores. Our preliminary analysis indicated Z-scores for very small gene sets are not reliable, therefore only gene sets with size greater than 5 were considered in our analysis.Our analysis had two distinct objectives. The first was to identify the most likely candidate oncogene among the genes in the reconstructed networks via topological analysis. The second one was to evaluate the Y-chromosome genes involved in prostate cancer, based on whether they interact with the identified candidate(s) in the reconstructed sub-networks.To identify the key genes in prostate cancer, we searched the stage-specific co-expression networks of prostate cancer for high connectivity (hub) or bottleneck genes [21,22]. The hub and bottleneck properties are considered as important centrality indices because they indicate critical intersections between clusters in the network, such that the network will be disrupted if they are removed [23]. Considering the possibility of more appropriate centrality indices, we also searched for genes with high Density of Maximum Neighborhood Component (DMNC), Maximum Neighborhood Component (MNC), and Maximal Clique Centrality (MCC) scores. There now exists a significant body of research which use the centrality measures to detect critical nodes in biological networks [24,25]. Lin et al. evaluated the performance of these indices in the analysis of a yeast protein–protein interaction dataset, and found that they could identify essential genes with high precision [26]. We performed topological analysis of both constructed networks using the cyto-Hubba package [26] which is a plugin for the popular network analysis software Cytoscape [27].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
