@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Modeling multiple experiments using regularized optimization: A case study on bacterial glucose utilization dynamics

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A global model for glucose utilization is proposed based on time-varying parameters.Optimization with regularization allows identifying global models across experiments.Local and global parameters can be identified using particle swarm optimization.Results are validated by predicting new conditions and through model integration.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Identification,Optimization,Regularization,Modeling,Particle swarm optimization,Biochemical systems,Bacterial metabolism,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The aim of inverse modeling is to capture the systems׳ dynamics through a set of parameterized Ordinary Differential Equations (ODEs). Parameters are often required to fit multiple repeated measurements or different experimental conditions. This typically leads to a multi-objective optimization problem that can be formulated as a non-convex optimization problem. Modeling of glucose utilization of Lactococcus lactis bacteria is considered using in vivo Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) measurements in perturbation experiments. We propose an ODE model based on a modified time-varying exponential decay that is flexible enough to model several different experimental conditions. The starting point is an over-parameterized non-linear model that will be further simplified through an optimization procedure with regularization penalties. For the parameter estimation, a stochastic global optimization method, particle swarm optimization (PSO) is used. A regularization is introduced to the identification, imposing that parameters should be the same across several experiments in order to identify a general model. On the remaining parameter that varies across the experiments a function is fit in order to be able to predict new experiments for any initial condition. The method is cross-validated by fitting the model to two experiments and validating the third one. Finally, the proposed model is integrated with existing models of glycolysis in order to reconstruct the remaining metabolites. The method was found useful as a general procedure to reduce the number of parameters of unidentifiable and over-parameterized models, thus supporting feature selection methods for parametric models.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the area of biochemical engineering, emerging analytical techniques such as Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) deliver increasing amount of experimental biological data containing important information about the system of interest. A great technological advancement is in vivo NMR [1], which makes possible to monitor metabolism in living cells by tracking the concentration of specially marked metabolites,11Usually, the 6th carbon in glucose is switched to (13C) isotope, which is tracked through the metabolic network.allowing to better understand their complex physiology. Indeed, dynamic modeling of the metabolism became one of the main research areas of systems biology due to the expected impact in areas such as metabolic and genetic engineering.A typical but yet unsolved problem is the modeling of glucose utilization in bacteria, a highly regulated process, in which the external sugar is transported through the membrane into the cell [2]. Accurately modeling this first step is of high relevance since it is usually the first reaction of the bacterial metabolism pathway and to which all the other metabolites are highly dependent [3,4]. Most modelers are focusing on the inverse problem, namely to identify the parameters of a set of differential equations that best fit available experimental datasets [5]. However, the majority of these models lack generalization capabilities, i.e., even if a perfect fit to a single experiment is achieved, they cannot explain the systems׳ behavior in different experimental conditions.In this context, multi-objective PSO (MOPSO) was extended with term-wise decomposition, using a generalized mass action (GMA) model [6]. This ODE model approximates the reaction rates with power-laws, which in this case are decoupled into an equation system by replacing derivatives with the values of the observed slopes. However, it is known that this type of decomposition is highly sensitive to noise [7], which might lead to poor estimates in real noisy settings. Another approach is to apply MOPSO directly for global modeling [8], and combining the multiple objectives with dynamic weighting. The present work greatly expands this previous proposal but a more throughout analysis of the parameter solution space is performed, along with an improvement on the utilization dynamic model. Moreover, regularization is introduced in the optimization procedure, thus leading to a contrasting perspective regarding the overall fitting methodology.In this paper the multiple objectives are extended with regularization, which penalize the deviances between the parameters on different experiments. The aim is to develop and identify a model that can accurately describe different experimental conditions of bacterial glucose utilization and simulate/predict novel experiments. This paper is organized as follows: in Section 2 we introduce the dataset, the model and our method of identification, in Section 3 the results of bacterial glucose utilization is described in detail. The methods and the results are further discussed in Section 4 and finally in Section 5, conclusions are drawn.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
