@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Determining the bistability parameter ranges of artificially induced lac operon using the root locus method

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We use root locus method to determine bistability parameter ranges for lac operon.The method captures parameter ranges ensuring triple roots to equilibrium equation.Analyzing gene regulatory networks under parameter uncertainties is achieved.Bistability ranges for TMG- and IPTG-induced lac operon models are obtained.The method is applicable to any biological model based on mass action kinetics.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Lac operon,Bistability,TMG,IPTG,Root locus,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper employs the root locus method to conduct a detailed investigation of the parameter regions that ensure bistability in a well-studied gene regulatory network namely, lac operon of Escherichia coli (E. coli). In contrast to previous works, the parametric bistability conditions observed in this study constitute a complete set of necessary and sufficient conditions. These conditions were derived by applying the root locus method to the polynomial equilibrium equation of the lac operon model to determine the parameter values yielding the multiple real roots necessary for bistability. The lac operon model used was defined as an ordinary differential equation system in a state equation form with a rational right hand side, and it was compatible with the Hill and Michaelis–Menten approaches of enzyme kinetics used to describe biochemical reactions that govern lactose metabolism. The developed root locus method can be used to study the steady-state behavior of any type of convergent biological system model based on mass action kinetics. This method provides a solution to the problem of analyzing gene regulatory networks under parameter uncertainties because the root locus method considers the model parameters as variable, rather than fixed. The obtained bistability ranges for the lac operon model parameters have the potential to elucidate the appearance of bistability for E. coli cells in in vivo experiments, and they could also be used to design robust hysteretic switches in synthetic biology.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The lactose operon (abbreviated as lac operon) of E. coli bacterium is a gene regulatory network that is responsible for controlling lactose metabolism [1]. The lac operon is composed of three structural genes, lacZ, lacY and lacA, which encode β-galactosidase, galactoside permease and thiogalactoside transacetylase enzymes, respectively. The permease enzyme transports lactose or its non-metabolizable analogs, methyl-1-thio-β-d-galactoside (TMG) or isopropyl-β-d-thio-galactoside (IPTG), into the cell. β-Galactosidase hydrolyzes the transported lactose (a disaccharide) into galactose and glucose to be metabolized and catalyzes the conversion of internal lactose to allolactose to induce transcription of the lac operon via binding to the lac repressor. β-Galactosidase cannot metabolize TMG and IPTG, so these chemicals are ideal molecules for artificially inducing the lac operon. Thiogalactoside transacetylase, plays roles in sugar metabolism and detoxification, catalyzes the transfer of an acetyl group from acetyl-CoA to thiogalactosides [2].The lac operon of E. coli is controlled by two distinct mechanisms: (i) in the absence of lactose and its analogs, the lactose repressor protein encoded by the lacI gene binds to the promoter region of the lac operon and prohibits the expression of lacZ, lacY and lacA, preventing the induction of the lac operon; (ii) when glucose is available in the extracellular medium, E. coli prefers to use glucose as a carbon-energy source even in the presence of inducers, so the lac operon is not induced due to two glucose-induced suppression processes, catabolite repression and inducer exclusion [3]. Herein, catabolite repression is responsible for the inhibition of the mRNA transcription in the presence of glucose. The presence of glucose results in low 3′-5′-cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) concentrations, which prevents the binding of cAMP to cAMP receptor protein (CRP), which is required to form the catabolite gene activator protein (CAP) complex required for mRNA transcription. The second suppression process, inducer exclusion, involves the inhibition of external lactose transport into the cell via the interaction of glucose with the permease, which excludes the inducer [3].Under glucose starvation, both the glucose-stimulated suppression mechanisms become ineffective and allow lactose (or an artificial inducer such as TMG or IPTG) to induce the lac operon. Herein, this system is induced via the following molecular interactions: first, the availability of a small amount of permease due to the basal transcription of mRNA mediates the transport of a small amount of external lactose (or an artificial inducer) into the cell. Then, allolactose, which is produced from the transported lactose by β-galactosidase, or the transported artificial inducer binds to the LacI repressor protein and changes the conformation of the repressor to dissociate the repressor from the promoter region. The resulting inhibition of the LacI repressor induces the lac operon, allowing the RNA polymerase enzyme to come into contact with the free promoter site of the lac operon and initiate the synthesis of the lacZ, lacY and lacA genes. Then, the transcription of mRNA and the expression of permease, β-galactosidase and thiogalactoside transacetylase increase rapidly. The increase in the amount of permease due to the production of mRNA provides a positive feedback, resulting in the transportation of lactose (or an artificial inducer) and the production of mRNA in much greater amounts compared to the basal activity. This mutual amplification is limited by the saturated rate of molecular interactions. The amounts of mRNA, internal inducers and permease eventually reach steady-state values, as determined by the reductions, due to degradation and other processes.By virtue of the above described control mechanisms, the lac operon defines a biological switch controlled by two inputs (i.e., external glucose and lactose-artificial inducer) so that it is open (induced) only when lactose (or an artificial inducer), but not glucose, is available in the extracellular medium. In experiments using TMG and IPTG at the population and cell level, the induction status of E. coli clearly depends on its previous induction status in addition to the levels of extracellular glucose and inducer concentrations [4–8]. E. coli cells maintain their induced and uninduced states (i.e., if they are induced or uninduced, they have a tendency to remain in that state). A large number of theoretical studies have attempted to explain how two alternative equilibrium states (i.e., the induced and uninduced states) exist as steady-state levels for the same concentrations of extracellular glucose and inducer [6,9–19]. Research generally states that this characteristic is due to the bistable behavior of a nonlinear dynamical system possessing two stable equilibria. This induction mechanism of the lac operon has been observed as the response to changing extracellular concentration levels of glucose and inducer, and it has been described in a number of models derived from enzyme kinetics using the well-known engineering concept of hysteresis [6].Although the above described operation of the lac operon as a bistable hysteretic switch under glucose starvation has been observed in many experimental studies using the gratuitous inducers, TMG and IPTG, no experimental evidence has been reported using lactose as a substrate [6,18–20]. The existence of bistability for both gratuitous inducers and natural inducer, such as allolactose, has also been studied using a number of theoretical models. Most lac operon models are derived from mass action kinetics employing Hill and Michaelis–Menten approaches, and they are defined by ordinary differential equations (ODEs) [3,6,11–16,18–25]. In silico studies revealed that these ODE models exhibit bistable behavior for both artificial and natural inducers, and while bistability is possible for natural inducer, it is less likely to occur compared to artificial inducers.A portion of the theoretical research suggests that induction of the lac operon in the natural setting with lactose as substrate lacks the bistable phenomenon [13,15,18–20]. Metabolism of the natural inducer attenuates the positive feedback due to the permease [15,18–20], and the increased stabilization of the dilution rate of permease, which is squarely proportional to the permease activity of the metabolism of the natural inducer [13], represent two major biological reasons why bistability is not apparent when lactose is used in in vivo experiments. The literature also suggests [16,24] that bistability does not disappear for lactose, although much higher lactose concentrations are required for it to be observed compared to artificial inducers. Therefore, there is still a need to test theoretical predictions with suitably designed in vivo experiments.ODE models, which are described in terms of molecule concentrations rather than molecule numbers, effectively represent molecular interactions only at high concentration levels, which is a valid assumption for inducers, but not for mRNA and permease variables. Stochastic models of the lac operon, which are usually expressed as the chemical master equation defining time evolution of the probability distribution of molecule numbers, have also been used to obtain more realistic predictions [16,24,26–30]. One report suggested [16] that the existence of bistability in the ODE model is implied by the bimodality observed in the steady-state solution of the corresponding master equation under the same parameter setting, but the reverse may not always be true. Other reports state [26,29] that bistability and bimodality do not necessarily imply the presence of each other. Thus, ODE and stochastic models for predicting bistable behavior of the lac operon must be analyzed by new theoretical studies and numerical simulations. Moreover, testing the present hypotheses and introducing new ones, such as studying the mechanisms governing lac operon dynamics in vivo, warrant further investigation [7,8,31–34].ODE models derived from mass action kinetics and stochastic models derived from stochastic chemical kinetics are defined by a number of internal parameters (e.g., reaction rate constants) and external parameters (e.g., external inducer and glucose concentrations) [28]. The quantitative and qualitative behaviors of lac operon models depend on the values of the model parameters. However, there is a significant amount of uncertainty regarding the estimation of the biophysically realistic values of these model parameters due to the differences between in vivo and in vitro kinetics, laboratory conditions, parameter heterogeneity within a population, a lack of direct measurements, and inaccuracies in data fitting used for parameter calculations, among others [20,29,35,36]. To validate or invalidate the existence of bistable behavior for the lac operon in natural settings, one can attempt to determine the entire bistability ranges of the model parameters and check whether the values falling within these ranges are biophysically realistic.This paper utilizes the root locus method to determine the bistability parameter ranges of the ODE model of the lac operon. The root locus method is applicable to address this problem because of the following facts: (i) ODE models derived based on mass action kinetics can be obtained as nonlinear state equations whose right hand sides are rational functions of molecule concentrations when Michaelis–Menten and Hill approximations employed; (ii) the equilibrium equation for these ODE models can be written as polynomial equations of the concentrations; and (iii) the model parameters originated from Michaelis–Menten and Hill kinetics constitute the linear coefficients of the polynomial equilibrium equation, so each of these linear coefficients can be considered as a control parameter, such that the number and positions of the equilibrium points can be determined as a function of the chosen control parameter using the root locus method. Thus, the bistability range with respect to a specific model parameter is obtained by specifying the parameter values yielding multiple (real) roots to the equilibrium equation. Herein, the existence of multiple equilibrium points, particularly three equilibrium points, such that two are asymptotically stable and the third is unstable, indicates the presence of bistability.To identify multiple equilibrium points, one may apply multiple root finding algorithms to determine the number and positions of the real roots of the polynomial equilibrium equation or integrate numerical ODEs to find the steady state solution for each possible initial state. These root finding and numerical integration algorithms, which could be applied for all possible values of the model parameters in the multi-dimensional parameter space, represent a considerable computational burden and do not provide a framework for analytical derivations. The root locus method proposed in this paper to determine bistability ranges presents graphical and numerical information related to the change of the number and positions of the equilibrium points. The method is especially useful for efficiently identifying bifurcation points where a qualitative change starts at these values of the parameters. It also provides a framework for analytical derivations to parameterize the bifurcation points, making it possible to specify the boundaries of the bistability regions. The proposed root locus method can be used for the parametric equilibrium analysis of any ODE model whose state equation form admits a rational right hand side, including models defining gene regulatory networks and metabolic networks. In contrast to a recently introduced discriminant based method [37] that can be used for polynomial equilibrium equations of degree less than four, there is no dimensional restriction when using the root locus method for the derivation of bistability parameter ranges in an analytical way. Therefore, the root locus method is able to determine the optimal value of a specific parameter, so it has a potential application as a design/control tool for biological and synthetic gene regulatory networks.The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the lac operon model analyzed in this paper. Section 3 briefly describes the classical root locus method of control theory and shows the superiority of the proposed root locus method over the root finding method for polynomial equilibrium equations in the steady-state analysis of two production–degradation type biological models. The application of the root locus method for the bistability analysis of a minimal TMG-induced lac operon model, which takes into account the catabolite repression and inducer exclusion mechanisms, are presented in detail in Section 4. The results include the root locus diagrams with respect to the model parameters and analytical derivations based on break-in and break-away points for capturing the bistability region boundaries in the model parameter space. Based on the results obtained using the root locus method, bistability regions were constructed in Section 4 in terms of internal parameters and input variables, namely external glucose and external TMG. Considering the fact that TMG- and IPTG-induced lac operon models have the same structure, despite having different parameter ranges, the bistability parameter region for the IPTG-induced model is also included in Section 4. Section 5 presents the conclusions.Most in vivo studies on the bistability of the lac operon utilized the artificial inducer, TMG, which allows for the separation of induction and metabolism; TMG is imported via permease, so it induces mRNA production, but it is not metabolized by β-galactosidase. Thus, due to their relative simplicity as a consequence of having fewer interactions and fewer variables involved, TMG and IPTG are suitable for in vivo experimental studies and the analysis of theoretical models of lac operon. In this study, we developed a mathematical model for TMG-mediated induction of the lac operon that is minimal in the sense that it contains the most basic mechanisms needed to express bistable behavior. This model can also be used to evaluate IPTG-mediated induction of the lac operon, although it is important to consider differences of the actual values of the model parameters.The TMG-induced lac operon model consists of three ordinary differential equations, with the mRNA, permease and TMG concentration as state variables. As shown in Fig. 1, the TMG model includes (i) the catabolite repression and inducer exclusion of the extracellular glucose, (ii) the transcription of mRNA by TMG, (iii) the production of permease, (iv) the transportation of TMG via permease and (v) the degradation of TMG, mRNA and permease. It is assumed that there are no translational and transcriptional delays in the lac operon mechanism. The model is suitable for analyzing the hysteretic bistable behavior of the lac operon, which occurs due to the positive feedback resulting from permease activation, and for representing the inducer but not glucose logical function expressing the induction mechanism of the lac operon.The TMG-induced lac operon model is described by the following state model, which is composed of three first order differential equations representing the reaction rates in terms of the mRNA, permease and internal TMG concentrations:(1)dMdt=αMfM,T(T)fT,Ge(Ge)−γMM(2)dPdt=αPM−γPP(3)dTdt=αTfT,Te(Te)fT,Ge(Ge)P−γTTwhere state variables M, P and T stand for the mRNA, permease and internal TMG concentration, respectively. The inputs Teand Gerepresent the external TMG and external glucose concentration, respectively. γiwithi∈{M,P,T}represents the loss constants for M, P, and T; γirepresents the composition of the active degradation,γ¯i, and the dilution due to growth rate, μi, i.e.,γi=γ¯i+μi. αiwithi∈{M,P,T}denotes the production constants of the gene products.fM,T(T)andfM,Ge(Ge)express the positive effect of the internal TMG and the negative effect of external glucose on the synthesis of mRNA, respectively. Similarly,fT,Te(Te)andfT,Ge(Ge)express the positive effect of external TMG and negative effect of external glucose on TMG uptake into the cell, respectively. Here,fM,Ge(Ge)andfT,Ge(Ge)are decreasing functions of external glucose; the former describes catabolite repression, while the latter describes inducer exclusion.Regarding the TMG-induced lac operon model, the temporal change in mRNA concentration is defined in (1) as the difference between the production depending on the internal TMG concentration under the catabolite repression effect of external glucose and the losses due to active degradation and growth. Equation (2) accounts for the change in permease concentration in terms of synthesized permease and losses. Similarly, the change in the internal TMG concentration is expressed in (3), where an increase in TMG is due to the import of the external TMG under the reduction effect of inducer exclusion, and a decrease is due to its degradation and dilution.Assuming the production of mRNA under TMG as an allosteric interaction similar to that of allolactose,fM,T(T)can be calculated using the following modified Hill function [39]:(4)fM,T(T)=1+K1TnK+K1Tnwhere n is the number of TMG required to inactivate a repressor protein, K1 is the equilibrium constant of the TMG–repressor protein interaction, and1/Kis the basal level of mRNA transcription in E. coli. For the inhibition of repressor protein, at least two TMG molecules must bind the repressor. Thus, n equals 2 in the analyses throughout this study.The root locus method is a well-known classical method in control area to determine the changes of the location of closed-loop system poles as a function of a model parameter. The usual concern in control applications employing the root locus method is to identify the range of a controller parameter ensuring a desired behavior of the closed-loop system such as Lyapunov (asymptotic) stability which is obtained for the closed-loop poles all in the open left half-plane. As described in Subsection 3.1, the poles of the Laplace domain (closed-loop) transfer function are indeed the roots to the characteristic equation which is a rational function of s complex variable. So, studying the positions of the poles in the complex plane is equivalent to determine the positions of the roots to a polynomial equation. This classical method of root locus is actually valid for any kind of polynomial equations with real-valued coefficients. The proposed application of the root locus method for the bistability analysis of lac operon relies on the following facts: (i) ODE models derived from mass action kinetics with Michaelis–Menten or Hill approach have state equation forms with rational right hand sides, so their rational equilibrium equations can be rearranged as polynomial equations. (ii) For a deterministic dynamical system defined by ODEs, in particular lac operon model given by (1)–(3), a bistable behavior requires triple equilibria which are actually the real roots to the equilibrium equation, exactly two of which are asymptotically stable in the sense of Lyapunov [37]. So, for the polynomial equilibrium equation case, the range of a specific model parameter ensuring three real equilibria can be found by applying the classical root locus to this equilibrium equation.To make the paper self-contained, the classical root locus method is briefly described in Subsection 3.1. Subsection 3.2 demonstrates the applicability of the root locus method for studying the change of the equilibrium point(s) of gene regulatory networks on a simple synthetic model representing the production and degradation of a biological molecule. Subsection 3.3 which considers a rather complicated production–degradation model available in the literature is devoted to show that the root locus method is by no means restricted to equilibrium equations of three or less degree as appeared in the bistability analysis of lac operon model presented in Section 4 but valid for the equilibrium equations of arbitrary degree.To describe the root locus method, let consider a linear time-invariant single-input single-output control system depicted in Fig. 2where Gc(s), Gp(s) and H(s) are the Laplace domain transfer function of the controller, plant and sensor, respectively. The closed-loop transfer function is given as(5)Y(s)R(s)=Gc(s)Gp(s)1+Gc(s)Gp(s)H(s)It is well known that the transient behavior and the Lyapunov stability can be studied based on the positions of the closed-loop poles which are the roots to the following characteristic equation:(6)1+Gc(s)Gp(s)H(s)=0Since a linear time-invariant system provides always rational transfer functions of s complex variable, then the characteristic equation can be factored out in terms of the open-loop zeros (zi׳s) and the open-loop poles (pi׳s) as follows:(7)1+Gc(s)Gp(s)H(s)=1+Kp(s+z1)(s+z2)⋯(s+zm)(s+p1)(s+p2)⋯(s+pn)=(s+p1)(s+p2)⋯(s+pn)+Kp(s+z1)(s+z2)…(s+zm)(s+p1)(s+p2)⋯(s+pn)=0Herein, Kpstands for a non-negative constant which may be the proportional controller gain. To find the range of Kpensuring Lyapunov stability, one may try to find the roots to the characteristic equation for all possible Kpvalues. Despite such a brute force approach leading an inefficient way, the root locus method exploits a set of useful properties to draw the loci of the roots as a function of Kpparameter without determining the roots for all Kpvalues. The most basic property might be the one stating that the roots to the characteristic equation starts from the open-loop poles (pi׳s) and tends to the open-loop zeros (zi׳s) as the gain Kpchanges from zero to infinity. The other basic properties on which the steps of root locus method are based can actually be derived from the magnitude and phase conditions in the following equation:(8)|KpGc(s)Gp(s)H(s)|=1,and∠KpGc(s)Gp(s)H(s)=±π(2k+1)Drawing the root locus can be implemented in a procedure combining the results of the following steps: (i) Calculate the open-loop poles and zeros. (ii) Determine the root loci on the real axis. (iii) Calculate the asymptotes of the root loci. (iv) Find the break-in and break-away points. (v) Calculate the departure angles away from the complex open-loop poles and the arrival angles to the complex open-loop zeros. (vi) Find the points where the root loci cross the imaginary axis. The implementation details and derivation of the properties of the root locus method can be found in a standard control text book, e.g. [38].Let consider a one dimensional production–degradation model for a biological molecule where the production is defined by assuming Michaelis–Menten kinetics and the degradation is defined by assuming linear growth for the cell:(9)dxdt=KpxKm+x−μxwhere x is the concentration of the molecule, Kpis the maximum production rate, Kmis the concentration level at which the production rate reaches to half of its maximum value and μ is the constant growth rate.The equilibrium equation for the rational right hand-sided state model is also rational and can be put into a characteristic equation form as:(10)KpxKm+x−μx=0↔1−Kpxμx(x+Km)=0The roots to the denominator of the characteristic equation are seen asxD(1)=0andxD(2)=−Kmwhich are actually the starting points of two branches associated to the root loci. One of these branches will end atxN(1)=0which is the finite root to the nominator while the other tends to the infinite root to the nominator. Using appropriate properties stated in Subsection 3.2, one can obtain the root loci as in Fig. 3forμ=1and Km=10 by using Matlab numerical software.In fact, for this second order polynomial equilibrium equation, one can also find the root loci in a closed form as:x(1)=0andx(2)=Kp−μKmμ. Despite such closed form solutions are not available for polynomial equilibrium equations with degrees higher than three, the root locus method is valid for any degree of polynomial equilibrium equations. When no closed-form solution exists, one may try to find the roots to the equilibrium equation for each possible Kpparameter values by a root finding algorithm. The root locus method is numerically more efficient in comparison to such a brute force method since it needs to calculate some feature only to capture the whole root loci.The computer experiments for the root locus method and also the root finding method were conducted in MATLAB numerical software. In a PC with a 2GHz Corei7Quad processor with 8GB RAM, the computation times needed for the root locus and the root finding were measured as 2.04s and, respectively, 6.59s when the v parameter was chosen in the range of[0,5000]and incremented with a step size of 0.1 starting from 0. When the step size was chosen as 0.01 for a better resolution for the same range[0,5000], the computation time became 12.57s for the root locus and 770.54s for the root finding. To obtain the root loci for the above mentioned specific values of parameter v, the Matlab function, rlocus(num,den,v), was used. The roots in the root finding method were computed for the same values of parameter v by using the Matlab function, roots. The results show that the root locus method is much more efficient than the root finding method in terms of computation time and that a ten-fold increase in the resolution of the parameter space results in approximately a six-fold increase in the computation time for the root locus method while more than a 100-fold increase in the computation time for the root finding method. It should be further noted that the computation time given for the root locus method includes also the time for plotting the root loci and the computation time for the root locus was obtained as 0.58s when the Matlab function, rlocus (num,den), providing a self-adjusting resolution was used.This subsection is devoted to explain that the root locus method can be applied to high order equilibrium equations associated to gene regulatory networks modeled by assuming Michaelis–Menten and/or Hill kinetics. Let consider the model of [26] where the production is of Hill type with Hill coefficient n=3 and the degradation is linear:(11)dxdt=vα+kxn1+kxn−βxThe work presented in [26] shows that the model has a bistable behavior for the model parameter values as v=40,α=0.125,k=0.093750×10−3andβ=0.95.Let us apply the root locus method to find the range of v parameter ensuring the bistability for the above given nominal parameter values. The equilibrium equation in the so-called characteristic equation form is obtained in the following equation:(12)1−vkx3+αβx(kx3+1)=0The root loci of the equilibrium equation in (12) are drawn in Fig. 4.Three positive real roots which are the necessary and sufficient for the bistability of the model are seen by the root loci to exist for the rangev∈(36.8,47.5). The upper and lower limits of the range are indeed break-away and break-in points of the root loci. The superiority of the root locus method becomes evident in this example since there is no known closed form expression for the roots to the fourth order polynomial equilibrium equationkβx4−vkx3+βx−αv=0.As done in Subsection 3.2, the computation times needed for the two methods were measured in the same numerical environment. The computation times needed for the root locus and the root finding were measured as 2.54sec and, respectively, 28.92sec whenv∈[0,5000]with a resolution of 0.1. For a resolution of 0.01 in the same range[0,5000], the computation time increased to 26.27sec for the root locus and to 3182.9sec for the root finding. The results show that the root locus method is much more efficient than the root finding method in terms of computation time also for the model in (11).As stated in Section 3, bistability of an ODE model necessitates to have three equilibria taking place at the positive concentration levels so that they are valid biologically. Exactly two of these equilibria should be asymptotically stable in the sense of Lyapunov [37]. Herein, the unstable equilibrium point at the mid actually behaves as a separator between the domains of attractions associated to the asymptotically stable equilibrium points. Thus, the bistability analysis of an ODE lac operon model is realized by first determining the roots to the equilibrium equations, such that the real roots provide the equilibria, and followed by studying the Lyapunov stability of each equilibrium point. It is shown [37] that the lac operon model defined in (1)–(3) either has a unique asymptotically stable equilibrium or triple equilibria two of which are asymptotically stable and the other unstable for all possible p, K, K1 parameter values. The Lyapunov stability of the equilibrium points of the model (1)–(3) has been well studied in [37]. So, this paper is focused on the existence of triple equilibria which is a necessary and sufficient condition for the bistability of the lac operon model (1)–(3).The parameter ranges that ensure the existence of triple equilibria for the ODE lac operon model (1)–(3) can be determined by finding the real roots to the associated polynomial equilibrium equation for each specific set of model parameters in a numerical way. Alternatively, the real roots can be identified by obtaining the closed form (in particular, analytical) expression of the roots and/or the transition points from real to complex roots as functions of the model parameters, for instance, by employing a cusp analysis [20] or a method based on discriminant of the polynomial equation [37]. The available analytical methods provide valuable insights into how the number and position of the real roots change depending on the parameters; however, they may be hindered when using polynomial equations greater than the third degree because these equations need to use derivations requiring the closed form (parametric) expressions of the roots of the polynomial equations or the discriminant of a polynomial equation. As described below, the root locus method serves as a powerful numerical and analytical tool for studying the conditions of model parameters yielding multiple equilibria. It should be noted that the root locus method is applicable to any polynomial equilibrium equation of arbitrary degree, and it is valid for multi-parameter cases. However, it is especially suitable for analyzing the effect of single parameter variations on the occurrence of multiple equilibria.To obtain the equilibrium equation for T, the state variables M, P and T are assumed to be constant in (1)–(3), and the equilibrium concentrations M and P are eliminated:(13)pfM,T(T)−T=p1+K1T2K+K1T2−T=0where(14)p≜αTγTαPγPαMγMfT,Te(Te)fT,Ge(Ge)fM,Ge(Ge)The rational equilibrium equation (13) is rearranged into the following polynomial form:(15)K1T3−pK1T2+KT−p=0As is the case for any odd degree polynomial equation, the third order equation (15) always has a real root corresponding to an equilibrium point. The other two roots of (15) may be either a complex conjugate pair or real. In the case of three real roots, they may appear as (i) three identical roots, (ii) two distinct roots, such that one is double, or (iii) three distinct roots. The existence of bistable behavior occurs only with two stable equilibria separated by an unstable equilibrium requiring three different real roots [37]. To determine the ranges of the parameters ensuring the bistability of the TMG-induced lac operon model in (1)–(3), we must identify the parameter values at which the complex roots transform to the real roots. These transition points are the break-in/away points in the root locus analysis.To determine the bistability parameter region of our lac operon model, the root locus method will be applied according to the following steps:1.For each model parameter (p, K, and K1), the equilibrium equation (15) will be written in the usual characteristic equation form:1+qN(T,q¯)D(T,q¯)=0, whereq∈{p,K,K1}is the parameter under consideration,q¯represents the rest of the parameters, and the numerator (N) and denominator (D) are polynomial functions of T andq¯.Determine the roots ofN(T,q¯)=0andD(T,q¯)=0for specific choices ofq¯. Then, draw the root locus originating from the roots ofN(T,q¯)=0and ending at the roots ofD(T,q¯)=0.To identify the boundaries of the bistability region, compute the break-in and break-away points where pair of complex conjugates roots turn into a double real root and vice versa.For the p parameter, the equilibrium equation in (13) is written in the following characteristic equation form:(16)1−p1+K1T2T(K+K1T2)=0The positive feedback in the above equation should be taken into account when drawing the root locus.The general expression for the roots of the numerator (TN(1,2)) and the roots of the denominator (TD(1,2,3)) can be obtained as follows:(17)TN(1,2)=±j1K1,TD(1)=0,andTD(2,3)=±jKK1By finding the extrema of p with respect to T from the following equation:(18)ddT(T(K+K1T2)1+K1T2)=K12T4−K1(K−3)T2+K(1+K1T2)2the break-in and break-away points are obtained in terms of K and K1 according to the following equation:(19)T(1,2,3,4)=±(K−3)±(K−9)(K−1)2K1.It should be noted that only realT(1,2,3,4)correspond to the break-in and break-away points. Hence,K>9andK1>0are obtained as necessary conditions for the existence of bistability, and these values coincide with the result of the discriminant based analysis given in [37] as well as the results obtained in the literature [6,20].Considering K=167.1 andK1=1μM−2, which are values reported in some experimental studies on E. coli[6], the root locus diagram for the p parameter is drawn in Fig. 5using Matlab numerical software. The diagram reveals that there is only one real root for small and large p values, and three real roots exist for a bounded interval of p. By computing the break-in and break-away points, the bistability interval is determined asp∈(25.7μM,84.1μMfor the considered K and K1 values.The bistability interval in Fig. 5 is derived for particular values of K and K1. The lower and upper limits, as well as the existence of the bistability interval for p depend on K and K1 values. Eq. (19) for break-in and break-away points indicates that the (positive) K1 acts only as a scaling factor, causing a quantitative, not a qualitative, change on the root locus drawn for p. To observe qualitative changes in the root locus and the bistability interval for p, it is sufficient to only consider different values for the K parameter.A gallery of root locus diagrams obtained for different K values is given in Fig. 6, where K1 remains constant at1μM−2. Fig. 6a demonstrates the scenario with only one real root for all p values, in other words, complex root loci that never cross the real axis. Herein, K is equal to 2 as an example of K values less than 9 that lack break-in and break-away points. Fig. 6b corresponds to the limit case of K=9, where the break-in and break-away points coincide, so there is a triple real root for a specific p value, but no other p value providing multiple real roots. In Fig. 6c–f, which consists of four different K values greater than 9, three real roots exist for p values in non-empty and bounded intervals. Herein, K=167.1, K=1000, and K=7200 are the values of the repression factor measured/estimated by the work in [6] for the TMG-induced lac operon, by the works in [11,39] for the IPTG-induced lac operon, and by the works in [26,40] for the IPTG-induced lac operon, respectively.The lower pland upper pulimits of the bistability intervals for the p parameter change with the K parameter, such that the bigger the K, the larger the interval. The variations of pland puvalues in relation to K can be expressed by determining the p values corresponding to the break-away and break-in points calculated in (19) using the rewritten equilibrium equation,p=T(K+K1T2)1+K1T2:(20)pl=(K−3)+(K−9)(K−1)2K1(3K−3+(K−9)(K−1)K−1+(K−9)(K−1))(21)pu=(K−3)−(K−9)(K−1)2K1(3K−3−(K−9)(K−1)K−1−(K−9)(K−1))Note that the real and positive T values used above in finding pland puare the only break-away and break-in points under the condition ofK>9andK1>0because T representing the TMG concentration can only be a positive value.The computation times needed for the root locus and root finding methods were measured in the numerical environment expressed in Subsection 3.2. The computation times needed for the root locus and the root finding were measured as 3.39sec and, respectively, 18.85sec whenv∈[0,5000]with a resolution of 0.1. When the resolution was chosen as 0.01, the computation time for the same range was obtained as 48.26sec for the root locus and as 2383.9sec for the root finding.The equilibrium equation (15) can be rewritten into the following characteristic equation form to repeat the analysis of Subsection 4.1 now for the K parameter:(22)1+KTK1T3−pK1T2−p=0The discriminant based analysis of [37], the results obtained in the literature [6,20] and the root locus with respect to the p parameter in Subsection 4.1 indicates thatK>9seems to be the only condition necessary for bistability. However, Fig. 7demonstrates that the root locus with respect to the K parameter whenK1=1μM−2andp=74.59μM, must not only be bounded below but also bounded above. The lower and upper limits are actually the break-in and break-away points, respectively.Note that in Subsection 4.5,p=74.59μMis the value ofp≜αTγTαPγPαMγMfT,Te(Te)fT,Ge(Ge)fM,Ge(Ge)as a mid-value of the bistable interval for the experiments conducted forTe=20μMin the absence of external glucose [6].Note that [6] reported K=167.1 as the repression factor for TMG that is included by the bistability interval (148,1390) determined by the root locus depicted in Fig. 7 for the parametersK1=1μM−2andp=74.59μM.The bistability conditions for the K parameter are studied in the sequel by deriving the structural features of the root locus for K, such as the break-in and break-away points in terms of p and K1. The numerator (T) has a unique root at the origin, and the roots of the denominator polynomial equation (K1T3−pK1T2−p=0) can be obtained using the Cardano formula, as demonstrated in (24)–(26):(23)TN(1)=0(24)TD(1)=p3−13K112(r1+r2)3−13K112(r1−r2)3(25)TD(2)=p3+1+i36K112(r1+r2)3+1−i36K112(r1−r2)3(26)TD(3)=p3+1−i36K112(r1+r2)3+1+i36K112(r1−r2)3where the r1 and r2 variables are defined below:(27)r1=−pK12(2p2K1+27),r2=27p2K14(4p2K1+27)The break-in and break-away points are the roots of2K1T3−pK1T2+p=0sincedKdT=0, and they can be obtained as follows:(28)dKdT=−2K1T3−pK1T2+pT2=0TheT(1,2,3)values in Eqs. (29)–(31), which are the roots of the numerator polynomial equation (2K1T3−pK1T2+p=0) of (28), are break-in and break-away points of the root locus:(29)T(1)=p6−16K112(r3+r4)3−16K112(r3−r4)3(30)T(2)=p6+1+i312K112(r3+r4)3+1−i312K112(r3−r4)3(31)T(3)=p6+1−i312K112(r3+r4)3+1+i312K112(r3−r4)3where r3 and r4 variables are defined below:(32)r3=2pK12(54−p2K1),r4=432p2K14(27−p2K1)Note that the break-in and break-away pointsT(1),T(2), andT(3), are functions of thep2K1, p and K1 parameters. To understand the highly nonlinear dependency ofT(1),T(2), andT(3)onp2K1, instead ofT(1),T(2), andT(3), it would be better to draw the real and imaginary parts of the functionsT^(1)≜6K1T(1)K1p23,T^(2)≜12K1T(2)K1p23andT^(3)≜12K1T(3)K1p23, as illustrated in Fig. 8.Fig. 8 indicates that ap2K1>27is necessary for the existence of bistability, as only real and positiveT(1),T(2), andT(3)values define break-in and break-away points.p2K1>27coincides with the condition obtained by discriminant based analysis of [37].The analytical expression of the upper and lower limits of K (Kuand Kl, respectively) were derived using a similar procedure to that of Subsection 4.1, and the values are listed in the following equations:(33)Ku=−K1(T(2))3−pK1(T(2))2−pT(2)(34)Kl=−K1(T(3))3−pK1(T(3))2−pT(3)whereT(2)andT(3)are defined in (30) and (31). Actually the upper bound in (33) is equivalent to the upper bound in (20), although their closed-form expressions are quite different and very hard to justify their equivalence by algebraic manipulations. The equivalence of the boundary surfaces defined with (33) and (20) can be shown in a numerical way. So, there is a need to apply the root locus method for each specific parameter if the bistability range of it is of particular interest. Another reason for the necessity of applying the root locus for each parameter, namely p, K, and K1 follows from that each bound of a specific parameter defining a two dimensional boundary surface in the three dimensionalp–K–K1parameter space is obtained by assuming the other two parameters as free ignoring any possible constraint over them and so there is a need to capture these constraints.Fig. 9represents a gallery of root locus diagrams for different K1 and p values obtained by Matlab yielding the existence or non-existence of the break-in and break-away points. Fig. 9a–c corresponds to the scenario of constantK1=1μM−2and three different p values (p2K1<27,p2K1=27, andp2K1>27, respectively). Fig. 9d–f corresponds to the scenario of constantp=50μM, which was chosen arbitrarily in the bistable interval for p, and three different K1 values (p2K1<27,p2K1=27, andp2K1>27, respectively). Note that Fig. 9c and f only have an interval of K, providing the bistability.This subsection provides the root locus analysis for the K1 parameter. For this purpose, the equilibrium equation in (13) is rewritten in the characteristic equation form, with respect to K1 in the following equation:(35)1+K1T3−pT2KT−p=0The numerator has a double root at T=0 and a real root at T=p. However, the denominator has only one real root atT=pK, whereas the numerator has three real roots:(36)TN(1,2)=0,TN(3)=p,TD(1)=pKThe break-in and break-away points, which are extrema of K1 as the function of T, can be calculated in terms of the K and p parameters as follows:(37)dK1dT=T(2KT2−pT(3+K)+2p2)(T3−pT2)2=0The first break-in/break-away point in (38) is equal to zero. The other two break-in/break-away points in (38) represent the roots of the second order numerator polynomial equationpT(3+K)+2p2=0:(38)T(1)=0,T(2,3)=p(3+K)±p(K−9)(K−1)4KTo have realT(2,3)which define the break-in/break-away points and the bistability interval of K1,(K−9)(K−1)must be positive. Hence,K>9is necessary for bistability. The second possibility,0<K<1, does not yield a non-empty bistability region for K1 because such K values cause negative K1 values in (39) and (40) at the break-in/break-away points. Hence, K1uand K1lrepresent the upper and lower limits of the bistability interval for the K1 parameter. K1land K1uare obtained by substitutingT(2)andT(3)in the following equation:K1=p−KTT3−pT2, as shown below(39)K1l=16K3[1−K−(K−9)(K−1)]p2[(3+K+(K−9)(K−1))2(3−3K+(K−9)(K−1))](40)K1u=16K3[1−K+(K−9)(K−1)]p2[(3+K−(K−9)(K−1))2(3−3K−(K−9)(K−1))]Choosing K=167.1 andp=74.59μM, which ensure bistability for at least for some specific K1 values (i.e.,K1=1μM−2), Matlab was used to draw the root locus diagram for K1 in Fig. 10. For these values of K and p parameters, the bistability region is determined asK1∈(0.119μM−2,1.27μM−2)from the root locus and also from (39)–(40). Note thatK1=0.0252μM−2andK1=0.031μM−2values, which are reported as repression factors for the IPTG-induced lac operon in the literature [11,26,39,41], are outside of the bistable interval obtained for K=167.1 andp=74.59μM. Moreover, K=167.1 andp=74.59μMare compatible with the observations in [6] regarding a TMG-induced lac operon, but they may not be realistic for an IPTG-induced lac operon.Fig. 11displays a gallery of root locus diagrams for K1 that were obtained using Matlab with a fixed p value and different K values, yielding the existence or non-existence of the break-in and break-away points.The bistability conditions derived using the root locus method in Subsections 4.1–4.3 were obtained for one-parameter only (i.e., forq∈{p,K,K1}). Each of these conditions defines a one-dimensional bistability interval, considering one of the parameters as free and holding the other two as fixed. The upper and lower limits of the bistability interval for a specific parameter are functions of the other two parameters. Considering the dependency of the limits of the bistability intervals associated with specific q parameters on the rest parameters (q¯) and combining all of the obtained conditions, we determined the three-dimensional bistability region inp–K–K1space and its two-dimensional intersections within certain planes by holding a parameter inq¯as fixed. After integrating all of the bistability conditions, complete bistability region was determined algebraically in the following equation:(41)Rbi≜{(p,K,K1)∈R3|pl<p<pu,K1l<K1<K1u,Kl<K<Ku,p2K1>27,p>0,K>9,K1>0}The bistability region given by (41) coincides with the region found in [37]. The geometry of the bistability region is shown in Figs. 7 and 8 in [37].Using the values for pland pufrom (20)–(21), the bistability range of the p parameter can be depicted as a function of the K and K1 parameters. For three specific values of K1 reported in the literature [6,11,26,39,41] (0.0252μM−2,0.031μM−2, and1μM−2), the corresponding bistability regions in the two dimensional parameter space ofK–pwere derived (Fig. 12). Note that the larger the K1 value, the smaller the upper limit (pu), the smaller the lower limit (pl) and the narrower the (pl,pu) interval of the p parameters.Using the upper and lower limits of K1 in (20) and (21), the bistability regions of theK–K1plane for several p values (12.36μM,74.59μM, and129.26μM) were calculated (Fig. 13). As clarified in Subsection 4.5,p=12.36μM,p=74.59μM, andp=129.26μMrepresent the value ofp≜αTγTαPγPαMγMfT,Te(Te)fT,Ge(Ge)fM,Ge(Ge)in the absence of external glucose and with external TMG concentrations ofTe=1μM,Te=20μM, andTe=50μM, respectively. Herein, whileTe=20μMis included,Te=1μMandTe=50μMare not included in the bistable interval reported in [6].Fig. 13 demonstrates that the apex of the bistability region occurs at K=9. In other words, K=9 is the lowest value of K that ensures the existence of a non-empty bistability interval for K1. Furthermore, the bistability interval for K1 grows as K increases, and the interval becomes narrower as p values increase.In the literature, the bistability region is commonly described inGe–Tespace, namely in terms of external glucose and TMG concentrations, not thepK–K1parameter space given by (41). Because the parameterp(Te,Ge)≜αTγTαPγPαMγMfT,Te(Te)fT,Ge(Ge)fM,Ge(Ge)defined in (14) is a function of Geand Te, the bistability region inGe–Tespace can be specified by determining the Teland Teulimits corresponding to the pland pubistability limits.When considering the repression factor K=167.1 and the dissociation constantK1=1μM−2of repressor-inducer complex to be the values stated in [6] for the TMG-induced lac operon, the upperpu=84.1μMandpl=25.7μMlimits of the bistability range of the p parameter is already obtained by the root locus of Fig. 5. Identifying thatp(Te,Ge)corresponds to the multiplicationα(Ge)β(Te,Ge)=α(Ge)βTe(Te)βGe(Ge)in the TMG-induced model of [6] and using the estimations ofα(Ge),βTe(Te)andβGe(Ge)by [6],p(Te,Ge)=α(Ge)βTe(Te)βGe(Ge), is obtained as(42)p(Te,Ge)=[84.41+(Ge8.1)1.2+16.1][0.00123Te0.6][100−35(100Ge)10+(100Ge)]Herein,α(Ge)is the maximal production rate of lac permease,βTe(Te)βGe(Ge)measures the TMG uptake rate per permease molecule, and the units for Teand GeareμM.Now, exploiting the invertibility ofβTe(Te)=0.00123Te0.6, Te, Teland Teulimits are derived as a function of Gein the following equations:(43)Teu=[pu/(0.00123[84.41+(Ge8.1)1.2+16.1][100−35(100Ge)10+(100Ge)])]1/0.6(44)Tel=[pl/(0.00123[84.41+(Ge8.1)1.2+16.1][100−35(100Ge)10+(100Ge)])]1/0.6Thus, using these upper and lower limits, the bistability region of the TMG model inGe–Tespace can be drawn as demonstrated in Fig. 14, which is close to the experimental results provided by Fig. 5c of [6] and the bistability range of Tegiven in [8] for the TMG-induced lac operon.It should be noted that, as opposed to the statement made by [6], the bistability region inGe–Teis not independent of the values of K1. To see this fact, we considered K=167.1 and the dissociation constant asK1=0.0252μM−2, which is the value reported for the repressor-IPTG complex in [11,39].For these parameters, the root locus for the p parameter given on the left side of Fig. 15yields the upperpu=530μMand lowerpl=162μMlimits for the bistability range of p, and then, the bistability region inGe–Tespace is obtained as illustrated on the right side of Fig. 15.Fig. 15 demonstrates that the lower K1 value dramatically shifts theGe–Tebistability region described previously, so that Tevalues ensuring the bistability for K=167.1 andK1=0.0252μM−2occur beyond100μM, which are out of the Tebistability range reported[3μM,30μM]by [6] in the absence of external glucose. Therefore, theK1=0.0252μM−2value estimated from the IPTG experiments is not a valid estimation for TMG.To obtain the bistability region inGe–Iespace for the IPTG-induced lac operon, we considered K=1000 andK1=0.031μM−2parameter values, which are estimated by [26] based on the results in [40,41] for the IPTG-induced lac operon. Herein, Iestands for external IPTG concentration. For K=1000 andK1=0.031μM−2, the root locus for the p parameter, which is given on the left of Fig. 16, provides the bistability limits aspu=2840μMandpl=359μM.ConsideringfT,Ge(Ge)=[0.8441+(Ge8.1)1.2+0.161]andfM,Ge(Ge)=[1−0.35(100Ge)10+(100Ge)]as the estimates provided in [6] for the inducer exclusion and catabolite repression, respectively, and using the valuesαT=2220min−1,γT=0.0308min−1,αP=2.25min−1,γP=0.0308min−1,αM=0.0498μMmin−1,γM=0.4408min−1andKIe=870μMestimated by [26], the dependence of thep(Ie,Ge)parameter on external IPTG and external glucose may be calculated as follows:p(Ie,Ge)=αTγTαPγPαMγMfI,Ie(Ie)fI,Ge(Ge)fM,Ge(Ge)=(594869.65)Ie870+Ie×[0.8441+(Ge8.1)1.2+0.161]×[1−0.35(100Ge)10+(100Ge)]Then, using the limitspu=2840μMandpl=359μM, theGe–Iebistability region is obtained as shown on the right of Fig. 16.It should be noted that, for K=1000 andK1=0.031μM−2parameter values, theGe–Iebistability region obtained by the root locus is compatible with the experimental result reported as [1.5μM,2.5μM] by [8] for the bistability range of the external IPTG concentration in the absence of glucose.If the above analysis is repeated for K=7200 andK1=0.0252μM−2parameter values, which are the values reported in [11,39], and the parametersαT=2880min−1,γT=0.0226min−1,αP=10min−1,γP=0.6726min−1,αM=0.997μMmin−1,γM=0.4336min−1andKIe=260μM, which are estimated by [11], the bistability limits for p is obtained aspu=22700μMandpl=1070μMusing the root locus on the left of Fig. 17. Then, using these limits, theGe–Iebistability region is obtained as shown on the right of Fig. 17. Herein, the dependence of thep(Ie,Ge)parameter on external IPTG and external glucose is estimated by the parameters in [11] as follows:p(Ie,Ge)=αTγTαPγPαMγMfI,Ie(Ie)fI,Ge(Ge)fM,Ge(Ge)=(4356453.37)Ie260+Ie×[0.8441+(Ge8.1)1.2+0.161]×[1−0.35(100Ge)10+(100Ge)]TheGe–Iebistability region in Fig. 17 obtained using the parameters provided in [11] may also be compatible with the experimental result reported as [1.5μM,2.5μM] by [8], for the bistability range of the external IPTG concentration Iewhen Ge=0. However, it should be noted that although the upper limit of Iein the bistability interval given in Fig. 17 for Ge=0 is close to the value of2.5μM, the lower limit of Ieis approximately 15 times lower than the value of1.5μMreported by [8].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we used the root locus method to derive the ranges of the model parameters providing bistable behavior for minimal TMG- and IPTG- induced lac operon models in a detailed and systematic way. The theoretical results obtained for the ranges of external glucose and external inducers, which ensure the bistability of the lac operon for both of TMG and IPTG are compatible with the experimental observations reported in the literature.To derive the bistability parameter regions, we employed the root locus method to determine the number and positions of the real roots of the equilibrium equation of the considered ordinary differential equation model in a successive way, such that one model parameter is taken into consideration at each step, while the remaining parameters remain fixed. The root locus method not only provides an efficient numerical tool for multiple equilibrium analysis, but it also specifies the bistability region boundaries, namely the bifurcation points, in an analytical manner based on the parametric expression of break-in and break-away points.In contrast to existing methods that enable analytical derivation to determine bistability parameter regions, the root locus method is applicable to state equations with rational right hand sides that yield polynomial equilibrium equations without any dimensional restriction.The determined bistability ranges for the lac operon model parameters might aid our understanding of variations in the appearance of the bistable behavior of the biological lac operon, which presents differently from one species to another and even from one experiment to another. By checking whether the experimentally measured parameter values fall in the determined bistability regions, it may be possible to achieve the validation of the lac operon models developed in the literature.The determined bistability ranges may allow us to determine feedback and/or optimal control methods to regulate the behavior of lac operon, while optimizing performance measures.The developed root locus method is especially useful for understanding the effect of a specific parameter on the bistability behavior of the lac operon without assuming any nominal value for this parameter, so it provides a solution to the issue of parameter uncertainty, which is the norm, rather than the exception, in gene regulatory networks.The root locus based parametric equilibrium analysis used for bistability analysis of lac operon models in this paper is applicable to any multi-dimensional multi-parameter system model defined by state equations whose right hand side is rational in terms of state variables. Metabolic and gene regulatory networks represent examples of these types of systems when Hill and Michaelis–Menten approaches are employed for the derivation of system models based on enzyme kinetics. To implement the classical single-parameter root locus for a multi-dimensional multi-parameter model describing the dynamics among a set of molecular concentrations, one needs first to recast the equilibrium equations in terms of a number of state variables into a single equilibrium equation of a single state variable by eliminating all state variables other than the one of particular interest. What would be done for a model with a large number of parameters such as models of cell fate decision processes with more than 50 parameters [42] is (i) to reduce the number of parameters as much as possible by combining the ones having an effect on the positions of the roots as if a single parameter such as p parameter of the paper, (ii) to consider the model constants only which are the input (control) parameters or the ones with large uncertainties as the parameter, (iii) to apply the root locus for a specific parameter after holding all parameters fixed other than the specific one, and then (iv) repeat this procedure for all possible values of the fixed parameters and also for each other parameter whenever necessary, so combine the results.The described root locus-based bistability analysis may be applied to study of the effect of a specific mechanism not included by the considered minimal lac operon model, and it could also be used study the bistable behavior of the lac operon under natural conditions.Taking into account possible connections between the loci of the equilibrium points and behavioral characteristics, we expect that the root locus method is appropriate for potential applications in designing synthetic biological switches and for bifurcation analysis of multi-dimensional and multi-parameter biological models with respect to some control parameters.None declared.