@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
BioBankWarden: A web-based system to support translational cancer research by managing clinical and biomaterial data

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A web-based computer system—BioBankWarden—is proposed and deployed.The system allows researchers to integrate and analyze clinical and biomolecular data.BiobankWarden concerns the control of patient records and biomaterial storage.BiobankWarden allows the control of disease research groups and research projects.The system allows integrated studies under translational research.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Translational medicine,Biological databases,Oncogenomics,Biomaterial management,Clinical data management,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundResearchers of translational medicine face numerous challenges in attempting to bring research results to the bedside. This field of research covers a wide range of resources, including blood and tissue samples, which are processed for isolation of RNA and DNA to study cancer omics data (genomics, proteomics and metabolomics). Clinical information about patients׳ habits, family history, physical examinations, remissions, etc., is also important to underpin studies aimed at identifying patterns that lead to the development of cancer and to its successful treatment.PurposeDevelopment of a web-based computer system—BioBankWarden—to manage, consolidate and integrate these diversified data, enabling cancer research groups to retrieve and analyze clinical and biomolecular data within an integrative environment. The system has a three-tier architecture comprising database, logic and user-interface layers.ResultsThe system׳s integrated database and user-friendly interface allow for the control of patient records, biomaterial storage, research groups, research projects, users and biomaterial exchange.ConclusionsBioBankWarden can be used to store and retrieve specific information from different clinical fields linked to biomaterials collected from patients, providing the functionalities required to support translational research in the field of cancer.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Human genome mapping and the emergence of new sequencing techniques have motivated cancer researchers to focus a great deal of attention on understanding the mechanisms that contribute to the development of oncology diseases. This includes translational medicine, which combines basic, social and political sciences to optimize patient care and preventive practices and to identify behavioral and environmental factors that can trigger mutations in the human genetic code, which can give rise to a variety of tumors [1]. Translational medicine involves the application of scientific research results, particularly those of omics techniques, to improve health and treatment processes [2], aiming to bridge the gap between research and clinical practice.Scientists usually investigate abnormal levels of gene expression that could be related to specific cancer diseases in order to identify the gene responsible for the disorder. This requires the collection of tissue and blood samples from patients to isolate DNA, RNA and proteins, which can reveal genetic mutations. A concomitant analysis of patients׳ personal and clinical data, such as family history, smoking and drinking habits, race, medical history, etc., can also be performed to identify cancer-related factors. Finally, the data obtained from these different sources can be analyzed jointly to determine which environmental or behavioral factors play meaningful roles in cancer genesis.The purpose of this study was to develop a web-based computer system—called BioBankWarden (BBW)—which enables researchers to store, retrieve and integrate biomolecular and clinical data on biomaterials collected from patients, as recommended by Brisk research-oriented storage kit [3]. BBW supports the management of biomaterial data, such as requisitions and submissions of aliquots, to help researchers to determine the requirements for their studies. Another important point is to manage user permissions to access data from specific research groups, avoiding ethical issues. To facilitate the control and access of patient data from different clinical areas, BBW provides different data sets for each clinical area, according to the user׳s needs.The Bank of Central Nervous System Tumors, which emerged as a subproject of the Clinical Genome Project, an initiative of the Department of Neurosurgery of Ribeirão Preto Medical School (RPMS) – University of São Paulo (USP) – Brazil, initially contained samples of only one type of nervous system tumor. This initial collection of biological material was later expanded to encompass all the tumors of the central nervous system, as well as other diseases treated by the neurosurgical team of the Teaching Hospital of RPMS, i.e., urology, gastric surgery, proctology and gynecology. The Biobank Nucleus for Research Support, which was created in 2011 through a collaboration of several researchers at the Translational Laboratory, also contains a large number of samples. In 2012, CISBi (Center for Integrative Systems Biology) was created to provide computational tools for the analysis, integration and interpretation of biological data and to encourage the formulation of new concepts involving relevant biological issues, such as dynamic systems theories, analysis of molecular noise, and statistics applied to genetic networks. The development of the BBW system is the result of the Biobank and CISBi merger. BBW will support the storage, management and integration of data from all the projects related to these initiatives. The researchers who participate in the projects contribute by detailing the system requirements and evaluating the prototypes.Several computational platforms have been designed to store and query biomolecular and clinical data. Some examples are: Slim-Prim (Scientific Laboratory Information Management – Patient-care Research Information Management) [4]; STRIDE (Stanford Translational Research Integrated Database Environment) [5]; and I2B2 (Informatics for Integrating Biology and the Bedside) [6].Miyoshi et al. [7] implemented the IPTrans (Integrative Platform for Translational Research), a framework for integrating biomolecular and clinical data based on the use of a common reference ontology. The clinical database of this platform is based on the Entity-Attribute-Value data structure. However, this platform does not provide tools for controlling the storage and distribution of biomaterial samples or for discriminating specific clinical data according to different clinical areas (digestive tract, female reproductive tract, etc.) or for arranging data and users according to research groups and projects.IPTrans framework supports the integration of heterogeneous data sources containing personal, demographic and clinical information about patients. It has also a database to store results of biomolecular procedures, such as levels of genes expression, performed on the same patients׳ genetic material. In addition, an analytical module is under development, which will enable the user to perform analyses by merging clinical data and biomolecular results. As part of this environment, BBW will be a clinical data source of IPTrans. The results of biomolecular procedures performed on BBW biomaterials will be stored in the biomolecular database of IPTrans and then the analytical module will be able to perform the clinical/omics integrative analysis.Thus, the main benefit we expect from BBW is that it can act as a clinical data source for a broader environment, namely the IPTrans, thereby promoting the desired linking with biomolecular data, thus enabling the user to accomplish integrative analyses. Other major contribution of the system׳s implementation is its capability to tightly control storage and usage of biological materials. Furthermore, BBW enables the management of information about patients and biomaterials by assigning them to research projects and/or groups and also defining a user hierarchy of access in such a way to guarantee security and privacy of sensitive data.Elliot and Peakman [8] describe the UK Biobank system as a large database composed of biological samples collected from 500,000 patients between 2007 and 2010. The clinical data, which comprise physical and cognitive measurements, were collected by means of questionnaires, and the biological samples consist of urine and blood. All the samples are stored and managed by a proprietary LIMS (Laboratory Information Management System).In Norway, Ronning et al. [9] created a biobank with 380,000 biological samples comprising mainly whole blood, plasma, DNA and urine from pregnant women, their partners and their children. The LIMS manages de-identification, location of the aliquots in freezers, and quality control of the entire process.Roden et al. [10] developed a DNA biobank linked to clinical information from a de-identified electronic medical record (EMR) system. This biobank receives a constant supply of new DNA samples, at a rate of 700–900 samples per week. De-identification and sampling algorithms were developed and integrated into the biobank information system.In Taiwan [11], a biobank was created to collect DNA from a large group of people, aiming to track their health and lifestyle for at least 10 years. The participants will be volunteers recruited throughout the country, in the 30-year age range and of both sexes. The main goal is to track biological data on common chronic diseases such as high blood pressure, diabetes and cancer.Although other research groups have implemented biobank systems, most of these systems focus on specific diseases or conditions, e.g., the Norway Biobank, which focuses on obtaining biological material from pregnant women. Other systems focus on a specific type of biomaterial such as DNA. Another limitation of these biobanks is the fixed size of samples, such as the UK Biobank, which does not accept new biomaterials over time. In addition, patients׳ clinical and demographic information in these biobanks established a priori, and therefore does not allow for the addition of new clinical information.Unlike the above cited systems, the computational framework and functionalities of BBW, which are described below, appear to be more generic, robust and flexible than the existing solutions. Another relevant feature of BBW that differentiates it from other proposals is its capability to support the management of users, research groups and projects. In contrast to other systems, BBW allows for the creation and association of different projects involving different groups of users, and has a requisition module to manage the output of material based on roles and permissions for exchanges among collaborative groups.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Our goal in this study was to deploy a system that enables members of cancer genome research groups to manage, store and merge their clinical, biomolecular and biomaterial data. This system allows for the storage and retrieval of clinical information about the patients whose biomaterial samples are stored in it. BBW possesses several functionalities to allow for management of these biomaterial samples.With regard to patient clinical data, BBW stores personal and sociodemographic information, as well as information on personal exams, images, follow-ups, etc., related to specific clinical fields of patient treatment and research.The system is already deployed to perform usability tests with a group of users of CISBi and Biobank Nucleus, providing them with data that will be analyzed to determine whether or not the system meets their requirements.A data analysis system is being implemented to allow users to analyze biomaterial data using specific samples and clinical data of patients from whom biomaterials were extracted.As future work, we plan to develop a new module called Semantic Annotation Module. This module will allow users to annotate the biomaterials and projects stored in the BBW, using concepts from biomedical ontologies, coding systems and terminologies. Currently, we have already implemented ICD-10 to annotate diagnosis. Other ontologies and terminologies that can be used in BBW are Gene Ontology (GO) to represent biological processes and gene functions studies, and Logical Observation Identifier Names and Codes (LOINC) to represent drugs in general. This semantic annotation is an important feature to improve the identification of relevant biomaterials that can be used in new research projects, leading to better standardization and interoperability.BBW enables research groups and projects to manage, make available, share and merge material and information in a practical and user-friendly way, improving the quality of specific genetic research. In this sense we intend to give a contribution to translational research.None declared.