@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Octree-based, automatic building façade generation from LiDAR data

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Introducing a new automatic method to detect boundary points of façade features.Boundary points were extracted based on a local score of data points.The algorithm automatically detected all openings and filled non-openings.This was achieved without any supplemental datasets or user knowledge.Building models were generally more accurate and faster than previous works.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR),Terrestrial laser scanning,Masonry buildings,Geometric modelling,Computational modelling,Finite element modelling,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper introduces a new, octree-based algorithm to assist in the automated conversion of laser scanning point cloud data into solid models appropriate for computational analysis. The focus of the work is for typical, urban, vernacular structures to assist in better damage prediction prior to tunnelling. The proposed FaçadeVoxel algorithm automatically detects boundaries of building façades and their openings. Next, it checks and automatically fills unintentional occlusions. The proposed method produced robust and efficient reconstructions of building models from various data densities. When compared to measured drawings, the reconstructed building models were in good agreement, with only 1% relative errors in overall dimensions and 3% errors in openings. In addition, the proposed algorithm was significantly faster than other automatic approaches without compromising accuracy.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Laser scanning, also known as Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR), rapidly and accurately acquires topography of object surfaces and generates a set of data known as a point cloud. Laser scanning is gaining popularity in reverse engineering [1–3] and visualization  [4,5], yet exploiting the data for structural analysis remains a topic for development [6,7]. Developing automatic, robust, and efficient methods to reconstruct geometric building models for computational modelling has the potential to save money and time for projects needing city-scale modelling.Computational models are especially important in structural engineering, when assessing the status of existing buildings or any risks related to adjacent construction works. For tunnelling projects this can be highly problematic, because the measured drawings used as the basis for the solid models needed for Finite Element Modelling (FEM) are rarely available for the vast majority of structures that comprise the architectural fabric of many historic cities. Overcoming this data gap has traditionally required the manual surveying of each structure. Along a single tunnel route, this may include hundreds of structures for each kilometre of tunnelling, thereby making the financial and temporal requirements of such surveying cost-prohibitive. For example, a study of the area along the first kilometre of the upcoming Dublin Metro which included 449 buildings potentially at risk [8]; mostly small (2–4 storey), slender, load-bearing, rectangular masonry buildings with regular features and little, if any, ornamentation  [9]. Of the 449 buildings, measured drawings of some type (not necessarily complete) were available for only 27.6% of the buildings. These types of buildings are extremely vulnerable to tunnel-induced subsidence damage. During Dublin’s last tunnelling project, 1 in 8 buildings along the route were damaged at the cost of nearly € 5 million [10]. As such, the aims of this paper are to introduce an efficient and reliable approach for reconstructing the accurate geometry from LiDAR data of the load-bearing masonry buildings in a form that is compatible with FEM analysis. The proposed method can automatically eliminate unrealistic holes due to incomplete data or occlusions. The derived building models were benchmarked against a selection of other currently available solutions.Reconstruction often involves two main steps: segmentation and feature reconstruction. Segmentation extracts point clouds on planar features or of the façade objects in order to remove irrelevant points. The remaining portion of the point cloud is then used to reconstruct building models. In this paper, the segmentation step was conducted by employing software associated with the LiDAR scanner, whereas the building reconstruction with the necessary feature detection is the focus of the contribution herein.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The FaçadeVoxel algorithm is proposed as a rapid and robust, fully-automated approach to detect boundary points of façade features for many urban structures that otherwise lack existing geometric documentation. This is done by examining only sample points in the vicinity of detected boundary features. Sample points within full voxels around a boundary feature are extracted and examined based on a local score. Subsequently, these boundary points are used to generate fitting boundary lines, and all voxels belonging to a solid portion of the wall are determined. Afterwards, the complete solid model of the building was stored in a neutral file as input for a commercial computational modelling programme. The algorithm consistently detected all openings for three sample buildings and also succeeded in automatically filling non-openings, even at data densities as low as 175 pts/m2. This was achieved without any supplemental datasets, user knowledge, or manual intervention. Furthermore, the resulting solid models were fully compatible with a common, commercial FEM package. When compared to two previous research-based approaches and a commercial program, building models based on the FV method were generally more accurate, and up to 25 times faster for datasets of up to 650.3k points.Like the three comparative approaches, the FV algorithm is currently limited to relatively simple 2D morphologies. A full 3D model can be obtained theoretically by segmentation and subsequent reassembly of individual exterior walls. Future work is planned in this direction. Additionally, further work is needed to address non-rectangular window openings.