@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A novel fuzzy logic-based image steganography method to ensure medical data security

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Secure multiple medical signals by combining them into one file format.Propose a new steganography method in literature.Secure patients׳ personal data by encryption and compression algorithms.Increase data repository and transmission capacity of multiple medical signals.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Medical image steganography,Medical data security,Fuzzy logic algorithm,Similarity based algorithm,Least significant bit,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstractfx1

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
These days, a recent cybercrime is the capture of medical data. If medical data is captured or altered, it may cause a violation of patient׳s rights and changes in medical treatment. Hence, all patient records, especially medical images, must be kept confidential [1,2].An electronic health record (EHR) is a systematic collection of electronic health information about a patient or population [3]. It may include clinical examinations, patient demographics, diagnosis annotations, prescriptions, medications, past medical history, histological and other findings, vital signs, immunizations, laboratory data, and radiology reports [4]. It is gathered for patient care, clinical research, epidemiological studies, or insurance companies. It is shared by means of information systems and local or wide networks.The process of medical image information accounts for at least 90% of all the medical information in a hospital system [5]. Medical images (X-ray, CT (computed tomography), MR (magnetic resonance) imaging, ultrasound, etc…) are handled, stored, printed, and transmitted using the Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine (DICOM) standard. DICOM enables the integration between different devices, software, and platforms into a picture archiving and communication system (PACS). The DICOM format specifies a header that contains the metadata of the image (image size, data type, representation, etc…) and patient information, exam, modality, acquisition parameters, physician, and health center. The DICOM metadata is stored in the DICOM header [6,7]. Hence, patient information in DICOM file must be secured within the network to prevent tampering, illegal copying, and patient privacy leaks, and to ensure copyright protection, and other information security issues [8].Medical information (MI) security protects the rights of patients and ensures the responsibilities of the health professionals. Health information systems must possess three mandatory characteristics: confidentiality, reliability, and availability [9]. Security tools such as firewalls, virtual private networks (VPNs), and cryptography techniques (symmetric, asymmetric, or hashing encryption) are used to secure medical data. However, firewalls are easily bypassed by hackers. Encryption does not guarantee the confidentiality or secrecy of data; moreover, it increases computational costs. In addition, the file headers of medical data can be captured in the plaintext format [1,9]. Alternatively, steganography techniques can be used to increase the security of medical data.Steganography is the science that embeds a secret message in an appropriate multimedia cover, for example graphic, audio, and video files. The ultimate objectives of steganography are imperceptibility, robustness, capacity of the hidden message, and resistance to tampering [10]. Many methods concerning steganography methods are proposed to ensure medical data security in literature [1,9,11,12]. These methods, based on the processing domain, can be categorized as: (1) spatial domain and (2) transform domain. Spatial domain techniques (least significant bit (LSB) embedding, spread technique, fixed quantization, histogram methods, etc…) are simple and operate more rapidly, but they are vulnerable to compression, geometric distortion, and filtering. Techniques of transform domain (discrete wavelet transform, discrete cosine transform, discrete Fourier transform) are compatible compression, robust against many geometric distortions (e.g. rotation, scaling, translation, cropping, and filtering). However, they have high computational time and complexity. LSB embedding techniques offer comparatively higher embedding capacity. In either case, properties of the human visual system are exploited to control the quality of the image [1]. Hence, this study proposes two new steganography algorithms to modify the LSB technique.In the literature, many approaches were proposed to secure the patients׳ medical image information with different modalities (MR, CT, X-ray, etc…), or in biological signals (EEG, ECG, EMG, etc…) [1,9,11–15]. In particular, some studies examined a similar subject as our study [16–22]. These studies used medical images as a cover to hide patients’ information (patient name, age, date of birth, weight, gender, address, etc…). Furthermore, embedded messages are composed of both patients׳ information and biological signals such as EEG, ECG, or EMG. These studies worked on limited images and biological signals, so that the capacity of hidden message was low.This study aims to: (i) secure multiple medical signals by combining them into one file format; (ii) propose a new steganography method in literature; (iii) secure patients׳ personal data by encryption and compression algorithms; and (iv) increase data repository and transmission capacity of multiple medical signals. In this study, the EEG and MR images of 22 epilepsy patients were tested by the proposed steganography methods.The remainder of the study is organized as follows. Section 2 describes materials and methods; the proposed methods are also presented in Section 3. The obtained results of proposed methods and discussion are given in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 includes the conclusion and future studies.This study aims to use EEG signals and MR images that are obtained from same patients and to embed more data with EEG into MR images of same patient. For this reason, the MR images and EEG of 22 epilepsy patients are collected from the Department of Neurology at Gazi University. Eleven females and 11 males were included (age: 18–55 years; mean age: 32±7.9 years). The details of the medical dataset and capacity of the used data are presented inTable 1. Different sized 3762 MR images of 22 epilepsy patients with 16bits were used as cover images. The embedded message was combined with the patient׳s information, doctor׳s comments, and EEG file header information and segmented EEG data. The patient׳s information (patient name, patient ID, patient birth date, patient gender, patient age, patient weight, patient address, study date, study time, study ID, study modality, study description, series date, series time, and series description) were separately selected from the meta-header of each of the DICOM files. An EEG was also recorded from 21 multiple electrodes that are placed on the scalp using an International 10–20 system. EEG records take about 20–40min for the diagnosis or treatment. EEG file headers have information on record such as time points, number of electrodes, sampling interval, starting time, and name of electrodes. In Table 1, EEG data is stored using short data structure as 4 byte (The Capacity of EEG Data=The Number of Electrodes*Time Points of EEG*4). Furthermore, Visual Studio.NET 2010 platform and MATLAB were used to code the methods and analysis.Least Significant Bit (LSB) embedding is a simple and fast strategy in steganography. It has high imperceptibility and embedding capability. Hence, this study proposes two new methods to modify LSB embedding using medical data. The analyses consist of two stages: embedding and extracting, respectively.The embedding stage is shown inFig. 1. Initially, the patient׳s information is obtained from DICOM series of epilepsy patient. The EEG data is segmented according to the size of these DICOM images. The information of the EEG file header and size of segmented EEG data are also integrated as embedding EEG data for each DICOM image.In the message preprocessing stage as shown in Fig. 1, lossless compression methods, which are LZW (Lempel–Ziv–Welch) and Huffman Compression, are used to increase message capacity. Furthermore, LZW and Huffman Compression methods also ensure the complexity of the message. The detail of Huffman and LZW can be found in [23–25], respectively. To increase security, the compression message is encrypted by the Rijndael symmetric encryption algorithm using a 128-bit key. Secondly, the proposed methods, which are similarity-based LSB(SM-LSB) and fuzzy-logic-based LSB (FL-LSB), select non-sequential LSBs of image pixels with using the differences in gray levels of the pixels. Finally, the selected LSBs of the pixels are altered with the message bits in stego images. These processes are simultaneously run with all DICOM series to decrease computational time.The extracting message stage requires stego-DICOM images and a stego-key, which is the authentication key for decryption, as shownFig. 2. Firstly, the proposed methods give the pixels coordinates, which have an embedded message. These pixels are used to gather the message. Secondly, the obtained message is decrypted and decompressed. Finally, the patient׳s information, segmented EEG, and the doctor׳s comments are displayed in a GUI (Graphical User Interface) screen. All hidden EEG data can be also gathered from the DICOM series. The comparison results of the proposed algorithms are evaluated by correlation coefficient (R), PSNR (peak signal-to-noise ratio), MSE (mean square of error), SSIM (structural similarity measure), UQI (universal quality index) between the cover and the stego-DICOM series.Two methods are proposed for medical image steganography, namely, the similarity-based LSB (SM-LSB) and fuzzy logic-based LSB (FL-LSB).An image is sampled by pixels. In the gray-scale image, pixels have gray level intensities. In color images, pixels are also represented by three component intensities, being red (R), green (G), and blue (B) [26]. A similarity measure is the similarity degree between two groups or between two objects. In image processing, the similarity measure of two pixels is used with distance information in Euclidean color space [27,28]. Demirci [27] proposed a similarity-based method for edge detection. Furthermore, pixel-value differencing (PVD) or adjacent pixel difference (APD) methods determine embedding pixels in histogram-based steganography [29,30]. These methods have high embedding capacity and PSNR values [29,30]. Karakis et al. [31] used similarity to embed patient׳s information and EEG into medical images. However, the capacity of message was too low, and it does not show the capacities of proposed method. For this reason, this study proposes a new similarity-based LSB (SM-LSB) method using the adjacent pixel value differencing in an image as shown inFig. 3.The main idea of this method is to generate a new image whose pixels have double values at the interval [0 1]. This similar image of cover image is used to determine pixels for the embedding message. In this method, if the values of similar pixels are higher than the determined threshold (Th) by trial and error, they are selected to hide the message. The neighboring pixels of the image (P1, P2, …, P9) using the 3×3 window have three color component (R, G, B) as shown inFig. 4[27,28,31]. These pixels are defined asP1(R1,G1,B1).In the first stage, the similarity method calculates the pixel differences using color distance. The gray level differences of each color component between pixels P1 and P2 can be defined with Eq. (1).(1)ΔR=|P1(R1)−P2(R2)|ΔG=|P1(G1)−P2(G2)|ΔB=|P1(B1)−P2(B2)|Where R is red, G is green, and B is blue in pixel in Eq. (1). The color distance between any two pixels in the color space is calculated with respect to the gray level differences by the Euclidean norm, following Eq. (2).(2)di,j=13(ΔR2+ΔG2+ΔB2)In the second stage, the similarity of two pixels is measured using Eqs. (2) and (3). Similarity can be expressed in terms of an exponential or Gaussian function of distance [27,28]. In this study, color similarity is calculated with Eq. (3).(3)Ck(xi,xj)=exp(−dijqDn)Where Dnis the normalization coefficient, and it is examined by trial and error in Eq. (3). The value of Dnis determined as 128.In third step, local similarity values are calculated using a 3×3 window, as shown inFig. 5. The local smoothness of kth pixel can be estimated with Eq. (4). It is also provided to decrease noise. Fig. 5 also shows the calculation similarity values for the P1 pixel with dashed lines.(4)Sk=18∑n=19Ck,nfork≠nIn fourth stage, the similarity values of all image pixels are used to generate a similar image whose pixels have double values at the interval [0, 1]. The coordinates of the pixels in the similar image are held in a new matrix to hide the message, if the similarity values of the cover image are higher than the threshold (Th=0.5). These coordinates give pixels location in the byte array of image. Finally, the message is embedded in a stego-image via these obtained coordinates.In the extraction stage of the message in SM-LSB, the stego image and the same threshold (Th) was used. The gray level differences of color components are calculated the neighboring pixels of the stego image by Eq. (1). The color distance of pixels are calculated by the Euclidean norm in Eq. (2). The similarity values of pixels are found by using Eqs. (3) and (4). Similarly, the coordinates of the pixels are determined between the similarity values of pixels and threshold values. The hidden message is extracted using the coordinates of the stego image׳s pixels.In image processing, the Euclidean color space is generally used to measure the distances of the pixels. However, some studies show that perceptual color proximity cannot be measured using Euclidean distance. In the literature, rule based approaches were proposed to overcome this problem. These approaches were also used for color image segmentation and filtering [27,28,32–34]. Karakis et al. [35] proposed a rule-based steganography method in BMP images. For this reason, this study proposes a new fuzzy logic-based LSB (FL-LSB) algorithm to determine pixels to embed the message into medical images and to increase the capacity of the embedding message as shown inFig. 6.In first stage, gray level differences of the neighbor pixels using a 3×3 window are used as inputs of FL-LSB algorithm. These differences of each color component between P1and P2are calculated using Eq. (1). Gray level differences (ΔR,ΔG, andΔB) of pixels are defined with three linguistic values as Zero: ZE, Medium: MD, and Large: LR [35].In the second stage, the FL-LSB algorithm calculates membership values of the gray level difference of each color component for the neighbor pixels. Five triangular fuzzy sets are used to fuzzify the gray level difference as shown inFig. 7. Their linguistic values are defined as: Not Similar: NS, Slightly Similar: SS, Moderately Similar: MS, Quite Similar: QS, and Exactly Similar: ES. Fig. 7 also shows the membership values (µ) with respect to similarities (S). Red, blue, and green components of gray levels in neighbor pixels are separately designed in Fig. 7. Cetin et al. [28] proposed a fuzzy-based filter and gray level differences were fuzzified by seven fuzzy sets and their linguistic values. However, this study uses five fuzzy sets to decrease computational time. Similarly, three fuzzy sets are not used due to obtaining different similar values [35].In the third stage, the fuzzified gray level differences of each color component are combined according to the fuzzy rules as shown inTable 2. The fuzzy rules are defined as follows:Rule1: IfΔRis Zero andΔGis Zero andΔBis Zero, Then P1 and P2 are Exactly Similar,Rule2: IfΔRis Large andΔGis Large andΔBis Large, Then P1 and P2 are Not Similar,Rule3: IfΔRis Large andΔGis Zero andΔBis Medium, Then P1 and P2 are Moderately Similar, and so on.In the fourth stage, the similar percentage of neighbor pixels values is obtained by using the center-average defuzzification and product, presented in Eq. (5)[28].(5)S=∑j=1ZSjμpremj(L)∑j=1Zμpremj(L)Where Sjdenotes the center of similarity percent in the jth rule, and Z also denotes the number of the rules.μpremj(L)is calculated in Eq. (6)[28].(6)μpremj(L)=μRj(ΔR)μGj(ΔG)μBj(ΔB)In the fifth stage, the similarity values of image are obtained using a 3×3 window using Eq. (4). The similarity values generate a new image whose pixels have double values at the interval [0, 1]. Finally, the mean similarity values of the 3×3 window are selected as the LSB pixels to embed the message. The FL-LSB method is modified as LSB method using similarity values of pixels according to the differences of gray levels. Hence, non-sequential LSBs of pixels are directly replaced to embed the message.In the extraction stage of the message in FL-LSB, the stego image was used. Firstly, the gray level differences of the neighbor pixels using a 3×3 window are calculated by Eq. (1). Secondly, the gray level differences were fuzzified by five fuzzy sets and their linguistic values. The fuzzified gray level differences of each color component are combined according to the fuzzy rules. Finally, the similar percentage of neighbor pixels values is defuzzified by Eq. (5). The mean similarity values of the 3×3 window are selected as the LSB pixels to extract the message. The message is at last separated as patient׳s information, doctors׳ comment and EEG data.In this study, the performance of the proposed methods was evaluated between the cover and stego DICOM series by five different comparison methods. These include: MSE (mean square of error), PSNR (peak signal-to-noise ratio), SSIM (structural similarity measure), UQI (universal quality index), and correlation coefficient (R), which are given as following in Eqs. (7)–(11), respectively.(7)MSE=1MN∑i=0M−1∑j=0N−1(f(xi,yj)−g(xi,yj))2Where M and N are the dimensions of the images; f(x, y) and g(x, y) are the cover and the stego images [35]. The peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) calculates the noise effect of the embedding message between cover and stego images [35].(8)PSNR=10log(255X255MSE)MSE and PSNR are inconsistent with the human visual system (HVS). UQI evaluates the loss of correlation, luminance distortion, and contrast distortion. SSIM considers image degradation as perceived change in structural information. Hence, the performances of UQI and SSIM are better than the MSE and PSNR.(9)SSIM(x,y)=(2μxμy+c1)(2σxy+c2)(μx2+μy2+c1)(σx2+σy2+c2)(10)UQI(x,y)=(4μxμy2σxy)(μx2+μy2)(σx2+σy2)μxis the average of X,μyis the average of Y,σx2is the variance of X,σy2is the variance of Y,σxyis the covariance of X and Y. In Eq. (9), c1 (c1=(k1L)2) and c2 (c2=(k2L)2) are two variables to stabilize the division with a weak denominator. L is also the dynamic range of the pixel-values. k1 and k2 have default values as 0.01 and 0.03, respectively [36].The correlation coefficient (R) compares two images for image registration in image processing. It is described in Eq. (11)[37].(11)R=∑M∑N(fMN−f¯)−(gMN−g¯)(∑M∑N(fMN−f¯)2)(∑M∑N(gMN−g¯)2)f¯is mean of pixels in cover image, andg¯is also mean of pixels in stego images in Eq. (11).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
