@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Automatic segmentation of maxillofacial cysts in cone beam CT images

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Accurate segmentation of cysts and tumors is important step in computer assisted surgery.Manual segmentation performed by radiologists is tedious and time consuming.Normal head and face structure is roughly symmetric with respect to midsagittal plane.An automatic method based on asymmetry analysis is proposed which is general enough to segment various types of jaw cysts.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Asymmetry,Jaw cyst,Computer-aided diagnosis,Cone Beam Computed Tomography,Registration,Segmentation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Accurate segmentation of cysts and tumors is an essential step for diagnosis, monitoring and planning therapeutic intervention. This task is usually done manually, however manual identification and segmentation is tedious. In this paper, an automatic method based on asymmetry analysis is proposed which is general enough to segment various types of jaw cysts.The key observation underlying this approach is that normal head and face structure is roughly symmetric with respect to midsagittal plane: the left part and the right part can be divided equally by an axis of symmetry. Cysts and tumors typically disturb this symmetry. The proposed approach consists of three main steps as follows: At first, diffusion filtering is used for preprocessing and symmetric axis is detected. Then, each image is divided into two parts. In the second stage, free form deformation (FFD) is used to correct slight displacement of corresponding pixels of the left part and a reflected copy of the right part. In the final stage, intensity differences are analyzed and a number of constraints are enforced to remove false positive regions.The proposed method has been validated on 97 Cone Beam Computed Tomography (CBCT) sets containing various jaw cysts which were collected from various image acquisition centers. Validation is performed using three similarity indicators (Jaccard index, Dice's coefficient and Hausdorff distance). The mean Dice's coefficient of 0.83, 0.87 and 0.80 is achieved for Radicular, Dentigerous and KCOT classes, respectively. For most of the experiments done, we achieved high true positive (TP). This means that a large number of cyst pixels are correctly classified. Quantitative results of automatic segmentation show that the proposed method is more effective than one of the recent methods in the literature.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The accurate segmentation of lesions and tumors is an important step in computer-aided diagnosis systems. This step is usually performed manually by a radiologist, however manual segmentation becomes tedious in the presence of small sized lesions and time consuming due to the large amount of data to be analyzed. Hence, developing an automatic method can save radiologists time. Automatic segmentation of jaw cysts from volume images is a challenging task and by applying prior knowledge about healthy tissues we can simplify this task.CBCT is a rapidly advancing area of imaging specifically designed for maxillofacial region and can provide three dimensional images of hard and soft tissue structures with lower dose of radiation [1–2]. This is an important aspect since sensitive tissues and organs are located in head and face. In evaluating cysts or benign tumors, OPGs33Orthopantomogrammay not fully record the dimension and location of the lesion. Multi-planar sections (axial, coronal and sagittal planes) and 3D reconstruction are required in examining cysts or tumors. In several studies, accuracy of CBCT images in diagnosing jaw cysts is evaluated [3–8]. Many researchers reported that the accuracy of CBCT imaging is comparable to conventional CT with no significant statistical difference [3,5,8]. However, like other imaging technologies, surgical biopsy and histopathological evaluation are needed for further accurate differential diagnosis of some lesions [4]. Thus, it can be concluded that CBCT is a reliable tool for preoperative radiological assessment of cyst and tumors when compared with conventional CT.Several methods for automatic segmentation of jaw tissues are proposed in the literature. Rueda et al. utilized a combination of Active Appearance Models and semi-automatic landmarking for automatic segmentation of jaw tissues [9]. Segmentation of mandibular canal, cortical bone and trabecular core is performed by shape modeling and semi-automatic landmarking is used to improve the AAM method and decrease annotation time. The proposed AAM method is robust against small shape variability in mandibular canal and cortical bone, however due to high shape variability in trabecular core, the fitting result is not accurate and the training set was annotated to avoid trabecular details during the segmentation. In [10], Fuzzy connectedness based algorithm is proposed for segmentation of jaw tissues. The segmentation results are promising; however the algorithm is very sensitive to parameters and seed selection. Later, they extended this approach to 3D [11] and employed morphological processing to obtain a closed surface. Kale et al. proposed Level Set and Bayesian methods for automatic segmentation of human facial tissues [12]. They compared the accuracy and speed of both methods and the best results were achieved using Bayesian overall. The main drawback of the methods is that the accuracy of segmentation is heavily dependent on the correct choice of mean intensity values for four tissue classes (air, fat, muscle and bone). Wavelet density model (WDM) was proposed by Chang et al. [13] to segment the outer surface of the anterior wall of maxilla. This method is specifically developed for accurate segmentation of maxilla in CBCT data.To the best of our knowledge, there are very few researches performed in automatic segmentation of jaw cysts. Okada et al. [14] combined graph-based random walks segmentation with machine learning-based boosted classifiers in order to segment dental periapical lesions. The accuracy of this method depends on the choice of initial seeds. In [15], an algorithm is developed to identify dental cyst using morphologic descriptors of the shape, margin and area at an early stage. Then, a neural network is trained to diagnose and measure severity of cysts with high classification accuracy in dental X-rays. In clinical applications, it is difficult to find a suitable template for each cystic lesion. Stoetzer et al. [16] proposed an automatic atlas-based algorithm for the segmentation of anatomical structures. Correspondence between atlas or template images and patient images was detected using this algorithm. The structures are segmented automatically by elastic deformation of the templates to match the atlas images to a patient's images. The proposed procedure provides surgeons with information about the total volume of a cyst. However, the performance of atlas based methods would be poor in detecting maxillofacial cysts due to high variability. Rana et al. [17] developed Smartbrush tool based on region growing for automatic segmentation of mandibular odontogenic cysts and tumors. The result of segmentation using Smartbrush was compared with manual segmentation and threshold-based segmentation in terms of accuracy and time expenditure. The main drawback of region growing is that the final result depends on accurate marking of initial seed points. Aforementioned studies are limited to specific types of cysts and many challenges and issues should be solved regarding to accuracy and speed.Identification and segmentation of jaw cysts is challenging due to several problems. First, cysts can be of various sizes and locations. In fact, a cyst segmentation algorithm has to deal with a large number of datasets in terms of variations and complications. Thus, initialization of parameters should be done carefully and effective operator interaction is substantial. Second, the intensity ranges of surrounding tissues are similar to that of cyst. In this case, conventional segmentation algorithms often generate many false positive pixels and hence poor segmentation results. Third, due to the lower contrast of CBCT images with respect to MSCT, automatic segmentation is more challenging. Design of powerful image enhancement algorithms and filtering is essential for CBCT image analysis.In this article, a symmetry-based framework for automatic jaw cysts segmentation is developed and applied to a dataset of CBCT images. The prior knowledge about the symmetry of healthy tissues is used to segment jaw cysts and cystic like lesions. Two main steps are symmetry axis detection and non-rigid registration which should be performed accurately. For non-rigid registration, we have employed multi-resolution FFD registration. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we introduce the proposed framework for cysts segmentation which consists of diffusion filtering, symmetry axis detection and removing false positives. Then, in Section 3 the experimental results are reported. In Section 4 and 5 discussion and conclusion are presented, respectively.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
