@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Retrieval of non-rigid 3D shapes from multiple aspects

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Multiple aspects are considered for non-rigid 3D shape retrieval.Two distinctive viewpoints are considered for shape representation.A new retrieval optimization approach is proposed.A shape filtering algorithm is designed to remove the junk shapes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Non-rigid shape retrieval,Multiple aspects,Shape representation,Retrieval optimization,Shape filtering,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
As non-rigid 3D shape plays increasingly important roles in practical applications, this paper addresses its retrieval problem by considering three aspects: shape representation, retrieval optimization, and shape filtering. (1) For shape representation, two kinds of features are considered. We first propose a new integration kernel based local descriptor, and then an efficient voting scheme is designed for shape representation. Besides, we also study the commute times as shape distributions, which grasp the spatial shape information globally. Both of them capture shape information from different viewpoints based on the same embedding basis. (2) We then study the typical problem of retrieval optimization. Prior works show poor stability under different similarity windows. To deal with this deficiency, we propose to model the problem as a distance mapping on a graph in spectral manifold space. (3) Usually, for each retrieval input, a list is returned and there may be lots of irrelevant results. We develop an algorithm to filter them out by combining multiple kernels. Finally, three public datasets are employed for performance evaluation and the results show that the studied techniques have contributed a lot in promoting the recognition rate of non-rigid 3D shapes.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With the wide application of non-rigid 3D shapes in fields like biomedical, chemistry, and film and game industry, the non-rigid 3D retrieval technology turns out to be quite important in reducing shape construction cost. Isometric variation is one of the most typical non-rigid deformations, which can change the shape of surfaces without tearing and stretching, like bending. Besides, there exist some other shape variations, such as scaling and noise, which bring about more difficulties for shape recognition. Hence, how to realize invariant shape representation is a challenging topic  [1–4].One of the major goals of pattern recognition and machine intelligence is the development of efficient methods for shape description or the creation of shape signature to capture shape properties which could distinguish it from shapes belonging to the other classes. Recognition and retrieval in low-level feature space is a basic issue and lots of methods have been proposed [4–11]. By studying the prior works, we focus on three aspects for non-rigid 3D shape retrieval, including shape representation, retrieval optimization and shape filtering, where the first one is a basis and the other two are related to retrieval strategies by using additional information besides features (e.g. prior knowledge or latent information). Based on these considerations, we study related techniques for non-rigid 3D shape retrieval.The main research contents of this article are illustrated in Fig. 1, which consists of the following three topics.(a)Shape representation. We first study feature extraction and matching methods for non-rigid shape description and retrieval, where two distinctive (local and global) features are studied and evaluated fork-nearest neighbor (KNN) retrieval without using extra information independently.Retrieval optimization. In feature space, a universal and error-free descriptor is hard to realize, which may inevitably lead to incorrect feature distances. To alleviate the deficiency in retrieval, distance learning based on the averaged local paths (e.g. Q→A→D) is promising to reorder the results. An optimized result is illustrated in the green circle of Fig. 1(b). Though X appeared in the initial retrieval results of Q, it is far from the others (i.e. A, B and C) which are close to D. Then, by averaging the local paths, the distanced(Q,X)would become larger whiled(Q,D)would become smaller even if there exists a long path (i.e. Q→D), which finally results in the removal of X and addition of D.Shape filtering. Usually, the results of each retrieval can be classified into three types: fully similar shapes (FSS) from the same class, partially similar shapes (PSS) from another class, and fully irrelevant shapes (denoted as junks). In the low-level feature space, it is hard to distinguish FSS and PSS because of feature errors or discriminative ability. But, one thing is certain that the visual difference between FSS and junks is high. Thus, it is feasible to remove the junks from the retrieval results for improvement. The operation does not impose explicit restrictions on PSS because some of the results would provide users with more possibilities for shape reusage or some other useful suggestions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, multiple aspects are considered for non-rigid 3D shapes retrieval. Firstly, for shape representation, both of the local and global features (IHKS and CTF) are studied for shape description. Specifically, the heat accumulation descriptor IHKS has several interesting properties, including isometric invariant, scale invariant, robust, informative and discriminative. Then, a new graph diffusion approach is devised for retrieval optimization and, compared with the iterative random walks based method, our approach has a superior stability for various similarity windows because it adopts the averaged local paths. Additionally, we propose a shape filtering technique to remove the junk shapes. The visual links between the query and the retrieval list are used for grouping and then the visually unrelated shapes are removed. Finally, the presented experiment results show that our research is promising and the proposed techniques have produced positive influences on non-rigid shape retrieval.