@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An intelligent approach for dimensioning completeness inspection in 3D based on transient geometric elements

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new algorithm to inspect the completeness of 3D dimensioning is described.The constrained states of geometric element are simply identified.The transformed constraints reduce the complexity of system.The time-consuming iterative calculations are avoided.8 types of geometric elements and 9 types of geometric constraints are processed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Dimensioning completeness inspection,Basic geometric element,Transient geometric element,Geometric reasoning,Geometric constraint,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Complete dimensioning plays an important role in digital product design. This paper proposes an intelligent reasoning approach to inspect the dimensioning completeness for 3D mechanical parts. Firstly, the problem of inspecting the dimension completeness is transformed into the problem of determining the geometric element (GE) constrained states. Then, 8 types of general geometric elements are decomposed into basic geometric elements (BGE) and basic dimensional elements (BDE), and an intermediate model named transient geometric element (TGE) is proposed to reflect the influences of geometric constraints (GC) on the BGEs. Thereafter, 3 types of complex constraints are decomposed into 6 types of simple constraints, which are then utilized to form the generation rules of the TGEs. Then, an upgrading geometric reasoning method of creating new TGEs is developed to get the BGE’s constrained state and the dimension usage status. Finally, the completeness states of dimensions are acquired according to the dimension usage status and the BGE’s constrained states. The presented approach is tested by a pre-dimensioned mechanical part composed of many typical geometric elements and constraints, and the result demonstrates that the dimensioning completeness states can be successfully inspected.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Dimensioning is an essential component of mechanical product design, and the schemes of dimensions should comply with the industry standards  [1]. A 3D part model that is designed by the feature-based parametric design systems contains a great many of dimensions in the features. Most of these dimensions are localized dimensions, and repeat with each other sometimes because of the same features. Meanwhile, the overall dimensions of the part are always missing in these dimensions. Especially in a complex part, the missing and redundant dimensions appear frequently. Therefore, in order to perfectly express the design intent during the process planning and product manufacture, intelligent inspection of the dimension completeness is essential.Geometric constraints can be divided into topological and metric constraints  [2]. Solving all the constraints to get geometric element positions during the part model construction is called geometric constraint solving (GCS). Dimension is an explicit annotated metric constraint. Although the geometric element positions are fixed after product design, the workers could not directly obtain the exact design intents which are implied in the annotated dimensions. In other words, the geometric elements of the part model are only restricted by the topological constraints and annotated dimensions for the workers. Then, some unfixed geometric elements will be created by the missing and redundant dimensions. A dimension is redundant if its geometric elements are over-constrained. The part misses dimensions when there are unfixed geometric elements. Once the constrained states (fixed or unfixed) of the geometric elements are determined, the dimension completeness states (missing, redundant, etc.) can be determined. Therefore, the problem of inspecting the dimension completeness is converted to the problem of determining the geometric element constrained states. Different from GCS that requires finding the exact solution, the completeness inspection just needs to determine whether the exact solution exists or not.In this paper, all the geometric elements are supposed to be unfixed with respect to the geometric space at first. A set of specified datum planes can be fixed due to the six-point location principle. Then the constrained states of geometric elements that share common constraints with the datum planes can be determined. After that, the constrained states of each geometric element can be successively determined according to the related geometric elements and constraints. As a result, solving all the constraints at the same time can be avoided.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section  2 reviews the related work in the dimensioning completeness inspection. Section  3 discusses the representation models of geometric elements. The methods and rules adopted to analyze and simplify the geometric constraints are introduced in Section  4. The proposed algorithms for intelligently inspecting the dimensioning completeness are presented in Section  5. An example is given in Section  6 to show the effectiveness of the presented approach. In the end, Section  7 draws the conclusions of this paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The dimensioning completeness inspection plays a critical role in 3D product designs. This paper proposes an intelligent reasoning approach to inspect the dimensioning completeness in mechanical parts, with the constrained states of their geometric elements obtained using the transient geometric elements. Specifically, the geometric elements are decomposed into BGEs and BDEs, and then the TGE is proposed to reflect the influences of the constraints on the geometric elements. Afterwards, the generation rules of the TGEs under 6 types of dimensions and simple constraints are analyzed, and the decomposition and simplification strategies of 3 types of complex constraints are established. New TGEs are then created using an upgrading geometric reasoning method to get the states of constrained BGEs and geometric elements. Finally, the completeness states of dimensioning are determined according to both the usage status of dimensions and the states of constrained geometric elements. By executing a typical case of example, the proposed approach is demonstrated to be stable and reliable.The main advantages of this study are as follows: (1) the presented representation models of geometric elements can simplify the identification of the geometric element constrained states. The proposed transformation rules of constraints can reduce the computational complexity of the system. (2) the time-consuming iterative calculations can be avoided by using the upgrading reasoning method based on TGE. (3) the approach with a good generality is developed based on the research of the B-Rep model. It can deal with 8 types of general geometric elements, 9 types of dimensions and constraints. Therefore, the automaticity of dimension design can be improved when the approaches are applied in commercial systems.On the basis of dimensioning completeness inspection, two problems will be investigated in the future work. How to generate the suitable dimensioning solutions to the unfixed geometric elements is the first one that needs to be solved. And how to select the alternative dimensioning solutions to the over-constrained geometric elements is another problem to investigate.