@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
ECISER: Efficient Clip-art Image SEgmentation by Re-rasterization

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose ECISER, a method for clip-art image segmentation.It achieves dramatic computational speedups over the state-of-the-art approaches.It preserves almost the same quality of results.The basic idea is to connect image segmentation with aliased rasterization.We also present a clip-art image segmentation database with ground truth labeling.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Image segmentation,Re-rasterization,Color line model,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Image segmentation is the process of partitioning an image into a set of non-overlapped regions. In the present work, we consider the case where the image to be segmented is a clip-art image. Such an image is typically piece-wise smooth, and consists of a few color regions without fine textures (see Fig. 1(d)). Moreover, a clip-art image is often generated by an anti-aliased rasterization process. As a result, the color of the edge pixels could be blended by the colors of two or three pixels nearby. These are specific characteristics of clip-art images, which could be important cues for segmentation.Segmenting clip-art images often serves as an important step in many applications. From the segmentation map, it is possible to identify regions of interest and objects in the scene, which is beneficial to subsequent clip-art image processing such as vectorization  [1,2], colorization  [3,4], cartoon character retrieval  [5,6], computer-assisted painting of cels  [7,8], and cartoon animation compression  [9,10]. Notably a vector form may be sometimes better for representing a clip-art scene, but in many of the above applications, further vectorizing the image may complicate the problem but provide little advantage. To say the least, vectorizing a clipart image still need a segmentation step, because most effective vectorization approaches just segment an image into regions before the subsequent steps can be done.Unlike general image segmentation, there tend to be stricter requirements for clip-art image segmentation. On the one hand, high precision is often required when segmenting a clip-art image. The specificity of the clip-art contents makes the false segments more noticeable in simple clip-art scenes than in natural images. Even a small mistake made by segmentation could result in poor visual quality. Take the segmentation result in Fig. 10(d) for example, the small over-segmented strokes are striking in the simple and clean segmentation map. Indeed, these artifacts also constitute a serious problem for a subsequent process such as image vectorization. On the other hand, efficiency of the segmentation is also important, as the above applications are sometimes running on a mobile device, or expected to be an interactive work-flow with short waiting time. For example, one may want to import a raster clip-art image into a document/canvas as a vector element for high-quality display or further editing. If image segmentation (a time-consuming step of raster-to-vector conversion) can be instantly done, then the user does not have to wait for a few seconds or even minutes before any subsequent process, and hence the work flow becomes much smoother and more productive. Consequently, high accuracy and efficiency are generally both required in many applications, which is intrinsically difficult to be accomplished simultaneously. We are going to provide a solution for this problem in this paper.There indeed exist several segmentation approaches specific to clip-art images  [1,3,2]. Detailed review could be found in the next section. To the best of our knowledge, the current state-of-the-art method for high quality clip-art image segmentation is Vector-Magic  [1], especially for those images where the color of each region is uniform. The key to their success is an anti-aliased generative model that effectively captures the characteristics of a large proportion of clip-art images. However, these methods are still not sufficient for our purpose. They often operate on a few seconds or even minutes basis to balance accuracy and overhead computation, which is not fast enough for interactive purposes. Some other approaches (e.g.  [11]) are fast, but these fall into general image segmentation category. Such methods merely take characteristics of clip-art images into account, and tend to suffer from unsatisfactory accuracy when segmenting a clip-art image. Therefore, none of the existing methods are suitable for our purpose.To develop a fast and accurate algorithm, one natural way is to speed up the method based on an anti-aliased generative model since the most accurate algorithm relies on such a model. However, it is not an easy task. The reason is that the anti-aliased generative model is typically used in a Bayesian framework and inevitably lead to an optimization of a cost function that is computationally expensive  [1]. Unless a major revision to such a model is made, it is difficult to significantly reduce the computational cost. Therefore, to solve our problem, the key issue might be devising a novel method without costly optimization algorithm while grasping the essence of the anti-aliased generative model. This is also the main challenge in the present work.In this paper, we aim to address the above challenge, and propose a fast yet accurate method, ECISER (Efficient Clip-art Image SEgmentation by Re-rasterization), for segmenting a clip-art image. It takes advantage of the particular nature of clip-art images, and segments the image by re-rasterization. Our method is typically more than 10 times faster than the state of the art approach (i.e., Vector-Magic), while the segmentation quality of both methods is almost the same.The main contributions of this paper are the following:1.To the best of our knowledge, we are the first one to reveal the relationship between clip-art image segmentation and aliased rasterization, and convert the image segmentation into the problem of re-rasterization. Even further, we propose an effective and efficient way to solve the latter problem. It is worth mentioning that the proposed method for re-rasterization might be also used for super-resolution other than segmentation.Based on the re-rasterization, a complete practical segmentation algorithm, ECISER, is developed towards achieving fast and accurate segmentation. Like current state-of-art approaches for clip-art image segmentation, it could effectively avoid results containing small over-segmented regions along object boundaries while preserving other details. But the computation cost of the proposed algorithm is significantly reduced, which enables more applications such as interactive cartoon animation processing and mobile clip-art image editing.As a byproduct of the first contribution, we propose a simple yet effective approach for obtaining ground truth labeling of clip-art image segmentation. More specifically, the labels are fully automatically derived from the vector images. This method works well for clip-art segmentation labeling because clip-art image segmentation is closely related to aliased rasterization. Based on such a method, we also present a database of clip-art images segmented by pixel labels. This database is to be made available to the public11See http://ECISER.tk.in the hope that we can place the problem of clip-art image segmentation on firm, quantitative ground.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section  2, we introduce some related work. Section  3 gives a rethinking of clip-art image segmentation, and converts the original segmentation problem into a problem of re-rasterization. Section  4 describes the approach for re-rasterization without anti-aliasing. Based on this method, Section  5 develops the proposed segmentation algorithm, ECISER. To evaluate ECISER, Section  6 presents the way to construct a database of segmented clip-art images, followed by experimental results with comparison to state-of-the-art methods in Section  7. Finally, we draw conclusions and give further discussion in Section  8.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
