@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Modeling left and right atrial contributions to the ECG: A dipole-current source approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We used a model of the atria and torso to compute ECG from dipole-current sources.We simulated the separate contributions of the left and right atria to the ECG.The approach helped relate the P wave morphology to atrial anatomy.Atrial fibrillation simulations emphasized the role of each atrium on ECG waveforms.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Computer modeling,Cardiac electrophysiology,Left and right atria,Electrocardiogram,P wave,Dipole source,Atrial fibrillation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents the mathematical formulation, the numerical validation and several illustrations of a forward-modeling approach based on dipole-current sources to compute the contribution of a part of the heart to the electrocardiogram (ECG). Clinically relevant applications include identifying in the ECG the contributions from the right and the left atrium. In a Courtemanche-based monodomain computer model of the atria and torso, 1000 dipoles distributed throughout the atrial mid-myocardium are found to be sufficient to reproduce body surface potential maps with a relative error<1%during both sinus rhythm and atrial fibrillation. When the boundary element method is applied to solve the forward problem, this approach enables fast offline computation of the ECG contribution of any anatomical part of the atria by applying the principle of superposition to the dipole sources. In the presence of a right–left activation delay (sinus rhythm), pulmonary vein isolation (sinus rhythm) or left–right differences in refractory period (atrial fibrillation), the decomposition of the ECG is shown to help interpret ECG morphology in relation to the atrial substrate. These tools provide a theoretical basis for a deeper understanding of the genesis of the P wave or fibrillatory waves in normal and pathological cases.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Electrocardiograms (ECG) remain the most common diagnostic technique in cardiology. These bioelectric signals receive contributions from all parts of the heart due to the spatial filtering effect of the torso volume conductor. In the ECG, the P wave (depolarization of the atria) is well separated from the QRS complex (depolarization of the ventricles) thanks to the delay caused by the atrioventricular node. In contrast, within the P wave, the contributions of different anatomical parts of the atria (e.g. left and right atria) overlap because cells in different parts of the atria depolarize simultaneously. The ability to separate these contributions would be desirable in the presence of left–right atrial gradient, when structural remodeling or a therapy (e.g. catheter ablation) affects a specific region, or when the dynamical regime is not uniform (e.g. stable rotor at some location and fibrillatory conduction in the rest of the tissue).In experiments, it is possible to isolate or cut a piece of tissue to measure the activity generated by the rest of the tissue. However, cutting a piece of tissue generally affects the propagation pattern in the rest of the tissue. The situation is even worse during an arrhythmia since this lesion may be pro- or antiarrhythmic. In computer models, the decomposition of the ECG into a sum of signals generated by the sources located in different anatomical regions (e.g. left and right atria) is straightforward when the bioelectric sources are expressed as current dipoles, as demonstrated below. While P waves are routinely simulated in computer models [1–6], only the signal representing the global atrial activity is generally computed since it can be compared to its clinical counterpart.In this paper, we formulate and validate the current-dipole approach in the context of a biophysical model of the atria during sinus rhythm and atrial fibrillation. We surmise that this tool will help better understand and interpret the genesis of the P wave and fibrillatory waves in relation to atrial anatomy.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
