@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Evolutionary growth of certain metabolic pathways involved in the functioning of GAD and INS genes in Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus: Their architecture and stability

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Algorithm for evolutionary growth of 4 pathways in Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus.Integration from 36 databases for constructing the metabolic pathways.Finds patterns for community, interaction, growth using Hamming, cuts and payoff.Pathways grow in a manner when densest metabolite evolves followed by its links.This model of evolution has been termed as ‘divergent root-to-leaf’ growth model.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Community structure,Evolution,Hamming distance,Hasse diagram,Payoff matrix,Tanimoto coefficient,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The behavior and evolutionary properties of metabolic pathways have been studied for a long time using architectural and network-based methods [1]. Among various research attempts undertaken in network-based studies, an essential one is based on identifying meaningful patterns within metabolic pathways. It aims at identifying essential regions within metabolic pathways and is useful for studying evolution. Furthermore, it also identifies functionally important metabolites that help in determining alternate paths in metabolic pathways [2,3]. This also help in identifying analogous pathways that exist in different species and provide a key step in discerning essential properties of evolution in terms of interactions among metabolic pathways [4]. To analyze the importance of interactions among metabolic pathways in evolution, we have selected certain metabolic pathways involved in the prevalence of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus (T1D).Diabetes Mellitus (DM), one of the most prevalent diseases in India, is mostly due to the food habit and lifestyle. We have implemented our proposed algorithm on certain metabolic pathways involved in the emergence of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus (T1D). It is a disorder characterized by high blood sugar, resulting in improper production of insulin. It results in failure and dysfunction of multiple organs. Moreover, till date around 250 genes have been studied for analyzing their role with T1D, one of which is anti-Glutaric acid decarboxylase (GAD) that leads to autoimmune processes for β-cell destruction [5]. Similarly, the insulin gene (INS) is the second well established susceptibility locus in Diabetes Mellitus, contributing to about 10% towards T1D susceptibility [6]. We have considered four metabolic pathways which have shown role in the expression of GAD and INS genes, namely, glutamate, β-alanine, taurine and hypotaurine and butanoate metabolisms, for the purpose of studying their development from an evolutionary point-of-view. This study is very critical, as analyzing the growth history and lineage of these metabolic pathways can lead to understanding the circumstances and role which might be responsible for a diseased state.The major hypotheses proposed till date regarding metabolic pathway evolution are based on gene duplication events. One of the earliest attempts in this regard has been the ‘Retrograde’ hypothesis, which suggested that the biosynthesis of metabolites requires sequential activities and sub-step conversions of precursors [7]. Alternatively, the ‘Granick’ hypothesis suggested that biosynthesis of metabolites are results of forward evolution from simple precursor compounds [8]. Likewise, the ‘Patchwork’ hypothesis suggested that metabolic pathways have evolved through the reactions of certain primitive enzymes with a variable number of chemically related metabolites, followed by duplication events, resulting in metabolite diversification [9]. Similarly, the ‘micro-evolution’ theory states that certain divergent features are significant among growing entities in metabolic pathways [10]. Lastly, the ‘Semienzymatic’ origin of metabolic pathways suggested that certain prebiotic stable metabolites, mediated by specific and non-specific enzymes resulted in their evolution.Our proposed algorithm has three modules, first, ‘pattern finding’ identifying patterns in metabolic pathways based on structural and functional features. We have used Hamming distance, the Tanimoto coefficient and Community structures for detecting meaningful patterns [11] (discussed in ‘Methodology’ section). The second module, i.e., ‘interaction identification’ identifies interactions based on the patterns [12], wherein interaction is ‘the effect that is conferred upon one biological moiety to another׳. Fig. 1illustrates interactions occurring within carbohydrate metabolism in H. sapiens at levels of representations [13]. We use cut-sets and a ‘Divide-and-conquer’ strategy for studying interactions [14]. For example, in Fig. 2, butanoate metabolism is partitioned into S1 and S2 by removing a link between acetoacetyl CoA and (S)-3-hydroxybutanoyl CoA. The third module, i.e., ‘growth detection’ identifies growth using the patterns, their interactions and certain perturbations, for which we have associated weights to metabolites and reaction links (butanoate metabolism in Fig. 3). But, analyzing metabolic pathways on the basis of architectural features only may not facilitate functional significance. For this purpose, we have identified cycles and Hasse[15] (qualitative), ODEs for identifying Stoichiometric[16], Gradient[17], Jacobian[18] and payoff matrices [19] (quantitative); and ‘bi-directional best hit criterion’ and nutrient availability (functional) features respectively. For evolutionary studies, we have studied scale-free properties [20] (discussed in ‘Methodology’ section) (Fig. 4), wherein the evolutionary growth resides on novel link attachment in existing metabolic network, as per the ‘micro-evolution’ theory. We term this evolutionary process as ‘divergent root-to-leaf’ growth model (discussed in detail in ‘Methodology’ section).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Among various investigations undertaken in systems biology, an important task is identifying meaningful patterns within metabolic pathways. This approach aims at identifying essential regions within metabolic pathways of various organisms and is useful for studying evolution as well. Here, we developed an algorithm that has three modules, of which the first one was used for pattern identification on the basis of structural, functional features and topologies. Commonly occurring patterns identified similar patterns of conversion and mutation, and thus could provide key insight essential for drug development in relation to rogue pathways. We analyzed the onset of T1D in H. sapiens by studying the role of GAD and INS genes in metabolic pathways, namely, glutamate, β-alanine, taurine and hypotaurine and butanoate metabolisms, involving in T1D for the purpose of studying their growth in evolutionary time scale.In our algorithm we used the concept of Hamming distance and Tanimoto coefficient for identifying certain graph-based Community structures in metabolic pathways, which were further used to detect meaningful patterns. We further used functional validations representing the patterns using cycles and ODEs. We then tested the stability of these cycles by calculating eigenvalues from the Jacobian matrix that we formulated from the ODEs. Likewise, metabolic networks consisted of large number of interactions that occur among its components. These interactions also gave an insight into the functional, structural, topological and evolutionary organization of the network. The second module of our algorithm identified interactions based on the patterns found by the first module. Study of interactions among the components of a network is usually carried out by partitioning it into sub-networks and analyzing the types of interactions occurring among them. In this work, we developed a technique for network-partitioning based on cut sets. We analyzed the size of metabolic pathways, which denoted the boundary assignment of the metabolites involved in the metabolic pathways. We further used hasse diagrams and implemented DC method to test for cuts and metabolite groups. Furthermore, higher the size of metabolic pathway, lower was the robustness, as more was the chance that the metabolic pathways could be targeted for external perturbation. In this work we categorized the interactions into neighbored, serial, parallel, convergent and divergent. The third module of our algorithm was to identify the growth of metabolic network based on the already known patterns, their interactions and some other parameters like performing mutational events. We further tested the various interactions by plotting Payoff matrices. These matrices identified those interactions which are of functional significance to the metabolic pathway. For evolutionary studies, we used the concept of identifying the densest metabolites in the pathway along with their reactions. We suggest that the densest metabolite in the metabolic pathway was the earliest one in terms of evolutionary occurrence. This is an extension of the classical ‘micro-evolution’ hypothesis. We use a combinatorial approach for the same. This approach began with comparing the metabolic pathways of glutamate, β-alanine, taurine and hypotaurine and butanoate metabolisms involved in T1D ongrowth in H. sapiens from the available public repositories.An interesting feature that we could observe from this study was that with increase in mutational events the compactness of the earliest metabolite and its neighbors increased. However, this phenomenon occurred only when mutations occurred in its outermost neighbors. But, if the same events occurred in the nearest neighbors of the oldest metabolites, the complete metabolic network collapsed. Thus, in terms of functionality, the oldest metabolite was of the topmost priority. We concluded that Hamming distance and TC helped in signifying a biological meaning to the patterns. Moreover, the community structures found on the basis of Hamming distances consisted of metabolites separated by the same number of substitutions. We observed that the patterns found above were separated by the least number of substitutions and remain conserved through evolution. We could say that these patterns were significant as they were the least mutated through evolution, and needed to be further studied for analyzing any possible interactions, to predict their role in evolution. Furthermore, we found that the interactions found in the pattern behaved in divergent manner. But, a ‘divergent’ interaction might not suggest that the metabolites involved in them behaved in divergent manner during evolution. For this reason, it was evident that we further perform the analysis on these patterns and their interactions for studying their growth pattern and evolutionary significance. We found that the most significant interactions existing among the patterns found in these metabolic pathways were divergent in nature. We found that the densest metabolite, in terms of occurrence, in glutamate, β-alanine, taurine and hypotaurine and butanoate metabolisms were l-glutamate, l-aspartate, taurine and acetoacetyl CoA, respectively. We finally conclude that these four metabolic pathways grow in a manner which was very similar to divergent growth, i.e., the earliest metabolite evolves first, followed by the growth of its reaction links and branches, leading to a method, we termed as ‘divergent root-to-leaf’ model, an extension to the ‘micro-evolution’ theory. Thus, the metabolites and associated reaction links other than the root or the most dense metabolites are thought to have evolved from these dense metabolites.None declared.Supplementary data associated with this paper can be found in the online version at doi:10.1016/j.compbiomed.2015.03.012.Application 1