@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Maximizing clinical cohort size using free text queries

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We demonstrate the value of free text queries in cohort identification.Incremental value is added compared to structured data queries alone.We determine the value of free text using 3 disparate use cases.Use case specific values and limitations are identified in large data sets.Exploratory value of a direct search tool in contrast with heavier NLP systems.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Gingko,Warfarin,Overweight,Diabetes,Text query,Structured data,Cohort identification,Unstructured data,Clinical notes,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundCohort identification is important in both population health management and research. In this project we sought to assess the use of text queries for cohort identification. Specifically we sought to determine the incremental value of unstructured data queries when added to structured queries for the purpose of patient cohort identification.MethodsThree cohort identification tasks were evaluated: identification of individuals taking gingko biloba and warfarin simultaneously (Gingko/Warfarin), individuals who were overweight, and individuals with uncontrolled diabetes (UCD). We assessed the increase in cohort size when unstructured data queries were added to structured data queries. The positive predictive value of unstructured data queries was assessed by manual chart review of a random sample of 500 patients.ResultsFor Gingko/Warfarin, text query increased the cohort size from 9 to 28,924 over the cohort identified by query of pharmacy data only. For the weight-related tasks, text search increased the cohort by 5–29% compared to the cohort identified by query of the vitals table. For the UCD task, text query increased the cohort size by 2–43% compared to the cohort identified by query of laboratory results or ICD codes. The positive predictive values for text searches were 52% for Gingko/Warfarin, 19–94% for the weight cohort and 44% for UCD.DiscussionThis project demonstrates the value and limitation of free text queries in patient cohort identification from large data sets. The clinical domain and prevalence of the inclusion and exclusion criteria in the patient population influence the utility and yield of this approach.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Recently healthcare has come to embrace the potential of ‘analytics’ on large datasets for operations, quality improvement and clinical and biomedical research [1]. With the increase in the availability of large healthcare datasets, there are significant challenges in accessing and making use of these data. There is a need for tools and protocols to harness and ‘tame’ these big data so that they can be converted to information and ultimately into actionable knowledge. Otherwise, there is a real danger of amassing large datasets that never fulfill the potential of improving patient care and increasing healthcare efficiency.One critical component of big data analysis is cohort identification, i.e. the reliable identification of a group of patients of interest. Cohort identification is typically an iterative process in which the goal is to separate definite ‘cases’ of interest from possible cases and then find appropriate controls [2]. Determining whether a given patient meets the definition of a case is often challenging and requires accurate and reliable data. Current database search capabilities support cohort identification within electronic medical record (EMR) systems, however, these are limited to cohort identification based on structured data [3–8]. Recently, there is increasing interest in the use of clinical notes for cohort identification [9–14].In this study, we sought to determine the value of adding free text search to structured data queries as compared to structured data query alone for cohort identification from an extremely large dataset (>17 million unique individuals). The study employed Voogo, a user-friendly clinical data search engine that executes key word searches of clinical free text. We compared the cohorts identified using free text search to structured-data-only queries, and did so in three cases of increasingly complex inclusion criteria. A random sample of electronic medical notes from 500 patients was then evaluated by human review to estimate the positive predictive value of correctly identifying cases using free text queries. Our overall goal was to determine the value of free text queries in cohort identification by answering the question: how many additional patients and observations can be identified through free-text queries as compared to using structured data queries only?The Veterans Health Administration (VHA) operates one of the largest integrated healthcare systems in the United States. The VHA has seen a steady increase in enrollment in recent years with 8.6 million total living enrollees in fiscal year 2012. With regard to volume of patient care, in 2012 there were 79.8 million outpatient visits across VHA׳s hospital-based clinics and 827 community based outpatient clinics, and VHA׳s 151 hospitals handled more than 692000 inpatient admissions [16].The VA was at the forefront of the development of Electronic Health Records with its nationwide implementation of VistA in 1996. Therefore, VA now has extensive longitudinal records on its millions of enrolled veterans.Recognizing the opportunities for research using this aggregated data, the VA Health Services Research and Development (HSR&D) office funded the Veterans Informatics and Computing Infrastructure (VINCI), which began operations in June 2008 [15]. VINCI is a service-level collaboration between the Office of Information and Technology (OI&T) and the Office of Research and Development (OR&D), designed to serve the data and IT needs of the VA research community. VINCI provides centralized access to VA data resources in a high-performance computing environment with secure access to comprehensive VA healthcare data. VINCI׳s mission is to provide researchers with an environment for efficient, secure analysis of patient level data, and to provide tools and coordination for research in basic and applied medical informatics.The VINCI database is hosted on a Microsoft SQL Server DBMS installation. It is extremely large, at the time of this study providing access to structured and unstructured electronic medical data on 17,543,172 unique patients, living or deceased, since Oct. 1999. VINCI data is updated from raw VistA electronic health records on a nightly basis, and also provides snapshots at the end of the fiscal year [16]. The document corpus consists of 2,096,957,070 clinical documents from providers. The dataset also includes 1,611,284,360 diagnostic codes (ICD9), data on 1,654,598,048 pharmacy prescriptions, and 5,856,426,293 lab tests (both orders and results). Many other types of administrative and clinical data are also available for exploration and discovery. In order to access data, researchers request a VINCI workspace and submit a data access request form after acquiring approval from the institutional review board. The data request indicates the criteria and domains being requested. If approved, data managers provide access to the approved data set.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
