@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A semi-analytical approach to un-deformed chip boundary theory and cutting force prediction in face-hobbing of bevel gears

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Semi-analytical representation of the chip geometry in face-hobbing is presented.The method is computationally efficient and more accurate than numerical methods.Cutting forces in face-hobbing are predicted.Regions where are more prone to be worn out along the cutting edge are predicted.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Face-hobbing,Bevel gears,Un-deformed chip,Cutting forces,Virtual machining,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Rule-of-thumb based design for cutting tools and machining settings in face-hobbing of bevel gears result in cutting tool failures and quality issues. Lack of a virtual machining environment, to efficiently obtain the instantaneous un-deformed chip geometry and predict cutting forces in face-hobbing, causes undesirable production costs in industries. In the present paper, semi-analytical representation of the projection of the un-deformed chip on the rake face of the cutting blades is presented. The proposed approach is drastically fast and more accurate in comparison with numerical methods and can be implemented in a virtual gear machining environment. The cutting system intricate geometry, multi-axis machine tool kinematic chains and the variant cutting velocity along the cutting edge are taken into consideration to obtain the chip geometry efficiently. Then, cutting forces are predicted during face-hobbing by implementing oblique cutting theory using the derived chip geometry and converting face-hobbing into oblique cutting. The proposed methods are applied on two case studies of face-hobbing of bevel gears, and the chip geometry is derived and the cutting forces are predicted.(31)u1=Vbw⋅TT⋅[sin(Γ),sin(Γ),(−WO⋅sin(Γ)+a)/TTz+sin(Γ)]sin(Γ)⋅Vbw⋅[tan(Γ)⋅cos(φ),tan(Γ)⋅sin(φ),1],(32)u2=tan(Γ)⋅Vbw⋅TT⋅[cos(Γ),cos(Γ),(−C−WO⋅cos(Γ))/TTz+cos(Γ)]Vbw⋅[cos(Γ)⋅cos(φ),cos(Γ)⋅sin(φ),−sin(Γ)],(33)u3=tan(Γ)⋅Vbw⋅TT⋅[cos(Γ),cos(Γ),(−C+F−WO⋅cos(Γ))/TTz+cos(Γ)]Vbw⋅[cos(Γ)⋅cos(φ),cos(Γ)⋅sin(φ),−sin(Γ)],(37)Ktc=τssin(φn)cos(βn−γn)+tan2(λ)⋅sin(βn)cos2(φn+βn−γn)+tan2(λ)⋅sin2(βn),(38)Krc=τssin(φn)cos(βn−γn)⋅tan(λ)−tan(λ)⋅sin(βn)cos2(φn+βn−γn)+tan2(λ)⋅sin2(βn),(39)Kfc=τssin(φn)⋅cos(λ)sin(βn−γn)cos2(φn+βn−γn)+tan2(λ)⋅sin2(βn),(A.7)rt,VII=[x7ty7tz7t]=[xO−ρ⋅cos(δ+L3ρ)−L5+L6⋅sin(αc)+re′⋅cos(π2−γ2)−re′⋅cos(v−L5−L6re+π2−γ2)y7tzO−ρ⋅sin(δ+L3ρ)+L6⋅cos(αc)+re′⋅sin(v−L5−L6re+π2−γ2)−re′⋅sin(π2−γ2)],L5+L6≤v≤L5+L6+L7,(A.8)rt,VIII=[x8ty8tz8t]=[v−L5−L6−L7−L8y8t0],L5+L6+L7≤v≤L5+L6+L7+L8,(A.9)yit=ypt+(xpt−xit)⋅nbx+(zpt−zit)⋅nbznby,i=1,…,8.Tool, machine and workpiece, cutter head and axillary tool coordinate systemsBlade profile parametersBlade rake angles measured in Sb and SeBlade angles measured in Sb and SeBlade heightTool Tip, Pitch PointConnecting vector betweenPand TTNormal vector to the rake face in coordinate systems, Se, Sh and SwCurve parameter for blade profile and cutting edgeMachine settings: horizontal, vertical, root angle and center to backNumber of gear teethNumber of blade groupsBlade group numberWorkpiece rotation ratioCutter head rotation angleCutter head rotary speed in rpmCutter head offsetCutting edge in cutter head and workpiece coordinate systemsGear blank dimensions: pitch angle, outer cone distance, face width, addendum, dedendumPeripheral surfaces of the workpieceSurface parameters ofW1,W2,W3Projection of un-deformed chip on rake faceBoundaries ofChpIntersection of rake face withW1,W2andW3Active boundary amongC41,C42andC43Effective cutting surface of outside and inside bladesThe number of a blade group thatChpis obtained onEffective inside and outside blade groupsPerpendicular planes to cutting edge and cutting velocityCutting velocity vectorProjection of V on planepCutting edge tangent vectorNormal rake angleInclination (oblique) angleDifferential un-deformed chipIntersection of planepand rake faceCutting edge curveBoundary ofChpon rake faceProjections ofCiandChon the rake face, respectively.Un-deformed chip thicknessLength of differential cutting edge elementCutting force coefficientsEdge cutting coefficientsA point on the cutting edgeUnit vectors in directions of the cutting velocity, normal and thrust atPe.Differential cutting forces in directions of cutting velocity, normal and thrust atPeTotal cutting forceNormal shear angleNormal friction coefficientShear yield stressChip compression ratio.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Face-hobbing is the most productive process to manufacture bevel gears. Due to the high productivity of the process, tool wear is a serious challenge in face-hobbing. The tool wear phenomenon is a result of excessive and varying cutting force distribution along the cutting edges of the blades in face-hobbing. Although face-hobbing is quite widespread, there is little research on cutting force and un-deformed chip geometry in this process. The machining performance (tool wear, deflection, breakage chatter, etc.) are affected severely by machining settings and instantaneous un-deformed chip geometry.The conventional method to derive the un-deformed chip geometry is to obtain instantaneous in-process model of the workpiece during machining. Nikolaos and Artomenis  [1], Vasilis et al.  [2], Dimitriou and Antoniadis  [3] and Artomenis  [4] implemented CSG (Constructive Solid Ground) method and Boolean operation to simulate hobbing of helical gears. They developed software called HOB3D®  for hobbing simulation. Brecher et al. [5–7] simulated face-milling of bevel gears using ray tracing and STL (triangular mesh) penetration calculation. They implemented their algorithm in face-milling simulation software called KegelSpan®. All the mentioned research works have implemented computationally expensive methods. Moreover, they have not worked on face-hobbing.Face-hobbing is the most complicated bevel gear manufacturing process because of varying cutting velocity along the cutting edge of the cutting blades. This kind of varying velocity is created due to special geometry of the cutting system and multi-axes machine tool kinematic chains. Therefore, obtaining instantaneous un-deformed chip geometry is a challenging process. The only research work on un-deformed chip geometry in face-hobbing was conducted by Habibi and Chen  [8]. They have proposed numerical methods to obtain the projection of un-deformed chip geometry on the rake face of the cutting blades,Chp, by discretizing the workpiece into two dimensional elements, disks, and intersecting the cutting edge of all blades with each disk. Although their methods are able to obtain the chip geometry and predict the cutting forces in non-generated face-hobbing, the computational cost of the methods is quite high (in scale of hours) and the accuracy of the derived chip geometry severely depends on how fine the workpiece is discretized. In addition, finer discretization means even higher computational cost. Moreover, the method fails to represent the accurateChpon the rake especially near the tool tip where it is a critical region because the cutting force distribution has the highest value in this area. The method is mainly inefficient due to fact that the approximate workpiece in-process model needs to be obtained numerically prior to derive the chip geometry.In the present paper, semi-analytical approach is introduced to defineChpmathematically in non-generated face-hobbing. Closed form formulations of boundaries and the area ofChpare obtained. Since the boundaries are piecewise, the curve parameter range of each piece is derived numerically by solving constructed equations. Since the un-deformed chip geometry is defined semi-analytically, the computational cost is reduced drastically from hours (using numerical method presented in Ref.  [8]) to scale of few seconds. In addition, the accuracy of the chip geometry is quite high in comparison with the results of Ref.  [8]. Since the cutting velocity varies along the cutting edge, the differential undeformed chip geometry is defined locally at each point on the cutting edge considering the corresponding cutting velocity.In order to derive the chip geometry, the mathematical representation of the cutting edge and the cutting surfaces needs to be obtained. Based on homogeneous matrix transformation method, many research works  [9–15] have represented the cutting surfaces in face-milling or face-hobbing mathematically. They used either Gleason Works’ cutting systems  [10,11,13–15] or Klingelnberg’s [9,12]. Habibi and Chen  [15] re-designed the conventional design of Gleason TRI-AC®  cutting system to improve tool wear characteristics of the cutting blades. In the present paper, their representation of cutting edge and surfaces are used.In order to derive the cutting forces during face-hobbing, the method presented in  [16] (which is known as “unified mechanics of cutting” method) is applied on face-hobbing. The method is capable of predicting cutting forces for any cutting processes as long as the chip geometry, cutting velocity, rake and inclination angles along the cutting edge are defined. The oblique cutting theory is applied to the process. The cutting edge of the blades is converted into many small elements. Each differential element represents a scenario of oblique cutting. In other words, face-hobbing is transformed to the oblique cutting concept. The total cutting forces is calculated by integrating differential cutting forces associated with all oblique elements along the cutting edge.In the present paper, Gleason TRI-AC®  cutting system, non-generating kinematic chains and workpiece geometry are described in Section  2. In Section  3, the projection of un-deformed chip geometry on the rake face of the cutting blades,Chp, is derived. The cutting forces are predicted in Section  4. Finally, in Section  5, two case studies are presented which for both, the in-process model of the workpiece and the un-deformed chip geometry are derived and the cutting forces are predicted.In face-hobbing, a cutter head and groups of cutting blades make a cutting system (Fig. 1). In the concept of half profile blades, one inside and one outside blade create a blade group. Each blade is mounted inside a cutter head slot with a special orientation. In the present paper, the mathematical representation of the cutting edge and cutting surfaces of outside blades are mentioned. However, in case of inside blades, all the formulations can be used easily since the inside blade is a symmetry of the outside blade.The cutting edge, rake and relief surfaces are the most important features of the cutting blades. Three coordinate systems are needed to construct the blade model, Se, Sb and St.ZeXe and ZeYe planes of the coordinate system Se are parallel to the blade front and side planes, respectively. The origin of Se is at the pitch pointP. The coordinate system Sb is created by a rotation of Se about Xe by a hook angle,ηb. The coordinate system St is just a translation of Se to the tool tip, TT (see Fig. 2).The equation ofPin the coordinate system St is written as(1)Pt=[xptyptzpt1]=[hf⋅tan(αb)−hf⋅tan(αb)⋅tan(kb)−hf1],wherekb,αbandhfare rake and blade angles measured in Sb and blade height, respectively.keandηbare set to 12° and 4.42° for TRI-AC®  cutting system  [11]. The equation ofce, connecting direction fromPto TT, can be written as(2)ce=[−sin(αe)sin(αe)⋅tan(ke)cos(αe)1].A connecting vector from the pitch point to the tool tip can be formulated as(3)cePT=(xpt2+ypt2+zpt2)0.5⋅ce/|ce|.The formulation of the normal vector of the rake face,ne, can be written as(4)ne=[−sin(ke)−cos(ke)01].Eventually, the equations ofceandnein coordinate system Sb are represented as(5)cb=[10000cos(ηb)−sin(ηb)00sin(ηb)cos(ηb)00001]ce,(6)Vb=[10000cos(ηb)−sin(ηb)00sin(ηb)cos(ηb)00001]ne.Equations of the cutting are presented in Appendix.In non-generated face-hobbing, the cutting system rotates (θ) and translates (Feed) towards the workpiece as schematically illustrated in Fig. 3.In order to find the effects of each cutting blade on the workpiece, the cutting surfaces are formulated in the workpiece coordinate system, Sw. In other words, the cutting blade motion should be seen by an observer connected rigidly to the workpiece. In order to do so, a series of matrix transformations are formulated as follows:(7)M1h=[cos(−θ)−sin(−θ)00sin(−θ)cos(−θ)0000100001],(8)Mm1=[100H010V001−BO0001],(9)M2m=[cos(−(π/2−γm))0sin(−(π/2−γm))00100−sin(−(π/2−γm))0cos(−(π/2−γm))−ΔXp0001],(10)Mw2=[cos(−Rbθ)−sin(−Rbθ)00sin(−Rbθ)cos(−Rbθ)0000100001],whereM1h,Mm1,M2mandMw2are transformation matrixes from Sh to S1, S1 to Sm, Sm to S2 and from S2 to Sw, respectively, and the equation of BO can be written in terms ofθas(11)BO(θ)=BO0−a12⋅AxωH2θ2−a2⋅V0ωHθ,whereωH,Ax,V0andBO0are cutter head angular velocity (rpm), acceleration (mm/s2), initial velocity (mm/s) and initial offset to back (mm), respectively, anda1=450πanda2=30π. BO decreases during machining process with a specified acceleration till it reaches zero.Eventually, the cutting edge formulation in coordinate system Sw can be written as(12)rw(s,θ)=Mwhrh(s),where(13)Mwh=Mw2M2mMm1M1h.Eq. (12) is a formulation of a unique surface called the cutting surface in terms of two independent variables,sandθ. Fig. 4shows cutting surfaces of a single outside blade for five rotations of the cutting system. As it can be imagined, taking into account the cutting surfaces of all the blades considering the process kinematic and their interaction with the workpiece makes a very complicated scenario to be simulated. Detailed descriptions in this matter can be found in  [8] in which face-hobbing is simulated numerically.In this paper, the geometry of the workpiece in face-milling is represented by the bevel gear geometric parameters (pitch angle,Γ, outer cone distance,C, face width,F, addendum,a, and dedendum,b). Fig. 5shows the axisymmetric section of the workpiece with the parameters.Equations of the peripheral surfaces of the workpiece which are in contact with the cutting blades,W1,W2andW3, can be written as(14)W1(φ)=[u⋅tan(Γ)⋅cos(φ)u⋅tan(Γ)⋅sin(φ)u+WO−asin(Γ)1],(15)W2(φ)=[u⋅cot(Γ)⋅cos(φ)u⋅cot(Γ)⋅sin(φ)C+atan(Γ)cos(Γ)+WO−asin(Γ)−u1],(16)W3(φ)=[u⋅cot(Γ)⋅cos(φ)u⋅cot(Γ)⋅sin(φ)C+atan(Γ)−Fcos(Γ)+WO−asin(Γ)−u1],respectively.Fig. 6shows the core idea of obtaining the projection of the un-deformed chip geometry,Chp, on the rake plane of the outside blade schematically. The geometry ofChpis derived at any rotation angle of the cutter head,θc, on the rake face of the outside blade of blade groupnbduring face-hobbing. The most important significance of the proposed method is that the workpiece in-process model is integrated semi-analytically in the boundary theory of the chip provided in the present paper. In other words, the in-process model is implemented in the boundaries of the chip formulations. Boundaries of the chip areC1,C2,C3andC4(Fig. 6). CurveC1is the cutting edge of the blade (from groupnb) that the cutting forces are predicted on it at any rotation angle of the cutter head,θc. However, curvesC2,C3andC4represent the in-process model of the workpiece atθc.C2andC3are derived from the cutting surfaces of the last outside and inside blades which have passed through the same gear slot and close to the blade from groupnb(the blade that the cutting forces are going to be predicted on). CurveC4is derived from the boundary surfaces of the workpiece. Therefore, using the proposed method, the need for updating in-process model is eliminated by integrating it into the boundary theory of the chip derivation. Obtaining the in-process model was the core of the conventional methods to derive chip geometry in such a way that at every time instant during machining this model must be updated (most of the times using computationally expensive numerical methods such as STL penetration, Boolean operation or Z-buffer representation).CurveC1in Fig. 6 is the cutting edge of the outside blade of blade groupnbatθc,C1=rw(s,θc). The workpiece in-process model right beforeθc, the machined workpiece, is created by cutting surfaces of the last outside,SEO, and inside blades,SEI, which have passed through the same gear slot and close to the current location of the outside blade atθc.SEOandSEIare called the effective cutting surfaces of the outside and inside blades, respectively. CurvesC2andC3are the intersections between the cutting surfaces,SEOandSEI, and the rake face, respectively.In order to detect which blade groups createSEOandSEI, a minimization problem is constructed and solved. The coordinates of the origin of coordinate system St of an outside blade of blade groupnin Sw,Otw, is obtained as(17)Owt(θ,n)=Mwh[cos(2⋅(n−1)⋅πNb)⋅X−sin(2⋅(n−1)⋅πNb)⋅Ysin(2⋅(n−1)⋅πNb)⋅X+cos(2⋅(n−1)⋅πNb)⋅Yhf1].The goal is to determine the effective blade group number of an outside blade,nEO, in such a way that the distance betweenOwt(θc−2πRb,nEO)and the origin of the coordinate system St of the outside blade of blade groupnb,Owt(θc,nb), is minimized. Hence, the objective function of the minimization problem can be written as(18)FE=|Owt(θc−2πRb,nEO)Owt(θc,nb)¯|.It should be noted that the last time that the blades of the cutter head were inside a gear slot where the outside blade of blade groupnbis machining atθc, is2πRbbeforeθc. Therefore, the effective cutting blade can be found atθc−2πRb. The group number of the effective inside blade,nEIis one group less thannEO, therefore,nEI=nEO−1. This rises from the fact that right before the effective outside blade of groupnEO, the effective inside blade from previous blade group,nEO−1, is engaged with the workpiece.C1,C2andC3are piecewise curves.C1is the cutting edge of the outside blade of groupnband is represented by Eq. (12) analytically asC1=rw(s,θc). However,C2andC3are intersections of the rake face of the outside blade of groupnbwith effective cutting surfaces,SEOandSEI, respectively. The cutting surfaces are also piecewise surfaces. The formulations of all pieces ofC2andC3are derived analytically in the following.The mathematical representation of the rake plane of the outside blade of groupnbcan be written as(19)Vbw⋅(P−TT)=0,wherePis a point on the rake plane and(20)Vbw(θ)=Mwh(θ)Vb.In order to derive the equation ofC2, the effective cutting surface,SEO, is substituted forPinto Eq. (19)(21)Vbw⋅(rw,i(θ,s)−TT)=0,wherei=I, II, III, IV, VI, VII and VIII.The effective cutting surface of the outside blade,SEO, consists of six pieces corresponding to generating parts of the cutting edge. Part I ofSEOis created byrw,I(s)which is a straight line in terms ofs. Therefore, for part I, Eq. (21) can be solved directly forsin terms ofθassI=gI(θ). Since parts III, VI and VIII are also generated by the straight segments of the cutting edge therefore, like part I, solving Eq. (21) forsleads tosIII=gIII(θ),sVI=gVI(θ)andsVIII=gVIII(θ).Parts II, IV and VII of the cutting edge are arcs. Therefore, Eq. (21) ​cannot be solved directly forsby its current shape. By substitutingrw,II(s),rw,IV(s)andrw,VII(s)into Eq. (21), this equation can be reformulated as(22)A(θ)⋅cos(Q(s))+B(θ)⋅sin(Q(s))+C(θ)=0,whereA,BandCare functions in terms ofθ, however in order to construct it, elements ofMwh,Mht,Vband geometric parameters of the cutting blade are used. The equation ofQfor sections II, IV  and VII is as follows:(23){Q=s/re,IIQ=(−δ⋅ρ−s+L1+L2)/ρ,IVQ=−(s−L5−L6)/re+γ2,VII .Solving Eq. (22) forQleads to the following equation(24)Q=arctan((−(−A⋅(C⋅A−A2⋅B2+B4−B2⋅C2))(A2+B2)⋅B+CB),−(C⋅A−A2⋅B2+B4−B2⋅C2)(A2+B2)).By substituting Eq. (24) into Eq. (23), the equations forscan be obtained assII=gII(θ),sIV=gIV(θ)andsVII=gVII(θ). Eventually, the mathematical representation ofC2can be written as(25)C2(θ)={rw,I(gI,θ)θI,1≤θ≤θI,2Irw,II(gII,θ)θII,1<θ≤θII,2IIrw,III(gIII,θ)θIII,1<θ≤θIII,2IIIrw,IV(gIV,θ)θIV,1<θ≤θIV,2IVrw,VI(gVI,θ)θVI,1<θ≤θVI,2VIrw,VII(gVII,θ)θVII,1<θ≤θVII,2VIIrw,VIII(gVIII,θ)θVIII,1<θ≤θVIII,2VIII ,whereθi,1andθi,2,i=I, II, III, IV, VI, VII and VIII, are lower and upper boundaries ofsfor different pieces which are obtained numerically. For pieces I, III and VI and VIII ofC2,θi,1andθi,2are obtained by solving Eq. (21) when lower and upper limits of curve parametersof the corresponding piece of the cutting edge,si,minandsi,max, are plugged in it. Therefore,θi,1andθi,2can be obtained by solving the following equations numerically, respectively,(26)si,min=gi(θi,1),(27)si,max=gi(θi,2).For pieces II, IV and VI ofC2,θi,1andθi,2are obtained by solving Eq. (22) when lower and upper limits of curve parameters, are plugged in it. Hence,θi,1andθi,2can be obtained by solving the following equations numerically, respectively,(28)A(θi,1)⋅cos(Q(si,min))+B(θi,1)⋅sin(Q(si,min))+C(θi,1)=0,(29)A(θi,2)⋅cos(Q(si,max))+B(θi,2)⋅sin(Q(si,max))+C(θi,2)=0.The representation ofC3can be obtained in the similar way as Eq. (25) for effective cutting surface of the inside blade,SEI. The equation ofC3can be written as(30)C3(ψ)={qw,I(fI,ψ)ψI,1≤ψ≤ψI,2Iqw,II(fII,ψ)ψII,1<ψ≤ψII,2IIqw,III(fIII,ψ)ψIII,1<ψ≤ψIII,2IIIqw,IV(fIV,ψ)ψIV,1<ψ≤ψIV,2IVqw,VI(fVI,ψ)ψVI,1<ψ≤ψVI,2VIqw,VII(fVII,ψ)ψVII,1<ψ≤ψVII,2VIIqw,VIII(fVIII,ψ)ψVIII,1<ψ≤ψVIII,2VIII ,whereψis the curve parameter andqwandfiare functions likerwandgi, respectively.As it is noticed in Eqs. (25) and (30), closed form equations for all pieces ofC2andC3are derived analytically where the lower and upper limits of the curve parameter ofC2andC3,θandψ, are obtained numerically.The curvesC41,C42andC43in Fig. 6 are results of intersection between the rake plane, Eq. (19), and the peripheral surfaces of the workpiece,W1,W2andW3, Eqs. (14)–(16). By substituting the equations ofW1,W2andW3forPin Eq. (19) and solving foru1,u2andu3, following equations are obtained in Box I, whereTTzisz-coordinate of the origin TT. Equations ofC41(φ),C42(φ)andC43(φ)are found by substitutingu1,u2andu3foruin the equations ofW1,W2andW3, respectively. Based on the location of the outside blade of groupnb, or in other words the location of the rake face inside the workpiece, one or two peripheral surfaces are in contact with the rake face. Fig. 6 shows the dominant situation in face-hobbing when only the surfaceW1is crossed the rake plane. In this case,W1is the effective peripheral surface,WE, andC41is the effective peripheral intersection curve,C4E. However, two peripheral surfaces are engaged with the rake plane when the cutting blade begins penetrating the workpiece or leaving the workpiece. The intersection points between boundaries,p1,p2,p3andp4are obtained numerically. The surface area ofChpcan be obtained easily using Green’s theorem. However, in order to find the area of the un-deformed chip, the varying cutting velocity along the cutting edge must be taken into consideration. In addition, the mechanistic model of cutting forces needs the differential area of undeformed chip geometry at any point on the engaging cutting edge. This concept is discussed in the following section.In the present research, the cutting forces in face-hobbing are predicted using a method developed by Habibi and Chen  [8]. The method transforms face-hobbing to many infinitesimal oblique cutting cuts (Fig. 7).Chpin Fig. 7 is the projection of the undeformed chip geometry on the rake face of the cutting blade for a small oblique cut.dAcis the area of the undeformed chip of the differential oblique cut.For each oblique elements along the cutting edge, the corresponding differential cutting forces are calculated as follows:(34)dftw=(Ktc(s)⋅dAc+Kte(s)⋅ds)⋅ntw,(35)dfrw=(Krc(s)⋅dAc+Kre(s)⋅ds)⋅nrw,(36)dffw=(Kfc(s)⋅dAc+Kfe(s)⋅ds)⋅nfw,wheredftw,dfrwanddffware differential cutting forces andKtc,KrcandKfcare cutting force coefficients andKte,KreandKfeare edge cutting coefficients. The cutting force coefficients can be formulated as follows  [16] (see Box II): whereγn,λ,φn,βn, andτsare normal rake angle, inclination angle, normal shear angle, normal friction coefficient and shear yield stress, respectively.In order to have accurate predicted cutting forces, cutting force coefficients must be estimated accurately experimentally. To do so, experimental orthogonal cutting tests (turning operations) are carried out by different feed rates, spindle speeds (which define cutting speed) and rake angles. The obtained orthogonal cutting parameters (estimated using turning experiments),φn,βnandτs, are unique for the tested workpiece and tool material pair which it means if either the workpiece or cutting tool material changes, the estimated orthogonal cutting parameters would not be valid anymore and for the new material pair a new set of turning experiments must be carried out to estimate new orthogonal cutting parameters. However, Eqs. (37)–(39) are still valid to transform orthogonal cutting parameters to oblique cutting parameters. Integrating the differential forces formulated in Eqs. (34)–(36) leads to the total cutting force,Fw, as follows:(40)Fw=∫s1s2(dftw+dfrw+dffw)wheres1ands2are the lower and higher curve parameter limits of the engaged cutting edge.In this section, the presented semi-analytical method is applied on two case studies of non-generated face-hobbing of bevel gears and the results are compared with numerical results of Ref.  [8]. Table 1lists the process parameters. The workpiece and cutting tool materials are chosen asTi6Al4Vand tungsten carbide (WC), respectively. The machining conditions for turning operations to estimate orthogonal cutting parameters are as follows: cutting speed (m/min),V∈[3,47], rake angle (°),γn∈{0,2,5,8,10,15}, feed rate (mm/rev),f∈{0.005,0.01,0.03,0.07,0.1}and the diameter of the workpiece is 100 mm  [17]. During these experiments cutting forces are measured and mathematical formulations of the cutting forces are fitted to the measured data. The obtained orthogonal cutting parameters for the given material pair can be written as  [16]:(41){τs=613MPaβn=19.1+0.29⋅γnrc=(1.755−0.028⋅γn)⋅th0.331−0.0082γnφn=arctan(rc⋅cos(γn)1−rc⋅sin(γn))Kte=24N/mmKfe=43N/mmKre=0,wherercis the chip compression ratio. In the following case studies, the cutting forces are predicted for one outside blade when it passes through a specific gear slot.The maximum un-deformed chip area reaches0.8mm2on the outside blade. Fig. 8shows several examples of derivedChpduring machining for different cutter head rotation angle,θ, and corresponding un-deformed chip area,Ac.Fig. 9shows the predicted total cutting forces for case study I by semi-analytical method (present work), numerical method (Habibi and Chen  [8]) and finite element analysis. The chosen outside blade passes through the same slot only four times (cycles a, b, c and d in Fig. 9 top).In order to validate the predicted cutting forces, the corresponding cutting forces are obtained using the commercial finite element machining software, Third Wave AdvantEdge®, for several sample locations of the blade at different cutter head rotation angles,θ. The workpiece and blade material are selected from the software library asTi6Al4Vand Carbide-Grade-P, respectively. Maximum and minimum element sizes for the tool are assigned to 1 and 0.03 mm, respectively. Minimum element size is assigned to the cutting edge. Minimum chip element is set to 0.01 mm and initial temperature is 20°C. The workpiece and tool CAD models are modeled in CATIA™ and then, STEP models of them are imported in Third Wave®. When STEP models of the tool and workpiece are imported to the software, it requires assigning boundary conditions on both models. All nodes on the assigned boundary surfaces are fixed. In the simulations, the back face of the cutter and peripheral surfaces of the workpiece which are not engaged in the cutting process are set as boundaries.The tool-workpiece material pair is the same as the material pair used to derive orthogonal cutting parameters (Eq. (41)). The selected blade locations, or cutter head rotation angles, are chosen in such a way that represents the shape of the cutting force diagrams properly in Fig. 9. Since the complex blade path in space with respect to the workpiece coordinate system cannot be modeled in ThirdWave®, therefore, the machining is assumed to be a straight cut at each selected location. Thus, the workpiece is modeled using the geometry of derivedChpat each chosen location, and the blade is mounted with respect to the workpiece using the corresponding average cutting velocity vector along the cutting edge. Fig. 10shows an example of conducted FE analysis atθ=16235°.The predicted total cutting forces and Third Wave®  results have less than 21% difference. The predicted cutting forces, in feed direction, show less than 11% difference. Reasons for these differences are explained in Ref.  [8] extensively.The semi-analytical cutting force results are in good agreement with numerical results from Habibi and Chen  [8]. However, the obtained chip is more accurate in the semi-analytical approach than the numerical method. In some locations, the numerical method overestimates, as inθ=64858°(Fig. 9(d)), or underestimates, as inθ=16240°(Fig. 9(a)). If the workpiece is discretized by a finer step size, the numerical results converge to semi-analytic results theoretically.Fig. 11shows the predicted total cutting forces for case study II. The semi-analytical results are in good agreement with numerical results (Habibi and Chen  [8]).The un-deformed chip thickness and cutting force distributions are shown in Fig. 12atθ=18784°along the cutting edge. The highlighted areas show the regions that the tool is going to be worn out faster than the other regions. The values of cutting force distributions alongx,y,z(Wx,WyandWz, respectively) and total distribution,W, as well as the chip thickness vary sharply in these regions. These results are in agreement with practical wear cases happened in gear manufacturing industries that the tool corner wears faster than other regions of the cutting edge.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
