@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A fully automatic 2D segmentation method for uterine fibroid in MRgFUS treatment evaluation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The proposed method performs a fully automatic uterus and fibroids segmentation.We provide the boundary and volume of ablated fibroid regions and uterus.Our approach is based on FCM and iterative optimal threshold selection algorithms.This solution could optimize the current operative MRgFUS methodology.Our approach can improve the follow-up of patients undergone MRgFUS treatments.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Automatic segmentation,Fuzzy C-Means clustering,Adaptive thresholding,MRgFUS treatment,Uterine fibroids,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Leiomyomas of the uterus, commonly known as uterine fibroids, are benign tumors occurring in women during reproductive years. One approach to this disease is MRgFUS, a non-invasive treatment that uses thermal ablation obtained by using the sonication process [1]. In fact, a High Intensity Focused Ultrasound (HIFU) beam on the affected area [2] reaches temperatures above 50°C, thereby causing protein coagulation and, consequently, tissue necrosis [3]. In fact, the overall therapy may involve multiple sessions or additional leiomyoma-related surgical interventions (such as myomectomy or hysterectomy). Therefore, the tumor recession needs to be followed quantitatively to assess the efficacy of the treatment.In MRgFUS treatments, MR image analysis is required in fibroid diagnosis, in the subsequent treatment phases, and in patient follow-up. In a pre-treatment phase, the uterus must be identified by the selection of some control points needed for the machine calibration (InSightec ExAblate 2100 integrated with the MR scanner GE Signa HTxt), for the treatment planning and for the localization, by means of fiducial markers, of the uterus, of the fibroids and of the neighboring organs to be protected by ultrasound. In a post-treatment phase, however, segmentation is used to estimate the uterus and ablated fibroid volumes.Nowadays, organ segmentation is performed manually, through time-consuming and operator-dependent procedures. Operator dependence is critical in terms of result reproducibility, while long treatment planning and execution times require very collaborative and motionless patients during the entire procedure (so as not to affect the uterus Region of Interest (ROI) and fibroid Region of Treatment (ROT) positions) and can have a negative impact on the optimization of both machine-time and operator-time.In this paper, we propose a novel method based on Fuzzy C-Means clustering and iterative optimal threshold selection algorithms for the fully automatic segmentation of the uterus and the fibroids within it. The proposed approach can be used to objectively evaluate the effectiveness of the MRgFUS treatment by automatically calculating the boundary and volume of the treated region (ROT). Moreover, as reported in [4], accurate assessment of the uterus (ROI) volume is very important in the follow-up of the treatment response. This solution could provide a valid support to healthcare operators (i.e. physicians, radiologists) making it possible to improve the current operative methodology.The research associated with the treatment of uterine fibroids was approved by the ethics committee, and has no implication on patient treatment. The proposed image analysis and segmentation are performed off-line and therefore do not change the current treatment protocol.The manuscript is structured as follows: Section 2 provides the literature background concerning uterus/fibroid segmentation approaches; Section 3 gives some theoretical explanation about the algorithms used; Section 4 describes the proposed automatic segmentation method; Section 5 illustrates the experimental results achieved in the segmentation tests; finally, discussions and conclusions are provided in Sections 6 and 7, respectively.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, a novel method based on Fuzzy C-Means clustering and iterative optimal threshold selection algorithms for the fully automatic segmentation both of the uterus and fibroids during MRgFUS treatment is proposed. The developed method could address and overcome some typical issues of manual segmentation approaches, such as time-consuming and operator-dependence. The proposed solution could provide a valid support to healthcare operators (i.e. physicians, radiologists) making it possible to improve the current operative methodology.Although fibroids are characterized by non-uniformity and irregularities, the proposed approach is able to segment ablated regions very accurately as demonstrated by the experimental results.Finally, our method provides a practical approach for the automatic evaluation of the boundary and the volume of ablated fibroid regions, without any user interaction or external input (e.g. treatment log files). As shown in Tables 5 and 7, the achieved segmentation results show the validity and the effectiveness of the proposed solution.None declared.