@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
TDSDMI: Inference of time-delayed gene regulatory network using S-system model with delayed mutual information

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Delayed mutual information is proposed to delete redundant regulator factors.Restricted GEP is proposed as a new representation of time-delayed S-system model.A hybrid particle swarm optimization is used to optimize the parameters of TDSS .Two step method TDSDMI is proposed to infer time-delayed gene regulatory network.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Time-delayed,Gene expression programming,Gene regulatory network,S-system,Delayed mutual information,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Regulatory interactions among target genes and regulatory factors occur instantaneously or with time-delay. In this paper, we propose a novel approach namely TDSDMI based on time-delayed S-system model (TDSS) model and delayed mutual information (DMI) to infer time-delay gene regulatory network (TDGRN). Firstly DMI is proposed to delete redundant regulator factors for each target gene. Secondly restricted gene expression programming (RGEP) is proposed as a new representation of the TDSS model to identify instantaneous and time-delayed interactions. To verify the effectiveness of the proposed method, TDSDMI is applied to both simulated and real biological datasets. Experimental results reveal that TDSDMI performs better than the recent reconstruction methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
One of the major challenges of system biology is to develop an efficient and accurate framework that could describe the dynamical behaviors of gene regulatory network during recent years [1,2]. Technologies like microarray and high-throughput sequencing could give a large number of gene expression data, which promotes inference of regulatory interactions among genes [3,4].Gene regulatory network (GRN) is one of the most important biological networks, which has some characteristics, such as strong coupling, random, time-delayed, and strongly nonlinear. In GRN, mRNA of transcription factor must first be translated into protein, and protein regulates the expression of the downstream region of target gene. The process from mRNA to regulation of transcription factor needs a time lag. The actual regulation of transcription factors from the transcription factor to mRNA requires a time delay. Almost all genetic interactions are delayed [5,6]. So time-delayed factor is one of the most important characteristics of gene regulatory network. Many methods have been proposed to identify time-delayed gene regulatory network (TDGRN). Huang et al. proposed GeneReg based on time delay linear regression to construct TDGRN [7]. Li et al. developed a new method that combined relative change ratio and time-delayed dynamic Bayesian network (TDBN) to infer networks [8]. Chueh developed a new approach to reconstruct time delay Boolean networks as a tool for exploring biological pathways [9]. Zoppoli proposed TimeDelay-ARACNE to detect time-delayed dependencies between the expression profiles by assuming as underlying probabilistic model a stationary Markov Random Field [10]. Some preprocess methods were also proposed to determine the optimal time delay in advance. For example, Mundra et al. proposed that an unbiased cross-correlation was used to determine the probability of time delay [11]. ElBakry et al. proposed that pairwise correlations between each pair of genes, for various time delays, were computed and the time delay, at which the correlation was maximum, was the estimated delay between the genes of the pair [12]. Through analysis of these methods, the following problems are not resolved. (1) Due to experimental cost and time, the gene express data has the “large p small n” problem (p is the number of genes and n is the number of experimental sample points). This problem could hinder identification work. (2) The time delay is fixed before the modeling model is constructed.To achieve a deep understanding of real-world problems in medicine, health care, technology and life sciences, some researchers have proposed reasonable mathematical methods [14]. Mathematical modeling is the art of translating problems from an application area into tractable mathematical formulations, whose theoretical and numerical analysis provides insight, answers, and guidance, useful to understand the original application [13]. One of the most successful mathematical methods is differential equation. The system of differential equations can describe the dynamic properties of a system, which changes with time quite well and predict the future states of the system very conveniently. Chen et al. proposed a system of ordinary differential equations (ODEs) to predict the small-time scale traffic measurements data [15]. Wu et al. proposed a sparse additive ODE model, coupled with ODE estimation methods and adaptive group least absolute shrinkage and selection operator techniques, to model dynamic GRNs that could flexibly deal with nonlinear regulation effects [16]. The data from real-word system inevitably contains noise. So instead of the conventional mathematical modeling approaches which are deterministic, stochastic techniques are becoming increasingly necessary. Chowdhury et al. developed a stochastic nonlinear differential equation (S-system) modeling approach to cope with the inherent noise present in the microarray data [17].In this paper, we propose a new framework based on time delayed S-system (TDSS) model and delayed mutual information (DMI) called TDSDMI to identify TDGRN. TDSDMI contains two steps. One step is that DMI could be used to delete redundant regulator factors and select the proper regulatory factor set for each target gene. This step could decrease the number of candidate regulation genes and revolve the data dimension problem. The second step is that time-delayed S-system (TDSS) model is proposed to infer TDGRN [18]. An improved gene expression programming (GEP), named restricted GEP (RGEP), is proposed as a new representation of the TDSS model. A hybrid evolutionary method based on a structure-based evolutionary algorithm and hybrid particle swarm optimization is used to optimize the architecture and parameters of TDSS model. In the process of optimization of TDSS model, the time delay could be learned from the gene expression data automatically.One synthetic data and real biological data are used to test the validity of our proposed model TDSDMI. Experimental results demonstrate that our model could infer gene regulatory network accurately.The traditional S-system model possesses a rich structure which can capture various dynamics and has a good compromise between accuracy and mathematical flexibility [19,20]. In order to model the delay characteristic of data, time-delayed S-system (TDSS) model was proposed. The form of each time-delayed differential equation i is given as follows [18]:(1)dXidt=αi∏j=1NXj,t−τgijgij−βi∏j=1NXj−τhijhij,i=1…N.Wherexj,t−τijis a vector element of dependent variables, which denotes the expression level of gene Xjat timet−τij(τij∈[0,τmax]). τmaxis the predefined maximum delayed length. N is the number of genes, αiand βiare vector elements of non-negative rate constants, and gijand hijare matrix elements of kinetic orders. Whengij>0, xjactivates the expression of xi. Whengij<0, xjsuppresses the expression of xi. hijis used for degradation.Ferreira first proposed gene expression programming (GEP) in year 2001 [21]. Due to its linear strings of fixed length like genetic algorithm (GA) and expression as nonlinear entities of different sizes and shapes like genetic programming (GP), GEP and modified GEP have been widely applied in many fields [22–24]. In this paper, according to special form of TDSS model, an improved GEP, named restricted GEP (RGEP), is first proposed.An example of TDSS represented by RGEP is illustrated in Fig. 1. TDSS contains two terms, so the chromosome in RGEP is composed of two genes. Each gene represents one term. A RGEP gene is a string of function and terminal symbols, which is composed of a head and a tail. The head part contains both function and terminal symbols, whereas the tail part contains terminal symbols only. The function (F) and terminal (T) sets are described as follows:(2)I1=F⋃T={⁎1,⁎2,⁎3,…,⁎n}⋃{x,R}.Where⁎nrepresents that n variables are multiplied, taking n arguments. x is variable and R is constant.The head could be created through selecting symbols randomly from the function set F and terminal set T. The symbols of tail are selected from terminal set T only. For each problem, user must determine the head length (h) in advanced. The tail length (t) is computed as:(3)t=(n−1)×h+1.Where n is the maximum number of arguments of functions. Suppose that the function set is{⁎1,⁎2,⁎3}and the terminal set is{x1,x2,…,x5}. The length of head is 3, and the length of tail is 7 (the maximum number of arguments of functions n is 3). Fig. 1(a) gives an example of chromosome encoding of RGEP.The number of genes in RGEP is set as 2, and the link function between two genes is represented by subtraction (−). Fig. 1(b) describes their arithmetic expression tree (ET). The linking function (−) connects the expression trees of gene1 and gene2 together to make up the expression tree of one chromosome.In the process of generating the initial population, three kinds of necessary parameters need be created randomly. The first ones are coefficients αiand βicorresponding to gene1 and gene2, respectively. In each gene, kinetic orders (gijor hij) are created randomly for every terminal node. The last parameters are time-delayed values (τij). Because each sample corresponds to one time stamp in the expression data (t1,t2,…,tmcorresponds to1,2,…,m), the time delay parameters are restricted to take only integer values. Each terminal node need to be given two kinds of parameters: kinetic orders and time-delayed values (Fig. 1(a)). The coefficients αiand βi, exponents gijand hij, and time-delayed values τijare optimized by hybrid particle swarm optimization described in Section 2.2.3.Three genetic operators are used for reproduction of chromosome of RGEP, namely mutation, recombination and selection. Mutation and recombination could generate new offsprings by changing parent population. Selection could select offsprings from parent population according to the fitness. Detailed operating methods are described in [25].To find the optimal coefficients and exponents of RGEP, a hybrid evolutionary algorithm based on particle swarm optimization (PSO) and binary particle swarm optimization (BPSO) is proposed. According to Fig. 1, we check all the parameters (αi,βi,gi1,gi2,…,gin,hi1,hi2,…,hin,τgi1,τgi2,…,τgin,τhi1,τhi2,…,τhin) contained in each model, and count their number Ni(i=1,2,…,M, M is the population size of TDSS model).The flowchart is illustrated in Fig. 2. All parameters are encoded into one chromosome. The coefficients (αiand βi) and kinetic orders (gijand hij) are real numbers, so these two kinds of parameters are optimized using PSO. However the time-delayed values (τ) are integer, so they are optimized by BPSO.•Particle swarm optimization: Each particle xirepresents a potential solution. A swarm of particles moves through space with the moving velocity of each particle represented by a velocity vector vi. At each step, each particle is evaluated and keep track of its own best position, which is associated with the best fitness it has achieved so far in a vector Pbesti. The best position among all the particles is kept as Gbest. A new velocity for particle i is updated by(4)vi(t+1)=w⁎vi(t)+c1r1(Pbesti−xi(t))+c2r2(Gbest(t)−xi(t)).Where w is the inertia weight, c1 and c2 are positive constants and r1 and r2 are uniformly distributed random numbers in [0,1]. Based on the updated velocities, each particle changes its position according to the following equation:(5)xi(t+1)=xi(t)+vi(t+1).Binary particle swarm optimization: In BPSO, the moving trajectory and velocity of each particle is defined in terms of probability. The moving trajectory represents changes of probabilities of a certain value. The moving velocity is defined as probability of a state or another state. Thus each bit xidof one particle is restricted to 0 or 1. Each vidrepresents the probability of bit xidtaking the value 1. A new velocity vidfor particle i is updated as same as PSO, which is defined in Eq. (4). xidis calculated as follows [27]:(6)xid={1,r<Sig(vid)0,other.Where r is created randomly from range [0.1, 1.0], and the functionSig(·)is defined as follows:(7)Sig(vid)=11+e−vid.The sum of squared relative error (SSRE) is usually used to search the optimal gene regulatory network according to the actual data and predicted data.(8)SSRE=∑i=1N∑j=1T(xij′−xij)2xij′.Where N is the number of genet, T is the number of sample points, xijis the raw experimental data of gene j in the ith time point, andxij′is an output data of gene j in the ith time point.Delayed mutual information (DMI) is proposed to evaluate regulatory relationship between genes. The computing process contains two steps:•Step 1: Firstly calculate the mutation information (MI) when time-delayed length τ is selected from range [0, L] (L is the maximum delay length τmax, which needs to be defined in advanced). The formula is described as follows [10]:(9)Iτ(xi,xj)=∑k=1P˜(xik,xjk+τ)logP˜(xik,xjk+τ)P˜(xik)P˜(xjk+τ).WhereIτ(xi,xj)represents MI between gene xiand gene xjwhen time delay is τ,P˜(xik,xjk+τ)is kernel function of joint probability distribution of gene xiand gene xj, andP˜(xik)is kernel function of marginal probability distribution of gene xi.The marginal and joint probability can be estimated by the Gaussian kernel probability density estimator [26].(10)P˜(xik)=1N∑j=1N1(2π)n/2σxn/2exp(−12(xij−xik)TC−1(xij−xik)).Where C is the covariance of variable xi, σxis the standard deviation of matrix C, N is the number of gene expression points and n is the number of genes.Using Eq. (10), Eq. (9) could be given as follows:(11)Iτ(xi,xj)=12log(σxi2σxjτ2σxixjτ).Step 2: Select the maximum value from all MI when τ is set as all possible values as DMI between gene xiand gene xj, which is described as follows:(12)I(xi,xj)=max{I1(xi,xj),I2(xi,xj),…,IL(xi,xj)}.Fig. 3shows the flowchart of our TDSDMI method. The details are described as follows.•Step 1: Candidate regulatory factor selection. High MI value indicates that there may be a close relationship between the two variables (genes), while low MI value implies their independence. For each target gene, genes with high MI are most likely the true regulators. According to gene express data, DMI between all possible target- regulatory pairs are computed using Eq. (12) (Fig. 3(b)). Predefine a threshold. DMI between two genes is set as zero when DMI is less than threshold (Fig. 3(c)). For each target gene, select the regulatory factors to constitute the candidate regulatory factor set. DMI between target gene and candidate regulatory factor must be not zero (Fig. 3(d)). This step could reduce the noisy regulation.Step 2: Time-delayed S-system identification. For each target gene, integrated with candidate regulatory set and gene expression data, RGEP is applied to identify TDSS to determine regulatory relationship between target gene and regulatory factors (Fig. 3(e)). The coefficients αi, βi, exponents gij, hijand time-delayed values τijare optimized by hybrid particle swarm optimization described in Section 2.3. SSRE is used as fitness function. Fourth order Runge–Kutta method (RK4) is used to solve time-delayed differential equation. Integrate all the regulatory relationships and gain the overall gene regulatory network (Fig. 3(f)).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
