@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Automated fixture configuration for rapid manufacturing planning

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Automatic rapid modular fixture configuration.Fast hashing algorithms to generate form/force closure grasps.Automatic selection & assembly of modular elements from user specified library.Includes accessibility & collision constraints for machining/inspection.Results for complex parts in realistic process plans.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Fixture synthesis,Force/form closure,Collision free planning,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The wide adoption of agile manufacturing systems has necessitated the design and use of fixtures or work holding devices that have in-built flexibility to rapidly respond to part design changes. Despite the availability of reconfigurable fixtures, practical fixture configuration largely remains an experience driven manual activity to enable customization for varying workpiece geometry, and most automated solutions do not scale well to accommodate such variation. In this paper, we address the problem of rapidly synthesizing a realistic fixture that will guarantee stability and immobility of a specified polyhedral work-part. We propose that the problem of automated fixture layout may be approached in two distinct stages. First, we determine the spatial locations of clamping points on the work piece boundary using the principles of force and form closure, to ensure immobility of the fixtured part under external perturbation. In particular, we show that the candidate restraints mapped to the six dimensional vector space of wrenches (force–moment pairs) may be hashed in a straightforward manner to efficiently generate force closure configurations that restrain part movement against large external wrenches. When clamps are allowed to exert arbitrarily high reaction forces on the part, the spatial arrangement of the clamping locations ensures the part is in form closure. On generating force/form closure configurations, the chosen locations are matched against a user-specified library of reconfigurable clamps to synthesize a valid fixture layout comprising clamps that are accessible and collision free with each other and the part. Additionally, in the case of determining machining setups the clamps are chosen to avoid collisions with the moving cutting tool. We demonstrate fast algorithms to perform both location selection and fixture matching, and show several results that underscore the practical application of our solution in automated manufacturing process planning.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Fixtures are work-holding devices used to locate and clamp a part surface to support manufacturing operations such as machining, inspection, and assembly. Typical part manufacturing requires planning several fixture setups to immobilize the work part while it is operated on in various orientations. Given a library of fixtures that may be used in a manufacturing process, a key challenge in automated manufacturability analysis is the synthesis of a fixture configuration that may be used to effectively clamp a specified work part during a manufacturing operation, and is the problem addressed in this paper.The design and fabrication of fixtures can take up to 20% of the total manufacturing cost, and using flexible or reconfigurable fixtures can lead to as much as 80% reduction in the fixture cost  [1]. Modular fixtures represent the most widely used class of flexible fixtures and are adaptable to a large class of parts. They are often used for moderate or small lot sizes, especially when the cost of dedicated fixtures and the time required to produce them may be difficult to justify. Complex workpieces are located through fixtures produced quickly from standard components and can then be disassembled when a production run is complete. Modular fixtures are typically supported on tooling plates with grid holes upon which the fixture is constructed  [2] (see Fig. 1).Fixture planning and configuration is a largely experience driven activity that focuses on determining precise location and clamping of workpieces according to a part design and process requirements. Process constraints can include collision avoidance with surrounding tooling and expected tool paths, accessibility of clamps to specified locations, part deformation under applied clamp forces, availability of fixture elements, tolerances etc. In this paper, we will focus on fixture planning with accessibility and collision avoidance constraints and choose components from an available catalog of fixture elements to determine the automatic and realistic solutions for modular fixturing of 3D parts.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Automated fixture planning and configuration for realistic three dimensional parts in a manufacturing process has not been very well addressed to date. Efforts in computing grasps for dextrous manipulators have many similarities with fixture planning but do not take process planning constraints into account. In this paper, we presented a generate and test algorithm that configures a set of locations with guaranteed stability properties that may be fixtured with a user specified library of modular fixtures while obeying accessibility and collision constraints encountered in manufacturing process planning.Using the principles of form and force closure as applied to robotic grasping, we demonstrated a novel algorithm to rapidly compute a set of clamping locations that ensure part stability under the application of external forces. Importantly, in robotic grasping the problem of finding stable or form closure grasps is often formulated in terms of computations with respect to the convex hull of wrenches in six dimensional space. We observed that the key requirement for stable grasping is determining wrenches with a positive span, which need not necessarily be computed in terms of the convex hull, and instead can be rapidly computed using a hashing scheme based on signs of Plücker coordinates of wrenches derived from sampled contact locations. We also demonstrated two fast algorithms to compute form closure configurations and showed that the convex span of the chosen wrenches may be maximized to provide grasps that resist large external wrenches.The generated locations are tested for fixturability with a library of modular fixture elements, after which a collection of clamps from the catalog is automatically assembled to produce visual feedback. Qualitatively distinct fixtures are provided easily with the generate and test approach and therefore the presented work can be integrated into a larger manufacturing process planning framework that provides detailed feedback.There are several opportunities to extend the work presented in this paper. For example, fixture planning can be made interactive by showing the partitions induced by the hashing scheme on the solid model and enabling users to pick wrenches directly from the part surface. The generated assemblies can also be used in conjunction with tool path generation and tolerance analysis to accurately outline process plans for manufacturing planning.