@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A content and structural assessment of oxidative motifs across a diverse set of life forms

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Protein is oxidized at RKPT and PEST motifs in protein during stress conditions.Mt respiration creates ROSs which are linked to oxidative damage.The frequencies of motifs attracting oxidation are shown to be reduced in Mt.These motifs are shown to be joints between turns, sheets, coils, and helices.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Carbonylation,Sequence comparison,Composition,Mitochondrial protein,Oxidative damage,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Exposure to weightlessness (microgravity) or other protein stresses are detrimental to animal and human protein tissue health. Protein damage has been associated with stress and is linked to aging and the onset of diseases such as Alzheimer׳s, Parkinson׳s, sepsis, and others. Protein stresses may cause alterations to physical protein structure, altering its functional identity. Alterations from stresses such as microgravity may be responsible for forms of muscle atrophy (as noted in returning astronauts), however, protein stresses come from other sources as well.Oxidative carbonylation is a protein stress which is a driving force behind protein decay and is attracted to protein segments enriched in R, K, P, T, E and S residues. Since mitochondria apply oxidative processes to produce ATP, their proteins may be placed in the same danger as those that are exposed to stresses. However, they do not appear to be impacted in the same way.Across 14 diverse organisms, we evaluate the coverage of motifs which are high in the amino acids thought to be affected by protein stresses such as oxidation. For this study, we study RKPT and PEST motifs which are both responsible for attracting forms of oxidation across mitochondrial and non-mitochondrial proteins. We show that mitochondrial proteins have fewer of these oxidative sites compared to non-mitochondrial proteins. Additionally, we analyze the oxidative regions to determine that their motifs preferentially tend to make up the connection points between the four kinds of structures of folded proteins (helices, turns, sheets, and coils).

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The effects of exposure to microgravity or weightlessness for extended periods of time have proven to have negative impacts on mitochondrial protein function. For instance, in Philpott et al. [19] it was found that morphological changes were observed in the left ventricle of rat hearts after space flight for 12.5days. After this short time in weightlessness aboard the Cosmos 1887 bio-satellite, many of the rats in the experiment acquired damaged and irregular-shaped mitochondria and generalized myofibrillar edema which contributed to heart failures and death. Mitochondria, which are unable to orient themselves in the cell, have been studied [4] where these dynamics were linked to several major neurodegenerative diseases – including Alzheimer׳s, Huntington׳s, Parkinson׳s and other diseases. The animals also exhibited myofibrils (rod-like units of muscles) which were abnormal after this short time of exposure. In addition, the rats in the study by Philpott et al. [19] exhibited loss of filament protofibrils (e.g., actin and myosin). The literature notes that protofibrils may be responsible for cell death in the organism, as noted in Caughey and Lansbury [3] and may have been implicated as the toxic species responsible for cell dysfunction and neuronal loss such as in Alzheimer׳s disease and other protein aggregation diseases, explored in Haass and Steiner [11].Oxidative stresses on Earth may be very similar to those noted during space flight due to naturally created free radicals and reactive oxygen species, as noted by Nikawa et al. [17]. In their study it was discovered that altered gravity conditions may be responsible for the onset of skeletal muscle atrophy in rat models, where rats were subjected to two forms of simulated weightlessness and also to actual space-flight conditions. Their study concluded that the distribution of muscular mitochondria had become diminished as a consequence of the damage to muscle fibers in all three conditions. They suggested that the muscular atrophy could be traced down to the interactions of free radicals and reactive oxygen species as a result of space-flight stresses.Since stresses and their accompanying free radical and reactive oxygen species damage also exist on Earth, the study of their interaction sites in protein may provide insight into how similar damage may be incurred in space and on Earth. In this paper, we show that there are generally less oxidative motifs in mitochondrial proteins (from our data set of enzymatic and non-enzymatic proteins) than in non-mitochondrial proteins (for the same two sub groups of protein). We draw our evidence from the reduced occurrence of carbonylation motif hot-spots which were defined by Maisonneuve et al. [15]. We contrast the scarcity of mitochondrial protein oxidative sites by showing that nuclear protein code contains many motifs which were probably not lethal to the cell since they continued to exist, or were embedded in folded protein at locations where they were allowed to prevail.We analyze the functional make-up of the existing regions of oxidation in mitochondrial and non-mitochondrial proteins to determine that the oxidative sites tend to be located in the connection points between two structural events in folded proteins (helices, turns, sheets, and coils). We determine that these functional regions hold some protein structural importance which may explain why they still exist in mitochondrial protein which produces high levels of dangerous oxidative activity.RKPT sequences and general carbonylation: Carbonyl derivatives are the result of direct metal-catalyzed oxidation interactions with the carbonylatable amino-acid side chains of arginine (R), lysine (K), threonine (T) and proline (P) residues and were explored in Maisonneuve et al. [15]. Carbonyl derivatives of cysteine, histidine, and lysine may also be formed by the adduction of reactive aldehydes which are derived from the metal-catalyzed oxidation of polyunsaturated fatty acids. In Dalle-Donne et al. [6], it was noted that the residues of lysine carbonyl derivatives may be formed by secondary reactions with reactive carbonyl compounds on carbohydrates and advanced glycation/lipoxidation end products.Proteolysis is the process of naturally removing proteins that are non-functional due to the stresses of aging and related kinds of natural damage. Here, a region of protein sequence signals a natural removal by cellular processes. The literature suggests that the age of the protein may not always be the needed trigger for protein carbonylation [14]. The same authors also studied insulin resistance (e.g., a symptom of protein degeneration) in mouse models in which they discovered that mice, having an over-expression of the human catalase gene to mitochondria, are protected from an age-induced decrease in muscle mitochondrial function and muscle insulin resistance. Furthermore, the study suggested that age-associated reductions in mitochondrial function are due to organelle-generated reactive oxygen species production, contributing to the pathogenesis of age-associated muscle insulin resistance (protein degeneration). We note that insulin-resistance, and perhaps the above-mentioned diseases associated with aging, may be avoided by therapies that reduce mitochondrial oxidative damage.Previously mentioned, aging or non-functional proteins are marked for destruction to avoid risks of failing protein in tissues. Oxidative carbonylation may not always be beneficial when it is due to environmental stresses that could create ailments such as Alzheimer׳s, cancer, cataractogenesis, diabetes, sepsis and others. Carbonylation may be central to these misfortunes since they all exhibit marked protein structures for degradation.PEST sequences: PEST sequences are hydrophilic, at least 12 amino acids in length and are rich in proline (P), glutamic acid (E), serine (S), and threonine (T). As in the case of carbonylation motifs, these regions also contain proline and threonine which may be attractors of protein degradation due to an associated short intracellular half-life. In Rechsteiner and Rogers [21], it was noted that PEST sequences are involved in proteolytic signaling for rapid protein degradation by cellular regulation and its associated control systems. The PEST sequences typically signal the protein which contains the motif(s) for quick proteolytic degradation by the 26S ubiquitin proteasome system. It was also noted that this mechanism is active after the ubiquitination at the lysine residues within the PEST sequence. Rechsteiner and Rogers [21] maintained that the PEST sequence generally acts as a signal peptide since its phosphorylation is likely necessary for protein degradation noted in Salmerón et al. [25]. These sequences have also been noted to be a stabilizing factor for L-type calcium channel proteins explored in Rogers et al. [23].PEST sequences are involved in the regulation of proteins in plants [13]. Dehydration responsive element binding is an important transcription factor that regulates environmental (abiotic) stress tolerance in plants. It was noted in Sakuma et al. [24] that a central region of the DREB2A transcription factor in Arabidopsis, acting as a negative regulatory domain, and when deleted, activates its protein under stress conditions and also allows for the up-regulation of genes associated with salt or heat-stress responsive genes. Furthermore, the authors have suggested that this mechanism involves a PEST sequence acting as a negative regulatory domain that contains phosphorylation target sites for protein kinases such as PKC and CK2.Mitochondria play a part in cellular signaling, cellular differentiation and are able to initiate cellular death. Because they are important to the cellular house-keeping and the general health of the cell, any alterations to prevent normal function in mitochondria may be lethal to the cell. The host is also at risk in the event of the dysfunction of the organelle – functional mitochondrial respiration and energy homeostasis are critical for normal heart function and skeletal muscle maintenance [12]. General muscular atrophy is also a result of impaired mitochondria [16]. Interruptions to normal mitochondrial function are often associated to other ailments and disorders such as myopathies and cardiomyopathies, diabetes mellitus, neurodegenerative illnesses such as Alzheimer׳s disease, diabetes [14] and aging, [5,7,27,28].Mitochondria are also responsible for the energy production of eukaryotic cells. In their absence, the cell would depend entirely on the anaerobic glycolysis as a source of ATP (adenosine triphosphate). When glucose is converted to pyruvate by glycolysis, only a marginal quantity of total free energy is released from the glucose which makes this an inefficient process for energy production. In the metabolism of sugars by mitochondria, the pyruvate is imported into the organelle where it is oxidized by molecular oxygen to carbon dioxide and water. The release of free energy from this operation makes an efficient process: 30 molecules of ATP are produced for each molecule of oxidized glucose, where as, only two molecules are released by glycolysis in the absence of the energy-making organelles. Mitochondria are mobile, able to change shape in the cytoplasm, and are able to drift around the cell while apparently associated with the microtubules. In some cells, they have been observed to anchor themselves to cellular locations where large amounts of ATP are necessary, such as in-between the myofibrils in a cardiac muscle cells or at the base of the flagellum of sperm cells.In muscle cells, much ATP energy is required for function which is provided by the mitochondrial matrix enzymes of inner membrane along the respiratory chain. Since the mitochondria produce these sizable amounts of energy by oxidation processes, it is likely that proteins (or regions along the proteins) which attract oxidative carbonylation would not provide an evolutionary advantage and may be removed due to evolutionary pressures. Furthermore, since mitochondria are able to merge with other like-organelles, a failure in energy production may be introduced to the unified pair to provide negative impacts to both the original organelles. On the other hand, such a point of oxidative damage attraction may not be detrimental to other kinds of proteins (e.g., nuclear) which do not function with such a significant profile in the cell. In this case, these carbonylation sites may be allowed to exist, especially if they occur in the middle of a folded protein where they cannot communicate with outside agents of biochemistry.We are interested in determining the general trends of motifs which attract carbonylation across a wide set of organismal protein sequence data. In Tables 1 and 2we give a complete listing of all the organisms that provide the sequence data for both our mitochondrial and non-mitochondrial (enzymatic and non-enzymatic) protein comparative sequence analysis, as well as the number of protein sequences in all sets. This organismal set was chosen for two main reasons: (1) the sequence data for the organisms and their mitochondrial genomes were freely available for download from the public international database, Uniprot (Protein Knowledgebase, UniProtKB, www.uniprot.org/); (2) these organisms represent a diverse group of life forms which may be sent on missions in space by NASA. For instance, during a mission of long duration, it may be desirable to send plants into space to provide much-needed nutrition for the crews. The animal, reptile and insect organisms provide more evidence from a wider variety of protein data which can be used for further comparison. By studying these organisms, we set the stage to understand how oxidation from microgravity or zero-gravity may affect them.The source of protein sequence data for this study came from the 3 May 2013 release of curated protein definitions from the UniProt-SwissProt knowledge base [9] (http://www.uniprot.org/). Within these protein definitions, the annotation keyword Mitochondrion is applied to proteins considered local to this organelle. The existence of an enzyme number was used to determine whether a particular protein is an enzyme. The BioPerl package (http://www.bioperl.org/) supports processing Swiss-Prot files and can extract protein sequences, annotation keywords and general information for each curated protein. We used the protein definitions from the Swiss-Prot release to create and populate our own SQLite database containing the protein information. Based on their genus and species, the protein sequences for the 14 target organisms of the study were extracted from the database. These protein sequences were partitioned into four protein classes based on the four possible combinations of the mitochondrial and enzyme properties.For each target organism, four combined sequences were created for the four protein classes. Each combined sequence consisted of all the proteins of the same protein class for the particular organism. Note that a delimiter character was inserted between individual protein sequences to prevent new motifs from appearing in the joins (e.g., between protein sequences) in their concatenated sequence. This delimiter served to increase the size of each protein by one which caused the coverage percent of motifs to be slightly underestimated for all cases. The protein definitions are almost all larger than 100 amino acids and thus the added space adds no more than 1% to the size of each protein. In addition, although the current paper reports results over protein data where a sequence similarity may exist across some of the sequences, we also provide all results in the Supplementary data using protein where the sequence similarity has been reduced by less than by 40%. These Supplementary results are available from the publisher׳s website.We now discuss the carbonylation content which we study across the concatenated protein content. Carbonylation and other forms of oxidative damage to cellular and mitochondrial proteins leave observable traces in the protein code [26,18]. In the study by Maisonneuve et al. [15], a system of rules was created to find carbonylation sites (e.g., profiles of oxidation attractors) in protein sequence data. The authors built these rules on the concept that carbonyl derivatives may be formed by direct metal-catalyzed oxidation attacks on the carbonylatable amino-acid side chains of arginine (R), lysine (K), threonine (T) and proline (P) residues (amino acids) in a protein sequence. These rules help to describe how to profile the RKPT-enriched carbonylation sites to be able to detect sites which are susceptible to oxidative attraction.Maisonneuve et al. suggested that their profile system could be used to generate motifs which are known to attract types of oxidation. Since mitochondria produce free radicals and reactive oxygen species (known agents of oxidation) as a result of respiration, a study of the quantity of sites that could initiate oxidation would help to explain why these proteins do not appear to oxidize more readily. By finding that this content is generally lower in mitochondrial proteins than in non-mitochondrial proteins, our study provides a deeper understanding into how nature may resist natural dangers. Furthermore, since free radicals and reactive oxygen species are also thought to be initiators of protein damage during other exposures to stresses such as microgravity [17], a study of content may explain where these protein failures are likely to occur.We used these rules to create profiles of the protein sequence sites of oxidative damage. Although [15] observed that aspartic acid (D), glutamic acid (E), tyrosine (Y), histidine (H) and cysteine (C) may be located near the hot-spot carbonylation motifs, we were only studying a distribution of 256 motifs themselves from an exhaustive list. We required the full set because the authors found that their rules do not always predict the oxidative nature of motifs by an analysis using mass spectrometry. By the same method, we created an alternative set of motifs attracting oxidation (PEST sequences) which are rich in proline (P), glutamic acid (E), serine (S), and threonine (T).We used proportions (for example, the coverage of a particular motif in the concatenated sequence data), not frequencies, to determine the impact of these motifs. A statistical tool was developed in Bonham-Carter et al. [1,2] that is able to determine the coverage across sequence material by an analysis of content of an arbitrarily selected motif set across a wide set of sequence data. Using this tool, the measurements of potential carbonylation sites were automatically normalized to allow comparison of the motif content between the sequences. To determine coverage of a particular motif in a sequence, we applied the following equation:miinSL=(count(mi)⁎|mi|)/|SL|, where miis a motif, SLis a sequence,count(mi)represents the number of occurrences of mifound in SL, and|mi|and|SL|are the lengths of the motif and the sequence, respectively. A proportion was computed for each of the n motifs of a set to create an n-length vector which would be processed by heatmaps. Each vector represented the coverage of the 256 RKPT motifs with respect to a particular protein class (mitochondrial, non-mitochondrial: enzymatic and non-enzymatic). By the same method, four vectors of size 256 are also created for the PEST motifs with respect to each organism.The Kruskal–Wallis one-way analysis of variance by ranks and its post-hoc pairwise comparison tests are sufficient to order the motif coverage over our sequence data (e.g., smallest to largest coverage). Traditional statistical tests such as the ANOVA test of means could also be applied to our data, however, we could not be sure that each test assumption (normally distributed, for example) could always be met with our biological data and so non-parametric tests were appropriate.The l-word analysis developed in Bonham-Carter et al. [1,2] was originally used to determine similarity between genetic sequence material. We used the author׳s method and tool to create vectors of motif proportion in our protein content. To create these vectors, the proportions of motifs from each RKPT and PEST set across each of the four protein class sequences are calculated and normalized. These vectors were then clustered and illustrated by heatmaps also used by the above authors.The heatmaps helped to visualize the proportions of oxidative motifs across our protein samples. In each graphic, there are four different classes of proteins shown for the organism (the enzymatic and non-enzymatic contents for each of the mitochondrial and non-mitochondrial sets). Running along the bottom of the figures are the proportions (coverages) of the RKPT or PEST motif set. The size of the proportion for each motif across each of the protein classes is illustrated by the brightness of cell colors directly above each motif. The lighter colored cells indicate larger proportions for a particular motif where-as darker cells indicate that the proportion is either zero (dark blue) or nearly-zero.Reduced mitochondrial oxidative content: For both our motif sets (RKPT and PEST) we noted that there was an overwhelming reduction of oxidative motif content in the mitochondrial (enzymatic and non-enzymatic) content. For instance, in the RKPT trials, all but three organisms indicated this reduction in mitochondrial protein content. Across the heatmaps of nearly all organisms of both the RKPT and PEST experiments we noted that in the mitochondrial proteins, there were generally more darker cells (indicating reduced motif proportions and absences). By contrast, the non-mitochondrial proteins tended to have many lighter colors to imply that these proteins contained many more motifs and generally higher concentrations. We note that this evidence suggests that mitochondrial proteins have fewer sites where oxidative carbonylation is likely to be initiated. Interestingly, in both the mitochondrial and non-mitochondrial sets, the enzymatic material tended to have fewer or lower motif concentrations than the non-enzymatic material.Figs. 1 and 2typify our findings of the RKPT and PEST sets: there were large portions of mitochondrial protein sequence code (enzymatic and non-enzymatic) which were devoid of the oxidative motifs, noted by the large expanses of darker colors, zero or near-zero proportions (no coverage) in the heatmaps. The other heatmaps (available in the Supplemental data) were similar and showed that a large part of the RKPT and PEST motifs sets also had zero or near-zero proportions in the mitochondrial sequence data. There was a striking similarity between both the RKPT and PEST sets in that there were only four organisms for which it was not completely obvious that the mitochondrial protein data had the least oxidative motifs: Rattus norvegicus (Norway rat), Homo sapiens (human), Mus musculus (house mouse) and Saccharomyces cervisiae (bakers yeast).Evolutionary importance: During the course of this study, we have noticed that there is often a link between the amount of absent RKPT and PEST material and the perceived longevity of the organism. For instance, in the above two heatmaps for the organisms maize and fruit fly which have shorter lifespans, the trends of motif absence are established. We suggest that since human lifespans are longer, the evolution of motif trends is not as pronounced as shown in Fig. 3. The heatmaps in the Supplementary data may allow other examples of this evolutionary interest to be found, although it does not appear to be a consistent finding throughout the entire set.When all the organismal vectors (56 total) were compared to each other in the same heatmap where they were clustered based on their motif content, we discovered that there were two basic sub-trees created in the RKPT and the PEST heatmaps. We also noted that across both oxidative motif sets, there were corresponding subtrees where the numbers of each type of sequence data were approximately the same. For instance, in the first subtree of the RKPT motif set, summarized in Table 3(RKPT1st), and that of the PEST motif set (PEST1st) the counts of the mitochondrial (both enzymatic and non-enzymatic) sequence data were eight (RKPT) versus five (PEST). The counts of the non-mitochondrial sequences for the same two subtrees were 22 (RKPT) and 18 (PEST). Conversely, in the second two subtrees summarized in Table 3 (RKPT2nd) and (PEST2nd), there were 20 (RKPT) and 23 (PEST) mitochondrial (enzymatic and non-enzymatic), however, there were six (RKPT) and 10 (PEST) non-mitochondrial (enzymatic and non-enzymatic) sequences. These findings suggest that the mitochondrial and non-mitochondrial sequence data (both enzymatic and non-enzymatic) had very comparable motif composition in terms of the RKPT and PEST sets, taken across in the protein sequence data.All 256 RKPT-enriched motifs are considered equally likely to promote carbonylation, we examine the coverage percentages of all such motifs to a particular combined protein class sequence in a single vector of 256 percentages. We are interested whether the percentages vary based on the protein class. Populations with significantly higher percentages would represent a protein class that is more susceptible to carbonylation. A similar argument can be made for PEST motifs. The resulting data sets of coverage percentages by the RKPT and PEST motifs did not follow a standard distribution – many of the 256 motifs had a zero coverage percentage. The resulting distributions of values were skewed by the abundance of zero values which created non-normal distributions. These distributions necessitated non-parametric tests of analysis. For each organism, we examined the data sets using the non-parametric Kruskal–Wallis rank test which was used primarily for comparing the distributions of multiple populations. Gao׳s nonparametric multiple comparison procedure was used for this purpose.The result of the non-parametric Kruskal–Wallis rank test comparing the RKPT motif coverage rate of the four protein classes in all 14 target organisms was that the null hypothesis was rejected for each organism using a 5% error allowance (α=0.05). This indicates that the distributions of coverage values are not considered to be equivalent in any of the organisms. The result of Gao׳s non-parametric multiple comparison post hoc tests showed that in 13 of the 14 organisms, the RKPT-coverage ratios in the mitochondrial proteins (both types) were found to differ significantly from those in the non-mitochondrial proteins. Between the two types of mitochondrial proteins (enzymatic and non-enzymatic), there was never a statistically significant difference in their RKPT-coverage ratios. In 13 of the 14 organisms, we noted that the mitochondrial proteins had RKPT-coverage ratios less than that of their non-mitochondrial counterparts (shown by comparison of the left and right sides of Table 4).Rankings of oxidative content: The premise of this paper is that mitochondrial protein sequence data holds the least oxidative motifs since oxidation is commonly performed in this organelle. In Table 4, we show the rankings from lowest to most oxidative motifs for both RKPT and PEST, according to our analysis. When we were ranking, if there was a tie between protein sequences, then we assigned the averages of all ranks of the tied sequences. In the case of amoeba, our Kruskal–Wallis results were inconclusive since all values were just above zero and too low to be accurately determined. We examined the RKPT and PEST heatmaps for the organism and made our rankings from the observed number of motifs contained in the protein samples. By our premise, we note that the average rankings of the mitochondrial enzymatic sequence data (ME) for RKPT and PEST were both 1.46. However, for the mitochondrial non-enzymatic (MN) data, we noted that the averages increased slightly for each: 1.96 (RKPT) and 1.86 (PEST). The mitochondrial values are much smaller than those of the non-mitochondrial sequences – the non-mitochondrial enzymatic (NE) sequence data had average rankings of 2.86 (RKPT) and 2.75 (PEST). The non-mitochondrial non-enzymatic (NN) sequence appeared to contain the most oxidative motifs from the entire set: 3.71 (RKPT) and 3.93 (PEST).Individual residues: We noted from the average content of the RKPT and PEST sequence that motifs increased in the mitochondrial to non-mitochondrial (both, enzymatic and non-enzymatic) sequence data. Since there are two residues (P and T) in common with both the RKPT and PEST motif sets, we asked whether this trend was due to an overlap of residues. We note in Fig. 4that the upward-averages from the motif sets were probably not likely due to both P and T uniquely since the trend we were looking for was largely absent. Although some of the residue averages across the organismal set appear to follow the same upward trend noted in the motif averages, the other residues do not. This finding suggests that the conjunction of some residues when found with others (forming motifs) may have been responsible for the trend of increasing averages in the protein sequences.In its primary structure, a protein appears as a sequence of amino acids which describe its functional identity. Since our study concludes that there are fewer regions which may incite oxidative activity in mitochondrial proteins, we now examine the kinds of structural features occurring at these RKPT and PEST oxidation-attracting regions. As implied already, one of the features of proline (P) in the RKPT and PEST data sets is that it is able to provide a flexible joint-like feature in the protein secondary structure. This amino acid is also likely to attract oxidative activity. Since the folded state of a protein is critical to its functional role, motifs which may allow for the alteration of the protein structure may be dangerous yet, necessary commodities. In this case, the proline component of the RKPT and PEST motif sets could be a necessary risk for the protein since it may have helped to determine some functional importance.Natural selection has appeared to favor the reduction in sites which are susceptible to oxidative activity in mitochondria. This may be due to the fact that mitochondria perform many oxidative reactions related to respiration which expose its proteins to large amounts of stress. It is therefore logical that regions which are not necessary to the protein׳s structure may not be conserved especially when they may cause danger. We suspect that these sites, although dangerous, may have been retained for some reason such as their structural contributions to the protein formation.In the next part of the study, we show that the few oxidative sites found in mitochondrial protein may also originate in regions where the oxidative content is unable to react when in contact with stress. In this work, we study the structural compositions of the regions of the sites and take into account their proportions (e.g., coverage) to show that they are often found to make-up the bends or joining regions that separate different states (e.g., the coils, sheets, helices and turns) of a folded protein. To show their bending or joining regions, we compare the number of oxidative motifs to all the other sequence content, across mitochondrial and non-mitochondrial protein. We utilize non-parametric Kruskal–Wallis rank tests to compare the proportions of structural features between these sets to draw our conclusions. Below, we list the individual tests (1 through 9) for our study where we weigh oxidation on one hand to non-oxidation on the other hand across mitochondrial and non-mitochondrial protein data. In Section 4.2, we explain the outcomes and significance of this work:1.RKPT oxidative regions within mitochondria compared to non-oxidative regions within mitochondria.PEST oxidative regions within mitochondria compared to non-oxidative regions within mitochondria.RKPT oxidative regions within non-mitochondria versus non-oxidative regions within non-mitochondria.PEST oxidative regions within non-mitochondria versus non-oxidative regions within non-mitochondria.RKPT oxidative regions within mitochondria compared to oxidative regions within non-mitochondria.PEST oxidative regions within mitochondria compared to oxidative regions within non-mitochondria.RKPT oxidative regions versus PEST oxidative regions in mitochondria.RKPT oxidative regions versus PEST oxidative regions in non-mitochondria.All words from mitochondria compared to all words from the non-mitochondria protein content.We first describe the method utilized to obtain the structural features located within the oxidative and non-oxidative protein of mitochondrial and non-mitochondrial sequence data. The Garnier tool [10], available in Emboss׳ bioinformatics toolkit [22], is a prominent software for the convenient prediction of protein secondary structural sequences [29,20]. Each organismal protein of our study was applied to this tool to determine a likely protein structure. We refer to the structural sequence as a that which was prepared by Garnier to predict the structures of the protein. This sequence is composed of the alphabet {C, E, H and T} for {Coils, Sheets, Helices and Turns}, respectively. The term, word, is reserved for regions which have been isolated from this structural sequence and are composed of protein structural information at oxidative sites. We use the term, motif, to imply a region that is made up of amino acid information and is derived from a protein sequence. We will use these two terms in the description of our method.In each protein, we determined the locations of the oxidation of the RKPT and PEST motifs. Since the relationship between an amino acid sequence (protein) and a structural sequence is one-to-one, we determine their structural nature from the structural sequences. At each oxidation site of length-4 (according to the location of the motif in original protein sequence), we recorded the length-4 word with a length-2 flanking region at both ends from the structural sequence. By adding this flanking region, we amassed more information concerning its structure. Each structural word was recorded and then removed from the structural sequence which we maintained for further testing. To avoid introducing new words into the sequence from its joining regions, we inserted a delimiter at the locations in the structural sequences. The words that were removed were recorded in lists and were later used to create a new sequence where each listed word was placed adjacently with the next listed word, separated by delimiters. In Fig. 5, we see the words of length-4 (and its length-2 flanking regions) being extracted from a structural sequence. These extracted words are shown to be used to create a new sequence which only contains the structural details of the oxidative regions. The structural sequences (devoid of oxidative motifs) are also maintained for later use.We define a grouping to be a specific word cluster where all members share a common prominent structure (e.g., a coil, helix, sheet or turn). In order to quantify the groupings which were derived from the sequence containing only structural content from the oxidative regions, we employed a sliding-window which moved from left to right down the sequence to extract all words of length-2 through 8. For each obtained word of a set for a particular length, we extracted its proportion (e.g., the sequence coverage) using the same equation as the one mentioned above in Section 2.3. This proportion was used to drive our non-parametric statistical tests which are discussed later. We extracted the word groupings (the dominant structural groups) by determining the most abundant character in the words using a majority ruling. In the case where there was a tie between two abundant characters in a word we attributed both dominant characters to the words.For example, the word, TTTCCC was characterized as contributing to both groups T and C (providing a turn and coil structure), however the word TTTT was characterized as only contributing to the group T (providing the word׳s turn structure). In Fig. 6, we illustrate the method used to assign the word groupings.We now describe the results of the outlined tests to compare the groupings of length-8 structural feature words. In each test, we determined the most prominent structural features which were in one kind of a set (oxidative or non-oxidative) and not in the other. In Figs. 7 and 8, we compared the groupings between oxidative regions within mitochondrial to non-oxidative regions within the mitochondrial proteins. For the RKPT set, we noted that the most prominent grouping was HT, suggesting that helices and turns were the most abundant kinds of structural features making up RKPT oxidative regions. These features, by comparison, were not prominent in the non-oxidative regions. In Fig. 8, CH (coils and helices) were the most prominent groupings of the PEST oxidative regions. From these two tests, we esteem that helices which become curves (or curves which become helices) are very important structures making up the oxidative regions. We suggest that any oxidative regions which are located in the mitochondrial protein may have survived so long by virtue of the fact that they were likely hidden deep within helices and curves and were therefore unable to interact with agents of carbonylation when under conditions of stress. All graphs concerning this work are available in the Supplementary data.In the tests of oxidative regions within non-mitochondria compared to non-oxidative regions within non-mitochondrial protein, of Figs. 9 and 10, we note the appearance of a length-4 grouping, CEHT. We note that this word implies that all four structures were found close to each other that made up some of the oxidative regions in non-mitochondrial proteins. In Figs. 9 and 10, curves and helices (especially for PEST motifs) were again important features in non-mitochondria which may appear to attract the oxidative motifs. Since complex structures of length-4 were not found mitochondrial oxidative motifs (from Figs. 7 and 8) we may conclude that the mitochondrial oxidative content was not found in these features. This adds support to a notion that oxidative regions exist in the simple joins between two kinds of basic structures.In the tests of oxidative regions within mitochondria compared to the oxidative regions within non-mitochondria (Figs. 11 and 12) we determine that RKPT motifs appeared to form joins of helices and turns (or vice versa) in mitochondria since HT in Fig. 11 was exceptionally prominent. This supports the preference of the motif set for helices and turns of Fig. 7. In the PEST motif set of non-mitochondria, joins between coils and helices were important structural features in Fig. 12, as they were in Fig. 8.When we compared RKPT structural features to those of the PEST set in mitochondrial protein (Fig. 13) we noted, that both sets form the joins of sheets and turns ET, although RKPT motifs appeared to inhabit more of these joins than the PEST motif set. In non-mitochondrial protein, there were fewer differences between both sets (Fig. 14) and we found that many of the structural features were present, although also in differing amplitudes. This implies that the oxidative content of non-mitochondria is able to survive in many more kinds of structural joining regions than in mitochondria.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study, we discussed general protein damage from oxidation carbonylation which has also been associated with muscular degeneration as observed from stress exposure to microgravity or zero-gravity environmental conditions. Since free radicals and reactive oxygen species are thought to be closely linked to muscular damage as a result of space-flight stresses according to Nikawa et al. [17]. Since they are also existent on Earth and initiated by other kinds of stresses, the study of protein interaction sites (both the RKPT and PEST sets) has provided knowledge about a possible mechanism for damage. In this paper, we showed that there were generally fewer sites for oxidative carbonylation in mitochondrial protein than in non-mitochondrial proteins (further divided into two discrete groups: enzymatic and non-enzymatic content). For this effort, we studied the differences of sequence composition in both datasets to locate and count profiled reaction site motifs (from the RKPT and PEST sets) which we applied to a statistical analysis.We noted from the average rankings of RKPT and PEST motif contents across each of the four concatenated sequence sets that there were generally differing amounts of the motif proportions. For example, in Table 4 it was clear that mitochondrial enzymatic protein sequence data contained the least amount of motifs which attract oxidative activity (the RKPT set). This finding was also the same for the PEST motif set. At the other end of the scale, the non-mitochondrial, non-enzymatic protein sequence data contained the most oxidative motifs (in both the RKPT and PEST sets).This phenomenon of having the least number of oxidative motifs in mitochondria may likely be explained by the fact that these organelles regularly perform procedures involving oxidation to harvest energy for their proteins. Furthermore, in muscular proteins, which require massive amounts of energy, there is generally more pressure on the mitochondria to perform their energy-amassing functions by oxidation. If certain mitochondrial proteins were attractors of unauthorized oxidative activity, then these proteins may place the organelle in the danger of being unable to fulfill their energy duties. Therefore, we suggest that the addition of elements of the RKPT and PEST motif sets, which are responsible for the types of protein carbonylation and degradation, would not enrich or positively contribute to the survival rates of the associated organelles. In this case, we maintain that they would likely be avoided by the protein sequence structure and may even be removed by evolutionary processes.We also note that there was no significant difference between the word proportions for mitochondrial and non-mitochondrial protein structures. The differences only became visible when comparing the oxidative and the non-oxidative content. We noted that the joining points where structural elements met were generally found in the oxidative regions of both protein sets. We found that there was a lower percentage of these joining-regions in the mitochondrial set compared to the non-mitochondrial set. For instance, in mitochondria, the largest percentage of structural joins in the RKPT oxidative set tended to be made up of helices joining with turns (see Fig. 7). However, the PEST set was found in fewer types of joining regions with the largest percentage occurring in the joins of coils to helices. There are four types of structural elements and every possible join between them occurs in the RKPT regions. This is not the case for the PEST content which was contained in four of the six possible joins (see Fig. 13). In particular, this set is missing the HT variety of joins which is the prominent in the RKPT regions.Oxidation sites in non-mitochondrial protein may not be exposed to a constant source of oxidative carbonylation. For this reason, their numbers may not have the same evolutionary pressures to be reduced as imaginable in mitochondria. On a final note, these sites in non-mitochondrial proteins may also reside deep within the cell where they are protected from the sources of oxidation. In future works, we will study a wider variety of proteins from diverse organisms and tissues-types to determine levels of carbonylation content. We esteem that similar tissue-types may have comparable levels of oxidative motifs.The authors declare no conflict of interests.