@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Modeling 3D garments by examples

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Designing 3D garments by directly compositing 3D parts from existing examples.Decoupling the high coupling between garment design and pattern making.The first attempt for examples-based 3D garment modeling.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Examples-based modeling,3D garment modeling,Garment prototype,Garment parts composition,Local parameterization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The clothing industry is facing rapid changes of consumer demands. Individualized clothing design has been seen as a trend in clothing industry. How to rapidly meet the consumer demands is the key problem in garment industry. The usual uncertainty and fuzziness of the consumer demands make the problem even complicated. It is meaningful to provide a conceptual design platform which helps the customers to clarify their design demands iteratively and enables the designers conveniently exploring, comparing, and evaluating the design concepts. The goal of our work is to establish a 3D graphics-based platform by seeking an easy-to-operate 3D garment modeling method.Various garment modeling methods have been developed since 1980s, most of which are typically 3D–2D–3D schemes  [1]: the process starts with a 3D conceptual idea in designer’s mind from which 2D fabric patterns are generated by pattern design tools (3D–2D stage). These patterns are then assembled and sewn together to form clothing on a 3D human model (2D–3D stage). In such a process, expert knowledge on 2D pattern generation is required. It has been shown that it takes years for a person to become an expert pattern-maker; even the design of simple garments, such as T-shirts and skirts, requires the expertise of an experienced pattern maker  [2]. In fact, in clothing industry, pattern making is a distinct job and is typically not handled by the designers themselves  [3]. The high coupling between garment design and pattern making blocks the designers’ creations. Not to mention, it would be much more difficult for common consumers to model their favorite garments.We provide a novel and feasible solution for decoupling the garment design and pattern making. Our approach is examples-based; 3D new garments are created by assembling or altering garment examples on individual human models. As shown in the left half part in Fig. 1, the examples in our database are classified into several levels according to their utilities. Users can choose proper examples with certain utilities and composite them on individual human models, as shown in the right half part in Fig. 1. Modeling 3D garments in such a “what you see is what you get” mode would greatly reduce the operation complexity and free the designers’ and customers’ creations and imaginations. Summarily, our approach distinguishes from the existing garment modeling methods with the following features:-•We propose a garment prototype guided garment parts composition method which allows designing 3D garment models by directly compositing 3D parts from existing examples. It makes easy for both the designers and customers to express their creations and imaginations in a 3D graphical way.Our approach bypasses the patterning making in the design stage, which effectively decouples the high coupling between garment design and pattern making in current mainstream 3D garment modeling methods.To our best knowledge, this work is the first attempt to create 3D garment models on individual human models by compositing parts from garment examples.It should be pointed out that our approach decouples the garment design and pattern making but not avoid the pattern making. Pattern making is postponed. After creating a 3D garment model, its 2D patterns could be obtained by trimming the 3D garment surface into several patches and then flattening these patches into 2D patterns, as would be detailed in Section  6.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. After reviewing the related work in Section  2, the feature curve-net based garment prototype generation method is proposed in Section  3. The garment prototype is used to guide fitting garment parts onto individual human models and compositing garment parts on individual human models as would be detailed in Sections  4 and 5, respectively. The manufacturability of the garment modeling result is improved in Section  6. Implementation details and user experience are described in Section  7. The whole paper is concluded in Section  8.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we propose a novel approach for modeling 3D garments. A new garment model can be created by substituting or compositing parts from examples with the guide of garment prototype. Our approach decouples the high coupling between garment design and pattern making that widely exists in the mainstream of garment design method and can free the user’s creation and imagination. Our system can be conveniently operated by both experts and common users without any design skills.This paper takes a small step down a new way; many works are to be carried out in the future:(i)Our current approach can tackle the garment examples with tubular structures, such as garment bodies, skirts, sleeves, etc., but cannot tackle piecewise parts, such as cardigans, collars, etc. This issue can also be addressed by setting curves on the garment prototype, corresponding to the boundaries of the piecewise parts, so as to align the parts and create transitional surfaces in between the parts with the guide of garment prototype, similarly as the method proposed in this paper.In this paper, we only give examples of upper garments and skirts. However, our approach could also be used for modeling 3D trousers, as long as the trousers prototypes were provided.Our current approach concerns more on visual look like than physical reality; we plan to integrate the physics-based garment draping technology into our approach.More intelligent tools are looking forward to be developed, such as intelligent retrieval that can automatically suggest appropriate garment parts for the user to make the operation easier.