@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Quantitative assessment of myocardial fibrosis in an age-related rat model by ex vivo late gadolinium enhancement magnetic resonance imaging with histopathological correlation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
High-resolution LGE CMR imaging can detect age-related myocardial fibrosis.There was a significant increase of collagen in the aged vs. the young rat hearts.Quantitative LGE and texture analysis correlated well with histology measurements.Texture analysis may improve the myocardial fibrosis assessment in LGE CMR images.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Diffuse myocardial fibrosis,Gadolinium,Magnetic resonance imaging,Texture analysis,Computer quantification,Aging,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstractThis study assessed age-related diffuse myocardial fibrosis in two different age rat groups using quantitative texture analysis of high resolution ex-vivo late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging. Results were compared with histological references. There was a significant increase of collagen fibers (%LV fibrosis) in the LGE CMR and contrast texture images of the elderly compared to the young group. Our results suggest that texture analysis may improve the assessment of subtle age-related myocardial fibrosis from LGE CMR images with a higher separability and increased SNR.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The presence of myocardial fibrosis is associated with the development of cardiomyopathies [1] and has been shown to increase with age [2–4]. Myocardial fibrosis in nonischemic cardiomyopathy (NICM) may alter the morphology and function of the myocardium and lead to adverse cardiac outcomes [5–7]. Non-invasive imaging methods are therefore desirable for the detection and quantification of fibrosis in the myocardium and to stratify the risk of sudden cardiac events.Currently, myocardial infarction or scar from ischemic cardiomyopathies (ICM) is identified by late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging [8]. The combination of the contrast agent kinetics and the jeopardized cellular structure of the myocardium result in signal enhancement in the diseased area. Ex-vivo imaging of myocardial infarction can be performed at a near-cellular level and closely match with histologic myocardial fibrosis [9]. Myocardial infarctions are focal, and are seen as concentrated patches of enhancement in LGE CMR images. However in the presence of diffuse fibrosis, there is an intermingling of healthy and diseased myocardial cells accompanied by an increased extracellular space, which results in subtle non-uniform regions of enhancement across the myocardium in LGE CMR images. It has therefore been challenging to quantify the level of fibrosis in the myocardium from NICM using conventional approaches. For example, clinicians relied on the visual appearance of enhanced regions in LGE CMR images to characterize diffuse myocardial fibrosis, using qualitative descriptions such as: “patchy foci, heterogeneous, multifocal, and non-specific” [1]. Standard quantification methods, such as signal enhancement thresholding, used to detect focal myocardial scars in ICM, may not work for diffuse fibrosis in LGE CMR images [10–13]. Other quantification methods of diffuse fibrosis relied on the non-focal aspect of diffuse fibrosis [14]. More recently, descriptors based on acquisition parameters such as the pre- or post-contrast T1 and extracellular volume fraction (ECV) imaging techniques have emerged to measure diffuse myocardial fibrosis from various etiologies [10–13,15–20]. There are an increasing number of studies assessing the reliability of these methods to detect diffuse myocardial fibrosis. The advantage of these methods is the absolute scale to measure these myocardial tissue properties. CMR diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) has been explored in patients with heart failure to characterize the myocardial microstructure in the presence of diffuse fibrosis [21]. Alternatively, T2 measurements have been successful in detecting diffuse myocardial fibrosis [22]. However, in former studies when the acquisition methods are not available, an image based analysis method to identify diffuse myocardial fibrosis could be beneficial.Quantitative texture measures from CMR image have previously been applied to characterize the structural complexity of the myocardium that changes in the presence of disease. Eftestol et al. [23] found texture analysis in the infarct area combined with LV ejection fraction measurement could discriminate patients at higher risks of developing arrhythmia. Kotu et al. [24] studied how texture analysis could segment myocardium infarct region from remote myocardium and as well distinguish higher risk patients with implantable cardioverter defibrillator for the treatment of ischemic cardiomyopathies. More recently, Thornhill et al. [25] applied texture analysis to LGE CMR of patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and found distinct texture features could discriminate those patients from healthy volunteers, even without the presence of significant hyper-enhancement in the myocardium. However, all these studies lacked histological validation.The specific aim of this study was to determine whether quantitative texture analysis of LGE CMR images can detect subtle myocardial fibrosis. We hypothesize that computational texture analysis of the LGE CMR images may improve the assessment of more subtle and heterogeneous myocardial fibrosis and may discriminate elderly from young hearts.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We demonstrated that high resolution LGE CMR images can detect the presence of subtle age-related myocardial fibrosis in ex-vivo rat hearts of different aged groups. Texture feature analysis of those images may add additional value to the assessment of fibrosis in the myocardium. A significant increase of myocardial fibrosis was found in the elderly group compared to the young rats in this study. Our results show both signal intensity and contrast texture analysis of the LGE CMR images can separate the two age groups of rats with great accuracy, although the SNR was increased for the contrast texture maps. The quantification of fibrosis on both LGE CMR and histology data correlates well. This is the first CMR imaging study that confirms diffuse myocardial fibrosis that occurs due to aging can result in a complex signal intensity pattern in high resolution LGE images and that texture analysis can be successful in identifying fibrotic myocardial regions. These techniques may be useful for analyzing LGE CMR images in patients with various cardiomyopathies but this will require further studies.