@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Formation of reentrant circuits in the mid-myocardial infarct border zone

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Ventricular tachycardia is commonly caused by a reentrant circuit.Reentrant circuits are not always mappable on endocardial or epicardial surfaces.In the study, a model is presented of mid-myocardial reentrant tachycardia.The model is based on convex wavefront curvature, which causes functional block.Both slabs and conduits of surviving viable mid-myocardial tissue can support reentry.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Circuit,Curvature,Reentry,Ventricular tachycardia,Wavefront,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
IntroductionIn this study, the mechanisms for onset and maintenance of mid-myocardial (intramural) reentrant circuits are considered, based upon anatomical structure.MethodA model of electrical activation wavefront curvature in the mid-myocardial postinfarction border zone is developed. Two arrhythmogenic structures are considered: 1. a constrained slab of viable tissue, and 2. a strand of surviving myocardial fibers with distal expansion. Equations are formulated to estimate activation coupling intervals, and ranges in taper and circuit dimensions, that will support functional conduction block during premature stimulation and reentrant ventricular tachycardia.ResultsFor onset and maintenance of reentry, the arrhythmogenic regions forming both slab and strand circuits are in the range of 50–600µm at their thinnest dimension. For constrained slabs, unidirectional block leading to reentry forms in the thin-to-thick direction during premature stimulation, and functional block at lateral boundaries enable formation of a double-loop circuit. The activation wavefront proceeds around the impediment and then curves in the opposite direction through the slab, reentering the previously excited tissue. For strands, unidirectional block forms at a distal expansion in response to premature stimulation. The strand reentrant circuit is bounded by infarcted tissue causing anatomical block, and can be single-loop or coaxial. For all architectures, circuit dimensions ranging from 1.6×1.6mm to 3.5×3.5mm support functional block when premature stimulus coupling intervals are 117–150ms and ventricular tachycardia cycle lengths are 160–350ms.ConclusionsFor slab and strand mid-myocardial arrhythmogenic structures, taper and circuit dimensions govern ranges in premature excitation coupling intervals and tachycardia cycle lengths necessary to support functional block.In prior work, reentrant circuit formation at the postinfarction surface of the heart was described based upon critically convex wavefront curvature, which results in functional conduction block [1,2]. Such circuits are entirely mappable with contact electrodes, and are evident in clinical as well as canine episodes of ventricular tachycardia [3]. During tachycardia, the reentrant circuit tends to reside at the endocardial surface in clinical post-myocardial infarction [4], and at the epicardial surface in canine postinfarction hearts [5], although intramural and opposite surface reentry can also be observed [6,7]. The electrical activation wavefront typically propagates in a thin surviving layer of border zone that is adjacent to the heart surface, with the infarct at depth. The circuit is therefore maintained in part by no-flux anatomical boundaries, i.e., non-conducting zones consisting of heart surface and infarct. The central common pathway, also called the diastolic pathway or isthmus of the reentrant circuit, is coincident with the thinnest border zone [1,8,9] and is bounded laterally by functional conduction block. These arcs of block result from the presence of source–sink mismatch and critically convex wavefront curvature, when current generated from a smaller volume of previously excited myocardium at the thinnest border zone is insufficient to activate the larger volume of surviving myocardium in the distal, laterally outward direction. This has been observed to occur when the thinnest infarct border zone is ≲500µm [8,9]. The presence of critically convex wavefront curvature, source–sink mismatch, and functional block is rate-dependent [10,11]. That conduction block is functional, not anatomic, is evident since it is only present at the short activation coupling intervals of premature stimulation and ventricular tachycardia, not at the longer cycle lengths of normal sinus rhythm [12,13].Previously, it was shown in postinfarction canine hearts that the thinnest epicardial border zone has an average thickness of 231µm at the reentry isthmus location, while the outer circuit pathway averages 1440µm in thickness [1].Fig. 1 depicts the configuration based upon prior work. There is a step change in infarct border zone thickness from 231µm to 1440µm across the lateral isthmus boundaries (dashed lines in Fig. 1A) but a more gradual change along the isthmus long axis. During premature stimulation from the site noted, unidirectional conduction block can occur at the region of gradual change, i.e., the proximate edge of the proto-isthmus entrance, when the wavefront results from a premature stimulus [2]. The wavefront then bifurcates, traveling as two distinct wavelets about the sides (Fig. 1A) [2]. The wavelets then curve and coalesce, and propagate as a single impulse in the opposite direction. If sufficient time for recovery of excitability has elapsed, the merged impulse can cross the unidirectional block line from the opposite side to reenter the previously excited region, initiating reentrant ventricular tachycardia, as illustrated in Fig. 1B. The circuit will be stably maintained only if there are lateral bounding lines of functional conduction block which are approximately constant in position (thick lines). Outward across these lateral boundaries, the sharp change from thinnest-to-thick border zone causes critically convex wavefront curvature and functional block. The electrical impulse thus propagates through the isthmus, but it cannot traverse outward at the lateral boundaries (as noted by small blue arrows and double lines in Fig. 1B). Since conduction block occurs at both lateral edges, a double-loop circuit configuration is initiated, and maintained during reentry [2].Although the above model describes reentrant circuits at the heart surface, ventricular tachycardia sometimes exhibits an incompletely mappable or even an entirely unmappable circuit there, but it is evidently not focal in origin, suggesting that the circuit may either contain transmural components, or perhaps is entirely constrained to the mid-myocardium (intramural location). In this study, the model developed for reentrant circuits forming at the heart surface is extended to describe anatomical structures causing arrhythmogenicity in the mid-myocardium. Equations are formulated to express the unique structural aspects of the mid-myocardium that can lead to onset and maintenance of reentrant circuits as a source of ventricular tachycardia from this region. The equations are used to estimate the mid-myocardial geometric dimensions and characteristics leading to functional block and reentry, which is partially validated by comparing with prior work, and can be further tested in future studies.In this section, equations that describe wavefront curvature causing functional block at the postinfarction surface of the heart are first reviewed [1,2,14]. Then equations describing critically convex wavefront curvature at mid-myocardial arrhythmogenic structures are formulated.When the infarct border zone resides at the heart surface, the conduction velocity equation for thickness-induced changes in wavefront curvature can be written as [2]:(1)θ≈θo−Dc⋅ΔTTwhere θ is the wavefront conduction velocity, θois the velocity when the geometry of the conducting medium along a particular distance is unchanged, T is the border zone thickness, c is the spatial transition step, or space step, and D is the diffusion coefficient, with c and D both constant, and ΔT is the spatial change in thickness per unit space step c, taken as the absolute maximum ΔT in the vector field about the measurement point [1,2]. The approximation sign is used to simplify a more complex equation derived in prior work [1], and is valid when the absolute maximum ΔT≪c. For functional conduction block to occur, from Eq. (1), the following condition must therefore be met:(2)θo<˜Dc⋅ΔTTwhich will occur when T is minimized and ΔT is maximized, i.e., as the activation wavefront propagates along a sharp transition from thinnest-to-thick border zone. An approximation is used in Eq. (2) because very slow conduction may effectively result in functional block if the tachycardia cycle length is shorter than the wavefront travel time across the lateral boundary. The conduction velocity equation can also be written as follows [11,15]:(3)θ=θo−D⋅ρwhere ρ is the absolute magnitude of the degree of wavefront curvature. From Eqs. (1) and (3):(4)ρ=1c⋅ΔTTor:(5)ρ⋅c=ΔTTFor surface reentrant circuits in canine postinfarction, on average based upon prior measurements [1] shown in Fig. 1, Eq. (5) has a value from isthmus to outer pathway of:(6)ΔTT=1440µm−231µm231µm=5.23(unitless)From Eqs. (5) and (6):(7)ρ⋅c=5.23To determine the relationship between ρ and c, the degree of wavefront curvature can also be written by modeling the activation wavefront leading edge as a circular arc [16], as illustrated inFig. 2A. The circular arc corresponding to the wavefront leading edge has a chord length of w; thus the absolute degree of wavefront curvature can be written as:(8)ρ=sinβw/2where β is the angle between the wavefront propagation direction and the no-flux boundary at the wavefront endpoints. When the wavefront propagates through a narrow isthmus opening to an expanse, β=90° (Fig. 2B). In this configuration, for longitudinal wavefront propagation through a narrow aperture created by incisions, which are no-flux boundaries, functional conduction block has been shown to occur for a width w=0.6mm at the narrow opening, when the coupling interval for programmed electrical stimulation is 200ms [10]. This work was done in sheep myocardium; both sheep and canine hearts are similar in size to human hearts, which minimizes the structural differences [17]. At this value of w, from Eqs. (7) and (8):(9a)ρ=2⋅sin(90°)0.6mm=3.33mm−1(9b)cmax=5.233.33mm−1=1.57mmwhere cmaxis the approximate maximum value for the thin-to-thick spatial transition step which still results in conduction block at this coupling interval. In accord with the value of cmaxin Eq. (9b), a spatial transition distance of ~1–2mm from thinnest-to-thick border zone is observed at the lateral isthmus boundaries, and functional block is maintained there at ventricular tachycardia cycle lengths [1], which average 200ms in postinfarction canine hearts [18]. At a faster coupling interval of 150ms, a typical interval for premature excitation when programmed electrical stimulation is used to initiate reentrant ventricular tachycardia, conduction block for the configuration of Fig. 2B will occur when the isthmus width w=1.29mm [10]. At this activation rate:(10a)ρ=2⋅sin(90°)1.29mm=1.55mm−1(10b)cmax=5.231.55mm−1=3.37mmAnd at the faster coupling interval of 117ms, block will occur for a width w=2.64mm [10]. At this activation rate:(11a)ρ=2⋅sin(90°)2.64mm=0.758mm−1(11b)cmax=5.230.758mm−1=6.90mmFor comparison, the values calculated in Eqs. (9)–(11) are shown inTable 1. The values for cmaxin Eqs. (10b) and (11b) (right hand column in Table 1) are in accord with the approximate length of 4–10mm that is observed at the proto-isthmus entrance (as noted in Fig. 1A), i.e., the location where unidirectional block forms at premature coupling intervals of 117–150ms during programmed stimulation [2]. Thus, the heart surface circuit dimensions observed at onset and maintenance of reentrant ventricular tachycardia are in agreement with model predictions.The above paradigm for describing the presence of functional block leading to reentry was developed for activation wavefront propagation when the infarct border zone is located at the heart surface. Suppose however that the border zone is confined to the mid-myocardium. Let a slab of surviving tissue be constrained along one axis, the Z-axis, as is illustrated in the schematic ofFig. 3A. The infarct is shown in green and has two components, that limits, at top and at bottom, the extent of the surviving mid-myocardial slab of tissue, which is located between the infarct components and is not colored. When the wavefront moves laterally in Fig. 3A (depicted by short red arrows), it will block at the sharp expansion, as in Fig. 2B, if the slab thickness w≤0.6mm, and the space step c along which the rapid expansion occurs is ≤2mm, at average ventricular tachycardia cycle lengths (200ms) (Eq. (9)).In Fig. 3A, functional block may also occur in the forward direction (long arrow) if there is sufficient source–sink mismatch at the distal expansion. The constrained slab may also be irregular, as illustrated in Fig. 3B. In this case, calculation of the degree of wavefront curvature, and determination as to whether or not block will occur in the forward direction, can be done piecewise over segments, with each segment having an approximately unchanging angle β. Over the segment marked by w in Fig. 3B, the wavefront would actually be concave, not convex, facilitating propagation and increasing the conduction velocity, since the surviving myocardium becomes thinner in the travel direction at that location. To determine whether unidirectional conduction block will occur in the forward direction for an constrained mid-myocardial slab, the wavefront leading edge can be modeled as illustrated inFig. 4. The chord length at the starting position (position 1) is w. Over the space step c, when the wavefront arrives at position 2, the chord length increases to a value of 2·r2. From trigonometry:(12)sinβ=oppositehypotenuse=r2−w2c2+(r2−w2)2Suppose as a first approximation:(13)c≫r2−w2where the much greater symbol in Eq. (13) (i.e.,≫) means at least 2×. Then from Eq. (12):(14)sinβ≈r2−w2cThus, from Eqs. (8) and (14):(15)ρ=1c⋅r2−w2w/2=r2w/2−1cEq. (15) can be rewritten as:(16)ρ⋅c=2r2−wwwhich is the mid-myocardial equivalent to expansion of the border zone at the heart surface described in Eq. (5), i.e.:(17)2r2−ww⇔ΔTTThe quantity on the left-hand-side in Eq. (17), representing the taper of the mid-myocardial slab in the forward direction, becomes larger for a lesser initial chord length w, and for an increase in the change in chord length 2r2−w. This is similar to the quantity on the right-hand-side in Eq. (17), representing the taper of circuits at the heart surface [1,2], which becomes larger at the thinnest border zone where T is at its smallest value and the change in thickness ΔT is positive.Eq. (15) can also be rewritten as follows:(18)ρc+12=r2wwhere the right-hand-side in Eq. (18) is related to the ratio of the chord length at the traveled position 2 to the chord length at the initial position 1. To calculate the dimensions necessary for unidirectional block, angles βxand βyin Fig. 3a can be averaged. From Eq. (14):(19)sinβx≈rx−w2c(20)sinβy≈ry−w2cThus:(21)sinβavg≈rx+ry−w2⋅c=rx+ry2−w2c=r¯−w2cwherer¯is the average value of rxand ry. Therefore, r2=r¯. Supposing, as a first approximation, that similar dimensional changes occur at a constricted slab of surviving mid-myocardial tissue as at the heart surface, then ρ·c=5.23 (Eq. (7)), and from Eq. (18):(22)ρc+12=5.23+12=3.12=r2wBased on Eq. (22), the value of r2, and the chord length 2r2 at the traveled position 2, for which unidirectional block will occur, can be calculated for a range of initial chord lengths w at position 1, and are provided inTable 2. In this table, Eq. (13) is valid to w=0.6mm, at which point cmaxat the 150ms coupling interval, 3.37mm (Eq. (10b)), is approximately twice the value of r2−w/2 (1.57mm). At the mid-myocardium, 0.6mm, or 600µm, is likely the upper limit for the thinnest portion of the constrained slab, so as to support both unidirectional block in the forward direction during premature stimulation, and functional block along the lateral boundaries during ventricular tachycardia, at the coupling intervals used in Eqs. (9)–(11). The lower limit of initial thickness, 0.05mm, is in accord with the lower bound of average isthmus thickness measured for surface reentrant circuits in postinfarction canine hearts [9].Mid-myocardial reentrant circuits may also take the form of an electrically conducting strand, or conduit. A symmetric conduit is illustrated inFig. 5A. Since the conduit is symmetric, the chord length w can be obtained for any orientation. For the short segment of conduit shown, there is no change in taper; hence the leading edge of the activation wavefront would be planar and perpendicular to the travel direction. An actual conduit, however, is likely to taper and be asymmetric, as illustrated in Fig. 5B. As shown, any cross section of this conduit is more oblong than circular. To estimate the degree of wavefront curvature along this conduit, as a first approximation the chord length along multiple axes, as compared with two axes for the case of a constrained slab, can be integrated about the solid angle, i.e. by measuring, from Eq. (21):(23)sinβavg=r¯−w2cwith:(24)r¯=∑mi=1riwhere m measurement orientations originating at the conduit center are used to determine the average. Conduction block at the lateral boundaries of the conduit is anatomical in Fig. 5, not functional as for the slab of Fig. 3, i.e., the conduit is composed of a surviving strand of viable myocardium surrounded by infarcted tissue, such that no-flux conditions exist at the wavefront endpoints.Based on this configuration, a reentrant circuit would be anticipated to form according to the following paradigm. Suppose there are two surviving strands of viable myocardium connected at the ends, with infarcted tissue being present around them. This is illustrated as a schematic inFig. 6. Let a premature impulse arising from elsewhere reach one of the ends where the strands are connected. The impulse will propagate along both strands as illustrated in Fig. 6A. There is a sharp distal expansion along the top strand. If the conduit is sufficiently narrow proximal to the expansion, and if it expands to a sufficient degree so that the traveling wavelet becomes critically convex, then unidirectional block will occur in the forward direction, as noted by the double line in Fig. 6A. The wavelet along the lower strand proceeds unimpeded. At the right end where the strands are connected, it propagates into the upper strand, and successfully passes through the expansion without blocking (Fig. 6A), owing to the more gradual expansion in the travel direction. With sufficient delay for recovery of excitability, it then traverses the unidirectional line of conduction block in the opposite direction, leading to onset of reentry (Fig. 6B). The circuit therefore consists of a single loop. During reentry through this mid-myocardial conduit, electrical activity can conduct to other heart regions via connections at the ends of the strands, as shown by the outwardly directed arrows in Fig. 6B.Based upon integration about the solid angle for the conduit, using Eqs. (23) and (24), it would be expected that unidirectional conduction block would occur, as in Fig. 6A, for similar parameter values as are given in Tables 1 and 2. Instead of chord length w being measured in two dimensions as for the slab configuration however, the starting aperture of the strand where unidirectional block occurs would be the mean diameter of the conduit at position 1, which would be on the order of 0.05–0.6mm as in the column for chord length w (Table 2). Similar spatial transition intervals c of approximately 4–10mm would be anticipated to result in conduction block at a sharp distal expansion of the conduit, when the coupling interval of the incoming premature stimulus is on the order of 117–150ms.In canine postinfarction, the average isthmus XY (surface) dimensions in the epicardial border zone are 21mm×21mm [18]. Rounding, suppose as a first approximation that a reentrant circuit loop is square with dimensions 20mm on each side. The average conduction velocity at the reentry isthmus location is 0.47mm/ms, while it is 0.25mm/ms at turning points around the circuit, and 0.76mm/ms away from the isthmus in the border zone [19]. Let the average conduction velocity in this region therefore be approximately 0.4mm/ms. The path length around the circuit is 20mm×4 sides=80mm, and the travel time for the wavefront to traverse this path would be:(25)80mm×ms0.4mm=200mswhich is the average ventricular tachycardia cycle length in postinfarction canine hearts [18]. Very fast ventricular tachycardias with cycle lengths of approximately 160ms have sometimes been observed in canine postinfarction [2,18]. At a cycle length of 160ms, a circuit loop approximately square in shape would have dimensions of:(26)160ms×0.4mmms=64mmor 16mm on each side. This would be the approximate minimum expected size of a reentrant circuit loop, although circuits of smaller dimension might possibly exist, depending upon the degree of slowing around turning points due to convex wavefront curvature [2,11]. The maximum circuit size would depend on the maximum cycle length for which the circuit is not interrupted by a sinus beat. The S1 coupling interval used for programmed electrical stimulation in canine hearts is typically 350ms [20] so as not to be interrupted by a sinus beat. At this activation rate, a reentrant circuit causing ventricular tachycardia would have dimensions of:(27)350ms×0.4mmms=140mmwhich for a square configuration is 35mm on a side. The first two columns of Table 1 can be plotted in order to estimate ρ at cycle lengths of 160ms and 350ms. The linear regression equation, with an r2 value of 0.99 (SigmaPlot ver. 13.0, Systat Software, 2014), is:(28)ρ=(0.0314×cyclelength)−3.00Based on the regression analysis, at a tachycardia cycle length of 160ms, ρ=2.02mm−1 and at 350ms, ρ=7.99mm−1. Using these values for the degree of wavefront curvature in Eq. 7, the spatial transition across the lateral boundaries from thinnest-to-thick border zone for the surface and mid-myocardial slab configurations must be c≤2.59mm at a tachycardia cycle length of 160ms and c≤0.655mm at a cycle length of 350ms. Therefore, very short spatial transition distances would be needed for functional conduction block to occur in the lateral direction from thinnest-to-thick border zone when the circuit pathway is long and the tachycardia cycle length approaches the maximum anticipated value of 350ms.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
For the types of mid-myocardial arrhythmogenic structures described herein, it is possible for unidirectional block to occur when the region is electrically activated at premature coupling intervals, which can lead to reentry in the previously excited area. If the area is bounded laterally by arcs of conduction block, either functional (slab) or anatomical (strand), then a reentrant circuit can be maintained. Based upon structural considerations, the circuit will tend to have a double-loop configuration for circuits arising at constrained mid-myocardial slabs, similar to double-loop circuits forming at the heart surface, while for a circular mid-myocardial double-strand connection in its simplest form, the circuit will be single-loop, or coaxial, although more complex strand connections could possibly result in the formation of a reentrant circuit with two or multiple loops. The taper and circuit dimensions of the arrhythmogenic structure govern the ranges in premature excitation coupling intervals resulting in reentry onset, and the tachycardia cycle lengths necessary to maintain the circuit.