@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Shape changes of bioprinted tissue constructs simulated by the Lattice Boltzmann method

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A Lattice Boltzmann model describes shape changes of tissue constructs in hydrogel.We simulate the evolution of structures built by printing multicellular cylinders.A defect in a bioprinted tissue construct increases as cells rearrange.A stack of multicellular cylinders may give rise to a perfusable tissue construct.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Tissue engineering,Tissue fusion,Numerical simulation,PETSc,Hydrogel,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
When tissue damage impairs the function of an organ, transplantation is one option. Nevertheless, in Europe alone about ten people die every day while waiting for a transplantable organ [1,2]. The waiting list of the Eurotransplant International Foundation (which spans seven European countries) includes about 15,000 transplant candidates [1]. In the United States, according to the Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network, as of August 21, 2015, 133,602 people are waiting for a transplantable organ; in contrast, the number of donors was of about 6000 in 2015, and 14,400 in 2014 [3].Transplantable organ shortage motivates research in regenerative medicine and tissue engineering. Tissue engineers combine methods of cell biology, polymer chemistry and engineering to build three-dimensional (3D) constructs suitable for replacing or repairing damaged tissues [4,5]. On the long term, tissue engineering aims to build functional organs, thereby solving the problem of transplantable organ shortage [6].Understanding the principles of morphogenesis is indispensable for developing efficient strategies in tissue engineering. In this endeavor, computational methods proved valuable in pointing out dominant morphogenetic mechanisms [7]. Random walk, Monte Carlo and particle dynamics algorithms have been used to simulate rearrangements of cells in vitro and in vivo[8]. Monte Carlo models of cellular resolution [8–10], although unable to account for tissue rheology, were able to simulate shape changes of artificially assembled multicellular systems. Among these, kinetic Monte Carlo simulations proved especially successful in predicting multicellular rearrangements in bioprinted tissue constructs made of heterotypic cell aggregates [9]. The kinetic Monte Carlo approach was recently extended to address the time evolution of a bioprinted vascular network [10], an important problem of bottom-up tissue engineering. Based on a careful calibration of the time scale [9], kinetic Monte Carlo simulations predicted the time course of the emergence of branched tubes made of endothelial and smooth-muscle cells [10].Using the CompuCell3D modeling environment (based on the Glazier–Graner–Hogeweg model, also known as the cellular Potts model), Thomas et al. [11] simulated the fusion of two contiguous multicellular aggregates and pointed out the role of individual cell motility in this process. To simulate cell invasiveness in the context of a two-dimensional wound healing assay, Scianna proposed and extension of the Glazier–Graner–Hogeweg model, in which cells are represented as a set of three subcellular compartments (nucleus, cytosol and plasma membrane), moving on substrates covered by collagen fibers of various architectures [12]. Tissue fusion was simulated also by a model that takes into account the resistance of cells to shape changes, cell adhesion, drag forces, and active forces exerted by adjacent cells [13].A wide variety of multicellular systems are viscoelastic, behaving as elastic solids on short timescales (seconds) and highly viscous fluids on long timescales (hours) [13–15]. Tissue rheology is well captured by several computational models [13,16–18]. A detailed model of subcellular viscoelasticity [16] proved able to describe individual cells, as well as cell populations in interaction with the extracellular matrix. In this model, a cell is composed of subcellular elements (nodes) that represent the plasma membrane, viscoelastic elements that represent the cytoskeleton, and nodes bound by viscoelastic elements that represent the cell nucleus. The model incorporates cell growth, cell division, cell death and cell adhesion. It was used to simulate relevant morphogenetic phenomena involving hundreds of cells [16]. The subcellular element model (ScEM) [17,18] views cells as a set of nodes (subcellular elements) subject to pairwise interactions described by an effective potential. Nodes represent micrometer-sized volume elements of the cytoskeleton, whereas the interaction potential describes forces mediated by protein filaments that connect neighboring volume elements. The potential describes short range attraction, as well as repulsion at short distances, accounting for volume exclusion. Nodes located on the interface between two different cells are also subject to an intercellular interaction potential, which accounts for cell adhesion. The ScEM also incorporates cell growth, cell division and active forces exerted by cells, being suitable to simulate morphogenetic phenomena involving thousands of cells [18]. A recent model of cellular resolution [19] captures tissue plasticity in simulations of epithelial layers made of hundreds of cells. In this model, cells are represented as point-particles able to establish bonds with their neighbors. Unlike radial interactions, these bonds are able to transmit non-central forces and torques; moreover, they are dynamic.Individual-based computational models enable us to study morphogenesis and tissue biomechanics. Certain tissue engineering applications, however, do not require the level of detail offered by individual-based models. A typical tissue construct consists of106−109cells. Therefore, the focus is on the shape changes of the construct rather than on the movement or shape changes of individual cells. Moreover, on the timescale of interest in tissue engineering (days) many biological tissues behave as viscous fluids. Hence, in a first approximation, the viscoelasticity of cells and tissues, which is manifest at timescales of minutes, may be omitted if we aim to describe the evolution of a tissue construct.As an alternative to individual-based models, our group developed a Lattice Boltzmann (LB) model of a multicellular system placed in cell culture medium [20]. Since it describes evolution in terms of distribution functions, the LB method does not impose a limit on the number of constituent cells. Recently proposed phase field models of multicellular aggregate fusion also present this advantage [21].The LB model of Ref. [20] describes the multicellular system as a highly viscous, incompressible fluid, whereas the embedding medium (i.e. cell culture medium) is modeled as the vapour phase of the fluid. To validate the LB approach, we simulated the sidewise fusion of two multicellular cylinders and, for a certain range of model parameters, we observed a qualitative agreement with experimental results regarding the fusion of multicellular spheroids [20]. We are unaware of quantitative experiments on the fusion of two contiguous multicellular cylinders, which would allow a quantitative calibration of our LB model.The analogy between multicellular systems and viscous fluids is justified by the differential adhesion hypothesis proposed by Steinberg, which states that cells seek positions that enable them to establish the largest possible number of strong bonds with their neighbors [14,22]. Thus, a system made of cohesive cells behaves as a highly viscous fluid, and, therefore, it can be characterized by physical quantities such as surface tension and viscosity [15,23].Mesoscale modeling techniques, such as dissipative particle dynamics and the LB method, are being employed to describe a wide variety of flow phenomena in biological systems, and are viewed as powerful in silico tools in biomedical research, able to facilitate the development of new therapies [24].In this paper we extend our LB model to treat two components of different viscosities and simulate the time evolution of certain tissue constructs (tubes and sheets) of interest in tissue engineering. The model extension is necessary in order to treat multicellular systems embedded in a supportive hydrogel, a configuration encountered in bioprinting – an emergent tissue engineering technique, in which multicellular spheroids, or cylinders, are deposited by a 3D printer, along with a hydrogel that provides mechanical support until the construct becomes sturdy [25–27].The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the mathematical details of the extended LB model and the methods used to analyze the results of simulations, Section 3 presents computer simulations of the evolution of bioprinted tubes and patches made of cohesive cells, Section 4 discusses the results in the view of 3D printing experiments and Section 5 presents the conclusions of the work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper presents a Lattice Boltzmann (LB) model of a multicellular biological system embedded in a hydrogel bathed by cell culture medium. The model consists of two highly viscous immiscible fluids of different viscosities. Shape changes of the system are driven by the interfacial tension and resisted by the viscosities of the two fluids. Similar multicomponent LB models are known in the literature. The novelty of this work is not the model itself, but its adaptation for the biological problems raised by tissue engineering.On a long timescale, of the order of hours or days, the fluid-like behavior of multicellular systems is well established experimentally [14,15]. Here we argued that the fluid analogy might be applicable also for hydrogels that can be reorganized by cells (by locally secreting extracellular proteolytic enzymes) [51]. In such a model, the viscosity of the fluid that represents the hydrogel is an effective measure of the cells׳ ability to remodel the hydrogel (the faster the remodeling, the lower the viscosity).Our two-dimensional LB simulations were found in qualitative agreement with the evolution of three-dimensional tubular tissue constructs built by printing contiguous multicellular cylinders in a hexagonal arrangement [27].Then, using the same parameters, we have simulated the evolution of a structure that had a fusion defect due to imprecise printing. The results suggest that incomplete fusion will not heal in time; on the contrary, the niche in the tube will grow, eventually leading to a solid cylinder of cells. Thus, according to our simulations, if the early fusion is incomplete it is useless to further culture the construct.Since multicellular patches are of interest in many tissue engineering applications, ranging from corneal repair to heart patches [52], we have also simulated the shape changes of sheet-like structures obtained by contiguously printing multicellular cylinders on a planar, non-adherent substrate.Finally, we used LB simulations to suggest a feasible way to build a bulky, perfusable tissue construct by cell cylinder printing.The results presented here indicate that Lattice Boltzmann simulations might offer useful hints for tissue engineers, enabling them to test different working hypotheses at a fraction of the cost of laboratory experiments.