@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
VAAPA: A web platform for visualization and analysis of alternative polyadenylation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A web platform for visualization and analysis of alternative polyadenylation (VAAPA) was developed.It was designed in a multi-tier architecture and developed based on Smart Google Web Toolkit using Java language.It can visualize the distribution of poly(A) sites and poly(A) clusters of a gene or a section of a chromosome.It can highlight genes with switched APA sites among different conditions and display the respective sequence and poly(A) signals.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Web platform,Alternative polyadenylation,Poly(A) tag,Poly(A) site,Poly(A) cluster,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Polyadenylation [poly(A)] is an essential process during the maturation of most mRNAs in eukaryotes. Alternative polyadenylation (APA) as an important layer of gene expression regulation has been increasingly recognized in various species. Here, a web platform for visualization and analysis of alternative polyadenylation (VAAPA) was developed. This platform can visualize the distribution of poly(A) sites and poly(A) clusters of a gene or a section of a chromosome. It can also highlight genes with switched APA sites among different conditions. VAAPA is an easy-to-use web-based tool that provides functions of poly(A) site query, data uploading, downloading, and APA sites visualization. It was designed in a multi-tier architecture and developed based on Smart GWT (Google Web Toolkit) using Java as the development language. VAAPA will be a valuable addition to the community for the comprehensive study of APA, not only by making the high quality poly(A) site data more accessible, but also by providing users with numerous valuable functions for poly(A) site analysis and visualization.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Polyadenylation is one of the critical post-transcriptional processes in eukaryotic cells. It involves cleavage at the 3′ end and addition of a tract of adenosines [poly(A) tail] [1]. Polyadenylation is essential for many aspects of mRNA metabolism in the cell, including stability of mRNA, export of mRNA from the nucleus, and regulation of mRNA translation [2]. It is also interconnected to other mRNA biogenesis and functions, such as transcription initiation, termination, and pre-mRNA splicing. Because of the microheterogeneity [3], the cleavage at the 3′ end may be imprecise, resulting in mRNAs with variable ends. A poly(A) tag is a short RNA tag sequenced from the 3′ end and poly(A) site junction of the fully processed mRNA. We refer to the poly(A) site as a location where one or more poly(A) tags are mapped. Poly(A) sites in the same gene that fall within 24 nucleotides (nts) of each other are defined as a poly(A) cluster. The number of poly(A) tags assigned to each poly(A) cluster reflects its expression level or frequency of utilization. The location of a poly(A)cluster is the position of the poly(A) site supported by the most number of poly(A) tags [4].If a gene has more than one poly(A) cluster, the nature of the expressed mRNA may be altered via the choice of alternative poly(A) sites. This process is called alternative polyadenylation (APA). APA as an important layer of gene expression regulation has been increasingly recognized in different species. More than 70% of genes in mammals and about 50% of genes in flies, worms, and zebrafish have been shown to display APA [5]. APA is also widespread in plants and algae. Nearly 30% of genes in algae, up to 70% of genes in Arabidopsis, and more than 50% of genes in rice undergo APA [4,6]. A poly(A) site can be located in different genomic regions, such as 3′ UTR (untranslated region), 5′ UTR, intron, and coding sequences (CDS) [4]. Choice of different poly(A) sites can produce mRNAs with variable 3′ ends or encode different protein isoforms, which contributes to the complexity of the transcriptome [5]. Moreover, APA site could be utilized in a tissue/stage-specific manner [7]. The gene that possesses at least two poly(A) sites and shows significant difference in the use of poly(A) sites between different conditions is called APA site switching gene [8]. APA site switching could lead to the gain or loss of miRNA binding sites in the 3′ UTRs, which may affect the stability of mRNA and translation.Currently, several web-based browsers such as GBrowse [9], UCSC Genome Browser [10], and CBrowse [11] can be utilized for the visualization of genome and the respective sequence features. In addition, some poly(A) site databases are available, such as polyA_DB [12], polyA_DB2 [13], PACdb [14], and the polyadenylation atlas database (http://bioinfolab.muohio.edu/polya/) which is currently under development. However, these browsers are not specific for the study of polyadenylation and cannot be used to visualize poly(A) sites of genes. Poly(A) site databases can provide only the plain poly(A) data rather than the function of visualizing and analyzing poly(A) site distributions on the whole genome level. It is still challenging to visualize and analyze poly(A) sites and APA site switching between different conditions in a genome-wide fashion. With the development of next generation sequencing, biologists are able to obtain unprecedented amount of poly(A) site data from different conditions. It is in urgent need to develop a user friendly tool to visualize the massive poly(A) site data to assist biologists for further APA analysis. To meet this demand, VAAPA was developed. VAAPA is intended to leverage existing poly(A) site data sets, genomic sequences, and annotations by providing users with easy-to-use web-based tool for analyzing and visualizing poly(A) sites and APA site switching under different conditions. VAAPA is available as a web server at http://bmi.xmu.edu.cn:8001/VAAPA.Users can upload their data of the targeted species to the platform for visualization and analysis of APA. Currently, the poly(A) site dataset of Arabidopsis was tested in VAAPA, which was obtained from a previous study [4]. A background database was constructed to store the data for the server. There are three kinds of tables to in the database: genomic annotation table which stores the annotation of the genome; relation table which is used to connect other tables; poly(A) site tables which store the information of poly(A) sites in different samples/conditions. VAAPA provides numerous functions to query, analyze, and visualize poly(A) sites from the database according to the user input.VAAPA was developed based on the Smart GWT (Google Web Toolkit) with Java language. It integrates MySQL, Spring, Hibernate, and MVP (Model-View-Presenter) design pattern. This platform implements a multi-tier architecture (Fig. 1). The infrastructure layer designs the adapter components, providing an interface for data access. The log service module was created through Spring AOP (Aspect Oriented Programming), which is separate from other functional modules. The persistence layer implemented based on Hibernate and Gilead shields the differences between various databases for upper level applications. The business logic layer encapsulates several business components, in which modules of comprehensive poly(A) analysis, data uploading and downloading, and other services are integrated. The interface layer interacts with the client and the server based on GWT RPC (Remote Procedure Calls). The presentation layer is mainly designed with Smart GWT, which shows results in different web browsers and provides a user interface for data query and task operation.VAAPA can generate visual query results with detailed poly(A)site information according to the user input. It can also display a gene model, the distribution of poly(A) sites and clusters, and the respective sequence and poly(A) signals.Poly(A) sites located within 24nt of each other are dynamically clustered as a poly(A) cluster using a background program. The expression level of this poly(A) cluster is the sum of the number of poly(A) tags that are clustered [4]:(1)PATNUMPAC=∑i=1kPATNUMPAi,i=1,2,…,kwherePACdenotes the poly(A) cluster,PATNUMPACrepresents the number of poly(A) tags of the poly(A) cluster,PAimeans the i-th poly(A) site,PATNUMPAiis the number of poly(A) tags of the i-th poly(A) site,kdenotes the number of poly(A) sites that are clustered.The coordinate of this poly(A) cluster is the coordinate of the poly(A) site with the most number of poly(A) tags among all clustered poly(A) sites [4]:(2)CoordPAC=CoordPAIand(3)PATNUMPAI=max(PATNUMPAi),i=1,2,…,kwhereCoordPACmeans the coordinate of the poly(A) cluster,CoordPAimeans the coordinate of the ith poly(A) site.VAAPA provides functions to analyze and compare the difference of poly(A) sites among different conditions. The user can recognize switching genes with significant difference in the choice of poly(A) site from genes that have at least two poly(A) sites or clusters. To make a fair comparison among different conditions, the TPM (Tag Per Million) normalization method was adopted:(4)T=t×1000,000/Swhere t is the number of poly(A) tags of one poly(A) cluster, S means the sum of the number of poly(A) tags in this condition.VAAPA cannot only visualize the distribution of poly(A) sites and clusters of any given gene or a section of a chromosome in one condition, but also compare the difference of the distribution of poly(A) sites and clusters among different conditions if the user chooses more than one condition. The visualization of alternative poly(A) sites from different conditions can assist biologists for APA analysis, especially for the study of APA site switching.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
VAAPA was specifically designed for the analysis and visualization of poly(A) site data. It was developed based on Smart GWT using Java language. VAAPA provides various functions for comprehensive polyadenylation analysis, including data query, uploading, downloading, visualization of poly(A) site choice, and display of sequence and poly(A) signals. VAAPA will be a valuable addition to the community, not only by making the high quality poly(A) site data more accessible, but also by providing users with numerous valuable modules to enhance the functionality and usability.None declared.