@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Robust semi-automated quantification of cardiac MR perfusion using level set: Application to hypertrophic cardiomyopathy patient data

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Semi-automated quantification of multi-slice cardiac MR perfusion is proposed.LV center and RV insertion points are manually chosen, and remaining steps are automated.Myocardium is automatically segmented using distance regularized level set evolution.Accuracy of myocardial upslope quantification is evaluated on clinical HCM data.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
MRI,Dynamic contrast enhanced imaging,Myocardial perfusion,Image segmentation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundRecently there have been several clinical MR perfusion studies in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) who may suffer from myocardial ischemia due to coronary microvascular dysfunction. In these studies, data analysis relied on a manual procedure of tracing epicardial and endocardial borders. The goal of this work is to develop and validate a robust semi-automated analysis method for myocardial perfusion quantification in clinical HCM data.MethodDynamic multi-slice stress perfusion MRI data were acquired from 18 HCM patients. The proposed semi-automated method required user input of two landmark selections: LV center point and RV insertion point. Automated segmentations of the endocardial and epicardial borders were performed in three short-axis slices using distance regularized level set evolution on RV, LV, and myocardial enhancement frames.ResultsThe proposed automated epicardial border detection method resulted in average radial distance errors of 7.5%, 9.5%, and 11.6% in basal, mid, and apical slices, respectively, when compared to manual tracing of the borders as a reference. In linear regression analysis, the highest correlation of myocardial upslope measurements was observed between the manual method and the proposed method in the anterolateral section (r=0.964), and the lowest correlation was observed in the inferoseptal section (r=0.866).ConclusionThe proposed semi-automated method for myocardial MR perfusion quantification is feasible in HCM patients who typically show (1) irregular myocardial shape and (2) low image contrast between the myocardium and its surrounding regions due to coronary microvascular disease.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
First pass myocardial perfusion MRI is a powerful, non-invasive technique that is capable of identifying ischemic regions in the myocardium using an extracellular contrast agent [1]. The imaging typically involves pharmacologic adenosine stress which induces vasodilation of the coronary arteries for increased blood flow in the myocardium. Patients with epicardial coronary artery stenosis or microvascular disease are subject to inducible ischemia during adenosine stress. Dynamic T1-weighted gradient echo imaging sequence can visualize ischemic regions in the myocardium after injection of a bolus of T1-shortening gadolinium-based contrast agent.Visual assessment of hypoenhanced myocardium in stress perfusion MR images is a simple and subjective method for the diagnosis of perfusion defect. Quantitative analysis of myocardial perfusion may be preferable for the objective assessment of perfusion deficit and for longitudinal studies of myocardial tissue perfusion changes with therapeutic interventions. As first pass myocardial perfusion data consist of multi-slice dynamic image frames, quantitative analysis using manual procedures is laborious and time-consuming.Several image segmentation techniques have been proposed for the goal of efficient quantification of myocardial perfusion [2–8]. Weng et al. proposed a semi-automated technique in which myocardial segmentation was based on morphological region growing of a ring around the LV blood pool [5]. The method involved manual procedures of selecting four representative image frames (i.e., baseline image, RV enhancement image, LV enhancement image, and myocardial enhancement image). The selection of the frames may not be trivial, involving a navigation of approximately 20 frames during the first pass of the contrast agent. Tarroni et al. proposed a semi-automated technique which was based on a modified active contour model that considered noise statistics of the myocardium and blood pool [2]. The technique involved user selections of the LV point and RV insertion point. The best frame for segmentation was automatically selected in the frame in which the intensity inside the LV cavity reaches 95% of its maximum [2]. Model-based methods have been proposed to improve the accuracy and robustness of myocardial segmentation but are not entirely automated in the sense that they require manual procedures in the training steps for parameter estimation [3,8].The level set framework [9] has been widely used for medical image segmentation. It introduces a topological level set function as parameters in the energy minimization problem. The minimization process of the energy functional is iterative. It promotes the attraction of the evolving contour (i.e., zero level set) to the desired edges. A primary advantage of level set methods is their flexibility in splitting and merging the zero level contours. Initialization of the zero level set needs to be adequately chosen, and re-initialization is often necessary for improving the stability and accuracy of boundary detection. Level set methods have been demonstrated for semi-automated or automated segmentation in a variety of medical imaging research fields [10–12].In this work we apply a level set method to clinical hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) patients. HCM is a genetic heart disease, is a common cause of sudden cardiac death in young adults, and is also a cause of heart failure [13]. Clinical cases of HCM show a variety of myocardial thickening patterns (e.g., asymmetrical shape of the myocardium, septal hypertrophy, and apical hypertrophy) as shown inFig. 1 and manifest blunt response of myocardial contrast uptake. Myocardial perfusion quantification has been performed on HCM patients in the literature [14–17]. The reasons for selecting HCM patients are twofold. First, to our knowledge, no studies investigating methods for automated segmentation of myocardial perfusion in HCM have been reported in the literature. Second, HCM perfusion data have more pixels in the myocardial wall than normal volunteers׳ perfusion data. The wider spacing between the endocardium and epicardium in HCM may facilitate the demonstration of our novel segmentation method. In our study, perfusion MRI data have an in-plane spatial resolution of 2.5–3.0mm, which is relatively lower than the in-plane spatial resolution (1.3–1.7mm) of cine MRI data, and the normal myocardium typically has the thickness of 2–4 pixels in diastole.In this study we demonstrate a semi-automated analysis method for quantifying myocardial upslope during first pass in stress perfusion MRI in HCM. The method involves a minimal level of user interaction (i.e., selections of RV insertion point and LV center point). For automated segmentation we utilize the distance regularized level set evolution (DRLSE) method [18] in multiple image frames of interest for robust detection of the myocardium. Finally, we provide a regional analysis of myocardial upslope, which is a standard semi-quantitative measure in myocardial perfusion. We demonstrate the feasibility of the method in 18 HCM patients.MRI experiments were performed on a 1.5T scanner (Siemens Avanto, Erlangen, Germany). A body coil was used for radiofrequency (RF) transmission, and a 32-channel phased-array receiver coil was used for RF signal reception. The cardiac MR protocol included (1) cine imaging, (2) stress perfusion imaging, and (3) late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) imaging. For stress perfusion imaging, adenosine was injected at 0.14mgkg−1ming−1 for 3min before perfusion imaging and the adenosine infusion continued during perfusion imaging [19]. A single bolus of Gd-DTPA was injected into the subject׳s antecubital vein. The subject was scanned immediately after the injection of a dose of 0.1mmol/kg gadobutrol (Gadovist; Bayer Heatlthcare, Berlin, Germany) at an injection rate of 4ml/s, followed by a 40ml saline flush. The MRI operator instructed the subject to hold his or her breath immediately when the right ventricle (RV) started to become bright. The stress perfusion scan was electrocardiogram (ECG)-gated and lasted for 80 heart beats.Clinical MR examinations were approved by our institutional review board, and informed consent was obtained from the patients prior to MR examinations. The diagnosis of HCM was based on Doppler echocardiography according to the criteria of diastolic wall thickness >1.5cm. We considered 18 HCM patients (16 male and 2 female) for image analysis. All subjects underwent stress perfusion MRI in our institution during the period of 2014–2015. Subjects׳ ages ranged from 38 years to 71 years (mean age=54.8 years). Male subjects׳ ages ranged from 38 years to 71 years (mean age=53.7 years). Female subjects׳ ages were 60 years and 67 years (mean age=63.5 years).Fast gradient echo sequence with saturation preparation was used for myocardial perfusion imaging. Imaging sequence parameters were as follows: imaging flip angle=15°, in-plane resolution=2.5mm×3.0mm, slice thickness=8mm, acquisition matrix size=160×104, number of image frames=80, time interval between saturation preparation and the time point where the central k-space line is acquired=100ms, phase encoding order=linear, echo time=1.25ms, field-of-view=400mm×315mm, and slice-to-slice acquisition time interval=170ms. Parallel imaging [20] with an acceleration factor of 2 was used to reduce the acquisition window. Four short-axis slices (sequentially from the most basal slice to the most apical slice of the myocardium with a slice interval of 14.4–17.6mm) were acquired in every R–R interval, and three short-axis slices except for the most apical slice were considered for image analysis.Image analysis was performed in a MATLAB programming environment (version 2014b, MathWorks Inc., Natick, MA, USA) on a 64-bit Microsoft Windows 8.1 operating system with Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-4710HQ CPU @ 2.50GHz and 16GB RAM. Acquired perfusion images were pre-processed: motion correction was performed to align the short axis heart images across frames [21], and intensity correction was performed to correct for image intensity inhomogeneity caused by the coil sensitivity variation. Although we acquired four short axis slices, we excluded the most apical slice due to its small size of the myocardium and considered the analysis of the remaining three short axis slices which were referred to as basal (or slice 1), mid (or slice 2), and apical (or slice 3) slices in this study.Fig. 2 shows a flowchart of our analysis method.An RV peak enhancement frame was selected automatically as described inFig. 3. First, a maximum intensity projection map (Eq (1)) produces bright signals both in the RV and the subcutaneous fat close to the surface coil array(1)maxIPi(x,y)=maxtSi(x,y,t).whereSiis MR perfusion signal in slice i (in our case, i=1, 2, 3), (x, y) is voxel location, and t is frame index. To unambiguously identify the RV, we noted that the RV is dark prior to the contrast enhancement, while the subcutaneous fat is bright in all time frames. Hence, we performed minimum intensity projection (Eq (2)) and could identify the subcutaneous fat region(2)minIPi(x,y)=mintSi(x,y,t).After the identification of the fat region followed by the substitution of zero values, we could identify the location of maximum intensity in the RV. The location of maximum intensity served as a seed point (see Fig. 3d) for region growing in the RV blood pool. An RV peak enhancement frame was determined by finding a maximum frame index in the RV time intensity curve (see Fig. 3e).Manual procedures involved the selection of two points, each corresponding to the LV center point and RV insertion point. An image denoising algorithm was performed using anisotropic diffusion [22], and then a seeded region growing algorithm [23] was performed to increase the number of voxels in LV. The average image intensity of the LV voxels increased the signal to noise ratio in the LV time–intensity curve, from which a frame index of the LV maximum intensity was obtained. A frame index of myocardial enhancement was determined to be 8 frames later than the LV peak enhancement frame. The line connecting the RV insertion point and the LV center point was drawn, and then 6 equally angular sectors were determined for segmental analysis of myocardial perfusion (seeFig. 4). We divided the myocardium into 6 segments for segmental analysis because this number has been commonly adopted for the basal or mid-short axis slice in the cardiac imaging community [24].An accurate placement of seed points in the myocardium is important when using a level set based algorithm for myocardial segmentation. An automated placement of seed points in the myocardium consisted of the following steps. First, the LV blood pool was segmented using a seeded region growing with the LV center as a seed point. The region growing segmentation resulted in the segmented voxels having a value of 1 and the un-segmented voxels having a value of 0. The segmented voxels were expanded using a morphological operation of image dilation (seeFig. 5b) such that the boundary of the expanded mask lay in the myocardium. The outermost voxels in the segmented mask were selected with an angle spacing of roughly 360°/(the number of seeds) to distribute the seed points uniformly in the myocardium. We noted that when seed points are distributed uniformly in the myocardium, the pixel distance between adjacent seed points increases as the distance from the LV center to the seed point increases. To maintain the pixel distance regardless of the distance from the LV center, we chose the number of seed points to be proportional to the periphery length of the myocardium(3)nseeds=kA,whereAis the number of segmented voxels in the LV blood pool and is proportional to the area of the LV blood pool. A constantk=0.6 was empirically chosen. Fig. 5c shows an example of automated placement of seed points in the myocardium.Image segmentation was performed using the distance regularized level set evolution (DRLSE) method proposed by Li et al. [18]. Previous level set methods often apply re-initialization of the zero level set in an ad-hoc way and evolve the zero level set to the object boundaries. DRLSE introduces a distance regularization term in the energy functional to maintain the desired shape of level set function. The distance regularization term is minimized when the gradient magnitude of the level set function is 1 at the zero level set, and the external energy term is minimized when the zero level set is located at the object boundaries. This is advantageous compared to other previous level set methods because the distance regularization term maintains a desirable property of signed distance function in the level set function as the level set evolves, and there is no need for re-initialization of the zero level set.Endocardial border detection was performed on an LV peak enhancement frame using DRLSE [18]. The initial seed points in the myocardium underwent region growing and resulted in initial contours for the DRLSE algorithm. Iteration numbers and parameter values for the DRLSE algorithm were determined empirically. In the LV peak enhancement frame, the LV blood pool appears bright, and the myocardium appears dark. The DRLSE segmentation resulted in a ring shape covering the myocardium (see Fig. 5d). The endocardial border was reliably detected due to high contrast between the LV blood pool and myocardium. On the resulting ring shaped binary image, we performed seeded region growing where the seed point was located at the LV center point. The region growing produced a binary mask, the edge of which was a final endocardial border (see Fig. 5g). This approach can exclude the papillary muscle in final myocardial segmentation.The RV enhancement frame and myocardial enhancement frame were both considered for the epicardial border detection. We applied the DRLSE to these two frames of interest individually and then obtained a segmentation result (see Fig. 5h) after taking the intersection of segmented voxels. With the LV center point as an origin, angular sectors with an angle spacing of 9° were defined. A voxel of maximum radial distance from the origin within each sector was found, and then the vertices with maximum radial distance in all of the sectors were connected such that an epicardial boundary of polygonal shape was obtained. Similarly, an endocardial border was constructed from the segmented mask of the LV blood pool (see Fig. 5g). The final segmented myocardium was obtained as the subtraction of a set of voxels within the endocardial polygon from a set of voxels within the epicardial polygon.In four HCM patients with severe hypertrophied myocardium, the LV blood pool was not observed in slice 2 or slice 3 due to wall thickening of hypertrophied myocardium during data acquisition in systole. The RV blood pool was not observed in slice 2 or slice 3. The proposed algorithm was further refined in order to handle these special cases and properly identify myocardial segments (see Fig. 2). An absence of the RV blood pool was detected when the average intensity after region growing with an automatically chosen seed point was smaller than 60 % of the average intensity of the RV region of interest (ROI) in slice 1. An absence of the LV blood pool was detected when the LV center point has an intensity of less than 60 % of the average intensity of the LV ROI in slice 1. In case of the absence of the LV blood pool, a circle with a radius of 20 pixels centered at the LV center point was drawn automatically, and it served as the endocardial boundary. The epicardial boundary was detected using the DRLSE on a myocardial enhancement image frame.To assess the performance of the proposed segmentation method, one trained expert with 11 years of experience in MR image analysis conducted manual tracings of epicardial and endocardial borders twice. The epicardial (or endocardial) discordance of boundaries (DB) between the manual and automated segmentation methods was estimated as the mean of absolute differences of point-by-point radial distances from the LV center point, normalized by the mean of radial distances in the manual segmentation [25], as described in Eq (4)(4)DB(r,t)=1N∑i=1N|dr(θi)−dt(θi)|1N∑i=1Ndr(θi),where r is manual method and t is automated method,d(θi)is the radial distance from the LV center point to the point on the border at an angleθi.In addition, the Dice similarity coefficient (DSC) metric [26] was used to evaluate the automated segmentation method against the manual segmentation method:(5)DSC(A,B)=2×n(A∩B)n(A)+n(B),whereAis segmented myocardial voxels from automated segmentation,Bis segmented myocardial voxels from manual segmentation, andn(S)is the number of segmented voxels in a setS. DSC has a maximum value of 1 when A completely overlaps with B and has a minimum value of 0 when A has no overlap with B.From the locations of the LV center point and RV insertion point, the myocardium in each slice was automatically divided into 6 equally angular segments (seeFigs. 4 and 6a) similar to the standardized myocardial 16-segment model [24]. For each time frame, the signal intensity of the LV cavity ROI was obtained after averaging image pixel values in the LV cavity ROI. Similarly, for each time frame, the signal intensity of a myocardial segment was obtained after averaging image pixel values in the myocardial segment. Time intensity curves were obtained for the LV cavity and the 6 myocardial segments in each slice. A temporal median filter with a filter length of 6 was applied to the myocardial time intensity curve to reduce noise fluctuation in the curve while preserving the slope of the curve. As shown in Fig. 6b, the upslope was calculated as follows. First, the LV slope was computed during the first pass of contrast uptake in the LV time intensity curve. Second, the myocardial slope was computed during the first pass of contrast uptake in the myocardial time intensity curve. Finally, the upslope was calculated by taking the ratio of the myocardial slope to the LV slope. The proposed automated method was compared with the manual method using Student׳s t test analysis and linear regression analysis. Pearson correlation coefficients and estimates of the slope and y-intercept were computed. P-values<0.05 were considered statistically significant.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We have demonstrated the feasibility of a semi-automated analysis method for MR perfusion quantification in HCM patients. The proposed method requires user input of selections of RV insertion point and LV center point, and then it automatically segments the myocardium using DRLSE while handling the case of the absence of LV blood pool due to wall thickening of the hypertrophied myocardium. Regional quantification of myocardial upslope using the proposed method is in good agreement with the manual method.