@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Prediction of temperature and damage in an irradiated human eye—Utilization of a detailed computer model which includes a vectorial blood stream in the choroid

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We created an eye model with a very precise geometry.The blood stream in the choroid is implemented by the use of a vectorial flow.This model predicts temperatures and damages of the human eye under laser irradiation.The calculated temperatures and damages are in good agreement with measurements.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Eye model,Ocular blood flow,Vectorial blood stream,Retinal damage,Arrhenius integral,Temperature prediction,Damage prediction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The work presented here describes the development and use of a three-dimensional thermo-dynamic model of the human eye for the prediction of temperatures and damage thresholds under irradiation. This model takes into account the blood flow by the implementation of a vectorial blood stream in the choroid and also uses the actual physiological extensions and tissue parameters of the eye. Furthermore it considers evaporation, radiation and convection at the cornea as well as the eye lid. The predicted temperatures were successfully validated against existing eye models in terms of corneal and global thermal behaviour. The model׳s predictions were additionally checked for consistency with in-vivo temperature measurements of the cornea, the irradiated retina and its damage thresholds. These thresholds were calculated from the retinal temperatures using the Arrhenius integral. Hence the model can be used to predict the temperature increase and irradiation hazard within the human eye as long as the absorption values and the Arrhenius coefficients are known and the damage mechanism is in the thermal regime.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With the increasing number of laser applications in different fields from display technologies to laser surgery it is of great interest to evaluate the effect of intentional and accidental exposure of the human eye. Examples for these applications are scanning laser displays [1] and environmental sensors [2] which can cause accidental exposure of the retina. Photocoagulation treatments are an example for intentional exposure at which the retinal temperature is crucial [3]. Computer models of the eye offer an easy and fast assessment of a multitude of different irradiation scenarios. They allow the prediction of laser induced temperatures and damages without the need for animal experiments.In 1975, Emery et al. [4] built one of the first of these computer models of an eye, namely a rabbit׳s eye. Lagendijk [5] presented different mathematical eye models for humans and rabbits in 1982 before Scott [6] developed a FEM-model of the human eye in 1988. Based on these works, many different eye models have been developed until today. The most relevant models for the work presented here are discussed in this section. Explanations concerning the mathematical model approaches of those works can be found in section 2.1.In 2006 and 2007, Ooi and Ng [7–10] built models, which used a rather rough geometry. The retina, the choroid and the sclera were assumed to be one region and the shape of the iris did not match with physiological values. The thermal effect of the blood flow was implemented by a heat transfer through the sclera in those models. Flyckt et al. [11] in contrast presented a computer model in 2006 which considers the blood flow by the implementation of discrete blood vessels. However, in this work the vitreous, the aqueous, the iris and the ciliary body were treated as one region.In 2008, Nasution and Ningtyas [12] evaluated the retinal temperature under irradiation using a model which basically is the same as the one used by Ng [9,10]. Within this work it was suggested to implement the blood flow by the use of a perfusion term, but it does not appear that it was done. In the same year Cvetkovic et al. [13] published another model which had an improved geometry (sclera, retina and choroid were modelled as different layers) and combined the scleral heat transfer with perfusion terms for the ciliary body and the retina, but used no perfusion term for the choroid. This model was used to calculate the thermal effect of the eye under irradiation for different laser wavelengths. Narasimhan et al. [14–17] then combined the scleral heat transfer with a perfusion term for the choroid and again evaluated the retinal temperature behaviour under irradiation. In 2013, Mirnezami et al. [18] used his model to assess the irradiation of the whole eye, using only the scleral heat transfer.Based on this previous work, a model is presented here, which combines a high degree of geometrical accuracy with the implementation of a vectorial blood stream in the choroid. To the authors׳ best knowledge, this kind of model does not exist until now. The model is then used for temperature and damage calculations, the whole procedure can be divided into four steps1.The development of the eye model itself. Descriptions on the used geometry can be found in Section 2.3.2, while the implementation of the blood flow is discussed in Section 2.3.4. The blood flow becomes especially important since the presented model is designed to determine the effects of retinal irradiation for any kind of illumination scenario and the influence of the blood flow is a key issue when dealing with longer illumination times [19–21].The calculation of the energy which is absorbed at the different regions of the retina.The evaluation of the thermal behaviour over time.The calculation of the Arrhenius integral (see Section 2.2) in order to determine the likelihood of damage. This calculation uses the results from point 3.This paper shows these four steps for the case of retinal irradiation but the procedure is transferrable to any part of the model.The work presented here is related to the authors׳ earlier publication [22] in which a fixed value for the blood inflow was used. In this model the choroidal thickness had to be modified (compared with the actual physiological dimensions) to keep the flowing speed constant for all points creating a flaw concerning the geometrical accuracy. In the current work the flowing speed is implemented differently (refer to section 2.3.4) allowing to position the optic nerve correctly. Since this change had a significant effect on the whole model, all calculations were repeated and none of the results presented here are overlapping with [22].In the field of thermo-dynamical considerations within the human eye, Pennes formulation of the bioheat equation is usually used [9,12,23]:(1)ρtct∂Tt∂t=∇(k∇Tt)+ωρbcb(Ta,in−Tv,out)+QIn this equationρis the density, c is the specific heat constant, k is the thermal conductivity and Q is a heat source term, while Tt describes the temperature andωrepresents the volumetric perfusion rate of blood. The heat source can stand for e.g. a metabolic activity or an externally caused heat deposition. The temperatures in the third term describe the blood temperature at the arterial inlet and the venous outlet. As explained above, some authors ([13,14,17,24,25]) use ω to describe the blood flow for different regions of the eye, others ([7–10,15,16,18,26,27])use the scleral heat transfer coefficient (refer to Eq. (2)) to consider the blood flow and define ω=0.The boundary conditions which apply for eye models concern with the sclera and cornea. In this field the nomenclature used by Lagendijk [5] has developed into a quasi-standard.Fig. 1 shows on the left hand side the boundary conditionsΓ1andΓ2which are defining the heat transfer through sclera und cornea.A slightly altered definition is used which is depicted on the right hand side of Fig. 1; our shape takes into account the eye lid. Its extensions are 2.3cm (taken from [28] without consideration of the lacrimal caruncel) by 0.95cm [29,30].The heat transfer caused by the temperature of the blood and the surrounding tissue is described by the scleral boundary condition in Eq. (2).nis the normal vector perpendicular to the related surfaces,hsclis the scleral heat transfer coefficient andTsclis the scleral temperature.(2)k∂Tt∂n=hscl(T−Tscl)atΓ1While the interaction of the cornea with the environment is defined by the effects of convection, radiation and evaporation(3)k∂Tt∂n=hcorn(T−Tcorn)+σε(T4−Tcorn4)+EatΓ2.Herehcornis the corneal heat transfer coefficient,Tcornis the corneal temperature and E the evaporation rate.Based on measurements on rabbits the value found for the heat transfer coefficient ishscl=65Wm−2K−1[5]. The respective values forhcornandEwere found to be10Wm−2K−1[4,9,] and40Wm−2[6]. The corneal emissivity ε is assumed to be 0.975 [31] andσis the Stefan–Boltzmann constant. These values are the standard for all current thermo-dynamical models of the human eye and are also used within this work.As mentioned above, the effect of the blood flow is incorporated in the scleral boundary condition in many models, which is a rather rough description. Narasimhan et al. [14] was using a constant perfusion valueωfor his 2D-model instead and Wainwright [24] converted the heat transfer coefficient from Lagendijk [5] into a perfusion value for his 3D-model. Cvetkovic et al. [25] used a perfusion term within the retina and ciliary body but did not consider it within the choroid. As explained in Section 1, Flyckt et al. [11] modelled the eye by the implementation of an actual blood stream within a net of vessels for the first time. Therefore the model assumed a vessel distribution within the sclera, choroid and retina. A value ofhcorn=13Wm−2K−1was used andhSclwas neglected when the active blood flow was turned on. A value of 8cm/s was used for the blood flow which was derived as a reduced flowing speed of the ophthalmic artery of 20cm/s. The model focused on a complete description of the eye within the skull and used a voxel size of (250µm)3.The Arrhenius integral uses the value and residence time of the temperature to determine tissue damage. The calculation is done using(4)Ω=A∫0τexp[−EaRT(t)]dt,with τ being the exposure time, Eathe activation energy, R the universal gas constant, T the temperature during exposure and A a pre-exponential scaling factor. The values used in this work are A=1.3×1099s−1 and E=628kJ/mol [32]. A value ofΩ=1then corresponds with tissue damage. Since a detailed explanation would be out of the scope of this work, the authors ask the reader to refer to [33] for detailed explanations.For the construction of the geometry Autodesk Inventor was used. The meshing and postprocessing were done with Altair Hypermesh and Hyperview while Ansys Fluent was used as a solver. Within the solver the method of finite volumes was used.The whole model has 761,766 tetrahedral elements. This mesh was found to be size invariant, which means that the calculations showed negligible change if the element size was decreased further. In order to keep calculation times reasonable33The computation time for the transient calculations was in the order of three days with the available processing power., it was decided to use this mesh and only replace certain parts of the model with a finer mesh if necessary. Therefore the retina had to be meshed with a minimal feature size of 5µm to enable absorption within the Retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) region of the retina.In this work, the geometry represents the actual physiological eye very closely.Fig. 2 shows the geometry while the geometrical values and tissue properties used are described in detail in the appendix (Tables A1 and A2)The boundary conditions are based on the definitions explained in Section 2.1. For the corneal surface an environmental temperature of 25°C is assumed, this value is 9.5°C smaller than the estimated final corneal value of 34.5°C. From this difference and a corneal evaporation rate of40Wm−2[6] a convection value of(5)40Wm−29.5m2K=4.21Wm−2K−1follows, which represents the evaporation of the tear film. This value is added to the corneal convection value of10Wm−2K−1[4,9], which leads to an overall value of(6)hcorn,1′=14.21Wm−2K−1Additionally a second value of(7)hcorn,2′=16.67Wm−2K−1is used, which corresponds with an evaporation rate of63.4Wm−2This is the highest value which is still within physiological range [20] and also fulfils this paper׳s validation criteria (see Section 2.4).h′corn,1andh′corn,2define the range of values for the corneal evaporation which is used in this work.The value for the scleral convection coefficient is derived under the following assumptions[5]: The distance between the eye and the brain is 14mm [5] and the tissue between eye and brain is assumed to consist of fat tissue only44Since fat has the lowest heat conductance which can be found between the brain and the eye. This assumption leads to the lowest possible cooling effect and is therefore the worst case in terms of thermal damage to the eye.which gives a heat conductance of0.25WmK−1[34,35].Therefore the convection coefficient is estimated to(8)hscl=0.25Wm−1K−1×114mm=17.85Wm−2K−1≈20Wm−2K−1.This value does not contain any fraction representing the thermal effect of the choroid since this is fully covered by the blood stream. To increase the accuracy regarding the transition between cornea and environment the actual eye lid extensions is implemented as already explained in Fig. 1.The physiology of the human eye shows basically two independent blood streams [36,37]. The first is located at the anterior part of the eye and can be described in a good approximation by a blood inlet at the circulus arteriosus iridis major (which is supplied by the long and anterior ciliary arteries)and an outlet at the vortex veins. The second blood flow starts from the short ciliary arteries and leaves the eye through the vortex veins as well (refer toFig. 3). Using these assumptions the model is built as shown inFig. 4.The blood flow is implemented using a vector field which determines the direction and intensity of the blood flow within each mesh cell. This is done in two steps: first, a vector field is created by defining the inflow and outflow regions (refer to Figs. 3 and 4) in the model and calculate the blood stream following from these conditions. This defines a certain direction and a certain flowing speed within each mesh cell. In the second step, the flowing speeds are scaled to a value of 5mm/s, as measured by Peyman et al. [38]. The directions of the vectors stay unchanged. After these two steps the model contains accurate flowing directions and flowing speeds. The scaling process is done using a so-called user-defined-function within Ansys Fluent55This is a c-code which can be read by Fluent and enables direct access to the mesh cell properties..For validation the calculation results are compared with measurements and state-of-the-art eye models. Accordingly, four validation criteria are defined for the eye model, which have to be checked for plausibility. They reflect the key points of thermal behaviour within the human eye under consideration of the available data. Criteria 1–3 are based on corneal temperature measurements and criterion 4 on temperature distributions of state-of-the-art eye models.Fig. 5 shows the resulting temperature distribution over the cornea. For different room temperatures the values of the corneal centre (indicated by the green arrow) and the averaged values (indicated by the yellow area) are shown in comparison with measurements which were taken from literature. The averaging was performed for the part of the cornea which is in direct contact with the environment and therefore visible. This part of the cornea is marked in yellow in Fig. 5. The yellow and green areas on the left hand side show the temperature range which occurs, if the corneal evaporation value is varied between14.21Wm−2E−1(upper boundaries of the temperature ranges) and 16.67Wm−2K−166As explained in Section 2.3.3 the first value corresponds with an evaporation rate of40Wm−2. The second value follows from an evaporation rate of63.4Wm−2which is the highest value which is still within physiological range [15] and also fulfils the validation criteria. It creates a convection value of6.67Wm−2K−1leading to a total value of 16.67Wm−2K−1.(lower boundaries). The temperatures calculated by the here presented model are within the range of the measured corneal temperatures measured by Kessel et al. [39] and the central corneal values measured by Kocak et al. [40], Gugleta et al. [41], Fujishimaet al. [42] and Craig et al. [43]. It also matches the range of corneal temperatures of 32.9–36°C from Purslow and Wolffsohn [44].From the data discussed above the values depicted inTable 1 are derived, which show the correlation between the corneal temperatures and the environmental temperatures. This is the average temperature increase for certain parts of the cornea following by an increase of the environmental temperature of 1°C. The data fits the expected range of 0.15–0.243°C [44,39].Fig. 6 shows simulation results of the temperature difference between the limbus (marked in blue) and corneal centre (green arrow) for different environmental temperatures. The calculations give a range of 0.41–1°C which is in good agreement with literature (0.45–1°C [44]).The temperature distribution of the whole eye is compared to state-of-the-art models from Lagendijk [5], Ng [9 and 10], Ooi and Ng [45] and Forushani et al. [26]. The model fulfils this criterion as it can be seen inFig. 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
