@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Parallel scheme for real-time detection of photosensitive seizures

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Healthy viewing.Real-time detection of hazardous video content for photosensitive seizures.Multicore parallel computation.Seizure pattern inducer testing benchmark.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Health safety,Multicore parallel processing,Pattern recognition,Photosensitivity,Photosensitive epilepsy,Real-time video streaming,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The production and distribution of videos and animations on gaming and self-authoring websites are booming. However, given this rise in self-authoring, there is increased concern for the health and safety of people who suffer from a neurological disorder called photosensitivity or photosensitive epilepsy. These people can suffer seizures from viewing video with hazardous content. This paper presents a spatiotemporal pattern detection algorithm that can detect hazardous content in streaming video in real time. A tool is developed for producing test videos with hazardous content, and then those test videos are used to evaluate the proposed algorithm, as well as an existing post-processing tool that is currently being used for detecting such patterns. To perform the detection in real time, the proposed algorithm was implemented on a dual core processor, using a pipelined/parallel software architecture. Results indicate that the proposed method provides better detection performance, allowing for the masking of seizure inducing patterns in real time.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
More than 50 million people worldwide suffer from epilepsy, making it the second most prevalent neurological disorder [1]. About 3–5% of those people have a particular form of epilepsy (called photosensitivity or photosensitive epilepsy) in which seizures can be evoked visually by high temporal contrast, high spatial contrast, or even particular colors. For these people, common stimuli, such as flashing emergency lights, flickering fluorescent lights, or lights seen through the blades of a moving ceiling fan can be hazardous. Another possible source of high-contrast spatiotemporal stimuli is viewed video [32].With the dramatic advances in digital information technology over the last two decades, video has become an increasingly dominant type of content transported across the worldwide web (For example, see YouTube [2]). Video streaming now accounts for about 68% of the downstream data traffic during peak periods, and it is expected to continue rising in the coming years [3].In addition, more and more of the video content being streamed over the web is being self-published, and is not always scrutinized, before being published, for compliance with video safety standards using video post-processing tools such as the Photosensitive Epilepsy Analysis Tool(PEAT)[4].While photosensitivity has gained a lot of attention in neurology, as well as in multimedia research fields, there has not been adequate research done toward the development of real-time hazardous pattern detection, for use on video that is streamed from Internet video servers. This is important for both PC and game consoles users, to assure that the observed videos/games do not induce harmful seizures.Game consoles such as Xbox, Play Station, and Steam box encourage freelancers and indie game developers to develop and publish their own content through webstores. In addition, several games, such as Minecraft and Little Big Planet, allow users to develop their own game stages and environments, and then share them with other game users. Many active gaming communities develop customized modifications to games (known as mods) that extend and augment the features provided by the original games [5].All of these unprecedented abilities to self-publish both videos and videogames increase the possibility of distributing malicious or unintended hazardous video content that might induce seizures in people with photosensitivity. Since there is no mechanism for the enforcement of any governing restrictions on such multimedia content, there is little, if any, enforcement at all [6]. This leads to health and safety concerns for those who suffer from photosensitivity. One famous example was an episode of the cartoon Pokémon, which was broadcast in 1997, which induced seizures and affected thousands of Japanese children [7].One of the main challenges in working with photosensitivity is that most people are not aware that they are vulnerable to this type of seizure until they either experience it, or they undergo a specialized epilepsy test involving an electroencephalogram (EEG) test, under the supervision of a neurologist [8].These factors have motivated not just scientists and media specialists, but even law makers in recent years have taken actions (a) to increase public awareness of the problem, (b) to suggest research to better understand the types of content that evoke seizures, and (c) to institute regulations to reduce the risk of seizures while playing video games [29].Most of the published research conducted to identify the types of content that evoke seizure in those with photosensitivity has been done by neurologists, who have employed one of two different methodologies. The first methodology surveys patients with photosensitivity, in an attempt to discover what types of spatiotemporal patterns tend to evoke seizures [9–13]. The second methodology employs EEGs that are recorded during intermittent photic stimulation (IPS), to identify photoparoxysmal responses (PPR) [8,14–17]. Some of the research done using these two methods has suggested some practical solutions to photosensitivity, such as the use of optical filters or colored glasses [18,19].Additional published research has been conducted by multimedia researchers, who tend to focus on identification of spatiotemporal video characteristics that might evoke seizures in people with photosensitivity [6,20–25]. Based on video characteristics identified by this methodology, guidelines and standards have been developed. However, not enough research has been done toward the development of software tools to identify such characteristics in recorded videos [4]. What is needed are tools that can analyze streaming video in real time, to filter out any content that might trigger seizures.This paper proposes a pipelined/parallel scheme for identifying seizure inducing patterns during real-time video streaming. The paper compares the performance of the proposed method with the PEAT post-processing tool [4] which is used for detecting such patterns in recorded videos. The experimental results show that the proposed method is able to provide accurate identifications of the seizure inducing patterns in real time. This paper includes the following contributions:•Real-Time Detection: The proposed method detects seizure inducing patterns in streaming video in real time.Multicore Parallel Computation: The proposed method harnesses parallelism in multicore hardware, to meet real time requirements, and to achieve better performance.Pattern Inducer: To evaluate the proposed method, a set of testing benchmarks is developed, in the form of video clips with spatiotemporal patterns that have the potential to induce seizures. These benchmarks can be used to provide a ground truth for this type of work.This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 surveys the existing work done in Photosensitivity. Section 3 describes the system architecture and its main components. Section 4 describes the implementation details of the system. Section 5 conducts the evaluation experiments, and provides comparisons of the results. Section 6 proposes a parallel scheme for real-time detection of the seizure inducing patterns. The paper is concluded in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper proposed a pipelined/parallel method for detecting video content that might induce seizures in people with photosensitivity during real-time video streaming. It also developed a testing platform called the Pattern Inducer, which automatically generates test videos that include video content that could potentially induce seizures. These test videos were then be used to evaluate and compare methods for detection, and showed that the proposed pipelined/parallel method outperformed PEAT in detecting seizure inducing patterns, even when done in real time.