@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Quantification of the acute effect of a low dose of red wine by nonlinear measures of RR and QT interval series in healthy subjects

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We compared the acute effect of red wine and control alcoholic drink on the heart rhythm properties.Nonlinear analysis of RR and QT series reveals the difference between the effects of wine and the control drink.Wine changed the complexity of series, while the control drink prolonged QT and RR intervals.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Heart rate variability,QT variability,Blood pressure,Red wine,Sample entropy,DFA,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The measures of nonlinear properties of RR interval and QT interval time series are sensitive to physiologically- or pathologically-induced complexity/regularity changes, but were not used to estimate the effect of alcohol intake. We wanted to examine the potential of these measures to quantify the acute effect of a low dose of red wine in healthy subjects. In separate experiments, fourteen young volunteers drank 200ml of red wine and a control drink with equal concentration of ethanol. ECG in supine position was recorded 20min before and 60min after drink intake. RR interval and QT interval series were extracted from ECG and we calculated variability, scaling exponents (α1 and α2) and sample entropy (SampEn) for both series. Systolic and diastolic blood pressures (BP) were measured every 10min. The immediate effect of both the drinks was equal: HR, BP and QT variability exhibited a sudden increase and then a decrease. However, the prolonged effect of wine and the control drink was different. Wine decreased both BP (p<0.05) and reduced complexity of RR and QT series (increased scaling exponents and decreased SampEn). The control drink prolonged QT and RR intervals (p<0.05). These results point out that the nonlinear properties of RR and QT interval series could be used to differentiate the effect of wine and ethanol. Changes in RR and QT interval series induced by a low dose of red wine are more detectable by methods that quantify the structure of the series than by methods that quantify their variability.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the last few decades, studies revealed the beneficial effect of low doses of alcoholic drink [1,2]. In particular, the effect of “a glass of red wine” was found to improve the function of cardiovascular system and to have other benefits. However, the beneficial effect of small amounts of alcohol is not fully understood. One approach to this problem is to estimate the response of the heart by analysis of quantities extracted from ECG. The acute effect of a low dose of red wine was found to be associated with acute prolongation of various electrographic time intervals [3–5]. Spaak et al. [6] showed that the acute effect of red wine and ethanol on heart rate variability (HRV) was similar and dose-related; one standard drink (155ml) had no influence on HR and HRV measures, but two alcoholic drinks did. Cameli et al. [7] reported that a low dose of red wine acutely slows cardiac conduction and prolongs repolarization in normal individuals. One of the causes that limit our knowledge is the difficulty to quantify small changes, those close to the threshold of the effect. An approach to this problem, which has not been used, might be nonlinear analysis of ECG derived quantities. In fact, nonlinear measures of HRV have gained recent interest as powerful methods for quantification of integrated cardiac control in various clinical settings [8].We hypothesized that the acute effect of a small amount of alcohol is reflected on nonlinear properties of heart-interbeat (RR) interval series and ventricular repolarization (QT) interval series. We wanted to estimate whether methods of nonlinear analysis are sensitive to reveal small changes induced by a low dose of alcohol and the potential of these methods to discriminate between the effect of pure alcohol and the effect of alcohol modified by components of red wine.The study group comprised of fourteen men aged (26±1) years with BMI=(24.5±0.5)kg/m2. They were apparently healthy, with no history or symptoms of heart disease, hypertension, or diabetes, with normal findings at clinical checks, and with no alcohol or drug related problems. The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Faculty of Medicine of University of Belgrade, and each subject signed an informed consent to the study protocol.Subjects attended two sessions that were one month apart. At the first session, they drank 200ml of red wine, (Cabernet Sauvignon Réserve, Radovanović, berba 2008), and the second time 200ml of a control drink with the same alcohol volume concentration (13.5%). The control drink contained drinking water, molasses-derived alcohol (96% v/v), citrus and raspberry aroma, acesulfam K (100mg/l) and aspartame (100mg/l). The subjects were instructed to eat nothing in the morning of the study and to abstain from caffeine and alcohol from the afternoon of the day before each session. Each session started at 11.00AM at the Institute of Biophysics, Belgrade Faculty of Medicine. All the drinks were taken within a 5min time frame.Subjects׳ ECGs were taken with sampling frequency of 1000Hz by a Biopac MP100 system with AcqKnowledge 3.9.1 software (BIOPAC System, Inc., Santa Barbara, CA, USA) in supine position: 20min before the drink intake (relaxation) and 60min after the intake of each drink, but not during the actual intake. QT intervals were determined by our own software based on tangent method estimation [9]. According to this method, the end of the T wave was defined as the point where the line from the peak of the T wave to the steepest point of the descending limb of the T wave intersected the isoelectric baseline. The R peaks and RR intervals were determined by Origin (Microcal Software, Inc., Northampton, MA, USA) software. Mean RR, mean QT, HRV indices, and QT variability were calculated from non-overlapping segments of 256 points. The number of these 256 points segments was 5 in the period of relaxation and 15 after drink intake. Power spectrum densities and spectral components were calculated as reported previously [10]. QT variability (QTV) was calculated as square of QT standard deviation. Blood pressure and HR were recorded by automatic wrist blood pressure monitor (Geratherm Medical AG, Germany) at the end of relaxation, immediately after the drink intake and then every 10min until the end of the recordings.The DFA, modification of random walk model analysis, has been used to quantify the fractal-like scaling properties of time series [11]. The root mean-square fluctuations of the integrated and linearly detrended data were calculated in observation windows of varying sizes and then plotted against the size of the window on a log–log scale. Power-law behavior was quantified as the slope of the linear regression line. Slopes, short-term scaling exponent α1 and long-term scaling exponent α2 were calculated over the window size n<32 and n>32 intervals. The values of scaling exponent indicate the type of noise: α~0.5 (uncorrelated white noise), α~1 (correlated 1/f noise) and α~1.5 (strongly correlated noise). Scaling exponents were calculated from the whole time series of RR and QT in relaxation and after the drink intake. At relaxation there were approximately 1000 and in the period after drink intake 3500 points.Sample Entropy (SampEn) was computed according to the procedure published by Richman and Moorman [12]. SampEn quantifies the irregularity of a time series and estimates the conditional probability that two sequences of m consecutive data points, which are similar to each other (within given tolerance r), will remain similar when one consecutive point is included. The SampEn algorithm considers two parameters: tolerance level r and pattern length m. According to the authors׳ recommendation, we chose a tolerance level of r=0.15 times standard deviation of the time series and m=2. SampEn was also calculated from the whole time series of RR and QT in relaxation and after the drink intake.Data are presented as mean±SE. Due to their skewed distribution, powers of RR intervals and QT variability were analyzed after natural logarithmic transformation. For all quantities, statistical analysis was performed by one-way ANOVA for 4 repeated measurements. The time course of the effect of wine compared to control drink was analyzed for all values of HR and BPs, as well as for every segment (RR, lnHF, QT, lnQTV) with one-way ANOVA for 2 repeated measurements. Dunnett׳s test for multiple comparisons was used for HR and BPs to compare values after drink intake with the baseline values (at the end of relaxation). Two-way cluster analysis of normalized values yn, calculated as yn=(ydrink−yrelax)/yrelax, was performed. For each cluster, mean values after drink intake and at relaxation were compared by one-way ANOVA for 2 repeated measurements. A p<0.05 was considered statistically significant. Analyses were performed using the SPSS (Statistical Package for the Social Sciences, Chicago, IL) software release 15.0.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
