@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Enteroscopic findings of Celiac Disease and their correlation with mucosal histopathologic changes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Celiac Disease is the most common inflammatory disease of the small bowel.Variety of endoscopic changes can be found in Celiac Disease patients.According to endoscopic and histopathologic data: Celiac Disease is a patchy mucosal disease and every patient with Celiac Disease exhibited at least one or more endoscopic changes through the proximal jejunum.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Celiac Disease,Single Balloon Enteroscopy,Endoscopy,Mucosal changes,Diagnosis,Classification,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Background and aimsSingle Balloon Enteroscopy enables us to examine the small bowel for various diseases. It provides a view of the intestinal mucosa with biopsy capability, which may be helpful in search of a mucosal disease such as Celiac Disease. Celiac Disease is a proximal enteropathy developed in genetically susceptible individuals to wheat protein gluten. Examination of the duodenum and proximal jejunum are mostly diagnostic. We aimed to review enteroscopic findings of the patients with Celiac Disease.Patients and methodsConsecutive adult patients (>18y) who needed intestinal or duodenal biopsy for the diagnosis of the Celiac Disease were included. Single Balloon Enteroscopy system was used to enter the proximal jejunum. All of the patients had biopsies in order to diagnose Celiac Disease.ResultsSingle Balloon Enteroscopy was performed in 33 patients. Twenty two (66.7%) subjects were diagnosed as Celiac Disease. The most common endoscopic abnormality in Celiac Disease was mucosal atrophy in 20 patients (90.9%), continuous involvement was the most common presentation (36.4%). All of the patients with Celiac Disease exhibited at least one endoscopic change.ConclusionsThis study confirmed the patchy nature of the disease with mostly diffuse involvement of the small bowel. However, any endoscopic abnormality can be found in every patient with Celiac Disease. Analysis of images from either conventional upper endoscopy or capsule endoscopy may aid the diagnosis.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Celiac Disease (CD) is an inflammatory disease of the small intestine in genetically predisposed patients due to permanent intolerance to ingested gluten [1,2]. A small bowel biopsy showing characteristic changes is considered the gold standard for the diagnosis of the disease with the support of the endoscopic and immunological markers [3]. Reported CD prevalence among different countries varies between 1:70 and 1:200. Clinical symptoms and laboratory markers range from asymptomatic to malabsorbtion according to degree of intestinal damage. Non-diarrhea associated forms (silent, oligosymptomatic or atypical CD) are the major mode of presentation. Anemia, osteoporosis, arthritis, infertility, hypertransaminasemia could be associated with CD and correct diagnosis could be a challenge. The only treatment of CD is a lifelong gluten free diet, which makes a reliable diagnosis very important [1–3].The rate of detection of CD is increasing due to public awareness and widely available serological testing, which, however, may cause formation of a difficult group of individuals with a clinical suspicion for CD and positive serology. This group quickly expands with the serological screening of first degree relatives with CD and patients with dyspepsia or irritable bowel syndrome where probability is quite high [4]. Second step in the diagnosis of the patients with CD is obviously endoscopy and histological examination of the intestine. This brings us to uncertain nature of the disease regarding the extent and how much small intestine is involved.CD is believed to be the disease of the proximal intestinal disease, although it could involve the entire small bowel. Mucosal changes associated with CD can readily be visible during the endoscopy procedure. These mucosal changes reflect the degree of intestinal inflammation and include reduced duodenal folds, mucosal fissures and a nodular pattern with a mosaic appearance [1]. However, sensitivity of the endoscopic findings associated with villous atrophy is far from ideal [1]. Moreover, patchiness of the mucosal changes associated with CD leads to a significant sampling error [5,6]. Can we improve the diagnostic accuracy going deeper in the proximal jejunum?The objective was to evaluate the findings of Single Balloon Enteroscopy examination of the proximal small bowel in order to classify the findings and extent of the disease through the small intestine with the aid of histological findings of the proximal jejunum in a series of patients with clinical and serological indicators of the CD.The study was a single-center prospective study of patients with diagnosed as Celiac Disease (CD). From October 2008 until October 2009, we included consecutive adult patients (>18y) who needed intestinal or duodenal biopsy for the diagnosis of Celiac Disease. Patients with comorbid diseases, symptoms and signs of intestinal obstruction, a history of small- or large-bowel strictures, inflammatory bowel disease, a known motility disorder of the gastrointestinal tract, or any previous bowel surgery, small intestinal bacterial overgrowth were excluded. Patients giving informed consent underwent SBE. The study was conducted according to the guidelines stated in the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the local Ethical Committee.The study used the SBE System (Olympus co; Tokyo, Japan). The technique used have been described in detail by Tsujikawa [7], however we evaluated the proximal jejunum instead of performing whole enteroscopy, which was mostly unnecessary in this group of patients. Maneuvers are basically the sequences of push and pulls of the endoscope and the overtube in a concerted fashion, which enables the deep enteroscopy. Mucosal changes were noted in order to classify the involvement site. No bowel preparation or pro-kinetic medications were used. Conscious sedation was achieved using intravenous midazolam. Same endoscopist (TK) performed all the enteroscopy procedures. All patients had biopsies of the bulb, the fourth portion of the duodenum, at the beginning and the most distal reached point of the jejunum.The histopathological grading of the Celiac Disease was according to the Marsh classification as modified by Oberhuber et al. [8]. Biopsies were fixed in buffered formalin and paraffin-embedded. Same GI pathologist (CS) evaluated the biopsy specimens. The histologic criteria for diagnosis of Celiac Disease used for this study required the presence of increased IELs with or without villous atrophy and/or crypt hyperplasia in at least 1 site (bulb, duodenum) without any other obvious cause. Patients diagnosed as CD formed the study group and others diagnosed as normal were used as a control group for the comparison of the endoscopic variables.Descriptive statistics were used to summarize the data; the categorical variables were expressed as percentages and continuous variables were expressed as means and ranges. The X2 or Fisher׳s exact test was used to test associations between two categorical variables. The strength of linear relationship between variables was measured using the Spearman correlation coefficients. The level of significance for statistical testing was defined as p<0.05. Sensitivities were reported with 95% confidence intervals.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
