@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Transport and deposition of pharmaceutical particles in three commercial spacer–MDI combinations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Numerical modeling of particle deposition in three commercial spacers.Introduction and demonstration of a novel particle injection method.Experimental validation of numerical results.Introduction of some design suggestions to improve spacers׳ effectiveness.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Respiratory drug delivery,Metered-dose inhaler,Respiratory spacer,Pharmaceutical particles,Lagrangian particle tracking,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Respiratory drug delivery has been under the research spotlight for the past few decades, mainly due to the high incidence of pulmonary diseases and the fact that this type of delivery offers the highest efficiency for treatment. Despite its invaluable benefits, there are some major drawbacks to respiratory drug delivery, the most important of which being poor delivery efficiency and relatively high drug deposition in undesirable regions, such as the mouth cavity. One way to improve the efficiency of respiratory drug delivery with metered-dose inhalers is placing a respiratory spacer between the inhaler exit and the mouth. It is argued that high drug deposition in the immediate airways of the respiratory system is strongly affected by relatively high initial momentum of pharmaceutical particles leaving the inhaler. A respiratory spacer, however, can provide an expansion region in which the initial momentum of particles can subside. As a result, particles enter the patient׳s oral cavity more gradually and are more likely to reach the desired regions. In this study, the effectiveness of using three commercial spacers paired with a commercial inhaler is examined through numerical investigation of fluid flow and particle transport phenomena. Particles ranging from 1 to 50µm in diameter are tracked using a Lagrangian point of view and fluid flow fields are resolved using the LRN k-ω turbulence model. A novel particle injection method is introduced and is demonstrated to be able to adequately capture the effects of particle initial momentum. Lastly, a few design suggestions are made.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Respiratory drug delivery is currently considered to be the most promising method for directly relieving or treating respiratory diseases, such as asthma. As compared with other methods, there are some unique advantages to this type of respiratory drug administration such as lack of exposure to digestive acids and enzymes, unmediated contact with afflicted regions of the pulmonary tract, and rather instantaneous effect. On the other hand, one of the drawbacks that is typically attributed to pulmonary drug delivery is considerable deposition of drug particles in undesired locations, which, in turn, reduces its effectiveness. Furthermore, unfavorable take-up of medication poses health hazards to patients.Among all pharmaceutical administration devices, metered-dose inhalers (MDIs) are undoubtedly the most popular. Although in common use, MDIs are known to result in poor drug delivery efficiency. This poor efficiency is typically attributed to the fact that MDIs impart an undesirably high initial momentum to the particles, which in turn increases unwanted deposition of particles in the oral cavity and upper airways. It is becoming more and more commonplace to use some sort of extension between inhaler outlet and mouth inlet in order to reduce the initial momentum of drug particles. Such extensions are typically referred to as respiratory spacers or simply spacers. Making use of a spacer is likely to improve the quality of respiratory drug delivery by providing a space for pharmaceutical particles to lose their initial momentum. As a result, drug particles are less likely to impact against the immediate walls of the oral cavity and upper airways.During the past few decades, Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) has emerged as a powerful tool for capturing both airflow and particle transport characteristics in human airways. CFD simulations can be used to directly address complicated and interconnected geometrical and physical factors related to both particles and airflow, such as flow turbulence [1], breathing patterns [2], the impact of discrete particles on continuous phase [3], and Brownian motion of particles [4].The main objective of this study is a numerical investigation of the transport and deposition of therapeutic particles, delivered by a commercially available MDI, in realistic models of the inhaler coupled with three commercial spacers. In this study, fluid flow is practically transient due to the transient nature of both breathing and delivery of drug particles to the spacer inlet. It is, however, well established that steady-state simulations using average flow rates are computationally efficient and able to estimate average deposition patterns that are in good agreement with in vivo and ex vivo experimental results [1,5]. Therefore, transient delivery of drug particles can also be approximated as being steady, at least within the scope of the present work.With respect to the flow Reynolds number (Re≈1000 at inhaler inlet,Re≈2000at spacer outlet, andRe≈5000at injector nozzle, for an average inhalation flow rate of 30lpm [6,7]) and geometrical irregularities associated with the inhaler and spacers, laminar to transitional and even fully turbulent flow is expected. To resolve these multiple flow regimes, the low Reynolds number (LRN) k-ω model is adopted based on its ability to accurately predict pressure drop, velocity profiles, and shear stresses for transitional and turbulent flows [8]. This model has been used successfully to accurately predict particle deposition profiles for transitional and turbulent flows in models of the oral airways [9,10] and multiple bifurcations [1].The first application of CFD to study inhaler design was conducted by Versteeg et al. [11], where CFD was utilized to predict steady-state airflow through an experimental MDI package and the Astra Zeneca Pulmicort® MDI, and to model an aerosol plume emitted within a USP induction port (USP-IP). Flow fields through both MDIs were found to be similar and highly complex. Jet flows emerging from the annulus around the canister were simulated and multiple regions of recirculation were evident resulting in high levels of turbulence. In this study the majority of deposition was found within the horizontal regions of the USP throat, which is consistent with findings of more recent research [12]. However, Versteeg et al. [11] acknowledged that due to technological limitations at the time only qualitative agreement between the CFD model and experiment could be achieved.Subsequent CFD studies on MDI and spacer devices have been done with a particular focus on the deposition of droplets within the device or spacer and the USP-IP or realistic mouth-throat geometries (MT). In a recent study, Longest and Hindle [13] evaluated the performance of the Respimat® Soft Mist Inhaler (SMI) through the concurrent use of CFD and in vitro experiments into the USP-IP and realistic mouth-throat geometry (MT). In vitro experiments indicated a substantial drug deposition loss of 27-29%. However, deposition of the Respimat® within the USP-IP and the MT was found to be relatively low, with most of the drug deposition occurring within the Respimat® mouthpiece. This high drug deposition observed within the mouthpiece was in good agreement with the CFD solution (within 20% error).Kleinstreuer et al. performed a comprehensive study [14] to simulate the airflow, droplet spray transport, and aerosol deposition in an MDI attached to a human upper airway model. Different device propellants, nozzle diameters, and spacer use were also investigated in this study. Results of CFD simulations exhibited multiple vortices within the inhaler and attached spacer at a flow rate of 30lpm. Utilizing a spacer significantly reduced droplet deposition within the oral cavity and, as a result, a greater proportion of droplets reached the lung in comparison with the case of not using a spacer. For CFC-MDIs actuated without a spacer, only 5.2% of released droplets reached the lung whilst 52.9% of droplets reached the lung when a spacer was used. Similarly, in HFA-MDIs, 46.6% of released droplets made their way to the lung in the absence of a spacer whilst 74.6% reached the lung when a spacer was used. These simulation results were in good agreement with both ex vivo and in vivo tests [15].Although a great deal of experimental and numerical studies have been devoted to investigating particle transport and deposition in human upper airways, relatively little work has been conducted in order to better quantify the particle transport phenomena in realistic models of commercially available spacer-inhalers. The fact that the previously utilized geometrical models are over-simplified (inhalers and spacers׳ geometries are often simplified and plastic quadrants which have considerable effect on the flow field are not included in the models) puts the accuracy of prior numerical studies in question and calls for more realistic investigation. In addition, particle injection conditions need to be more realistic so that the effects of particle initial momentum can be appropriately captured. In the present work, realistic models of three commercially available spacers and one MDI are developed, and care is exercised to capture almost all associated geometrical complexities. A novel particle injection method is proposed which is argued to be capable of properly capturing the impact of initial particle momentum and injection jet penetration on the characteristics of particle transport and deposition. This injection method is discussed in details in Section 3.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
