@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Classification of breast regions as mass and non-mass based on digital mammograms using taxonomic indexes and SVM

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This work proposes a methodology for classification of regions of mass and non-mass.Taxonomic diversity and distinctness are used to describe the texture.The tests were carried out over a sample of 3404 regions of mass and non-mass.The proposed work achieved good results for the classification with accuracy of 98.8%.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Medical image,Breast cancer,Phylogenetic trees,Taxonomic diversity index (,Δ,),Taxonomic distinctness (,Δ,⁎,),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Breast cancer is the second most common type of cancer in the world. Several computer-aided detection and diagnosis systems have been used to assist health experts identify suspicious areas that are difficult to perceive with the human eye, thus aiding in the detection and diagnosis of cancer. This work proposes a methodology for the discrimination and classification of regions extracted from mammograms as mass and non-mass. The Digital Database for Screening Mammography (DDSM) was used in this work for the acquisition of mammograms. The taxonomic diversity index (Δ) and the taxonomic distinctness (Δ⁎), which were originally used in ecology, were used to describe the texture of the regions of interest. These indexes were computed based on phylogenetic trees, which were applied to describe the patterns in regions of breast images. Two approaches were used for the analysis of texture: internal and external masks. A support vector machine was used to classify the regions as mass and non-mass. The proposed methodology successfully classified the masses and non-masses, with an average accuracy of 98.88%.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Breast cancer has the highest incidence of all cancers in the female population [1]. According to [2], it is also the type of cancer that kills the most women. The best known method for preventing breast cancer is early diagnosis, which lowers the mortality rate and enhances treatment efficiency.One prevention method is the mammographic exam. The results of this exam are analyzed by specialists (radiologists), i.e., physicians who are able to diagnose diseases from images. This step is a sensitive stage because the same exam can be interpreted differently, depending on the expert. The exam is also a repetitive task that demands a high level of attention to the smallest details.The sensitivity of mammograms varies between approximately 70% and 90%, depending on the following factors: size and location of the lesion, density of the breast tissue, patient age, exam quality and the radiologists interpretation ability [3]. The only way to ensure that a certain region is cancer is by a biopsy.For these reasons, in recent decades, there has been an increasing interest in the development and use of mammographic image processing techniques, with the primary objectives of increasing diagnostic precision and providing a second opinion to physicians. These techniques have been used to develop computer-aided detection/computer-aided diagnostic (CAD/CADx) systems.Various studies on increasing the accuracy rates of breast cancer detection with CAD systems have been reported. Three important common points in these studies are a high number of false positives, a high rate of false negatives and a reduced number of cases in the evaluation, which provides a better conclusion. Therefore, there is a continuous and necessary need for the development of CAD systems to support breast mass classification. In Section 2 and Table 5 we provide a summary of each work.In most CAD methodologies, the feature extraction stage is based on either geometry, for example, how round is the candidate, or on texture, which describes aspects of the candidate based on gray level distribution. For our methodology, we use only texture features.Diversity is term frequently used in Ecology. The objective is to describe the variety of species present in a community or area. A community is defined as a set of species that occur in a certain location and at a certain time [4]. Phylogeny is a branch of Biology concerned with studying the evolutionary relationships between species, by verifying the relationships among them, in order to determine possible common ancestors. A phylogenetic tree, or simply a phylogeny, is a tree in which the leaves represent the organisms and the internal nodes represent possible ancestors. The edges of the tree denote the evolutionary relationships [5].Taxonomic diversity and distinction indices were used for describing the texture of mass and non-mass. The first indexes consider the abundance of the species and the taxonomic relationship between them, whereas the second represents the average taxonomic distance between two individuals of a distinct species. These indexes are based on phylogenetic distance, considering the architecture of a rooted tree in the form of an inclined cladogram. In particular, this work contributes to this field through the use of texture features based on the taxonomic diversity index (Δ) and the taxonomic distinctness (Δ⁎) and by using phylogenetic trees for the classification of regions of the mammogram that were previously segmented as mass and non-mass.This paper is divided as follows: in Section 3 we present the methodology used to classify the regions of interest extracted from mammographic images as mass and non-mass, using taxonomic indexes for feature extraction and a support vector machine for classification. In Section 4 we show and discuss the results achieved using the proposed methodology. Finally, in Section 5, we present final remarks about this work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
