@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Heart monitoring systems—A review

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We classified portable heart monitoring systems in two manners, on-site and off-site.Off-site heart monitoring systems have been introduced in five modules.A detailed review of recent advancements in each module has been provided.Phonocardiography, electrocardiography, photoplethysmography and seismocardiography are discussed for long term heart monitoring.Smart phones based heart monitoring system and their challenges have been discussed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Heart monitoring system,Cardiovascular diseases,Cardiography,Electrocardiography,Phonocardiography,Photoplethysmography,Seismocardiography,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
To diagnose health status of the heart, heart monitoring systems use heart signals produced during each cardiac cycle. Many types of signals are acquired to analyze heart functionality and hence several heart monitoring systems such as phonocardiography, electrocardiography, photoplethysmography and seismocardiography are used in practice. Recently, focus on the at-home monitoring of the heart is increasing for long term monitoring, which minimizes risks associated with the patients diagnosed with cardiovascular diseases. It leads to increasing research interest in portable systems having features such as signal transmission capability, unobtrusiveness, and low power consumption. In this paper we intend to provide a detailed review of recent advancements of such heart monitoring systems. We introduce the heart monitoring system in five modules: (1) body sensors, (2) signal conditioning, (3) analog to digital converter (ADC) and compression, (4) wireless transmission, and (5) analysis and classification. In each module, we provide a brief introduction about the function of the module, recent developments, and their limitation and challenges.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Worldwide, the number of patients of cardiovascular diseases (CVD) is huge [1]. Mortality caused by CVD in 2008 was 17.3 million which represents 30% of global deaths. In the U.S. alone, 2200 persons lose their life due to CVD each day [2]. According to American Heart Association (AHA) report, the total cost of CVD and stroke in the U.S. for 2008 is estimated to be 298 billion dollar [1]. 80% of the total mortality caused by CVD occur in low and middle-income countries.These figures indicate need of systems that should be (1) sensitive to detect CVD at early stage, (2) capable of continuous monitoring, (3) light weight for portability, (4) cost effective. Lack of early stage detection and hence delay in medication causes heart diseases to extent at a level where it is difficult to cure [3]. Persons diagnosed with CVD need continuous monitoring of health status of their heart as they are at a higher risk to their lives as compared to the normal persons. According to the Heart Association, people diagnosed with CVD have 4–6 times higher mortality than normal one [4]. Portability of such systems makes it highly useful for elderly patients as this minimizes visits to clinics or hospitals. A cost effective system will emphasis the use of heart monitoring systems in low and middle income countries. Proper diagnosis reduces the mortality caused due to CVD which ensues economic up-lift of the country [5].Due to the problems mentioned above, a lot of work has been done in development of a diagnostic efficient system [6–10]. Keeping in view that heart monitoring systems would be used in different socio-economic conditions, rural-urban population, and deficiency of availability of cardiac experts [11], recent research is focused towards system features such as cost effective, portability, easy diagnose process, and signal transmission capability. In view of these developments, we propose a review of various work done in this area.Portable heart monitoring systems are used in two manners, as shown in (Fig. 1), one is on-site and other is off-site. In on-site monitoring, the acquired heart signal is processed on the patient site, without transmitting it to the remote site. While in off-site, the acquired heart signal is transmitted to a remote site using a wireless module. On-site heart monitoring system has advantages in the case of low latency feedback is required or wireless access is not accessible. Furthermore, it eliminates data transmission and hence eliminates the radio power consumption. However, the on-site monitoring has limitation that it has only a set of general diagnosis steps and thus unable to perform a detailed diagnosis. On the other hand, in off-site monitoring, diagnosis is performed at remote location with high computation capable processors and supports input from a cardiologist. This makes it suitable for accurate and detailed diagnosis. It is attractive because of higher processing capability and less power restrictions on such remote computation. Off-site monitoring also reduces the false alarm rate and thus reduces visits to clinics or hospitals. In view of these advantages of off-site monitoring, this paper is intended to provide a detailed review of recent research in the off-site monitoring system.A typical off-site heart monitoring system consists of five modules as shown in (Fig. 2). The system with first four modules – body sensor, signal conditioning, ADC and compression, and wireless module is situated at the patient site. While the fifth module that is analysis and classification module is situated at remote site which can be any computational device with high computational ability.Heart monitoring system uses signals produced by heart to diagnose its health status. It extracts diagnostic features from the acquired signal which caries information of heart functionality such as re-polarization, depolarization, and valve movements. Analysis of these features leads to specific health status of heart such as normal, arrhythmic, myocardial infarction, regurgitation, and stenosis. However, extraction of diagnostic features from the heart signal is challenging due to its non-stationary nature and the presence of noises such as muscles movement noise and environment noise in the signal. In this paper, we reviewed recent developments in the area of heart monitoring systems which are portable and have good diagnostic efficiency.Rest of this paper is organized as follow. Physiology of heart and cardiac cycle in Section 2 and brief introduction about important cardiovascular diseases in Section 3 are given for reader׳s simplicity. Section 4 describes the recent developments in the body sensors. While different approaches of signal conditioning have been reviewed in Section 5. In Section 6, analog to digital conversion and compression techniques are presented. Section 7 discusses various wireless transmission technologies and Section 8 gives comprehensive review of noise removal algorithms, analysis and classification techniques for heart signals. Conclusion and potential research area have been presented in Section 10 followed by important references.Since understanding of various components of heart monitoring systems needs knowledge of heart functioning, a relevant physiology of heart is described in this section.Heart is a prominent organ of human body. It supplies replenish oxygen to each part of the body and removes waste of each cell. Physiologically, heart comprises of four chambers named as left and right ventricles and left and right atrium as shown in Fig. 3. There are two atrioventricular valves namely tricuspid valve and mitral valve. As can be seen in Fig. 3, tricuspid valve separates right atrium and right ventricle while mitral valve separates left atrium and left ventricle. Aortic valve and pulmonary valve jointly called as semilunar valves separate left and right ventricles from aorta and pulmonary artery respectively. At rest, each cell of the heart muscle has a negative charge, called the membrane potential. Due to rapid change of membrane potential towards zero, due to influx of positive cations (Na+ and Ca++), an electrical impulse is generated at sinoatrial node. From sinoatrial node, the impulse spreads over both the atrium and both the ventricles. Presence of the impulse causes the contraction of atrium and ventricles sequentially.Contraction of both atrium pushes the blood into respective ventricles. Then the impulse spreads all over left and right ventricles which causes the contraction of both the ventricles. This contraction results to closing of both atrioventricular valves and opening of both semilunar valves. During this contraction phase, oxygenated blood from left ventricle flows into the body through aorta while deoxygenated blood from right ventricle flows into the lungs through pulmonary artery for oxygenation. Since body and lungs receive blood due to contraction process, pressure in body lungs becomes higher than pressure in atrium. Due to this pressure difference, now, blood flows into left and right atrium from lungs and body respectively. This process completes a cardiac cycle.Heart beats 100,000 times and pumps 2000 gallon blood in a day [12]. Heart function gets affected due to many factors such as psychosocial stress, smoking, excessive use of alcohol, malnutrition, lack of physical activity, and congenital diseases [13]. These factors may affect electrical activity of heart, structure of heart, and arteries. Due to these defects, different heart diseases occur. Dysfunction of electrical conduction system causes diseases such as sinus arrhythmia, atrial fluttering, atrial fibrillation, ventricular fibrillation, atrioventricular block, and bundle branch block. Defects in structure of the heart cause regurgitation, stenosis, enlargement of chambers, ventricular septum defect, etc. Defects in arteries cause hypertension, stroke, myocardial infarction, etc.According to American Heart Association report [2], following are the most common heart diseases. Myocardial infarction (heart attack), which occurs due to blockage in coronary arteries which supply blood to the heart cells. Insufficiency of blood supply causes dying of the heart cells and consequentially heart muscles lose pumping capacity. Hypertensive heart diseases occur when the blood pressure in arteries is much higher than the normal. High pressure causes stiffness of arteries, consequentially blood flow gets affected. Arrhythmia is fast and irregular beating of the heart. Congenital heart diseases are those which are present at the time of birth. Heart failure is a condition which indicates inability of the heart to pump the blood. Mortality caused by myocardial infarction was 21.6% of all mortality due to CVD in U.S., while 9.2% by hypertensive heart disease, 5.7% by arrhythmia, 8.0% by congenital heart diseases, and 6.9% by heart failure was accounted [2]. Since heart problems need diagnostic system, the following section discusses about body sensors used to acquire heart signal for this purpose.Different body sensors acquire heart signals in different forms such as electrical signal, acoustic signal, seismic signal, and optical signal. Fig. 4shows signals of one cardiac cycle acquired using electrodes, stethoscope, accelerometer, and diode as described below.Initial electrocardiography (ECG) was based on string galvanometer and was invented by Willem Einthoven in 1903. As discussed in Section 2, an electrical impulse originates at sinoatrial node and then travels through atria and ventricles. ECG measures the electrical activity of heart using electrodes placed on both side of the heart. The measured signal consists of different waves named as P, Q, R, S, T and U as shown in Fig. 4(a). P wave represents atria contraction while Q, R and S waves (called as QRS complex) reflect contraction of both left and right ventricles. T wave represents relaxation of ventricles and U wave is caused by the relaxation of inter-ventricular septum. Thus duration and amplitude of these waves provide significant information for diagnosis of health status of heart.Extraction of duration and amplitude of some of the waves (P, T and U) is difficult due to very weak amplitude, typically in the range of 100–300μV [14]. ECG signal lies in frequency band of 1–250Hz, where flicker noise is dominant and common-mode interference from the main power line is likely to interfere with ECG signal [15]. To overcome these problems signal conditioning, discussed in Section 5, is essential.Major problem with ECG is to establish good electrical conductivity between skin and electrodes. Some of the ECG sensors, widely used in practice, can be classified into following three categories.In these type of sensors, Ag–AgCl electrodes are attached to the skin using gel which provide a conducting medium for charge transfer between the electrodes and the body [6]. These sensors provide good signal quality, but it is inconvenient in terms of long term wear-ability due to use of gel which creates irritation and etching problem [6]. Moreover, For signal acquisition, attachment of electrodes to different points on the body restricts patient׳s mobility. The acquired signal quality may deteriorate due to sweat [16] and due to gel dehydration [17].These sensors use a metal plate direct placed on the skin without the use of gel. Thus the problem of irritation and etching caused by gel has been eliminated [18]. Although, it still has a direct contact with the skin. Dry sensors are robust to environment noises and sweat noise but more vulnerable to motion noise compare to wet sensors. Quality of the signal acquired using these sensors depends on the composition of the materials and the size of the electrode [17]. Increasing size of the electrode gives better capacitance and consequentially good signal quality but it decreases the patient׳s convenience.Capacitive coupled (CC) sensors avoid direct contact with the skin that minimizes patients׳ inconvenience as stated in the previous subsections, (a) and (b). A thin layer of insulator is placed between the body and metal-plate sensing electrode [6]. The electrode, together with the skin and insulator, forms a capacitance that conveys the ECG signal from the body to the sensor. Sensitivity of such sensors increases with the value of capacitance, which can be increased by increasing electrode area, by reducing thickness of insulator, and by using insulator with high dielectric constant. General expression of capacitance is given as follows:(1)C=ε0Adwhereε0is the dielectric constant, A is the electrode area, and d is the thickness of insulator. CC sensors have been developed on chair [19,20], on bed [21] and textiles [22]. Development of sensors on chair, bed and textiles supports continuous heart monitoring even when working in office and sleeping. CC sensors are highly sensitive to motion noise as in case of dry sensors. This is because, a movement of electrode changes the coupling capacitance and consequentially the acquired signal [6].A comparative study between three types of electrodes is presented in (Table 1). For clinical use, where simplicity of operation, less processing time, and good signal quality are preferred, wet sensors are suitable. Additionally, the availability, relative cheapness, and disposability of wet electrodes overcome hygiene concerns. While, the dry and capacitive electrodes are convenient in use, and consistent in performance. These features make these sensors suitable for long term, and unsupervised monitoring. However, the performance of these types of electrodes depends on the electrode geometry. Furthermore, these electrodes require proper shielding and settling time to perform comparable to, or better than wet electrode. Researchers in the past have made numerous attempts to overcome these problems [16].Stethoscope was invented by René Laennec in 1816. It is basically a transducer which converts vibration signal into acoustic signal. A phonocardiogram (PCG) is a plot of acoustic signal, acquired by stethoscope. Stethoscope makes PCG a highly portable, low cost, and non-invasive cardiography technique [10]. PCG signal, as shown in Fig. 4(b), consists of two classical heart sounds known as S1 (Lub) and S2 (Dub). S1 is generated due to closing of the tricuspid and mitral valves. It is composed of energy in 40–65Hz frequency band and 130–200ms time duration [10]. S2 is generated due to closing of aortic and pulmonary valves and lies within 45–65Hz frequency band and 100–150ms time duration [10]. Period between S1 and S2 is called as systole, while S2–S1 phase is called as diastole. There are two more components in PCG signal called S3 and S4 and they rarely occur. Murmurs are additional sounds that lie within a frequency band of 100–500Hz [10]. They indicate diseases in heart such as aortic stenosis, pulmonary stenosis, mitral regurgitation, and mitral stenosis. Stenosis and regurgitation are valvular diseases caused by stiffness of valves and improper closing of valves respectively. Stenosis restricts proper blood flow, while regurgitation causes blood to flow in opposite direction to the normal [10]. PCG has high potential to detect these valvular diseases and important cardiovascular diseases except myocardial infarction and congenital heart diseases. However it indicates the abnormality caused by myocardial infarction and congenital heart diseases. PCG signal may get contaminated by noises occurring due to breathing, movement of stethoscope while recording, ambient sources, etc. As a result of these noise problems, many filtering techniques have been developed to minimize affect of noise on PCG signal. Detailed discussion about the same is given in Section 8.Seismocardiography (SCG) is another non-invasive technique because it works using accelerometer, a non-invasive device. It measures mechanical vibrations which are generated by heart movement and transmitted to the chest wall [23]. As shown in Fig. 4(c), SCG contains waves corresponding to atrial contraction (ATC), mitral valve closing (MC), aortic valve opening (AO), point of maximal acceleration in the aorta (MA), aortic valve closure (AC), mitral valve opening (MO), and rapid filling of left ventricle (RF) [24,25]. Shapes of these waves give significant information about health status of heart. SCG is convenient to patients, as there is no need of multiple electrode contacts as in ECG. However, obtaining a clean SCG signal from an accelerometer is difficult, because of interference due to breathing.In photoplethysmography (PPG) fluorescent body parts such as earlobe and finger are illuminated with lights of different wavelengths emitted from light emitting diodes (LEDs). Then intensity of transmitted or reflected light is measured by photo-diode [26]. The measured intensity varies in time with the heart beat because blood vessels expand and contract with each heartbeat. The PPG waveform is composed of an ac component and a quasi-dc component [27], as shown in Fig. 4(d). The ac component is associated with heart beat and has fundamental frequency typically around 1Hz. The quasi-dc component, superimposed with ac component, relates to the respiration system. As the ac component of the PPG signal is in synchronization with heart beat, information about heart rate can be extracted from it. PPG uses LEDs and photo-diode which makes it low cost, non-invasive, easy to use and portable system. Since it operates optically, it is not intrinsically susceptible to capacitive coupling interference as in ECG [28]. However, photo-diodes are sensitive to natural and artificial light sources. PPG based heart monitoring systems are unobtrusive as size and weight of the device of PPG is low. PPG is generally used in direct contact with the patient׳s skin as in the case of other systems (ECG, PCG, SCG). But in the case of neonates, skin-damage, direct contact to skin is not feasible and hence Huelsbusch and Blazek [29] proposed a remote PPG (rPPG) that can acquire PPG signal without the contact with skin. The main concern with rPPG is its sensitivity to the subject motion.Portability of the system is induced by small size and low weight sensor, used by the system. ECG, PCG, SCG and PPG are portable as they satisfy these conditions. Portable diagnostic system is useful in many scenarios. Most use of the portable system is for long term monitoring, which is required for acute symptom detection and early diagnosis of the heart diseases. However the acceptance of a portable system depends on the diagnostic efficiency, performance of the system in different environmental conditions, comfort to the user, easy to operate, and cost.ECG signal contains information about the electrical activity of the heart. Thus provides better insight on the issues related to electrical conduction abnormality of the heart. While the PCG signal acquires acoustic sounds produced by the heart valves (mechanical action) and thus useful in diagnosis of the valvular diseases. Due to different source of producing these signals (ECG and PCG), the existence of a problem (e.g. structural abnormalities) in PCG signal does not imply the existence of the same problem in ECG signal and vice versa. SCG signal is also produced by the mechanical action (acceleration of the heart), measures compression waves. Acceleration is a second derivation of the displacement and that is why SCG signal contains more information compared to the PCG signal. PPG signal provides only limited information about the heart. It measures the blood variation in the blood vessels. Although, with the combination of ECG or PCG it has been used for the calculation of pulse transit time (PTT), which is an important diagnostic parameter in the case of obstructive sleep apnea detection and blood pressure measurement.For clinical use, all methods are suitable as signal to noise ratio (SNR) remains high. At home, in the presence of the environmental and motion noise, robustness of the sensor to the noises is a major issue. In case of ECG, as discussed in (Table 1), wet sensors are robust to noise while dry and capacitive sensors are vulnerable to noise. PCG is more vulnerable to patient׳s motion noise and environmental noise compared to the ECG. On the other hand, SCG is robust to the motion noise and environmental noise.PPG is the most suitable technique in terms of portability and used widely for heart rate calculation. Problem with the ECG is that it uses a gel which causes etching problem, and reduces comfort of the patient and hence reduces acceptability for long term monitoring. PCG has advantages over ECG in terms of comfort of the patient and easy to operate. SCG is superior to the PCG in terms of comfort because of the low weight (<3g) accelerometers.Heart signals, acquired by different body sensors, often get contaminated by noise components such as flicker noise, common-mode interference, power-line interference, and baseline wandering [15]. Also, amplitude of the acquired signal is typically low. A signal conditioning module typically consists of algorithm for noise minimization and amplifier to amplify low amplitude signals. This module operates on signals in analog domain. Power consumption of this module used to be low so as to support long term operability of heart monitoring systems. For the same purpose, Rieger [30] proposed a variable gain circuit consisting of a continuous-time input stage using lateral bipolar transistors. Spinelli et al. [31] proposed a driven right leg circuit to reduce common-mode interference. Gomez-Clapers and Casanella [18] used dual ground configuration to reduce the noise caused by power line interference and base line wandering. Since most of the heart monitoring systems are digital in nature and need communication for remote monitoring, the following section discuses about analog to digital conversation (ADC) and compression algorithms.Heart signals (analog) are converted into digital signals for its processing on digital computers. This is done by sampling the heart signal and quantizing the sampled values. This process is done on Digital Signal Processor (DSP) called Analog to Digital Converter (ADC). Selection of the DSP depends on the desired sampling rate, number of bits to be used for quantisation, operating frequency and power consumption. As described in Table 2, MSP based processors have lower power consumption compared to the PIC based processors, while the PIC based processors have higher operating frequency compared to the MSP based processors. Both types of processors provide multiple working and idle modes according to the required computational power, to optimize the power consumption. DSP with low power consumption supports long term monitoring of the heart. To optimize the power consumption, Bachmann et al. [32] proposed a DSP with the capability to perform in different power modes according to the required accuracy and available computational power. Power consumption was optimized at different abstraction layers from application optimization and mapping to system.Conventional sampling techniques, sample signals at or above Nyquist rate, which ensues perfect reconstruction of the signal. Nyquist rate is twice the maximum frequency component present in the signal to be sampled. Typically, heart signal components are below 1kHz frequency and hence, as per Nyquist rate, 2K samples per second are sufficient to avoid aliasing error. However, even 2K samples per second sampling rate generates a huge number of samples, if the heart is monitored for a long time. Consequentially, the power requirement of DSP increases as the number of samples to be processed is huge. In spite of it, compressed sensing (CS) enables sub-Nyquist sampling of signals.Compressed sensing (CS) is a data acquisition approach that requires only a few incoherent measurements to compress signals that are sparse in some domain [38]. Let [α] be an original input vector of dimension N×1 and [Ψ] is the N×N sampling basis or sparsifying matrix containing orthonormal basis (such as a wavelet basis) [ψ1,ψ1,…,ψn]. Then [X], sparse in [Ψ] domain with length N can be found as(2)[X]=[Ψ][α]Then output compressed vector is defined as(3)[Y]=[ϕ][X]where [ϕ] is the M ×N measurement or sensing matrix. So, we get an output vector [Y] with length M, whereM<N. CS captures M measurements from N samples using random linear projections. Now, as the lower number of measurements were taken than the original signal, non-linear optimization techniques are used to reconstruct the original signal [38]. Reconstruction of the signal can be achieved as(4)Min∥X^∥1subjectto[Y]=[ϕ][X^]Perfect reconstruction of the signal depends on the incoherence between [Ψ] and [ϕ] matrices. Thus, random matrices can be used as a measurement matrix because random matrices are, with high probability, highly incoherent with any fixed basis [Ψ]. CS is considered to be non-adaptive because measurement matrix [ϕ] remains constant.Several measurement matrix design considerations and reconstruction algorithms have been presented in [39] and found that using Bernoulli measurement matrix, compression ratio of 16 is achievable. Mamaghanian et al. [40] compared CS and the DWT-based compression algorithms and found that CS was inferior to DWT-based algorithm in compression performance. Despite of it, CS-based compression outperforms in terms of energy efficiency due to its lower complexity and reduced CPU execution time.After digitization of analog signals, digital signals are compressed to reduce amount of data. The basic purpose of data compression is to represent the original signal with a smaller number of bits than that is needed for the original signal. The compression is typically achieved by removing redundancy from the signal to be compressed. Since power requirement of wireless module directly depends on the amount of data to be transmitted, one of the major advantages with compression is a reduction in power requirement by wireless module. However, there is a loss of information, in general, when signal is reconstructed from the compressed data. A proper balance is maintained with compression ratio and the requirement that the information of diagnostic importance is preserved.Heart monitoring systems have additional requirement for compression algorithms to be computationally efficient to support long term monitoring. Various compression algorithms for heart signals have been reported in the literature. Wavelet transform [41,42], Walsh transform [43], Hermite function [44] and discrete cosine transform [45] based compression algorithms first decompose the signal into coefficients, by projecting the signal onto basis functions of transforms. Then compression is achieved by retaining only a small number of coefficients which typically preserves essential information of the heart signal. As stated before, computational complexity is crucial for the compression algorithm as these have to be implemented on the patient side. Computational complexity of DWT is O(N), DCT is O(NlogN), Walsh transform is O(NlogN), and Hermite function is O(Nlog2N). Thus DWT has lowest computational complexity. However, compression performance of the Hermite function based method is better than DCT and DWT based basic compression algorithms [44]. The performance of these algorithms depends on the following parameters: (a) choice of basis function, (b) decomposition level, and (c) the percentage of retained energy (number of coefficients). In these approaches, trade-off between the percentage of retained energy and compression ratio is crucial. Increment in the percentage of retained energy reduces compression ratio and enhances reconstructed signal quality and vice versa. Retained coefficients are compressed using conventional compression algorithms such as zero-removal [41], Huffman coding [41,42], dead zone quantization [45], and run length coding [42,46]. While, Sharma et al. [47] applied multi-scale principal component analysis (MSPCA) on wavelet transform coefficients and then MSPCA coefficients are uniformly quantized and encoded by Huffman coding. All the above algorithms compressed the entire frame with same compression ratio. On the other hand, researchers have been proposed approaches to use different compression ratio for different block of signals [43,46,48,49]. Different statistical parameters have been calculated to identify significance of the segment such as Wang et al. [48] calculated kurtosis, Kim et al. [49] calculated mean deviation (MD), Ma et al. [50] calculated wavelet coefficient energy. In [43], significance of the segment is calculated based on the energy of the Walsh coefficients. While, Rajoub [46] applied DWT and then divided the coefficients into three groups based on magnitude of coefficients and then applied different thresholding for each group.Researchers have also proposed compression algorithms that preserve features of heart signal (rather than preserving the waveform) [51,52]. In [51] Alvarado et al. proposed a compression algorithm based on integrator and fire sampler. Similarly, Kim et al. [52] proposed an algorithm based on curvature points, which calculated the important information from the signal.Compression algorithms which require low computation are suitable for long term heart monitoring. DWT based compression algorithms have lower computational complexity than other algorithms and thus have been used extensively. On the other hand, feature preserving compression algorithms have high compression ratio. They are suitable for heart signals because diagnosis can be performed based on these features. However, selection process of the diagnostic features from the heart signal is complex process. Furthermore, the performance of these types of algorithm deteriorated in the presence of noises.Digitized and compressed heart signals are transmitted to remote site. In off-site monitoring, analysis and classification of the heart signals are performed at the remote site. Transmitter consists of wireless module which helps to transmit heart signals to remote site. Low power consumption, convenient connection process, and low latency are some important features of wireless modules that promote wide acceptance of heart monitoring systems. In the literature, various wireless communication techniques and protocols have been proposed for transmission purpose (Table 3). Bluetooth 4.0 [37] wireless system supports 24Mbps data rate, has working range up to 100m, and consumes low power. Bluetooth devices with these features are suitable to be integrated with heart monitoring systems. But Bluetooth wireless systems require initial connection setup that has to be done manually. Patient׳s intervention is not desirable in a heart monitoring system as it reduces convenience. To overcome this problem an approach was proposed by Morak et al. [37] using radio-frequency identification (RFID) and near field communication (NFC). In this approach, the connection establishes by bringing two NFC enabled devices closer and using RFID information of both devices. The drawback of this approach is that it requires permanent activation of Bluetooth which results in extra power consumption. Moreover, NFC can support data rate up to 424kbps only. Since data rate is lower than Bluetooth 4.0, it takes long time to transmit data. A good review of the state-of-the art technologies for wireless network was presented by [32].Keeping in view the desired features of wireless module, various protocols have been proposed [6,36]. Chen et al. [36] proposed a reliable protocol based on any-cast routing algorithm. This algorithm automatically selects nearest hop (sink), in case of failure in original path, instead of rebuilding the path from the source node. Thus, it provides a reliable communication as well as reducing traffic overhead and transmission latency. However, selection of the hop process increases the complexity of routing algorithm and the complexity increases power consumption. To optimize power consumption, Nemati et al. [6] proposed an ANT protocol. The ANT protocol was used as a low-data-rate wireless module to reduce the power consumption and size of the sensor. ANT is an adaptive isochronous ad hoc wireless protocol based on master slave model. It consumes from 1mA to 6.3mA current and supports many topologies such as peer-to-peer, star, tree, and mesh. SimpliciTI is also a low power radio frequency (RF) network protocol used in heart monitoring systems [18,35]. SimpliciTI was designed by Texas Instruments for easy implementation and deployment on RF platforms. It is low data rate and low duty cycle protocol and supports star and peer-to-peer network topology.Ma et al. [50] proposed an unequal-error protection approach for heart signals to reduce transmission distortion and to reduce power consumption of wireless transmission. In this approach more protection is provided to the segment of heart signal which contains diagnostic important features compared to the other segments. Results showed that nearly 40% of transmission energy can be saved compared to the equal error protection.In a different approach, Atakan et al. [53] introduced the concept of a body area network (BAN) with molecular communication, where the messenger molecule is used as a communication carrier from a sender to receiver. However, the communications at the molecular scale are subject to numerous problems, some similar to the ones faced on a larger scale in existing wireless networks.Analysis and classification module performs automatic machine diagnosis that enhances diagnostic accuracy. It is very helpful in the present scenario, where the number of cardiologists is low when compared to the number of cardiac patients [5]. Typically, analysis and classification is performed in two steps: noise suppression, and analysis and classification. In noise suppression step, noises are suppressed from heart signals. In the next step, the heart signals are classified in normal and different CVDs.Noise suppression from heart signals is essential as its presence may lead to imprecise or inaccurate classification of the signals. For noise suppression, classical filters such as Gaussian filter, Chebyshev filter, Butterworth filter, and Weiner filter have been used extensively. Because, heart signals lie in the 20–500Hz frequency band and these filters are able to suppress noise in the selected frequency band (below 20Hz and above 500Hz). But noises, which overlap with spectral contents of heart signals, are not easy to suppress from the signals. Hence, sophisticated filters have been proposed in the literature for suppression of these types of noises (in-band noise) [59,60]. Filters have been developed based on wavelet transform [59]. In these filters, signals are transformed into wavelet coefficients, as discussed in Section 6. Then noise suppression is achieved by discarding the coefficients which are correlated to noises, by applying threshold. Although, wavelet based filters are able to suppress the in-band noise, but the threshold value plays a crucial role in this approach. If the threshold is selected high, signal information will be lost, while small value will not have a significant effect on the signal. To obtain optimal denoising parameter for DWT based denoising, Messer et al. [61] performed experiments and found that level 5 for the signal decomposition and soft thresholding with rigrsure threshold selection rule gives the best result.Almasi et al. [60] introduced model-based Bayesian denoising framework which combined the extended Kalman filter and dynamic model of the heart signal. Results demonstrate that the proposed method has the superiority over wavelet based denosing. However, the requirement of a model of the heart signal limits the use of this framework.Researchers have proposed many filtering approaches which analyze diversity between characteristics of heart signal components and characteristics of noises [7,15,62]. Lee et al. [7] used first order-intrinsic mode function (F-IMF) to minimize motion noise from the heart signals. F-IMF of the clean signal has periodic patterns, whereas noise contaminated signal has highly varying irregular dynamics with lower magnitudes. Thus, noisy segment can be classified from the clean heart signal. Liu et al. [15] removed the noises from heart signal components based on the characteristic of wavelet coefficient that the signal coefficients with large magnitude at a finer scale will also be large in magnitude at coarser scales. However, for coefficients which are caused by noises, magnitude will decay rapidly along the scales. Manikandan and Soman [62] calculated lag-1 auto-correlation coefficients, which give positive values for heart signal components and negative values for spurious noise.Quasi-cyclostationary nature of heart signals also has been considered to filter noise from the signals [63,64]. Quasi-cyclostationary means that the morphology of the heart signals does not change abruptly from a cardiac cycle to consecutive cardiac cycle. Thus, noise suppression can be achieved by correlating the consecutive cycles of the signal because noise components, in general, are uncorrelated. However, quasi-cyclostationary nature of the heart signal may not be fulfilled due to variation in waveform, presence of murmurs, and variation in the timing of the heart sound components. Furthermore, the performance of this approach depends on the segmentation of cycle.Adaptive noise cancellation (ANC) techniques are also found suitable for heart signals as they can detect dynamic variation in the signal [65]. Least mean square (LMS) is an ANC technique which calculates filter coefficients that relate to producing the least mean squares of error signal (difference between the desired signal and the filtered signal). Estimation of filter coefficients requires high computation. To reduce the computation of LMS algorithms, various variations in LMS algorithms have been proposed in the literature and reported in [65]. To further reduce the computational complexity, the author proposed [65] sign and error non-linear sign based LMS.Respiratory system also affects heart signals significantly. To overcome this problem, Chen et al. [66] proposed a zero crossing method. It calculates the time interval between two consecutive upward and downward points (IBI) in the signal. Then the inverse of IBI gives the frequency of breathing signal, which can be removed by notch filtering.Noise often appears in parts of the heart signal recordings. In some part, noise affects severely to the heart signal while in others it affects mild. In the case of severe contamination, that part of the signal can be eliminated from diagnostic consideration while in the case of mild contamination, noise suppression algorithm can be used. This approach will improve diagnosis efficiency as well as optimize complexity of denoising algorithms. This approach will be also helpful in home care systems for alarming to the user for the bad signal quality. Thus, it is of interest to obtain a signal quality index to find out a subsequence with better signal quality with respect to the rest of the cycle. Li et al. [67] proposed an optimum heart sound selection scheme based on cycle frequency spectral density. In this approach, the quality of the heart sound signal depends on the periodicity of the heart signal. In [68], the quality index was calculated using the Cepstral distance between homogeneous cardiac sounds. In this algorithm, first, the heart signal was segmented into separate cardiac cycle using wavelet based approach. After segmentation, Mel frequency Cepstral coefficient (MFCC) was calculated for each cycle. Finally, the reciprocal of distance between MFCC coefficients of consecutive cycle gives the quality score. The performance of this algorithm depends on the segmentation of the heart signal into cardiac cycle. Naseri [69] described an approach to identify the level of noise in the heart signal cycle. In this approach, first, the signal is segmented into separate heart cycle. Then, cycles are clustered into a finite number of groups based on geometrical parameter and spectral content. Next, median of these clusters is correlated to the test cycle features. Finally, by applying a threshold, the cycle is prescribed as clean or noisy. Although, requirement of a test cycle features limits the use of this approach.Analysis and classification of heart signals are challenging tasks due to non-stationary nature of the heart signals. Moreover, time to time varying morphology of heart signals from intra- and inter-patient needs sophisticated classification algorithms. Classification of heart signals is performed by analyzing diagnostic features present in the signal as follows.ECG signal consists of different waves, as discussed in Section 4 (A). Each wave is associated with particular functionality of the heart. Analysis of the shape of these waves leads to diagnosis of important cardiovascular diseases which includes MI, hypertensive heart diseases, arrhythmia, CHD. The impact of CVDs can be seen on the waves in ECG signal. Myocardial infarction causes ST elevation or depression depending on the severity of the infarction. Location of the infarction can be identified by analyzing ECG signals of different leads. In the case of hypertension, QRS voltage increases due to both thickening of wall (pressure overload) and dilatation of chamber (volume overload) of the left ventricle. The RR interval is critical in the diagnosis of many arrhythmia such as premature ventricular contractions, left and right bundled branch blocks, and paced beats [70].Classification of ECG signals is performed by analyzing shape of the waves presents in the signal. Parameters of the shape of the waves act as features for classification algorithms. Computational requirement of classification algorithms depends directly on the number of the features used and accuracy of classification depends on quality of the features. Thus, feature selection plays a prominent role in the classification of ECG signals. In the literature, many approaches have been proposed to select optimal features. Bashir et al. [70] calculated QRS, P and T waves morphological parameters as features to detect different arrhythmia. Then a parameter score was calculated for an adaptive selection of feature subset for particular arrhythmia. Accordingly, there will be a different feature set for each arrhythmia, which enhances the accuracy, and at the same time reduces the computational burden. While, Llamedo and Martinez [71] calculated interval features and morphological features for classification of arrhythmia. Interval features were calculated from R peaks, and morphological features were calculated from three sources, R–R interval, 2-D vectocardiogram loop and DWT of the ECG signal. Then outliers form the feature set were removed based on Kurtosis coefficients. Mar et al. [72] applied sequential forward floating search algorithm with a new criterion function index. Drawback of the proposed method is that in many cases the subset with highest criterion value has a very large number of features. Kamath [73] selected mean of Teager energy operator (TEO) in the time domain and frequency domain as features set. Key characteristic of the TEO is that it models energy of the source that generated signal rather than the energy of the signal itself. Hence, any deviations in the regular rhythmic activity of the heart get reflected in the TEO. Most of the above algorithms face the same challenge, requirement of a large number of the feature set. Large number of feature set is required for diagnosis of the different types of diseases, but it results in large computational complexity. Another challenge is due to variation in morphological descriptors of the heart signal with time.Since mathematical operators work in the time domain, these are computationally efficient and hence consume low power. Mathematical morphological operators have been used [74] to extract structural information of the ECG signals. However, computational requirement increases as increment in order of the operators. To optimize computation requirement, Zhang and Bae [8] proposed 1 dilation and 1 erosion based morphology operator sets. However, effectiveness of these algorithms depends on the selection of three structural components of the operator, shape, length, and amplitude.T wave delineation is crucial as prolongation of T wave to end of the T wave is associated with ventricular pre-arrhythmicity and sudden cardiac death. Noriega et al. [75] analyzed respiration effect on T wave. Atrial fibrillation (AF) is associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular and coronary artery disease, hypertension, etc. AF is typically diagnosed by analyzing irregular RR intervals. Huang et al. [76] proposed an algorithm to classify AF by analyzing RR interval.As discussed in Section 4.2, PCG signal consists of four sound components. Characteristics (intensity, frequency, and duration) of these sound components change due to the presence of CVDs. Additional murmur sounds may also be present in PCG signal due to the presence of CVDs. Although PCG can indicate abnormalities caused by important CVDs, it is used extensively for diagnosis of valvular diseases as sound components are produced by the valvular activity [10]. Valvular diseases cause systolic and diastolic murmurs. Aortic stenosis (AS), pulmonary stenosis (PS), and mitral regurgitation (MR) cause systolic murmurs. On the other hand, diastolic murmurs occur due to aortic regurgitation (AR), mitral stenosis (MS) etc. Systolic murmurs, AS lies in the frequency band of 120–250Hz, PS lies in 200–250Hz, and MR lies in 300–400Hz. MR can be classified from other two systolic murmurs (PS and AS), as with wider duration and higher frequency band. S1 also becomes quieter than normal, in case of MR. Whereas PS causes longer duration between aortic and pulmonary components of the S2, called as split S2. Splitting of S2 also may occur due to atrial septal defect and right bundle branch block. Diastolic murmurs lie in 100–250Hz. MS causes mid-diastolic murmur with louder S1 and causes a high frequency opening snap of 90–130ms after the aortic component of S2. While AR is relatively louder than other diastolic murmurs. But more severe AR causes a lower intensity murmur with longer duration. Two other sound components, S3 and S4, in PCG signal rarely occur and may indicate abnormalities. Presence of S3 in a child is normal, while in adults, it represents diastolic overload or cardiomyopathy [77]. S4 occurs just after atrial contraction and it may be due to ventricular hypertrophy or pulmonary arterial hypertension [77]. Analysis of the sound components and the murmurs leads towards to the classification of the PCG signals.Heart sound classification algorithms first partition the PCG signal into S1, S2, systole, and diastole intervals, by emphasizing them. To emphasize the heart signal components, envelop based parameters such as Hilbert transform, Shannon energy, cardiac sound characteristic waveform (CSCW) and time–frequency domain analysis such as STFT and wavelet have been presented in the literature. After segmentation of components, classification of PCG signal is performed by analyzing the characteristics of these components.Envelope extraction based classification algorithms are able to detect fundamental heart sound components and to classify the signal as normal or abnormal. Choi and Jiang [78] compared three envelope extraction algorithms, normalized average Shannon energy; envelope information of Hilbert transform, and the CSCW. As shown in the results, CSCW gives a more uniform representation of the fundamental components. The main challenge for the envelope extraction based algorithm is the selection of the threshold value. A higher value of threshold missed the S1 and S2, while the lower value of threshold detects spurious components and inaccurate S1 and S2. To resolve this problem, Atbi et al. [79] proposed a two step thresholding scheme. In the first step threshold is selected to detect S1 and S2 and in the next step, to detect murmurs. Envelop extraction based algorithms are computationally low complex. However, the performance of these algorithms depends on the morphology of the PCG signal. Furthermore, it becomes difficult to detect S1 and S2, where murmurs are merged with them.Frequency domain transformation techniques such as Fourier transform, discrete cosine transform, and auto-regressive based spectral analysis techniques provide frequency characteristics of PCG signal components. However, time–frequency domain analysis is more suitable for PCG signal analysis due to the diagnostic significance of timing and frequency of PCG components. Time–frequency analysis of PCG signal has been done using short time Fourier transform (STFT) [10,80], wavelet transform [80,81]. Boutana et al. [10] classified murmurs from PCG sound components by analyzing the Renyi marginal entropy of STFT coefficients. Renyi marginal entropy remains high for murmurs and low for sound components. While, author [80] implement the PCG analysis algorithm using STFT and wavelet on digital signal processing board. In [81], first heart sound signal is segmented into intervals associated with cardiac cycle. Then intervals were grouped together based on similarities between their STFT coefficients. In STFT, a trade off between time resolution and frequency resolution arises. Increment in size of time window increases the frequency resolution, but reduces time resolution and vice versa. Thus, selection of the optimal size of time window is crucial. For time–frequency analysis, wavelet offers a better compromise in terms of resolution. Its main difference with STFT is that the size of the window is not constant. It varies in inverse proportion to frequency in such a way that good time and poor frequency resolution obtain at high frequencies while good frequency and poor time resolution obtain at low frequencies.PCG signals have been classified using artificial intelligence algorithms such as Hidden Markov model [9] and neural network [82,83]. Extracted features from PCG signals using time and frequency analysis tools such as wavelet are used as feature points for these artificial intelligence techniques [82,83]. Use of the machine learning algorithms reduce tedious envelop analysis and its disadvantage in case of murmurs can be avoided, but at the cost of having to prepare the training dataset. To prepare the training dataset for PCG signal, Ahlstrom et al. [84] proposed a feature subset selection algorithm from features of different domain, including Shannon energy, wavelet, fractal dimension, and recurrent quantification analysis.PCG signal modelling is required to generate test data to analyze efficacy of the developed algorithm. Modelling of PCG signals has been done using exponential damped sinusoidal model [85], matching pursuit method [86]. These methods provide complete parameterization of the signal, but require a large number of components. Whereas linear chirp signal modelling is not suitable for PCG signal because components of PCG signal do not have a linear relationship with time. To achieve better accuracy, Xu et al. [87] proposed non-linear chirp signal modelling of the heart sound components.Seismocardiography (SCG) measures mechanical vibrations produced by heart during each cardiac cycle. As discussed in Section 4.3, SCG signal is composed of many waves. Each wave is associated with a particular event of the cardiac cycle. Thus, analysis of these waves provides diagnostic information related to the health of the heart. In [88], author studied the relation between the cardiac event position in SCG with ultrasound signal and showed SCG as an accurate indicator for cardiac events. Thus SCG signal can be used to detect cardiac cycle boundary, heart rate [89], heart rate variability [90]. SCG signals have been also used to obtain systolic blood pressure (SBP) [24]. It was shown that SBP has the correlation with starting point of the SCG signal in the x-axis to the midpoint of the z-axis. However, SCG has been used for the heart monitoring purpose, but its sensitivity to motion noise imposes limitation on its wide use.Characterization of the relation between SCG signal and ECG signal provides significant information related to heart functionality. Wick et al. [88] analyzed relation between the R wave of ECG and the AC wave of SCG signal. The R-AC period varies across two individual and also for the same person at different heart rates. This study strongly suggested the cardiac events also vary in the same manner. Tavakolian et al. [91] analyzed period between the R wave of the ECG and the AO wave of SCG to analyze the myocardial contractility. This period is called as pre-ejection period (PEP), increment in the PEP indicates reduction in contract-ability of myocardial. Moreover, SCG has potential benefits over ECG such as better specificity and sensitivity for detection of coronary artery diseases [92].PPG signal contains sufficient parameters to measure heart rate, arterial oxygen saturation, and information related to respiratory system [27,93,94]. As discussed in Section 4.4, PPG measures variation in intensity of light, reflected or transmitted, induced by variation in the amount of blood in blood vessels. Respiration information can be extracted using three vital parameters: PPG amplitude, variation in SpO2, and respiratory sinus arrhythmia [27]. Now a day, pulse oximeters (variant of PPG) are being used extensively for heart monitoring [27,93–95]. It measures multiple PPG signals at different wavelengths viz., red (660nm) and infrared (940nm). Pulse oximeters have been used for sleep apnea detection [27], pulse wave velocity calculation [93], hypoxia detection [94], and heart rate turbulence analysis [95]. Pulse oximeters have been developed as an in-ear sensor for cardiovascular monitoring [27,94]. This setup of sensor could offer three important advantages: (1) comfortable to wear and hence, suitable for long-term monitoring, (2) the tight-fitting could reduce interference from motion artifacts, and (3) robustness to conditions such as temperature or skin perfusion.However, PPG signals get contaminated primarily due to ambient light, motion artifacts and other physiological process. To extract information from the contaminated PPG signals, Madhav et al. [96] proposed a multi scale principal component analysis based algorithm. In this algorithm, noise suppression from the PPG signals was achieved using wavelet decomposition and reconstruction. Selection of coefficients to reconstruct relatively clean signal was done based on two measures, energy contribution level (ECL) and Kurtosis. After reconstruction of the clean signal, principal component (PC) analysis was performed to extract information about the respiratory system. Li and Warren [93] developed a sensor circuit in which photodetecters are radially distributed around the LED to increase the sensing area. This set-up improved the signal quality without filtering algorithm. Whereas, Stuban and Niwayama [97] analyzed optimal corner frequency of low pass filter for PPG signal. Setting the corner frequency to the fundamental frequency of the PPG signal resulted in decreased noise, and consequently, decreased standard deviation. de Haan and Jeanne [98] analyzed robustness of the chrominance based algorithms to separate motion induced distortion from rPPG signals in case of modest and vigorous motion.The latest generation of mobile phones (smartphones) is increasingly used for health monitoring, due to their powerful on-board computing capability, large memory, large screens and open operating systems that encourage application development. Technical features of mobile phone including text messaging, camera, internet access, inbuilt sensors, make it an appropriate platform for improving health care service [99]. Wireless technologies, including GPRS, GSM, 3GSatelite, Wireless, Lan networks, have been used for wireless transmission of the heart signal [100]. Mobile phones are also suitable platform to develop a heart monitoring system because of (1) the widespread adoption of phones, (2) peoples tendency to carry their phones with them everywhere, and (3) context awareness features [99]. Furthermore, visible representation of the health status of the patient on mobile encourages to be attentive for health promoting behaviour.Mobile phones are using for long term heart monitoring at home for, both manner, on-site monitoring and off-site monitoring. Home monitoring supports to reduce the rates of admission to hospital for chronic heart failure, improve the quality, reduce excessive travel time and reduce the cost [101–103]. While long term monitoring supports in early identification of deteriorations in patient condition and symptom control, and timely intervention of a medical team [99,104]. Smartphones based software application can help clinicians in identifying acute symptoms, decreasing unnecessary tests, to understand principles of disease diagnosis, and communication facility among clinicians [99,102]. In addition, mobile applications have been used for remote coaching, reminder to patient for appointments and health related information, public health research, primary care, emergency care, health information for self, drug reference, medical training, to encourage for primary care check-up, etc. Mobile phone based health monitoring system have been discussed in [102]. Some of them for heart monitoring are as follows: (1) cardiomobile is comprised of a heart and activity monitor, single lead ECG, GPS receiver, and programmed smartphone. The smartphone sends ECG rate, walking speed, heart rate, elapsed distance, and patient location to a secure server for real-time monitoring by a qualified exercise scientist. (2) Pulmonary rehabilitation is an application for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) rehabilitation and self-management, developed for smartphones. (3) mVisum is a specialized application for cardiology communications that monitor ECG data, alarm the user in abnormal case, and transmit data to clinician. (4) iCPR is a cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) training application. This application measures the chest compression rate and gives audiovisual feedback, improving the performance of chest compression by helping the user to achieve the correct chest compression rate. Another smart-phone based health monitoring system, BioSign, is reviewed in [104]. BioSign system alerts the patient in case of abnormality. It represents the health status of the patient as patient status index (PSI), which is calculated based on five vital parameters: heart rate, breathing rate, blood pressure, arterial oxygen saturation, and skin temperature.To enhance the user acceptability, Scully et al. [105] proposed a reflection photoplethysmography based on imaging by mobile phones. In this approach, the palmer side of the left index finger was placed over the camera lens of mobile with its flash turned on. Then variation of intensity in captured video indicates the heart beat. This approach does not require any extra hardware. However sensitivity of device get affects due to motion and pressure variation of the finger. Another approach proposed by Poh et. al [106] integrates reflective photo-diode into earphone which are unobtrusive, and low in size and weight. Then acquired signal was sent to mobile phone for monitoring purpose.Major challenges for smartphone-based health care system include cost, network bandwidth, battery power efficiency, small screen size, computer viruses, etc. [102]. Other issue is that it must be seamless and autonomous in its operation. It would be beneficial for those who are non-familiar with the technology.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
