@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
High order ADER schemes for a unified first order hyperbolic formulation of continuum mechanics: Viscous heat-conducting fluids and elastic solids

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
High order schemes for a unified first order hyperbolic formulation of continuum mechanics.The mathematical model applies simultaneously to fluid mechanics and solid mechanics.Viscous fluids are treated in the frame of hyper-elasticity as generalized visco-plastic solids.Formal asymptotic analysis reveals the connection with the Navier–Stokes equations.The distortion tensorAin the model appears to be well-suited for flow visualization.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
ADER–WENO finite volume schemes,Arbitrary high-order discontinuous Galerkin schemes,Path-conservative methods and stiff source terms,Unified first order hyperbolic formulation of nonlinear continuum mechanics,Fluid mechanics and solid mechanics,Viscous compressible fluids and elastic solids,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper is concerned with the numerical solution of the unified first order hyperbolic formulation of continuum mechanics recently proposed by Peshkov and Romenski [110], further denoted as HPR model. In that framework, the viscous stresses are computed from the so-called distortion tensor A, which is one of the primary state variables in the proposed first order system. A very important key feature of the HPR model is its ability to describe at the same time the behavior of inviscid and viscous compressible Newtonian and non-Newtonian fluids with heat conduction, as well as the behavior of elastic and visco-plastic solids. Actually, the model treats viscous and inviscid fluids as generalized visco-plastic solids. This is achieved via a stiff source term that accounts for strain relaxation in the evolution equations ofA. Also heat conduction is included via a first order hyperbolic system for the thermal impulse, from which the heat flux is computed. The governing PDE system is hyperbolic and fully consistent with the first and the second principle of thermodynamics. It is also fundamentally different from first order Maxwell–Cattaneo-type relaxation models based on extended irreversible thermodynamics. The HPR model represents therefore a novel and unified description of continuum mechanics, which applies at the same time to fluid mechanics and solid mechanics. In this paper, the direct connection between the HPR model and the classical hyperbolic–parabolic Navier–Stokes–Fourier theory is established for the first time via a formal asymptotic analysis in the stiff relaxation limit.From a numerical point of view, the governing partial differential equations are very challenging, since they form a large nonlinear hyperbolic PDE system that includes stiff source terms and non-conservative products. We apply the successful family of one-step ADER–WENO finite volume (FV) and ADER discontinuous Galerkin (DG) finite element schemes to the HPR model in the stiff relaxation limit, and compare the numerical results with exact or numerical reference solutions obtained for the Euler and Navier–Stokes equations. Numerical convergence results are also provided. To show the universality of the HPR model, the paper is rounded-off with an application to wave propagation in elastic solids, for which one only needs to switch off the strain relaxation source term in the governing PDE system.We provide various examples showing that for the purpose of flow visualization, the distortion tensorAseems to be particularly useful.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
An attempt to build a unified formulation of continuum mechanics in first order hyperbolic form that includes fluid mechanics as well as solid mechanics has been very recently described by Peshkov and Romenski in [110]. The proposed model, hereafter the Hyperbolic Peshkov–Romenski (HPR) model, can potentially cover the entire spectrum of viscous flows ranging from non-equilibrium gas dynamics to Newtonian and non-Newtonian fluids, and even elastic and plastic deformation in solids, provided that the continuum description is applicable. In order to make this possible, the material element22In fluid mechanics, the terms fluid elements, fluid particles and fluid parcels are also used.view point is employed and the very essence of any macroscopic flow, i.e. the process of material element rearrangements, is explicitly described in the mathematical model. We note that the term material element should be understood in the conventional meaning of continuum mechanics, i.e. as an ensemble of a sufficiently large number of molecules or atoms.An important difference between the HPR model and the classical continuum models is that the material elements not only have a finite size, but they also have an internal structure, which is subject to rearrangements, and which can be macroscopically described after introducing suitable quantities. Thus, in order to describe the deformability of material elements, a tensorial field33Rigorously speaking,Ais not a tensor field of rank 2, since it transforms like a tensor of rank 1 with respect to a change of coordinates.A(x,t)=[Aij]is used. It maps the material elements from a current deformed state to the undeformed state, and it contains the information about deformation and rotation of material elements. While this approach is standard in the framework of solid mechanics, it is much less obvious for fluid dynamics. Because of the rearrangements of material elements, the fieldAis not integrable in the sense that it does not relate Eulerian and Lagrangian coordinates of the continuum. As a result, the fieldAis local, see [110,70,77,78]. This is also the reason why we cannot callAthe deformation gradient, (or more precisely, the inverse deformation gradient), and thus, following [70,77,78], we shall instead refer to it as the material distortion field, or simply the distortion tensor.In addition to the distortion fieldA, another important information is required to describe rearrangements in a system of material elements of finite size. This information should characterize how easy or how hard it is for material elements to rearrange (fluidity). In the kinetic theory of liquids, Frenkel [60] proposed to use the average timeτFbetween two solid-like vibration states of an atom to describe the ability of a liquid to flow.44Frenkel's ideas have been discussed, used and extended during the last 20 years to compute the thermodynamic and dynamic properties of liquids, see [142,30,23,18,19] and references therein.Following this idea of Frenkel, it was proposed in [110] to use a continuum analog τ of Frenkel's timeτF. Thus, in our continuum approach, the time τ is the time taken by a given material element to “escape” from the cage composed of its neighbor elements, i.e. the time taken to rearrange with one of its neighbors. The more viscous a fluid is, the larger the time τ, i.e. the longer the fluid elements stay in contact with each other. The limiting cases, inviscid fluids and elastic solids, are recovered whenτ=0andτ=∞, respectively, while for viscous fluids, the time τ is finite with0<τ<∞(see the discussion in [110]). We shall call τ the strain dissipation time, because, in the mathematical formulation of the HPR model the inverse timeτ−1defines the rate at which shear strains dissipate during the rearrangement process.Our material element point of view allows to formulate the system of governing partial differential equations (PDE) with rather convenient mathematical properties:•First, the model is described by a system of first order PDEs. We recall that first order systems are less sensitive to the quality of the computational mesh and in general they allow to get a numerical scheme of higher order of accuracy than for a second order model on the same discrete stencil.Second, the model is hyperbolic if the total energy potential is a convex function of the state variables, see [110]. In other words, the model is based on a wave formulation. Indeed, from the point of view of the physics of wave propagation and because of the causality principle, any macroscopic transport phenomenon should be considered as a wave propagation process. In particular, the momentum transfer in a viscous fluid in the transverse direction to the mean flow is nothing but a wave propagation process. These waves are known as the shear waves, which are very dissipative waves propagating over a distance that equals just a few wave lengths. Nevertheless, such waves give rise to very important phenomena known as boundary layers. Thus, one may expect that a physically based boundary layer theory has to be based on such a transverse wave dynamics. In full agreement with the above discussion, there are two types of waves in our hyperbolic model, longitudinal waves and shear waves, which transfer momentum in the transverse flow directions.Third, the dissipative process of material element rearrangements is modeled by a stiff algebraic source term, i.e. this term does not depend on the space derivatives, which automatically implies that the characteristic speeds of the corresponding hyperbolic system are always finite (as they should), whatever the time τ is. One may recall that in hyperbolic Maxwell–Cattaneo-type models some characteristic speeds tend to infinity if the relaxation parameter tends to zero.We also note that the system of the governing equations discussed in [110] has already been derived by Godunov and Romenski in the 1970s [74,70] in the context of elasto-plastic deformation of metals, for which it has been used by several authors over the years [116,64,9,73,7]. On the contrary, the idea that the same model could also describe the dynamics of any continuum, including inviscid fluids, viscous Newtonian and non-Newtonian fluids, elastic and visco-plastic solids was discussed in [110] for the first time. In fact, a very similar idea was proposed by Besseling in [16], but unfortunately it has never been appreciated in the fluid dynamics context. In order to allow a quantitative comparison also with the Fourier heat conduction theory, in this paper we extend the model proposed by Peshkov and Romenski in [110] by including also hyperbolic heat conduction equations, as proposed by Romenski in [96,116,115,114]. The essential difference of our hyperbolic heat conduction model from that proposed by Cattaneo [28] is that the speed of the heat propagation front is always finite, whatever the heat flux relaxation parameter is.We emphasize that it is not our aim to provide a link with kinetic theory, although this could be very illuminating, but rather to verify the capabilities of the HPR model to account for a wide variety of dynamical systems.The resulting governing partial differential equations of the HPR model, introduced in [110] and presented later in Section 2, are rather challenging from a numerical point of view, since they constitute a large system of nonlinear hyperbolic conservation laws that also includes non-conservative products and stiff source terms. To the best knowledge of the authors, the complete first order HPR model presented in [110] has never been solved so far by any numerical method in multiple space dimensions and including all terms, hence one of the main goals of this paper is to thoroughly investigate the behavior of the HPR model in a large number of different standard benchmark problems of computational fluid mechanics and computational solid mechanics.It is important to mention that exactly for such a general class of nonlinear time-dependent hyperbolic PDEs, the families of ADER finite volume (FV) and ADER discontinuous Galerkin (DG) finite element methods have been developed in the past decade. The starting point of the original ADER (arbitrary high order derivatives) schemes of Toro and Titarev et al. for hyperbolic conservation laws [137,122,131,140,132,134,49,24,135] was the approximate solution of the generalized Riemann problem (GRP) [59,15] that arises naturally in the context of high order finite volume and DG schemes, due to their piecewise high order polynomial data representation, for which the vector of conserved variables and all its spatial derivatives are known at a given time level. The ADER approach has been successfully extended also to hyperbolic PDEs with stiff source terms [43,52,82,139], to hyperbolic PDEs with non-conservative products [41,45] and to parabolic problems [63,136,37]. Recent developments include space–time adaptive meshes [53,46,146], moving meshes [40,21], ADER–WENO finite volume schemes for divergence-free magnetohydrodynamics [4,6,5] and a posteriori limiting of high order ADER-DG and ADER-FV schemes [93,54,149,148]. In the context of ADER schemes, first order hyperbolic reformulations of parabolic viscous problems have been tackled by Toro and Montecinos in [100,99,138], while a series of interesting previous work on first order hyperbolic reformulations of advection–diffusion equations was proposed by Nishikawa in [106,107]. Although not directly related to viscous problems, we also would like to refer to the well-known relaxation system of Jin and Xin [120], which allows to reformulate any nonlinear hyperbolic conservation law as an augmented linear first order system with stiff relaxation source terms.In this paper, we concentrate our attention on compressible viscous Newtonian fluids, which in the classical continuum theory can be described by the hyperbolic–parabolic Navier–Stokes–Fourier (NSF) theory, as well as on elastic solids. It should also be noted that there are several advantages of a first order hyperbolic formulation of viscous fluids: first, the use of explicit Godunov-type shock-capturing finite volume schemes and, even more, the use of high order discontinuous Galerkin finite element methods is – at least in principle – straightforward for first order systems, while DG schemes need some special care in the presence of parabolic and higher order derivative terms, see the very interesting discussions in the well-known papers of Bassi and Rebay [10], Baumann and Oden [11,12], Cockburn and Shu [31,32], Yan and Shu [144,145,92] and others [1,80,81,86,29,63,44]. Second, the use of a parabolic theory can lead to a severe time step size restriction, if explicit time stepping schemes are used, since the infinite propagation speed of perturbations that is intrinsically inherent in parabolic PDEs is reflected in explicit numerical methods by a stability condition on the time step that scales with the square of the mesh size, while it scales only linearly with the mesh size for first order hyperbolic systems due to the classical CFL condition [34]. The situation is even worse for high order discontinuous Galerkin finite element schemes, where the explicit time step size scales not only quadratically with the mesh size, but where it decreases even quadratically with the order of the method. In Section 4 we will show one numerical example with an explicit time stepping scheme, where the use of the first order HPR model is clearly more convenient in terms of time step size and CPU time compared to the classical parabolic Navier–Stokes theory. As a third and last advantage of a first order hyperbolic model, we would like to emphasize that, by avoiding the presence of infinite wave speeds even in the Newtonian framework, the new formulation suggests that its extension to relativistic continuum mechanics should also be possible.The rest of this paper is organized as follows: in Section 2 we recall and discuss the extended hyperbolic Peshkov–Romenski model, denoted by HPR model in the following, including also a hyperbolic formulation of heat conduction. In particular, we show that the system is thermodynamically consistent and symmetric hyperbolic. A sketch of the analysis of the characteristics of the model is provided, together with a dispersion analysis of the wave speeds for relaxation times ranging from zero to infinity. We also carry out a formal asymptotic analysis of the system in the stiff relaxation limit, which reveals the direct connection of the first order HPR model with the well-established hyperbolic–parabolic Navier–Stokes–Fourier equations of viscous heat conducting fluids. In Section 3 we briefly summarize the numerical methods used to solve the HPR model in this paper, namely ADER–WENO finite volume schemes and ADER discontinuous Galerkin finite element methods, making use of the unifiedPNPMframework established in [38], which contains FV schemes and DG methods as two special cases of a more general class of numerical methods. In Section 4 we present computational results for a large set of different multi-dimensional test problems from computational fluid mechanics and also one example from computational solid mechanics, ranging from viscous low Mach number flows over viscous and inviscid compressible flows to the simulation of wave propagation in elastic solids. The paper is rounded-off by some concluding remarks and an outlook to future research in Section 5.The unified first order hyperbolic model for continuum mechanics proposed by Peshkov and Romenski in [110], including a hyperbolic formulation of heat conduction, reads:(1a)∂ρ∂t+∂ρvk∂xk=0,(1b)∂ρvi∂t+∂(ρvivk+pδik−σik)∂xk=0,(1c)∂Aik∂t+∂Aimvm∂xk+vj(∂Aik∂xj−∂Aij∂xk)=−ψikθ1(τ1),(1d)∂ρJi∂t+∂(ρJivk+Tδik)∂xk=−ρHiθ2(τ2),(1e)∂ρs∂t+∂(ρsvk+Hk)∂xk=ρθ1(τ1)Tψikψik+ρθ2(τ2)THiHi≥0,The solutions of the above PDE system fulfill also the additional conservation law(2)∂ρE∂t+∂(vkρE+vi(pδik−σik)+qk)∂xk=0,which is the conservation of total energy. We emphasize that in the numerical computations shown later in Section 4 of this paper, we solve the energy equation (2) instead of the entropy equation (1e), but from the point of view of the model formulation, the entropy should be considered among the vector of unknowns (see Section 2.2.1 for a discussion).Here we use the following notation: ρ is the mass density,[vi]=v=(u,v,w)is the velocity vector,[Aik]=Ais the distortion tensor,[Ji]=Jis the thermal impulse vector, s is the entropy,E=E(ρ,s,v,A,J)is the total energy,p=ρ2Eρis the pressure,δikis the Kronecker delta,[σik]=σ=−[ρAmiEAmk]is the symmetric viscous shear stress tensor,T=Esis the temperature,[qk]=q=[EsEJk]is the heat flux vector andθ1=θ1(τ1)>0andθ2=θ2(τ2)>0are positive scalar functions, which will be specified below, depending on the strain dissipation timeτ1>0and the thermal impulse relaxation timeτ2>0, respectively. The dissipative termsψikandHion the right hand side of the evolution equations forA, J and s are defined as[ψik]=ψ=[EAik]and[Hi]=H=[EJi], respectively. Hence, the viscous stress tensor and the heat flux vector are directly related to the dissipative terms on the right hand side viaσ=−ρATψandq=TH. Note thatEρ,Es,EAikandEJishould be understood as the partial derivatives∂E/∂ρ,∂E/∂s,∂E/∂Aikand∂E/∂Ji; they are the so-called energy gradients in the state space or the thermodynamic forces. The Einstein summation convention over repeated indices is implied.These equations are the mass conservation (1a), the momentum conservation (1b), the time evolution for the distortion (1c), the time evolution for the thermal impulse (1d), the entropy time evolution (1e), and the total energy conservation (2). The PDE governing the time evolution of the thermal impulse (1d) looks formally very similar to the momentum equation (1b), where the temperature T takes the role of the pressure p. Due to this similarity, it will also be called the thermal momentum equation in the following.One can clearly see that in order to close the system, it is necessary to specify the total energy potentialE(ρ,s,v,A,J). This potential then generates all the constitutive fluxes (i.e. non-advective fluxes) and source terms by means of its partial derivatives with respect to the state variables. Hence, the energy specification is one of the key steps in the model formulation.In order to specify E, we note that there are three scales involved in the continuum model formulation described in the introduction. Namely, the molecular scale, or the microscale; the scale of the material elements, called here mesoscale; and the flow scale, or the macroscale. It is therefore assumed that the total energy E is the sum of three terms, each of which represents the energy distributed in its corresponding scale. Thus, we assume that(3)E(ρ,s,v,A,J)=E1(ρ,s)+E2(A,J)+E3(v).The termsE3andE1are conventional. They are the specific kinetic energy per unit massE3(v)=12vivi, which represents the macroscale part of the total energy, and the internal energyE1(ρ,s), which is related to the kinetic energy of the molecular motion.E1(ρ,s)is the only energy which does not disappear in the thermodynamic equilibrium where any meso- and macroscopic dynamics are absent, and only molecular dynamics is present. For this reason, it is sometimes referred to as the equilibrium energy. In this paper, forE1, we shall use either the ideal gas equation of state(4)E1(ρ,s)=c02γ(γ−1),c02=γργ−1es/cV,or the stiffened gas equation of state(5)E1(ρ,s)=c02γ(γ−1)(ρρ0)γ−1es/cV+ρ0c02−γp0γρ,c02=const.In both cases,c0has the meaning of the adiabatic sound speed;cVandcpare the specific heat capacities at constant volume and at constant pressure, respectively, which are related by the ratio of specific heatsγ=cp/cV. In (5),ρ0is the reference mass density andp0is the reference (atmospheric) pressure.For the mesoscopic, or non-equilibrium, part of the total energy, we shall use a quadratic form(6)E2(A,J)=cs24GijTFGijTF+α22JiJi,with(7)[GijTF]=dev(G)=G−13tr(G)I,andG=ATA.Here,[GijTF]=dev(G)is the deviator, or the trace-free part, of the tensorG=ATAandtr(G)=Giiis its trace, I is the unit tensor andcsis the characteristic velocity of propagation of transverse perturbations. In the following we shall refer to it as the shear sound velocity. The characteristic velocity of heat wave propagationchis related to α,55The physical units of α arekg/(Kms2).as discussed later in Section 2.2.2. We stress thatE2(A,J)is a simple quadratic form in terms ofGijTFand J.We also note that, because of the frame invariance principle, or objectivity principle, the total energy can depend on vectors and tensors by means of their invariants only. By a direct calculation, one can see thatGijTFGijTF≡I2−I12/3,whereI1=tr(G)andI2=tr(G2), and thereforeE2, as well as the total energy E, are a function of invariants ofAand J.In general, the mesoscopic energyE2(A,J)can also be a function of ρ and s in addition toAand J. This would correspond to a coupling between the molecular scale and the scale of material elements. Such a dependence on ρ and s should be introduced in the velocitiescsand α, i.e.cs=cs(ρ,s),α=α(ρ,s). The dependenciescs(ρ,s)andα(ρ,s)should be taken into account when strongly non-equilibrium flows are considered. This would affect the computation of the pressure and of the temperature through the partial derivativesEρandEsand give rise to a so-called non-equilibrium pressure and a non-equilibrium temperature. For simplicity, however, in this paper we do not consider such a possibility, andcsand α are assumed to be constant.The algebraic source term on the right-hand side of equation (1c) describes the shear strain dissipation due to material element rearrangements, and the source term on the right-hand side of (1d) describes the relaxation of the thermal impulse due to heat exchange between material elements.After the total energy potential has been specified, one can write all fluxes and source terms in an explicit form. Thus, for the energyE2(A,J)given by (6), we haveψ=EA=cs2Adev(G), hence the shear stresses are(8)σ=−ρATψ=−ρATEA=−ρcs2Gdev(G),tr(σ)=0,and the strain dissipation source term is(9)−ψθ1(τ1)=−EAθ1(τ1)=−3τ1|A|53Adev(G),where we have chosenθ1(τ1)=τ1cs2/3|A|−53, with|A|=det⁡(A)>0the determinant ofAandτ1being the strain relaxation time, or, in other words, the time scale that characterizes how long a material element is connected with its neighbor elements before rearrangement.66Following Frenkel [60], this relaxation time was called particle-settled-life (PSL) time in [110].Note, that the determinant ofAmust satisfy the constraint(10)|A|=ρρ0,whereρ0is the density at a reference configuration, see [110]. Furthermore, from the energy potentialE2(A,J)the heat flux vector follows withEJ=α2Jdirectly as(11)q=TH=EsEJ=α2TJ.For the thermal impulse relaxation source term, we chooseθ2=τ2α2ρρ0T0T, and hence(12)−ρHθ2(τ2)=−ρEJθ2(τ2)=−TT0ρ0ρρJτ2.It contains another characteristic relaxation timeτ2that is associated to heat conduction.The motivation for this particular choice ofθ1andθ2can be found later in Section 2.3, where a formal asymptotic analysis of the model is presented, and where the connection with classical Navier–Stokes–Fourier theory is established in the stiff limitτ1→0andτ2→0.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
