@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A thermal cycling reliability study of ultrasonically bonded copper wires

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A thermal cycling reliability study of ultrasonically bonded copper wires on Cu substrates is reported.Results showed no discernible degradation or wear out from initial condition to 2900 passive thermal cycles from −55 to 125°C.Results obtained from nanoindentation showed cyclic hardening that might explain the increase in shear force after cycling.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Heavy copper wire bonding,Reliability,Power electronics,Passive thermal cycling,Hardness,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this work we report on a reliability investigation regarding heavy copper wires ultrasonically bonded onto active braze copper substrates. The results obtained from both a non-destructive approach using 3D X-ray tomography and shear tests showed no discernible degradation or wear out from initial conditions to 2900 passive thermal cycles from −55 to 125°C. Instead, an apparent increase in shear strength is observed as the number of thermal cycles increases. Nanoindentation hardness investigations suggest the occurrence of cyclic hardening. Microstructural investigations of the interfacial morphologies before and after cycling and after shear testing are also presented and discussed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In advanced and novel applications of power electronic modules, modules must be designed and manufactured to be capable of achieving higher switching frequencies and thus higher junction temperatures [1]. Current packaging and assembly technologies require further optimization and improvement to find reliable packaging solutions [2]. Failure analysis reveals that wire bond interconnections and solder joints are perhaps the most important life-limiting areas in power electronic modules [3–6]. New packaging and assembly technologies can address these issues by modification of wire bonding and solder joint materials [2,7]. It has been suggested that Al wire bonds might be replaced by copper wire bonds [8,9] and solder joints replaced by low temperature silver sintering or diffusion soldering [10]. However, replacing existing technologies with new ones presents new challenges [11,12].The recent interest in employing copper wire for interconnections instead of aluminium wire in semiconductor packaging is driven by a number of anticipated advantages [6]. Copper wire offers higher electrical and thermal conductivity compared to aluminium wire, and this may facilitate the achievement of higher current densities. It also has higher yield strength and mechanical stability which is expected to have a positive effect on thermo-mechanical reliability of wire bonds [4]. Table 1shows a brief comparison of material properties between aluminium wire and copper wire.Notwithstanding the abovementioned advantages, copper bonding suffers from some limitations. Copper wire is much harder compared to aluminium, so a higher bonding force and a higher value of ultrasonic power are required, and these can potentially damage the bond pad; this applies to either copper metallized die or copper substrates [11]. Furthermore, copper oxide easily forms at room temperature, and this can lead to poor bonding and a constant need to modify bonding parameters and set-up [11]. So far, indications are that copper wire bond reliability supersedes that of Al [4]; however, the mechanisms and modes by which copper bonds fail and the process parameters needed to achieve a reliable production process are still not well understood. In this paper, we characterise the reliability behaviour of copper wires bonded onto active braze copper substrates. Our aim is to attempt to elucidate the degradation behaviour of copper bonds.99.99% pure annealed copper wires, 381μm (0.015″) in diameter, were ultrasonically bonded on a F&K Delvotec ultrasonic wedge–wedge bonder at room temperature onto active metal brazed copper (AMB Cu) substrates with following bonding parameters: Time 300ms; Ultrasonic power 165 digits; Bond force starts 600cN; Bond force ends 1100cN; Touchdown steps: 100μm (see Fig. 1). The AMB Cu substrates consist of 300μm top plate and 250μm under plate layers of 99.95% pure copper on 1mm thick aluminium nitride ceramic. A Versa-XRM500 microCT system supplied by Carl Zeiss X-ray Microscopy was used for a same-sample X-ray tomography study. Four bonds were randomly selected for X-ray tomography and imaged in the as-bonded condition and then after 900, 1300, 2100 and 2900cycles, respectively. The pixel size was kept fixed at 1.73μm for all datasets. The bonds were subjected to passive thermal cycling from −55 to +125°C in an environmental chamber. A limited number of bonds were selected for shear testing and the remaining bonds were examined by tweezer pull-test after every 100cycles in order to determine the occurrence of any lift-offs or failures. Optical microscopy, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and focused ion beam (FIB) ion channelling of polished cross-sections were used to evaluate the bond pad area and characterise the bond interface microstructures. These were prepared by mounting the samples in edge-retentive epoxy resin and curing at room temperature for 24 hours. This was followed by successive grinding with 1200, 2500 and 4000 grit silicon carbide papers, and 3μm and 1μm diamond slurries on a Buehler Metaserv automatic polisher. Etched microstructures were achieved by a final vibrational polish in a 0.06μm colloidal silica suspension. Room temperature nanoindentation of polished cross-sections was performed using a CSM NHT2 machine platform equipped with a Berkovich indenter with a 50nm tip radius. Indentation arrays were made which ran parallel to the bond interface and spanned both the wire and substrate. The indent spacing was set at 42μm. The indentation tests were performed at a maximum load of 10mN with a 10s dwell at maximum load, and at a constant loading and unloading rate of 0.167mN/s. Indentation hardness values were extracted from the load–displacement curves using the Oliver & Pharr method [14].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A thermal cycling reliability study of ultrasonically bonded copper wires on AMB Cu substrates are reported in this work. The results obtained from both a non-destructive approach using 3D X-ray tomography and shear tests showed no discernible degradation or wear out from initial condition to 2900 passive thermal cycles from −55 to 125°C. An apparent increase of shear strength has been observed. Results obtained from nanoindentation showed cyclic hardening that might explain the increase in shear force after cycling. Initial pre-cracks observed underneath the wire occurred at a 45 degree angle to the interface appeared to follow a surface of low hardness defining interface between wire and the undeformed substrate. Further work will aim to characterise any link between this observation and bonding parameters. Further studies are also planned on copper-metalized active devices. Shear test results used in isolation may provide misleading information regarding copper wire bond degradation.