@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The effect of electroplating parameters and substrate material on tin whisker formation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Effect of electrodeposition parameters on tin whisker growth has been evaluated.Reduced whisker growth from deposits prepared at higher deposition current density.Low whisker growth observed for bright tin deposits on copper.No increase in whisker growth for tin deposits on copper stored at 55°C/85% humidity.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Tin,Whisker growth,Electrodeposition,Intermetallic formation,Characterisation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Electroplated tin finishes are widely used in the electronics industry due to their excellent solderability, electrical conductivity and corrosion resistance. However, the spontaneous growth of tin whiskers during service can result in localised electrical shorting or other harmful effects. Until recently, the growth of tin whiskers was successfully mitigated by alloying the tin with lead. However, restriction in the use of lead in electronics as a result of EU legislation (RoHS) has led to renewed interest in finding a successful alternative mitigation strategy.Whisker formation has been investigated for a bright tin electrodeposit to determine whether whisker growth can, at least partially, be mitigated by control of electroplating parameters such as deposition current density and deposit thickness. The influence of substrate material and storage at 55°C/85% humidity on whisker growth have also been investigated.Whisker growth studies indicate that deposition parameters have a significant effect on both whisker density and whisker morphology. As deposition current density is increased there is a reduction in whisker density and a transition towards the formation of large eruptions rather than potentially more harmful filament whiskers. Increasing the tin coating thickness also results in a reduction in whisker density. Results demonstrate that whisker growth is most prolific from tin deposits on brass, whilst that from tin deposits on rolled silver is greater than that observed for tin deposits on copper.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The move towards lead-free electronics manufacture, in the wake of EU legislation, such as RoHS (Restriction of Hazardous Substances Directive) [1], restricting the use of lead in electronics, has resulted in considerable research effort being directed towards the development of alternative strategies to mitigate tin whisker growth from solder finishes used in the fabrication of electronic components. Until 2006, when the legislation came into effect, problems associated with tin whisker growth and their potential to instigate failures in electronic components were effectively controlled through the use of Sn–Pb alloy finishes.A variety of approaches have been developed to minimise, prevent or inhibit the growth of tin whiskers; these include, (i) alloying the tin with either Bi [2–4] or Ag [3] to produce a deposit microstructure that is more resistant to whisker growth, (ii) annealing the tin electrodeposit at 150°C within 24h of electroplating [5,6] to reduce residual stress and develop a more uniform layer of intermetallic comprised of Cu6Sn5 and Cu3Sn compounds [7] and (iii) the use of a nickel underlayer to prevent the formation of Sn–Cu intermetallic [8,9]. The application of polymeric conformal coatings has also been shown to impede the growth of tin whiskers and reduce the risk of electrical short circuits; however, the effectiveness of the most widely used conformal coatings is very much dependent on the thickness of the applied coating [10], which can be considerably reduced at edges and corners [11,12].The aim of the current investigation was to determine whether an additional level of whisker mitigation could be achieved for pure tin electrodeposits through control of the deposit microstructure. This would be achieved through the use of electroplating parameters that would engender the tin electrodeposit with a microstructure and grain orientation that were inherently resistant to whisker growth; for example it is commonly accepted that deposits with columnar grain structures are more susceptible to whisker growth than those with equiaxed grain structures [13].Moon et al. [14] studied the effect of deposition current density on hillock formation from a bright tin finish. They observed that hillock formation reduced with increasing current density despite the transition to an increasingly fine grained columnar structure, which is generally considered more prone to whisker formation [13,15], and an increase in measured as-deposited stress levels. They attributed the reduced hillock formation to a change in deposit orientation towards [001] and a decrease in columnar grain diameter, which they thought increased the likelihood of ‘pinched’ grains. A strong influence of deposition current density on whisker growth was also observed by Sauter et al. for thermally cycled tin deposits on copper [16]; reduced whisker growth at higher deposition current densities was ascribed to the formation of a ‘globular’ microstructure rather than the columnar structure formed at low current density. An earlier study by Lee and Lee [17] showed no systematic effect of current density on whisker growth whilst a recent investigation by Sharma et al. showed that whisker growth on pulse electrodeposited coatings increased with increasing deposition current density due to a change in the orientation of the deposit [18].The tendency of an electrodeposit to grow whiskers may also be influenced by the texture of the deposited coating. Certain grain orientations are considered more whisker resistant than others [19–21]. For, example deposits with a (220) texture are reported to offer good resistance to whisker growth [20,22]. Alloying with lead also generally results in the formation of a (220) orientation [13,23,24]. Zhang et al [21] reported that bright pure tin deposits with a mixed 〈112〉〈101〉〈103〉 multi-peak texture (measured using X-ray diffraction) displayed a low tendency to form whiskers. A transition towards an [001] deposit texture with increasing deposition current density was also thought by Moon et al. [14] to contribute to reduced hillock growth. In addition, it has been predicted, on the basis of creep mechanisms, that deposits having substantially [001] orientated grains, with a grain size less than a critical value, are resistant to whisker growth [25].The tin grain structure and deposit orientation is also likely to affect the development of the Sn–Cu intermetallic at the coating-substrate interface, which is considered to be one of the main driving forces for whisker growth from tin deposits on copper [9]. However, there is often a lack of a direct correlation between whisker/hillock formation and intermetallic distribution at the whisker root [26–28].Despite the considerable number of tin whisker related studies, there are few that systematically investigate the effect of electrodeposition variables on the structure of the deposit and the ensuing whisker growth [14,16–18,29]. In this paper, the effect of electroplating variables, in particular deposition current density, on whisker growth is investigated for a bright acid-tin finish. Whisker growth has been evaluated for both tin deposits on copper and tin deposits on brass, the latter used to promote accelerated whisker growth. An increased whisker growth rate from tin deposits on brass occurs as a result of zinc diffusion through the tin and the subsequent formation of zinc oxide both on the surface of the deposit and at tin grain boundaries [30–34]. The effect of storage at elevated temperature and humidity on whisker growth has also been investigated for both tin deposits on copper and tin deposits on brass.Preliminary investigations of whisker growth from tin deposits on rolled silver have also been carried out since silver has been considered as a potential underlayer material [6,8]. Profuse whisker growth from tin deposits on silver was previously reported by Crandall [35], however, no explanation was proffered to explain this behaviour.Pure tin was electrodeposited onto copper (99.9%, 0.1mm thickness), brass (63% Cu/37% Zn, 0.38mm thickness) and silver substrates (as cold-rolled 99.97% purity, 0.175mm thickness), using a bright acid tin electroplating solution, which was comprised of 60gL−1 tin sulphate, 70mlL−1 sulphuric acid and Tinmac Stannolyte, a proprietary additive (MacDermid).Test coupons with dimensions 2×4cm were used with an electroplated area of 2×2cm. The coupons were used in the as-supplied condition with no additional polishing or grinding operations. Electrodeposition of pure tin was carried out using a 99.95% Sn foil anode (0.25mm). Immediately prior to electrodeposition, the substrates were degreased using acetone, pickled for 60s in a 20% v/v solution of sulphuric acid (SG 1.83), rinsed in deionised water and dried using hot air. Galvanostatic deposition using direct current was carried out at room temperature (∼20°C) using current densities of 5, 10, 20, 30, 40 and 50mAcm−2. The thickness of the Sn deposit was 2, 5 or 10μm. Typically, three identical test samples were prepared for each set of deposition conditions.Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was carried out using a Carl Zeiss Leo 1530 VP FEG SEM to determine the characteristic structure of the tin electrodeposit and subsequent whisker growth. The system is equipped with an Oxford Instruments X-Max 80mm2 Detector for energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS). Electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD), using a HKL Nordlys F high speed camera, was performed to determine the crystallographic orientation of the deposits. The grain structure of the electrodeposited tin was investigated by means of cross-sections prepared by focussed ion beam (FIB) milling using a FEI Nova 600 Nanolab Dual Beam FIB–SEM. Ion beam milling was performed at a 52° tilt angle with a 30kV gallium (Ga) ion beam. Initial trench milling was carried out at 20nA, and the final face milling was done at 3nA with a tilt angle of 53.5°. Ion beam images were acquired using the Ga-ion beam at a current of 30pA. The crystallographic structure of the deposits was determined using a Bruker D2 Phaser diffractometer system scanned from 25° to 120° (2θ), with a step size of 0.02° and a dwell of 0.1s.After deposition the samples were either stored at room temperature or exposed to elevated temperature and humidity to accelerate whisker growth. Test conditions of 55°C and 85% humidity were chosen to accelerate whisker growth based on the JEDEC standard [36,37] and previous investigations [38,39,15]. The effect of deposition parameters on whisker growth was evaluated using SEM. Whisker densities were measured using secondary electron images (at 300× magnification) acquired at random locations. Average whisker densities for each sample were calculated from 10 frames. Measured whiskers were divided into 3 categories; filament whiskers, large eruptions and eruptions/nodules <10μm in diameter.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The effect of deposition current density, deposit thickness and substrate material on whisker growth have been investigated for bright tin electrodeposits stored at room temperature and at elevated temperature/humidity.Low whisker growth rates have been observed for tin deposits on copper with no whiskers observed from deposits electroplated at 40mAcm−2 after 29months storage. The low whisker tendency of the electrodeposits may be attributed to their pronounced [001] orientation. For tin deposition onto both copper and brass substrates whisker density is lowest for samples electroplated at higher current densities. This is shown most clearly by the tin deposits on brass; deposition at high current density results in the formation of low densities of large eruptions, whilst high densities of long filament type whiskers are formed from deposits electroplated at low current density. A combination of high deposition current density and increased deposit thickness would provide the most efficacious whisker mitigation strategy.Exposure of tin deposits on copper to 55°C/85% humidity for 5000h has not resulted in increased whisker growth rates; this is attributed to the formation of a relatively planer intermetallic layer comprised of both Cu6Sn5 and Cu3Sn. For tin deposits on brass, exposure to elevated temperature and humidity results in greatly increased whisker growth rates as a result of increased zinc diffusion and subsequent zinc oxide formation at the deposit surface. The increased whisker growth rates for tin deposits on a silver substrate compared with those on copper suggest that further studies should be undertaken to confirm the suitability of silver as an underlay material to provide whisker mitigation for tin deposits on copper.