@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Effects of the intermetallic compound microstructure on the tensile behavior of Sn3.0Ag0.5Cu/Cu solder joint under various strain rates

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The IMC roughness and tensile strength of solder joint has a positive correlation.The tensile strength has a positive correlation with the strain rate.Ductile fracture in the bulk solder plays dominant role at the low strain rate.Brittle facture in the IMC layer plays dominant role at the high strain rate.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#


@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The effects of the intermetallic compound (IMC) microstructure and the strain rate on the tensile strength and failure mode of Pb-free solder joints are investigated. The samples of Sn3.0Ag0.5Cu/Cu solder joints are aged isothermally at 150°C for 0, 72, 288 and 500h, and the thickness of the IMC layer and the roughness of the solder/IMC interface are measured and used to characterize the microstructure evolution of the IMC layer. The tensile tests of the aged solder joints are conducted under the strain rates of 2×10−4, 2×10−2 and 2s−1. The results indicate that both the thickness and roughness of the IMC layer have influence on the strength and failure mode of the solder joint. With the increase of the aging time, the thickness of the IMC layer increases and the roughness of the solder/IMC interface decreases, as a result, the tensile strength of the solder joint decreases and the dominant failure mode migrates from the ductile fracture in the bulk solder to the brittle fracture in the IMC layer. There is a positive correlation between the tensile strength of the solder joint and the stain rate applied during the test. With the increase of the strain rate, the failure mode migrates from the ductile fracture in the bulk solder to the brittle fracture in the IMC layer.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Solder joints are commonly used to interconnect chip with substrate in first level packages or to interconnect component with printed circuit board (PCB) in board level packages. The mechanical behavior of solder joints is a key reliability issue for those packages. A solder joint consists of three constituents namely, the bulk solder, the Cu substrate, and the intermetallic compound (IMC) layer between the solder alloy and the Cu substrate, and two interfaces namely, the solder/IMC interface and the IMC/Cu interface. Thus the mechanical behavior of the solder joint is closely related with the mechanical behavior of these constituents. When the solder joint is under service condition or isothermal aging process, the microstructure of the three constituents evolves continuously [1,2], and this leads to the mechanical property change of the solder joint. Therefore, it is indispensible to investigate the effect of the microstructure evolution of the constituents on the mechanical behavior of the solder joint.During an aging process, the microstructure coarsening of the bulk solder was observed, but it has little influence on the tensile strength of solder joints [3], and thus more attention are paid to the microstructure of the IMC layer and its effect on the mechanical behavior of solder joints. The thickness of the IMC layer is one key parameter to characterize the IMC microstructure, and it has drawn a lot of attention. The growth kinetics of the IMC thickness under the soldering and isothermal aging conditions has been investigated extensively [4–6]. The effect of the IMC thickness on the tensile strength [7,8], on the shear strength [9–11] and on the fracture toughness [12] of solder joints has also been investigated. The roughness of the solder/IMC interface is another key parameter to characterize the microstructure of the IMC layer. A few investigations were reported on the roughness evolution during the soldering process [13–15], however, how the solder/IMC interface roughness evolution influences the mechanical behavior of the solder joint has not been well understood. Therefore, the effect of the solder/IMC interface roughness on the tensile strength and failure mode of the solder joint is investigated in this paper.Solder joints in portable electronic applications experience high strain rate deformation under conditions such as accidental drop/impact. Thus the effect of the strain rate on the mechanical behavior of solder joints is another important issue. Under the high strain rate deformation, the three constituents in the solder joint will exhibit different mechanical behavior because they have different sensitivities to the strain rate. The strain rate effect of the bulk solder has been investigated for various strain rates [16–19]. However, it is different from the strain rate sensitivity of the solder joint since the IMC layer is ignored. With increasing integrity and miniaturization of portable electronic devices, the size of the solder joint decreased, and the volume fraction of the IMC layer in the solder joint has been increased relatively [20]. Therefore, it is necessary to consider the effect of the IMC layer when examine the strain rate sensitivity of the solder joint. The effect of the strain rate on the tensile behavior of the solder joint has been examined at the strain rates ranging from 10−5 to 10−1s−1[21,22], but few studies have been reported on the tensile behavior of the solder joint under the strain rate more than 1s−1, which is the strain rate experienced by solder joints during mechanical shock [23]. The tensile strength of Sn3.0Ag0.5Cu/Cu solder joints was experimentally measured over the strain rate range 2×10−4–2s−1 in this paper.The purpose of this experimental investigation is to examine the effects of the IMC microstructure and the strain rate on the tensile behavior of the Sn3.0Ag0.5Cu/Cu solder joint. The average thickness of the IMC layer, the root mean square roughness of the solder/IMC interface and the average distance between two neighbored interfacial asperities in the solder joints with different isothermal aging time were measured and used to characterize the microstructure evolution of the IMC layer. The tensile strength of the aged solder joints were measured under the strain rates of 2×10−4, 2×10−2 and 2s−1, and the failure mode of the solder joints with different IMC microstructures and strain rates were examined. Based on our experimental observations, the effects of the microstructure of the IMC layer and the strain rate on the tensile behavior of the solder joint were presented, especially the effect of the solder/IMC interface roughness was emphasized.The geometry of the Cu/Sn3.0Ag0.5Cu/Cu solder joint is depicted in Fig. 1. To fabricate the sample, a Cu plate (99.9wt.% purity) was machined into dog-bone shape, and then it was cut into two identical pieces. The end faces of the two cut pieces were grounded carefully with 600#, 1000#, 1500# SiC paper and were cleaned in an ultrasonic bath to prepare for soldering. Sn3.0Ag0.5Cu solder bar was rolled and cut into thin sheets with a dimension of 4.2mm×1.5mm×0.5mm, and then the solder sheet was clamped between the two prepared Cu pieces covered with rosin flux by using screws in a soldering fixture. The entire fixture was put into a reflow oven. The total reflow time was 630s with the peak reflow temperature fixed at 250±1°C for 10s. The as-reflowed solder joint samples were isothermally aged at 150°C for 0, 72, 288 and 500h, respectively. After the isothermal aging, all the samples were polished with polishing pastes.To observe the IMC layer, the aged solder joints were packaged in epoxy resin, followed by grinding and polishing with 1μm diamond paste. To capture clear picture of the solder/Cu interface, the polished interface samples were etched by a solution containing 5% HCl and 95% C2H5OH. The microstructure of the IMC layer was observed by using a FEI Quanta 650 Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM). The composition of the IMC layer was determined by Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDX) analysis. For each aged solder joint, five zones along the solder/Cu interface were selected evenly and were observed.To characterize the microstructure of the IMC layer, the average thickness of the total IMC layer, dave, was measured by quantitative image analysis. For each observed zone, the area A of the IMC layer, i.e., the hatched area in Fig. 2, was measured and then was divided by the layer length L to obtain the average thickness as(1)dave=ALThe average thickness of the IMC layer after a particular aging time was then obtained by averaging the thickness of the five observed zones.Other two parameters, the root mean square roughness Rrms and the average distance between two neighbored asperities, λave, were used to characterize the roughness of the solder/IMC (Cu6Sn5) interface. The root mean square roughness Rrms was defined as(2)Rrms=1N∑i=1Nyi2where N is the number of the measured data yi, the yiis the distance of a peak or valley point on the interface to the mean surface level (MSL), as depicted in Fig. 2. The MSL was taken as the average thickness of the IMC layer defined by Eq. (1). For each solder joint, its Rrms was obtained by averaging the roughness of the five observed zones. This kind of roughness was also used in Refs. [14,15] to characterize the solder/IMC interface during soldering process.The average distance between two neighbored asperities, λave, was determined by measuring the distances between all adjacent asperities which were above the MSL as(3)λave=1N∑i=1NλiThe λave for each aged solder joint was then obtained by averaging those for the five observed zones. The combination of a smaller Rrms and a greater λave represents more planar solder/IMC interface.To investigate the effect of the IMC microstructure and the strain rate on the tensile behavior of solder joints, six solder joint samples for one aging time and one strain rate were tested on an INSTRON 5948 testing machine at room temperature in air. Four aging time, 0, 72, 288, 500h, and three strain rates, 2×10−4, 2×10−2 and 2s−1, were designed to be tested. The microscopic fracture morphologies of all the fractured samples were observed by a FEI Quanta 650 SEM.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The behavior of Sn3.0Ag0.5Cu/Cu solder joints was investigated over a variety of IMC microstructure and strain rate. Based on the experimental results and the discussion, following important points were derived:(1)There is a negative correlation between the IMC thickness and the tensile strength and a positive correlation between the IMC roughness and the tensile strength of the solder joint. The roughness plays a more important role at the two lower strain rates, 2×10−4 and 2×10−2s−1, and under the aging time of 288h or the critical IMC thickness of approximate 5μm.Under the same aging time, the tensile strength of the solder joint has a positive correlation with the strain rate.The thickness of the IMC layer and the roughness of the solder/IMC interface affect the failure mode of solder joints. With the increase of the thickness and the decrease of the roughness, the failure mode migrates from the ductile fracture in the bulk solder to the brittle fracture in the IMC layer.With the increase of the strain rate, the failure mode migrates from the ductile fracture in the bulk solder to the brittle fracture in the IMC layer.