@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Degradation of thermal interface materials for high-temperature power electronics applications

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Ag grease, solder joint and Ag, Sn foils as TIMs all degrade remarkably at 170°C.The degradation can be attributed to evolution of microstructure at interfaces.The degradation challenges finding of TIMs for high temperature power electronics.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#


@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The specific thermal resistance values of several thermal interface materials (TIMs) intended to thermally enhance Cu contact pairs and their degradation under isothermal ageing at 170°C have been investigated using Cu stack samples consisting of 10 Cu discs and 9 layers of the TIMs. The results obtained indicate that the specific thermal resistance values of the as-prepared Cu stack samples, one with conductive Ag thermal grease, one with Sn–3.5Ag solder joints and one with 25μm thick Sn foil as TIMs are significantly lower than those of the Cu stack sample without any TIM. However, after the isothermal ageing at 170°C for 90days, the specific thermal resistance values of the samples with these TIMs are not substantially different from those of the sample without any TIM. Also reported in this paper is an estimation of testing errors for the specific thermal resistance values, microstructure characterization of the aged samples and effect of the degradation of these TIMs on the thermal performance of a high-temperature half bridge power switch module.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Thermal interface materials (TIMs) have been widely used to minimize the contact thermal resistance between heat-generating electronic components and a variety of cooling systems such as heat sinks and heat pipes [1–5]. For example, in a typical power electronics package as shown schematically in Fig. 1, a TIM is used to enhance the heat transfer between the direct bonded copper (DBC) substrate under the semiconductor chips and a base-plate or heat sink [6]. In a wider context of electronics applications, TIMs can be rather arbitrarily categorized as polymer-based TIMs, solders, metallic foils, sintered metallic TIMs and carbon nano-tubes [1–5,7–16].Polymer-based TIMs include thermal greases (also called thermal pastes), organic phase-change materials, gels and adhesives [1–5,7,10]. For most of the state of the art polymer-based TIMs, they have good ability of filling microscopic voids and grooves on the mating surfaces, and hence their thermal performance with sufficient thick bondline was found to be more dominated by their bulk thermal conductivities, rather than by the contact resistance values [4]. However, when thin bondlines are used, their thermal performance may be dominated by interface resistance, and they are not stable at elevated temperatures regardless of their thicknesses because the temperatures of glass transition for these polymer-based matrixes are generally lower than 150°C.The rest of the TIMs are not as well developed and understood as those polymer-based TIMs. Solders are actively being used as TIMs for enhancing the thermal contact between two surfaces because solders have high thermal conductivity and can melt at relatively low temperatures to flow and spread along the mating surfaces [2,4,11]. The thermal performance of as-prepared solder joints used as TIMs is generally very good when compared to the polymer-based TIMs [2,4]. However, used as TIMs, the solders are generally soft Sn-based alloys and are prone to creep at elevated temperatures and the accumulation of plastic work leads to crack initiation and propagation [17,18]. Also, it was pointed out that the growth of intermetallic compounds (IMCs) between a solder and the contact metal on the mating surfaces would reduce the thermal contact conductance [2].In-Bi–Sn alloys had been used as liquid TIMs and achieved exceptionally low thermal resistance between heat-generating electronic components and heat removal systems [8,9]. However, this approach requires suitable barrier layer which needs to be deposited on the mating surfaces and have both good wettability and slow reaction with the liquid solder alloys [19]. In addition, it is also challenging to obtain polymer-based containments which are reliable at elevated temperatures to provide mechanical support for such thermal interface systems [20].Relatively soft metallic foils including Sn, In, Pb, Cu, Al and Au under certain amounts of pressure were investigated to improve thermal contact conductance in the stainless steel–stainless steel, mild steel–mild steel and Al alloy–Al alloy contact pairs [1]. Despite that fact that the surface characteristics may have effect on the conductance ratio, the mechanical properties of the foils tend to dominate the effectiveness of the material in thermal conductance applications.Sintered metallic TIMs using pastes of Ag, Cu, Au, Al, Mg, W and/or Ni nanoparticles to form effective joints between microelectronic devices and heat spreaders have been patented [15]. The sintering temperatures are generally below 250°C, and the sintered TIMs would consist of metallic networks or compacts with high thermal conductivity through burning out of the organic ingredients [13,15].Because of high flexibility and extremely high axial thermal conductivity, carbon nano-tubes were also investigated for use in TIMs [14,16]. They were mainly added as fillers in the polymer-based TIMs. In recent efforts, they were prepared as stand-alone aligned TIMs to make use of their high axial thermal conductivity, or as freestanding and flexible thermal pads in the form of buckypapers with three-dimensional networks [14].Despite the wide research and development of the various TIMs described, there is a lack of data about their long-term thermal performance for high temperature power electronics applications. For instance, it is desirable to develop power electronics modules which are reliable in continuous operation in an ambient temperature of 150°C and above for periods of several years. Examples includes aerospace where there is an increasing move to electronic rather than hydraulic or pneumatic systems, automotive under-hood applications in conventional, hybrid and electric drive systems and down-hole gas and oil field applications. Therefore, there is a need to identify suitable TIMs and understand their long-term thermal performance for high temperature power electronics applications.In the existing literature [7,21], the studies of TIMs were particularly directed for power electronics applications. Narumanchi et al [7] improved the steady-state test method based on the ASTM D5470 to measure the thermal resistance of several commercially available thermal greases at bonding line thickness of 100μm or thicker for automotive power electronics applications. Ousten and Khatir [21] investigated the thermal interface ageing of several elastomer films, phase change materials and graphite sheets under thermal cycling conditions between −50 and +150°C at a pressure of 20bar as found in power modules.The present study is concerned with the TIMs for high temperature power electronics applications. The objectives of this paper are to: (i) test and report the thermal performance of one conductive Ag thermal grease, one eutectic Sn–Ag solder joint and three soft metallic foils including one Ag and two Sn foils as TIMs to thermally enhance Cu contact pairs at temperatures above 150°C; (ii) investigate and compare the degradation of these TIMs under isothermal ageing at 170°C and a pressure of about 0.5MPa; (iii) characterize the interfacial microstructure between these TIMs and the Cu mating surfaces to explain the degradation of these TIMs after the isothermal ageing; and (iv) provide insight into the effect of the degradation of these TIMs on the thermal performance of one assumed high-temperature half bridge power module.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Based on the above results and discussion for the tested TIMs, the following conclusions are drawn:(1)The tested specific thermal resistance values of the Cu stack samples with the TIMs and without any TIM all decrease with increasing pressure and temperature. This can be mainly attributed to the contact resistance values between the interfaces which decrease with increasing pressure and temperature.The specific thermal resistance values of the as-prepared Cu stack samples with conductive Ag thermal grease, Sn–3.5Ag solder joint and 25μm thick Sn foil as TIMs are significantly lower than those of the Cu stack sample without any TIM. The lowest thermal resistance values have been achieved with the conductive Ag thermal grease.After the isothermal ageing at 170°C for 90days, the specific thermal resistance values of the samples with these TIMs are not substantially different from those of the sample without any TIM. Over the entire period of isothermal ageing, the evolution of the specific thermal resistance for the conductive Ag thermal grease is similar to that of the Sn–3.5Ag solder joints.The formation and growth of CuO on Cu surface may contribute to both an increase and decrease in the specific thermal resistance of the Cu stack samples. The degradation of the Ag thermal grease was due to the burn out of the polymer-based matrix, and the degradation of the Sn–3.5Ag solder joint was probably related to the formation and growth of voids and defects along the Cu6Sn5/Sn–3.5Ag solder interface during the isothermal ageing.Testing errors estimated through FE analysis reveals that the tested specific thermal resistance values can be used to provide relative comparison among the different samples. The tested specific thermal resistance values were at most 12.2% underestimated when compared with the real values, if the testing errors were caused by ignoring the heat losses through the insulation blocks and assuming the heat transfer across the Cu stack samples being one-dimensional.For high-temperature applications, the effect of the degradation of the TIMs on the thermal performance of power switch modules must be taken into account for ensuring long-term operation.