@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Exploiting temporal stability and low-rank structure for motion capture data refinement

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a temporally stable and noise robust matrix completion model.A trust data detection method will boost the automation and performance of our method.The optimization method for solving the proposed model is efficient and robust.The parameters of our model are insensitive for a large range of values.The outputs of our method are much more stable than the other methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Motion capture data,Data refinement,Matrix completion,Temporal stability,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Inspired by the development of the matrix completion theories and algorithms, a low-rank based motion capture (mocap) data refinement method has been developed, which has achieved encouraging results. However, it does not guarantee a stable outcome if we only consider the low-rank property of the motion data. To solve this problem, we propose to exploit the temporal stability of human motion and convert the mocap data refinement problem into a robust matrix completion problem, where both the low-rank structure and temporal stability properties of the mocap data as well as the noise effect are considered. An efficient optimization method derived from the augmented Lagrange multiplier algorithm is presented to solve the proposed model. Besides, a trust data detection method is also introduced to improve the degree of automation for processing the entire set of the data and boost the performance. Extensive experiments and comparisons with other methods demonstrate the effectiveness of our approaches on both predicting missing data and de-noising.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In recent years, with the rapid development of motion capture (mocap) techniques and systems, motion capture data have been widely used in computer games, film production and sport sciences [38,39,42,52]. The great success of animated and animation enhanced feature films Avatar provides a compelling evidence for the values of mocap techniques. However, even with the most expensive commercial mocap systems, there are still instances where noise and missing data are inevitable [1,3,18,21]. Fig. 1presents some real examples captured by ourselves using an optical mocap system. It can be seen that the acquired raw mocap data contains imperfections which should be refined before used for animation production. Thus, an important branch of motion capture research focuses on handling two highly correlated and frequently co-occurred sub-problems: one is to predict the missing values in mocap data and the other is to remove both the noise and outliers. These two sub-problems are collectively referred to as mocap data refinement problem. Meanwhile, the prevalence of some novel yet cheap mocap sensors (e.g., Microsoft Kinect), which are able to capture human motion in real-time but whose outputs are not very accurate especially when significant occlusions occur, makes the mocap data refinement problem much more pertinent and important [13,45,48,54,60].Although many researchers have studied this problem and numerous techniques have been proposed to deal with this problem, often the performance and application of these methods are hindered by their inherent drawbacks. For example, the interpolation methods used in some commercial mocap systems such as EVaRT and Vicon are only suitable to deal with the short-time (<0.5s) data missing problem [1]. The data-driven methods often suffer from the out-of-sample problem [4,5,37]. It is not exaggerated to say that the refinement problem is far from being solved and has attracted a great deal of attention in recent years [1,2,4,5,12,19,23,37,47,58].To handle this problem, a new optimization method is presented to process the input motion clip directly without the support of any motion database. We convert the mocap data refinement problem into a robust matrix completion problem with a smooth constraint. The proposed Temporal Stable and noise robust Matrix Completion (TSMC) model takes into account both the low-rank structure and temporal stability properties of motion data as well as the effect of noise. Additionally, we present an efficient trust data detection method to automate the data processing and boost the performance. The overview of our proposed approach is shown in Fig. 2.Briefly speaking, our research makes three main contributions:1.We can successfully convert the traditional mocap data refinement problem into a robust matrix completion problem with the smooth constraint and propose a new model to exploit both the low-rank structure and the temporal stability properties of mocap data at the same time.We present a fast optimization method to solve the derived mathematic model with its convergence guaranteed theoretically.An efficient trust data detection method is designed to increase the degree of automation for data processing and boost the performance of our model.In the remainder of this paper, we will first review some closely related work in Section 2. Then the detail of our proposed approach is given in Section 3 with extensive experiments following in Section 4. Finally, the paper is concluded in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
