@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An automated pattern recognition system for classifying indirect immunofluorescence images of HEp-2 cells and specimens

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose systems for classifying immunofluorescence images of HEp-2 cells.Images are classified at both the cell level and the specimen level.Ensemble SVM classification based on sparse coding of texture features was effective.Cell pyramids and artificial dataset augmentation increased mean class accuracy.The proposed systems came first in the I3A contest associated with ICPR 2014.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Anti-nuclear antibody test,Cell classification,Subcellular fluorescence patterns,HEp-2 cells,Multi-resolution local patterns,Ensemble SVM,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Immunofluorescence antinuclear antibody tests are important for diagnosis and management of autoimmune conditions; a key step that would benefit from reliable automation is the recognition of subcellular patterns suggestive of different diseases. We present a system to recognize such patterns, at cellular and specimen levels, in images of HEp-2 cells. Ensembles of SVMs were trained to classify cells into six classes based on sparse encoding of texture features with cell pyramids, capturing spatial, multi-scale structure. A similar approach was used to classify specimens into seven classes. Software implementations were submitted to an international contest hosted by ICPR 2014 (Performance Evaluation of Indirect Immunofluorescence Image Analysis Systems). Mean class accuracies obtained on heldout test data sets were 87.1% and 88.5% for cell and specimen classification respectively. These were the highest achieved in the competition, suggesting that our methods are state-of-the-art. We provide detailed descriptions and extensive experiments with various features and encoding methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Antinuclear antibody (ANA) tests are important in the diagnosis and management of autoimmune diseases. These include systemic lupus erythematosus, Sjogren׳s syndrome, rheumatoid arthritis, polymyositis, scleroderma, Hashimoto׳s thyroiditis, juvenile diabetes mellitus, Addison disease, vitiligo, pernicious anemia, glomerulonephritis, and pulmonary fibrosis. Immunofluorescene ANA tests have been recommended as the gold standard for ANA testing due to their relatively high sensitivity [1]. Specifically, human epithelial (HEp-2) cell specimens are examined using Indirect ImmunoFluorescence (IIF) imaging [2]. The flow of the IIF procedure includes the following steps: image acquisition, mitosis detection, fluorescence intensity classification and staining pattern recognition. The pattern recognition step is an important one as different patterns are suggestive of different autoimmune diseases. A nucleolar pattern is often associated with scleroderma, for example. Manual analysis of IIF images is laborious and time-consuming. Furthermore, two or more experts can be required to examine each ANA sample due to inter-observer variability. Aiming to standardize the procedure compared to current manual practice and to reduce workloads, computer aided diagnosis (CAD) systems have been proposed for the analysis IIF images [3,4].This paper describes a system to classify pre-segmented immunofluorescence images of individual HEp-2 cells into six classes (homogeneous, speckled, nucleolar, centromere, golgi, and nuclear membrane) as well as a system to classify HEp-2 specimen images into seven classes (homogeneous, speckled, nucleolar, centromere, golgi, nuclear membrane and mitotic spindle). Instances from these classes are shown in Figs. 1 and 2. These two classification tasks correspond to those used in the contest on Performance Evaluation of Indirect Immunofluorescence Image Analysis Systems (I3A)11http://i3a2014.unisa.itheld in conjunction with the 22nd International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR 2014). Our approach to classifying cell and specimen images is based on sets of local features which describe texture and intensity properties of local image regions. Extracted features are encoded via sparse coding and classification is performed using support vector machine (SVM) ensembles.After reviewing competing methods (Section 2) and describing our proposed method in detail (Sections 3–7), results on the I3A contest datasets are presented (Sections 8–10). This paper builds on our earlier I3A workshop papers [5,6]. It sets the proposed method in the context of related literature, describes it in more detail, presents more extensive experiments to investigate the effect of various components on performance, and summarizes performance in direct comparison with other methods. We present systems tailored to capture cell class-specific properties, leveraging state-of-the-art computer vision techniques. The experiments we report should help guide future developments in this area by providing evidence on the relative contributions of, e.g., feature combinations, data augmentation, cell pyramids, and sparse coding. Systems we proposed and describe in this paper won both tasks at the I3A contest in controlled tests. As such they can serve as benchmarks for researchers developing pattern recognition systems for this important application.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
