@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A generalisable framework for saliency-based line segment detection

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel information-theoretic salient line segment detection framework is proposed.A saliency-based filtering formulation enables efficient salient line detection.The approach detects the most discriminative lines avoiding repetitive scene parts.The framework is generalisable as demonstrated by an extension to depth imagery.Superior repeatability is demonstrated compared to existing line detectors.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Line detection,Feature detection,Feature matching,Registration,Saliency,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Here we present a novel, information-theoretic salient line segment detector. Existing line detectors typically only use the image gradient to search for potential lines. Consequently, many lines are found, particularly in repetitive scenes. In contrast, our approach detects lines that define regions of significant divergence between pixel intensity or colour statistics. This results in a novel detector that naturally avoids the repetitive parts of a scene while detecting the strong, discriminative lines present. We furthermore use our approach as a saliency filter on existing line detectors to more efficiently detect salient line segments. The approach is highly generalisable, depending only on image statistics rather than image gradient; and this is demonstrated by an extension to depth imagery. Our work is evaluated against a number of other line detectors and a quantitative evaluation demonstrates a significant improvement over existing line detectors for a range of image transformations.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Line segments are an important low-level feature, particularly where man-made structures are present. In many situations they may be used in a similar manner to points, e.g. pose estimation [5], stereo matching [9], or structure from motion [8]. This may often be helped by using the duality between lines and points, resulting in similar registration approaches for the two types of feature [26]. Further, there are tasks especially suited to lines, e.g. vanishing point estimation for camera calibration [10], image resizing [17], or structural graph matching [19].Existing line detection methods either first use a derivative-based edge detector and detect lines from the edges (e.g. [4] or via the Hough Transform [6]), or they directly group pixels in the image into line segments based on the magnitude and direction of their derivative [49,14]. However, these all act locally on the image, detecting a large number of lines, particularly in repetitive scenes. This limitation is illustrated11Image by Gila Brand, http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Washington_DC_windows.jpg. Licensed under CC BY 2.5. Grayscale of original.in Fig. 1: state of the art line detection detects all lines regardless of their significance, whereas, ideally, the non-repetitive lines denoting the geometrically significant edges would be preferentially detected.To address this, we propose to detect only the salient line segments, an area that, to the best of the authors׳ knowledge, has not been addressed in the literature. Instead, saliency detection commonly refers to the computation of a saliency map (e.g. [31]), with some work addressing salient edge detection [28] and salient point detection [32]. In detecting only the salient line segments, we propose an approach that is fundamentally different from existing methods for line segment detection in that it is not derivative-based: instead, it seeks informational contrast between regions and thereby favours non-repetitive edges. The information is expressed in terms of distributions of pixel intensities taken from rectangles of a variable width, meaning our approach operates over a larger scale than other detectors and so naturally avoids repetitive parts of a scene.We measure the contrast between the two distributions on either side of the line using the information-theoretic Jensen–Shannon Divergence (JSD). This measure has been used elsewhere for edge detection [39], unlabeled point-set registration [50], and DNA segmentation [25]. It has many interpretations, e.g. it may be expressed in terms of other information-theoretic quantities such as the Kullback–Liebler Divergence and Mutual Information, having further interpretations in both statistical physics and mathematical statistics [25], and is the square of a metric.Our measure of line saliency may further be used as a saliency filter on existing line detectors. This allows it to cull the non-salient line segments computed by other detectors and localise the position of salient lines under our saliency measure. It furthermore increases the speed of salient line detection by orders of magnitude over the naive approach of determining the saliency measure of every possible line segment on the image.This distribution-based approach to line detection we propose is highly generalisable, being applicable to any situation where informational contrast can be found. As such, we implement an extension for line detection in depth images, whereby lines that jointly delineate changes in surface orientation or texture are detected. These are reprojected, allowing for 3D salient line detection and hence potential multi-modal applications.The contributions of this paper are as follows: firstly, a distribution-based salient line segment detector is formulated and implemented: the first known method for salient line segment detection. Secondly, the notion of saliency-based filtering is applied to existing line detectors for efficient salient line detection. Thirdly, an extension to depth imagery is implemented, allowing for the detection of salient lines in 3D structures. An evaluation shows that, when considering that we detect only a small number of lines, our approaches significantly outperform the others in terms of repeatability and homography estimation. It demonstrates that they are representative of the underlying aspects of the scene, with potential use for problems that benefit from fewer, but more reliable, features e.g. [20].The structure of the paper is as follows: in Section 2, we review related work in line detection, edge detection, and line detection in depth imagery. In Section 3 the methodology is described for both salient line detection and saliency filtering, with the extension to depth imagery (and subsequently 3D by reprojection) described in Section 4. In Section 5 a range of qualitative and quantitative results are given, and in Section 6 our conclusions and ideas for future work are presented.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper we have presented a novel, distribution-based approach to line detection. Whereas other line detectors simply detect lines based on the image gradient, our approach explicitly takes into account the surroundings of a line, resulting in a line segment detector that naturally avoids repetitive areas and returns lines that are representative of the structure of the scene. Furthermore, its highly generalisable formulation makes it readily applicable to other modalities, as demonstrated by an extension to depth imagery, where lines that jointly delineate changes in surface orientation or texture are detected. For fast salient line segment detection, a filtering approach is proposed, often yielding similar results as the full saliency approach. The results indicate that our approaches achieve superior repeatability across a range of transformations compared to other line detectors and the multi-modal results indicate that they naturally detects lines representative of the structure of the underlying scene. Not only is it of potential use in registration contexts as evaluated here, but also for compression related tasks as demonstrated by its high repeatability under this transformation.There are potential areas for further improvements – in particular, the good results obtained by filtering methods (LSDF and LSDF-Loc) indicate that an approach that combines local and regional information about a line has potential benefits. Such a local and regional approach would have similarities with approaches to the more general problem of saliency detection in images. However since our approach is, to the best of our knowledge, the first distribution-based approach to line detection, we consider such a two-tier system beyond the scope of this research.Future work will include the registration of lines between different modalities (e.g. 2D and 3D). For this problem, the correspondences between line segments need to be determined – thus it is referred to as the Simultaneous Pose and Correspondence (SPC) problem. It is a computationally expensive problem [20] (for N 2D lines and M 3D lines, it has complexityO(M2N)) so any method that has a high repeatability for a smaller number of lines will be far more suited to this kind of problem. Hence it is anticipated that the approach proposed here will be of great use for the more general problem of pose estimation, not only for its ability to detect the structure of a scene in a small number of lines, but also its unified approach to line detection in multi-modal data.To facilitate repeatable research, all data used here that is not currently available as research data is now made available. Details are available for the Room dataset at [36]; for the Courtyard, Plaza and Reception datasets at [34]; and at [12] for images used that are not part of any cited dataset.None declared.