@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Robust multimodal face and fingerprint fusion in the presence of spoofing attacks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We examine spoofing robustness in multibiometrics attacking m out of n instances.1-Median filtering detecting score anomalies is proposed for spoof-resistant fusion.In contrast to sum-rule, operation with stable m-spoof performance can be achieved.Best performance (84%) for bagging of classifiers approach on LivDet2013 CrossMatch.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multibiometrics,Anti-spoofing,1-Median,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Anti-spoofing is attracting growing interest in biometrics, considering the variety of fake materials and new means to attack biometric recognition systems. New unseen materials continuously challenge state-of-the-art spoofing detectors, suggesting for additional systematic approaches to target anti-spoofing. By incorporating liveness scores into the biometric fusion process, recognition accuracy can be enhanced, but traditional sum-rule based fusion algorithms are known to be highly sensitive to single spoofed instances. This paper investigates 1-median filtering as a spoofing-resistant generalised alternative to the sum-rule targeting the problem of partial multibiometric spoofing where m out of n biometric sources to be combined are attacked. Augmenting previous work, this paper investigates the dynamic detection and rejection of liveness-recognition pair outliers for spoofed samples in true multi-modal configuration with its inherent challenge of normalisation. As a further contribution, bootstrap aggregating (bagging) classifiers for fingerprint spoof-detection algorithm is presented. Experiments on the latest face video databases (Idiap Replay-Attack Database and CASIA Face Anti-Spoofing Database) and fingerprint spoofing database (Fingerprint Liveness Detection Competition 2013) illustrate the efficiency of proposed techniques.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Fingerprint and face biometrics as most widely adopted traits are being exposed to an increasing threat of presentation attacks. Consequently, there are numerous studies [1,2] and open challenges [3,4] on anti-spoofing techniques assessing the spoofing detector׳s ability to distinguish between genuine and fake attempts for especially these two traits. Recently, the integration of anti-spoofing scores with recognition scores has received considerable attention [5–7]. The standard approach, as outlined in [5], has been to reject spoofed samples before comparing them against the gallery template. However, recognition scores can be helpful in the probe-attack spoofing detection problem and liveness scores can impact on the recognition task. Considering imposters with access to fake fingers or face photographs reveals an impact on overall accuracy (shifted imposter score distribution for non-zero-effort attempts [7]) and assuming a correlation between successful spoofs achieving a higher score and their corresponding liveness score is likely (and shown) to help in the final judgment of the decision task, especially in an ensemble of classifiers where this paper looks for outliers. It is therefore useful to investigate the benefits of dealing with a holistic (liveness and verification) multi-class problem rather than two separate classification problems (live vs. fake and genuine vs. impostor). If a system involves multiple modalities there is an even larger variety of different ways to treat the problem of combining liveness and recognition scores. Multibiometrics using face and fingerprint biometrics comes with many benefits including expected increased accuracy, higher universality (absence of single characteristics), efficiency (fast indexing), but its robustness to spoofing attempts has been shown to be compromised [8,9]. Furthermore, with the inclusion of multiple modalities the attacker has an even more extended choice to select the easiest modality to be attacked. It is therefore desirable to find new techniques coping with spoofing attacks, which are subject to investigation in this paper. The paper focuses on three objectives: (1) investigation of spoofing robustness in multibiometrics; (2) development of novel methods towards anomaly detection for increased systematic anti-spoofing; and (3) proposition of a novel bootstrap aggregating (bagging) of classifiers method combining features in fingerprint counter-spoofing.With regard to the first topic on spoofing robustness in multibiometrics, the paper tests degradation in accuracy for the “partial multibiometric spoofing” scenario, where m out of n samples are spoofed, highlighting the tradeoff between accuracy and security for different fusion methods. Fig. 1illustrates this concept. The sensitivity of a recognition and liveness fusion method with regard to spoofing is especially interesting in multimodal configuration, where scores originate from different underlying distributions and multiple traits facilitate a selection of the modality to be attacked. The paper analyses the impact of the number of spoofed fingers or spoofed face on accuracy using the latest biometric datasets. The relative robustness of several score-level fusion rules can be used to choose the most robust fusion rule [9].As a second outlined contribution, this paper presents a novel multibiometric spoofing-aware fusion method following the idea of anomaly detection and extending research in [10] to multiple modalities. This paper investigates 1-median-based fusion using outlier detection applied in a multibiometric setup. Note that the extension to multiple modalities raises further questions with regard to normalisation. For different modalities, scores generally follow different distributions. Therefore, counter-spoofing is much more challenging than for single-modality approaches, including multi-instance or multi-algorithm approaches. Further, this work presents further theoretical considerations and discusses parameter choice in detail. Recognition scores and liveness scores are likely to be dependent, as spoofing tries to achieve a high recognition score in order to successfully claim the alien (spoofed) identity. In partial multibiometric spoofing this information can be used to further discriminate between genuines and impostors. Despite spoofing sensitivity of traditional fusion techniques, it is a reasonable assumption to claim a higher difficulty for attackers to spoof multiple modalities at the same time or even to obtain the necessary samples to produce a fake fingerprint or face mask. On the other hand, special spoofing-robust fusion schemes might exhibit a reduced level of accuracy. This trade-off between cost and security to limit drawbacks [5,11] is investigated.Third and last, as a by-product of evaluations the paper further presents a novel spoofing detector again employing a fusion principle: bootstrap aggregating (bagging) of classifiers. This technique is employed in combining the decision outcome of multiple different classifiers. Using also multiple features to be more robust vs. changes in materials (see [12]), the paper aims at investigating this technique in the employed system as an anti-fingerprint spoofing technique towards integral fusion concepts in robust anti-spoofing. Bagging is shown to outperform state-of-the-art detectors on the most challenging LivDet 2013 Crossmatch subset database.The remainder of this paper is organised as follows: Section 2 introduces the problems of anti-spoofing and spoofing-aware fusion in biometrics. The proposed methods of bagging for spoof-detection and 1-median filtering for spoofing-resistant multibiometric fusion are outlined in Section 3. Section 4 highlights experimental results with regard to the proposed and investigated techniques. This includes a discussion of methods towards anomaly detection in multibiometrics, highlighting parameter choice and optimisation for the proposed 1-median filtering. Section 5 concludes this paper with an outlook on future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
