@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Design and optimization of backside illuminated image sensor for epiretinal implants

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Backside illuminated pixel structure is proposed and evaluated as epiretinal prosthesis implant.The maximum fill factor is observed due to separation of photosensitive area.The application of deep backside Deep Trench Isolation (DTI) results in a significant reduction of crosstalk.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Epiretinal implants,CMOS,Image sensor,Back side illumination,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Backside illuminated pixel structure is proposed and evaluated as the building block for the image sensor being used as epiretinal prosthesis implant. The image sensor pixel is designed with the parameters of 90nm technology node of standard CMOS (Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor) process. The image sensor is consisted of a p-sub/n-well structure as the photosensitive area with the pixel pitch of 20μm. The maximum fill factor is observed due to separation of photosensitive area with the readout transistor surface in backside illumination technology. 90% quantum efficiency at 600nm wavelength and the dark current of 74.6nA/cm2 at room temperature is achieved for the optimized pixel. The application of deep backside Deep Trench Isolation (DTI), with high depth n-well doping profiles, results in a significant reduction of crosstalk (5.6% total crosstalk).

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the past decade, lots of researches have been carried for treating some cases of blindness. In retinal degenerative diseases such as age-related macular degeneration and retinitis pigmentosa, blindness results from loss of photoreceptors, while the inner retinal neurons remain active [1,2]. The retinal prosthesis technology has demonstrated its effectiveness for the treatment of such cases [3–5].Two types of retinal implants are used as the medium for transferring the image data to the visual neurons. According to the placement of implants underneath the retina or up on the retina, it would be called subretinal or epiretinal, respectively. While the first epiretinal prosthesis that contained a silicon platinum array with 16 electrodes was implanted in 2002 [5], it can be used by the application of routine surgical methods [6–9]. Moreover the subretinal prostheses gain from simpler algorithms for image processing [6], while there is more space for the implantation of epiretinal systems in the eye area comparing with the subretinal systems [6].In the epiretinal implants an external camera attached with the signal processing circuits, captures the images and communicates the information to the implanted chip by telemetry system [5,10–13]. The implanted chip consists of an electrode array and a current digital to analog converter (DAC) [2,14]. The routing requirement between DAC and electrodes limits the spatial resolution of imaging and the electrode array size. In addition, an external camera and data link must be carried by patients.In some cases using intraocular photodiodes instead of external camera is suggested as shown in Fig. 1[15,16]. The routing problem between DAC and electrodes is omitted using the mentioned method and an externaltransmitter provides power to internal chips via radio frequency fields, while the receiver chip prepares the power for the stimulus chip. In such systems inside each pixel, a photodiode takes the information from the light and the pixel tunes level of stimulation of its point on the retina.This work presents a backside illuminated (BSI) pixel designed in the 90nm standard CMOS (Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor) technology optimized for the use as an epiretinal image sensor. The application of back-side illumination technology is proposed for epiretinal implants, in order to maximize the fill factor of the pixel which is defined as the ratio of the photosensitive area of the pixel to the whole pixel layout (including readout transistors). Since in the backside illuminated technology [17,18], the photosensitive area is placed in the back side of silicon which does not contain the readout transistors, it can extend the quantum efficiency which is the percentage of photogenerated carriers to the number of photons received by the image sensor.Fig. 2shows a general schematic view of stimulus chip. This cross section of the backside illuminated integrated circuit (IC) can be realized by using conventional CMOS imaging technologies. The outside photons are absorbed in the top layer of chip which contains the photosensitive area. The free electron–hole pairs which are generated due to the light absorption on the top layer are collected on the p–n junction capacitance as a linear function of the absorbed light. The charges which are collected by the light absorption make the signal which is being processed by the signal processing layer. Simple signal processing units can also be realized on the same layer as the photodiode array. Moreover, after the signal processing step, the neurons in the inner surface of the retina (ganglion cells) are stimulated corresponding to the output of signal processing layer by the implanted electrodes.To the best of our knowledge this work presents the first back-side illuminated image sensor designed and functionalized for the use in epiretinal implants. The BSI photodiode characteristics are optimized for achieving maximum quantum efficiency while limiting the noise factors. Section 2 describes the pixel layout structure while the quantum efficiency is characterized in Section 3. The two main sources of noise which should be considered for the image sensor photosensitive area are dark current and crosstalk which are analyzed in Sections 4 and 5. Results and conclusion finalizes the characteristics of the optimized pixel.Fig. 3shows the cross-section of the designed photodiode pixel. The biocompatibility of CMOS chips which uses silicon as the substrate meets the safety regulations for assembling the sensor in the eye area [14]. Same type of substrate materials have been used previously in other retinal implants [2,4,19]. The designed pixel pitch is 20μm to be comparable with the previous works [2,4,11].In order for the image sensor to be useful for integration in the human body, it should have the minimum power consumption to decrease the challenges of providing electric power inside the human body. Hence the minimum voltage level transistors and structures available in 90nm CMOS technology are used.Since the substrate has a lower doping concentration in compare with the implanted wells, it guarantees a wide depletion region inside the substrate, which is necessary for absorption of high wavelength photons and also the low junction capacitance [20]. Moreover, anti-reflection coating (ARC) layers are used to reduce the surface reflection of incident light for increasing the quantum efficiency. Silicon nitride, oxide double layers, and silicon nitride single layer for ARC on silicon substrate are introduced and simulated in this work.To minimize the optical and electrical crosstalk, insulating layers should be used between the photodiodes. The insulation layers used in deep-submicron CMOS technologies are shallow trench isolation (STI) [21], Deep Trench Isolation (DTI) [22], and Backside Deep Trench Isolation [23]. The DTI layer consists of sidewall oxide that ensures insulating capability, while the trench is filled with polysilicon or metal to provide mechanical stability of the structure [24]. After the DTI demonstrating its effectiveness in crosstalk reduction [22,24], more recently backside DTI have demonstrated evident reduction of crosstalk noise without quantum efficiency degradation in compare with the other CMOS image sensors [23].The efficiency of a pixel in converting photons to electrons is measured in the form of quantum efficiency. Fig. 4shows the quantum efficiency curves being simulated with a commercially available device simulator. It should be noted that the maximum quantum efficiency of 65% for standard FSI (Front-Side Illuminated) photodiodes is consistent with [25]. The quantum efficiency is defined as the number of electron–hole pairs generated for each incident photons:(1)η=IPq·Popthv-1[26]IPis the generated electrical current from the absorption of incident optical power Poptat the v frequency (h is the Planck’s constant, and q is the charge of electron). It should be noted that the intensity of light decades exponentially with penetrating in the silicon substrate as:(2)I=I0e-αX[27]where I is the intensity of light in the depth x and I0 is the intensity of light at the x=0+. α is the absorption coefficient which is highly wavelength dependent. According to Eq. (2), sufficient thickness for the photodiode absorption region should be devoted to gain maximum absorption and maximum quantum efficiency.Fig. 4 shows the quantum efficiency improvement for the designed image sensor using two layers of ARC. The consistency of FSI pixel quantum efficiency simulation results with the experimental evaluations [25,28], verifies the simulation setup. A commercially available Finite Element Method (FEM) simulator is used for solving the fundamental device equations, in order to obtain the electrical and optical characteristics of the proposed pixel. One of the pixels uses a silicon nitride layer with the thickness of 72nm as ARC layer. The other optimized pixel uses a combination of silicon nitride and silicon dioxide as two layer of ARC with the thickness of 43nm and 53nm respectively.Fig. 5shows the quantum efficiency simulation results in different biasing voltages of 0.5, 1.5 and 1.5V. It should be noted that the optimized pixels have higher quantum efficiencies in compare with FSI pixels. The lower quantum efficiency in the ultra-violet (UV) part of the spectrum is an indication of the non-satisfaction of fully depletion condition. The depletion region can be extended by increasing the bias voltage, which itself worsens the dark current noise.Dark current noise is defined as the electrical current which is generated inside the pixel without receiving any light. There are two main sources for dark current in the photodiodes being implemented in standard CMOS technologies called as tunneling and thermal generation current. While tunneling occurs in the deep submicron technologies due to the higher doping profiles, thermal generation is considered as the main mechanism for producing dark currents in submicron pixels being developed in standard CMOS technology. The dark current value is directly dependent on the reverse bias voltage and temperature [29].The dark current noise reduces with decreasing the bias voltage because the depletion region is widened by increasing the bias voltage (absolute value) and the increase in depletion region leads to an increase in the thermal generation current [29]. The dark current also increases with increasing the temperature because the number of thermal generated carriers is more in higher temperatures.The dark current simulation results are achieved using the device simulator and is shown in Fig. 6for two different bias voltages. Moreover three different types of FSI photodiodes is used for the dark current evaluation [20]. The operation voltage of 3.3V is considered in line with the other references for the comparison of dark current. Low voltages are used according to the power supply constraint in submicron technologies [2,14,19,30]. In accordance with the biasing voltage available in 90nm CMOS technology, the dark current is evaluated in 1V bias. This reduction in biasing voltage results in a significant reduction in dark current as shown in Fig. 6.The other main noise source which should be considered in retinal implants is crosstalk [26,27]. Crosstalk is defined as the noise which is injected to the image sensor because of the neighboring pixel activities. Crosstalk can occur in two different parts of the retinal implant system due to crosstalk between different stimulating electrodes on retina [31–34] or the crosstalk between devices, especially photodiodes.The amount of crosstalk between pixels in the designed image sensor is simulated for the observation of 650nm wavelength light as shown in Fig. 7a. 1.7V bias is considered for each pixel, and the value of crosstalk between diodes A and B is calculated by dividing the current of diode A to diode B. The crosstalk results are compared with five other types of BSI and FSI photodiode and shown in Fig. 7b [33,34]. Fig. 7b represents the crosstalk as the average crosstalk for 350–800nm of light illumination.To achieve lower amounts of crosstalk, the thickness of photodiode should be reduced [35] while on the other hand this reduction, reduces the amount of quantum efficiency itself [26,27]. Here, the thickness of photodiode that results in sufficient quantum efficiency for retinal implants is chosen while minimizing the needed silicon thickness.To compensate the crosstalk increasing which is caused by the high photodiode thickness, two more solutions are used. Increasing n-well depth which increases quantum efficiency and decreases crosstalk which leads to using maximum n-well depth available in 90nm technology. The second method is using backside deep trench isolation. Fig. 7b also shows the efficiency of deep backside DTI in the reduction of crosstalk noise.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A backside illuminated photodiode is designed with the standard process layers of 90-nm CMOS Technology to be used in epiretinal implants. To the best of our knowledge this sensor is the first back side illuminated photodiode in CMOS technology to be introduced and simulated for retinal implants. The sensor has full fill factor, above 90% quantum efficiency, 74.6nA/cm2 dark current, and 5.6% total crosstalk. The optimized image sensor is suitable for epiretinal implants because of working in low voltage of operation, low crosstalk, reasonable dark current and high quantum efficiency.