@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A chaos-based image encryption algorithm with simple logical functions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Proposed an effective chaotic encryption scheme based on confusion and diffusion principles.Introduced bitwise circular rotation operation to increase plaintext sensitivity.Proposed an effective encryption scheme with two independent chaotic functions to increase computing ability.Test results indicate that the proposed encryption method is more secure and fast.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Image encryption,Chaos,Low entropy,Security analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper proposes an effective chaos-based encryption algorithm specialised for images. A system of two independent chaotic functions with high sensitivity to initial states, is utilised to sufficiently apply confusion and diffusion principles for images with any entropy. One of the functions is used for shuffling pixel positions while the other for changing the values of pixels. In the resulting new pixel organisation, adjacent pixels with naturally close values will take on considerably different values, making it difficult to crack the encrypted image. To increase resistance of the system to differential attacks, some logical operations such as exclusive-or and circular rotation are used to spread the effect of a slight change in single pixel intensity of plain image over many pixels in cipher-image. A variety of analyses and tests has been carried out to prove the security and the validity of the algorithm. Even with low entropy images the proposed algorithm has been proved to be more secure and faster than the previous algorithms.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Since there has been a rapid advance in computing technology, developing effective techniques for secure storing and transmitting digital image data has become an important issue for researches. Applications especially for secure image storage and communication require image data production against unauthorised users. Whenever an image has to be employed in an application, image security becomes a crucial concept. In the last decade, many different encryption algorithms relied on diverse principles have been published in the literature [1]. Due to the specific characteristics of chaotic systems, chaos based encryption methods seem to be more efficient for practical use regarding reasonable speed, high security and complexity [2].It is expected from an ideal cipher to fulfill some fundamental cryptographic requirements as confusion, diffusion, and randomness. Chaotic systems offer advantages of random behaviour and greater sensitivity to initial conditions, so introduce very large space to resist brute force attacks. Since digital images inherently have redundant data, high similarity for neighbouring pixels, and less sensitivity to a tiny change in pixel attribute, the security requirements of digital images increase the importance of chaos based encryption methods [3,5].Based on the above discussion, an enhanced chaotic system with two Logistic Maps is proposed in this paper. The first Logistic Map is used to scramble the plain image for reducing correlation between adjacent pixels. So, statistical analysis becomes difficult to crack the cipher image. The purpose of the second Logistic Map is to further increase the confusion by changing the pixels’ values (i.e. decreasing the relationship between the plain image and the cipher image). In addition, the second Logistic Map makes it possible for the image data with any entropy structure to be securely encrypted. In order to reflect the influence of slight change in single pixel intensity of plain image on larger number of pixels in cipher-image, some logical operations such as XOR and circular rotation are exploited with the proposed algorithm.The main improvements of this paper can be summed up as: (1) to better shuffle the plain image for encryption, only two chaotic Logistic Maps are used together with some logical operations, (2) to get more uniform histogram for low entropy images, disruption of plain image is achieved in only a few rounds, (3) to resist differential attacks, the influence of one bit change in single pixel is spread over many pixels with the logical operations mentioned above.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
