@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Towards modular design of reliable quantum-dot cellular automata logic circuit using multiplexers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A modular design methodology around multiplexer is designed.This work make a trade-off between modular design and its reliability associated with fault tolerance and energy consumptions.Cascading lower order multiplexer to synthesize higher order multiplexer mitigating wire crossing and delay.Application of proposed design in CLB is also done.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Quantum-dot Cellular Automata (QCA),QCA multiplexer,Fault tolerant QCA circuit,Configurable logic block (CLB),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
With the rapid advancement in very large scale integration (VLSI) technology, it is the utmost necessity to achieve a reliable design with low power consumption. The Quantum dot Cellular Automata (QCA) can be such an architecture at nano-scale and thus emerges as a viable alternative for the current CMOS VLSI. This work targets design of logic module in QCA. It reports a modular design methodology to build the fault tolerant2n:1 multiplexer with optimized wire-crossings, delay and power consumption. A 2:1 QCA multiplexer is proposed as the basic logic module that in turn is utilized to synthesize 4:1 and 8:1 multiplexers. It shows significant achievement in terms of clock speed (36%), wire-crossing (58%), fault tolerance (77.62%) and power consumption over the existing designs. The effectiveness of proposed multiplexer is further established through synthesis of configurable logic block (CLB) for field programmable gate arrays (FPGAs).

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Downscaling of current CMOS devices beyond a certain limit is not feasible as it introduces an anomalous quantum behaviour in nano-scale level. Quantum-dot Cellular Automata (QCA), an emerging nanotechnology, is considered to be a potential alternative to the CMOS technology and provides solution to the fundamental limitation of CMOS. The primary advantage of QCA is the high device density and the computing speed at nano-scale era [1]. Most of the QCA designs, realized today, follow coplanar wire-crossing only. But the coplanar wire-crossing is highly susceptible to random external effects and cross-talk [2].The multiplexer plays key role in recognizing boolean function and in circuit designs, such as carrying out of a field programmable gate array (FPGA), controlled logic block (CLB) and memory circuits designs. An evolutionary approach is investigated in [3] to realise a modular2nto 1 multiplexer using the elementary building blocks like AND and OR-block. But the use of delay blocks and the extra interface circuits in that design add high circuit delays and complexity. Further cascading of two separate modules of lower order multiplexer can’t be utilized while synthesizing the higher order multiplexer. Moreover, the reliability issues related to fault tolerance and the optimization of a power consumption in a modular multiplexer are not addressed properly in the literature.The above factors demand trade-off between a modular design with less wire-crossing and its reliability associated with the fault tolerance as well as the power consumption. In this context, this work proposes a modular design approach for QCA logic block (CLB). It is designed around the modular multiplexer, in produced in this work, that can be used for realizing the basic boolean functions. The reliability of proposed designs are established the power estimation model. The salient feature of this work is as follows:•A modular QCA multiplexer module is designed and its effectiveness in realising higher order2n:1 multiplexers(n⩾2), just by cascading, is explored.Performance analysis of the proposed are design in terms of wire-crossings, delay and area are reported.Reliability of a QCA design is evaluated following the power estimation model and the fault tolerance capability.A control logic block (CLB), based on the proposed2:1 multiplexer, is designed that can be used to realize various boolean logic functions.The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces the QCA. In Section 3, a brief review on the work related to modular multiplexer is reported. T design of proposed modular multiplexer is detailed are in Section 4. Power consumption and fault tolerant capability of the multiplexer are estimated in Sections 5 and 6 respectively. In Section 7, a CLB is synthesized around the proposed modular multiplexer. Section 9 concludes the paper.A square shaped QCA cell consists of four quantum dots (Fig. 1(a)) at its four corners. In the dots, electrons are quantum–mechanically confined [1] and in standard fault-free QCA cell, there are two electrons. The electrons occupy opposite corners of the cell due to coulombic repulsions, and as such give rise to two stable configurations with polarizationP=-1(logic ‘0’) andP=+1(logic ‘1’), Fig. 1(b) [1]. A QCA cell, when flipped from logic state 1 to 0, there is no actual discharging of the capacitor as in conventional CMOS since the states 1 and 0 are determined by the position of electrons in the QCA cell. Further, the propagation of polarization along the cells is due to interaction of the electrons in adjacent QCA cells. Four distinct and cascaded clock phases are used to synchronise the QCA cells [1], as shown in Fig. 1(f), for the propagation of information (polarization). Clocking not only controls the information propagation but also provides the required power in a QCA circuit.The basic QCA structure is the majority voter which can be described by the function MV(A, B, C)=Maj(A, B, C)=AB+BC+CA (Fig. 1(c)). If required, And/Or gates can be derived from the majority voter by setting one of its inputs to a constant (−1)/(+1). Inverters in QCA can be realised in two different ways as shown in Fig. 1(d). Furthermore, a wire-crossing can be realised either as coplanar or as multilayer. Coplanar wire-crossing requires45°(+-cell) rotated cells with90°(×-cell) cells shown in Fig. 1(e). A very few attempts are made to realize multilayer wire-crossing due to its fabrication constraints.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
