@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Fault analysis and diagnosis system for induction motors

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This study analyzes the vibration signals of the 10 most common motor fault types.Extension theory and NN are combined to build the motor fault diagnosis system.The proposed motor fault diagnosis system is fast, requires less training data.The proposed fault diagnosis system exhibits first-rate identification capability.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Characteristic frequency spectrum,Extension neural network (ENN),Extension theory,Fault vibration signal,Motor fault diagnosis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study analyzes the vibration signals of fault induction motors for establishing an intelligent motor fault diagnosis system by using an extension neural network (ENN). Extension theory and a neural network (NN) are combined to construct the motor fault diagnosis system, which identifies the most likely fault types in motors. First, the vibration signal spectra of the 10 most common fault types are measured and organized into individual motor fault models. Subsequently, according to the motor fault data, representative characteristic frequency spectra are identified, and the correlation between the motor fault types and their corresponding characteristic frequency spectra are established to develop the motor fault diagnosis system. Finally, the test results confirm that the proposed motor fault diagnosis system is fast, requires less training data, and demonstrates first-rate identification capability.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Currently, motor fault assessment involves detecting signals from motors by using instruments. The signals are then analyzed by professionals, who identify the causes of excessive motor vibrations. However, because the knowledge, experience, and analytical approaches of professionals vary, motor condition assessment results can also vary. In addition, the signals must then be analyzed by on-site workers, who can use their knowledge and experience to identify the fault types, maintain drives, and replace components. This conventional troubleshooting method may cause errors in assessing fault points, engendering unnecessary human resource use and time costs in maintaining and replacing components [1,2].In response to consumer demands, electric equipment has recently become large-scale, automated, and complex, rendering conventional troubleshooting methods inapplicable to current equipment. Therefore, a new troubleshooting technique for identifying system fault points must be formulated. Scholars worldwide are committed to creating new system troubleshooting techniques [3–5]. An artificial intelligence algorithm [3] was applied to improve the efficiency of motor drive fault diagnosis and save human resources and time. In addition, approaches involving neural networks (NNs) [4,5] have been employed to establish motor drive fault diagnosis systems. These approaches require calculation of connection weights among neurons for identifying fault types. Although these approaches have improved troubleshooting speeds, they require voluminous system data [6–8]. Other types of algorithms, such as neural-fuzzy theory [1] and approximate reasoning [2], have also been applied for motor drive fault diagnoses. Neural-fuzzy theory does not require structuring motor drive systems; hence, establishing a fault diagnosis system on the basis of this theory involves only input–output relationships. However, when algorithms that are based on this theory are used, more time is required for identifying optimal solutions, and data identification must be performed individually. By contrast, approximate reasoning entails incorporating a simpler calculation approach for troubleshooting. Nevertheless, if differences in motor drive characteristics are not substantial, errors may occur when approximate reasoning is employed for troubleshooting. The researchers in [9] reported three motor fault diagnosis types, namely abnormal air-gap eccentricity, bearing failure, and broken rotor bar, on the basis of motor stator current power spectra, and they monitored the diagnoses through smart wireless sensor networks. However, these motor fault diagnoses cannot clearly identify the exact fault position. Hilbert and wavelet transforms and knowledge extraction by using data mining [10–12] have been applied for converting time–frequency plots into frequency–amplitude plots. In addition, the genetic algorithm selects the fault characteristics and diagnoses motor fault types. However, it can diagnose only six motor fault types: bowed rotor, broken rotor bar, fault bearing, unbalanced rotor, stator fault, and voltage unbalance. This implies that all of the 10 common motor fault types have yet to be diagnosed.A new approach to intelligent fault diagnosis of three-phase induction motors using a signal-based method was proposed in [13]. In the classifier design, the artificial ant clustering technique, inspired by the behavior of real ants, was used as an unsupervised classification method for optimizing fault diagnosis. This technique was tested in different situations to demonstrate its effectiveness in detecting failures, even when the information about operating modes is limited or difficult to obtain. Nevertheless, the obtained results proved the efficiency of the proposed approach only in diagnosing broken bars and bearing failure at various load levels. In addition, to accurately diagnose motor faults, such as broken bars, mixed eccentricity, and shaft bearing fault, the characteristic spectra of motor vibration signals and stator current have been obtained in [14–19]. However, other motor fault types demonstrating the same fault characteristic spectra still exist, but with different amplitudes, thus resulting in the false detection of a motor fault type during motor fault diagnosis.Developing a new fault diagnosis technique to shorten the time required by on-site workers for determining fault points and maintaining systems is highly imperative. In addition, on-site professional diagnosis staff can determine the required duration of system maintenance according to the signals acquired using such a new technique, thus increasing economic benefits.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 described the motor types and frequency spectrum analysis. And then, Section 3 expounded the proposed motor fault diagnosis system. An analysis of the measured vibration signal spectra for 10 fault types was made in Section 4. In Section 5, the proposed ENN fault diagnosis system was used for fault diagnosis of the induction motors. Finally, some conclusions and discussions are given in Section 6.The 10 most common motor faults can be divided into three categories: rotor, bearing, and electric machinery faults [1,2]. The causes of rotor faults are divided into four types, namely rotor unbalance, rotor bending, rotor misalignment, and rotor looseness. The motor vibration characteristics of these four fault types are detected using a frequency spectrum analyzer (Table 1). The characteristic frequency spectrum of rotor unbalance occurs at 1x speed frequency and is represented as 1f, and the other spectra occur at various speeds based on 1f. The spectral locations of rotor bending are 1f, 2f, and 3f, and 1f contains the highest peak value. The spectral peak values of 1f, 2f, and 3f decrease gradually. Among the characteristic frequency spectra of rotor misalignment, 2f contains the highest peak value and is accompanied by other multiplied frequencies, namely 1f, 3f, and 4f. In particular, 4f contains the lowest peak value. Among the frequency spectra generated by rotor looseness, 1f exhibits the highest peak value, and other multiplied frequencies such as 0.5f, 1.5f, 2f, 2.5f, and 3f also appear. The integral number multiplier demonstrates the most substantial peak values, which descend gradually.Faults occurring in bearing structures are divided into oil-film bearing and ball-bearing faults. This study focused on ball-bearing faults. In a motor-bearing structure that comprises a ball bearing, faults are categorized into three types, namely inner ring, outer ring, and ball damages, and Table 1 lists their frequency spectra. The frequency cluster generated when inner rings are damaged is indicated by the following equations [3,4]:(1)mfin±nfω,m=1,2,3,…;n=0,1,2,…(2)fin=12(fωM+dfωMDcosα)where finrepresents the frequency when the ball passes the initial point of the inner ring, fωrepresents the bearing rotational frequency, M represents the number of balls, d represents the ball diameter, D represents the bearing node path, and α represents the contact angle.As described in Table 1, the frequency spectrum is generated by the outer ring damage in the form of a frequency cluster, similar to that generated by the inner ring damage. Therefore, the frequency cluster location of the outer ring damage is indicated by the following equations [3,4]:(3)mfout±nfcage,m=1,2,3,…;n=0,1,2,…(4)fout=12(fωM−dfωMDcosα)(5)fcage=12(fω−dfωDcosα)where foutrepresents the frequency when the ball passes the initial point of the outer ring and fcagerepresents the revolution frequency of the ball.The frequency location of the characteristic spectrum caused by the ball damage is expressed by the following equations [1,2]:(6)mfroller±nfcage,m=1,2,3,…;n=0,1,2,…(7)froller=12(Dfωd−dfωDcos2α)where frollerrepresents the frequency of balls passing through the outer or inner rings.Unbalanced electromagnetic force distribution causes electric machinery damage during motor operation. An electromagnetic force is generated when electric circuits are connected and dissipates when circuits are disconnected. The unbalanced distribution of electromagnetic force is caused by air gap imbalance, rotor bar break, and phase unbalance, the vibration characteristic frequency spectra of which are listed in Table 1. The unbalanced distribution of electromagnetic force engenders electric machinery faults. Among the frequency spectra generated by air gap unbalance, those at 1f and 2fLare most substantial and are accompanied by sideband frequencies with frequency distances of fp. Specifically, fLrepresents the power frequency, and fprepresents the pole-passing frequency, which is demonstrated as follows [1,2]:(8)fp=P×fswhere P represents the motor rotor pole, and fsrepresents the slip frequency, which is indicated as follows:(9)fs=Ns−Nr60where Nrrepresents the rotor rotational speed, and Nsrepresents the synchronous speed, which is expressed as follows:(10)Ns=120×fLPRegarding the rotor bar break fault frequency spectra, the characteristic frequency spectra exhibit numerical values at 1f and 2f, and the frequency spectra are identified in a sideband frequency with a main frequency of fband frequency distance of Nr. Specifically, fbrepresents the rotor-bar passing frequency and is indicated as follows:(11)fb=B×Nr60where B represents the number of rotor bars. Among the three characteristic frequency spectra generated by unbalance faults, the peak values of the spectra at 6fL(six times the power frequency) are the highest, and the value of the spectrum at 1f is identified.Extension theory has three major characteristics: matter–element modeling, qualitative and quantitative attributes, and a nonclosed nature [20]. According to this theory, distances and rank values are used to establish the correlation functions of the fault types, and the correlation degree is applied to identify the fault types. Extension NN (ENN) theory enables supervised learning as well as the recollection and reduction of fault data. Therefore, in this study, a smart algorithm for the ENN was used as the basis for establishing the fault diagnosis system. The system was constructed to measure data on motor faults, implement subsequent training according to the data, and identify the fault types on the basis of the measured data to verify the applicability of the proposed fault diagnosis technique.The ENN proposed in this study was developed according to the network's learning ability. Fig. 1illustrates the ENN structure, which comprises an input, calculation, and output layers. Characteristic samples are entered into the input layer and images corresponding to the samples are generated by setting the range of weighting values in the calculation layer [21,22].In the calculation layer, the weighting valuewgmHrepresents the upper limit of the classical region of an input characteristic andwgmLrepresents the region's lower limit; moreover,wgmHandwgmLrepresent the maximal and minimal weighting values between the mth input and gth output ends, respectively. The output end in Fig. 1 indicates that for every characteristic sample input, only one output end changes. Therefore, the result can be used as the identification result of a characteristic sample at the input end. If the identification result does not fulfill the expectation, then the original weighting value is adjusted and relearned until the target value is achieved.ENN learning methods are divided into two types: supervised and unsupervised learning. Supervised learning involves inputting a set of characteristic samples and comparing them with the corresponding target values. If they do not correspond, then the weighting value is modified according to the error amount between the reference values and their corresponding target values. Continual adjustment and learning enable the network to identify the corresponding relationships between the input and output values. Unsupervised learning involves ENNs that automatically identify the regularity and attributes of their characteristic samples. When a set of test samples is input, ENNs use values closest to those of the samples as the identification results. Therefore, unsupervised learning does not enable accurate identification of the similarity or relationships among data. Supervised learning was employed as the primary ENN learning approach in this study. Adjusting the weighting value improved the identification accuracy of the developed system and reduced the rate of assessment errors. The parameters must first be defined to elucidate the ENN learning process. The learning samples are represented using P, withP≡{P1,P2,…,PNs}, where Nsrepresents the total number of learning samples.Accordingly, the sth sample may be represented asPsb≡{ps1b,ps2b,…,psqb}, where b is the category number of the samples and q is the total number of characteristics. ENis the total number of errors used for evaluating the identification accuracy of the ENN. Therefore, the total error rate Ermay be defined as follows:(12)Er=ENNsThe supervised learning calculation process of the ENN is as follows [17,18]:Step 1: Use the extension matter–element model to set the connection weighting value of the input and output ends as follows:(13)Rg=[Ng,c1,Vg1c2,Vg2......cm,Vgm],m=1,2,…,q;g=1,2,…,ywhere cmdenotes the mth characteristic of Ng; Vgm=〈wgmL,wgmH〉 denotes a classical region belonging to the cmof the gth cluster; and y denotes the total number of clusters categorized at the output end. Specifically,wgmLandwgmHare expressed as follows:(14)wgmH=maxs∈Ns{psmg}(15)wgmL=mins∈Ns{psmg}wherepsmgrepresents the learning data at the input end of the ENN.Step 2: Calculate the weight center of each cluster, which is represented by wcen, gand expressed as follows:(16)Wcen,g={wcen,g1,wcen,g2,…,wcen,gm,…}(17)wcen,gm=(wgmH+wgmL)2(18)g=1,2,…,y;m=1,2,…,qwhere wcen, g1 represents the first characteristic weight center in the data cluster g.Step 3: Express the sth learning sample of the read category number b as follows:(19)Psb={ps1b,ps2b,…,psqb},b∈ywhere y represents the total number of categories.Step 4: Use the extension distance (ED) (20) to calculate the distance between the learning samples and each cluster as follows:(20)EDsg=∑m=1q[|psmb−wcen,gm|−(wgmH−wgmL)/2|(wgmH−wgmL)/2|+1]wherepsmbrepresents the sth learning sample with the category number b and characteristic m, and wcen, gmrepresents the weight center between the mth input and gth output ends. Fig. 2illustrates a schematic of the ED, which is used to describe the distance between p and the interval 〈wL, wH〉. When the range of the interval 〈wL, wH〉 changes, its sensitivity causes the ED to change. In general, when the range of the classical region expands, the required data are indicated to be fuzzy, resulting in a low-sensitivity ED. Conversely, when the range of the classical region decreases, the data requirement is elucidated and the sensitivity of the ED is increased.Step 5: The calculation yields a new learning data cluster, herein referred to as g*, andEDsg*=min{EDsg}. If g*=b, then skip to Step 7; otherwise, continue to the next step.Step 6: Adjust and update the weighting value of b and g* as follows:(i)Update the weight centers of b and g*.(21)wcen,bmnew=wcen,bmold+η(psmb−wcen,bmold)(22)wcen,g*mnew=wcen,g*mold−η(psmb−wcen,g*mold)Update the weighting values of b and g*.(23){wbmH(new)=wbmH(old)+η(psmb−wcen,bmold)wbmL(new)=wbmL(old)+η(psmb−wcen,bmold)(24){wg*mH(new)=wg*mH(old)−η(psmb−wcen,g*mold)wg*mL(new)=wg*mL(old)−η(psmb−wcen,g*mold)In (21)–(24), η represents the learning rate of the ENN;wcen,bmnewrepresents the new weight center with the characteristic m and category number b (postlearning);wcen,bmoldrepresents the original weight center with the characteristic m and category number b (prelearning);wcen,g*mnewrepresents the new weight center with the characteristic m and category number g* (postlearning);wcen,g*moldrepresents the original weight center with the characteristic m and category number g* (postlearning);wbmH(new)andwbmL(new)respectively represent the new upper and lower limits of the weighting value with the characteristic m and category number b;wbmH(old)andwbmL(old)respectively represent the original upper and lower limits of the weighting value with the characteristic m and category number b;wg*mH(new)andwg*mL(new)respectively represent the new upper and lower limits of the weighting value with the characteristic m and category number g*; andwg*mH(old)andwg*mL(old)respectively represent the original upper and lower limits of the weighting value with the characteristic m and category number g*.Fig. 3depicts the weighting value adjustment process in Step 6. In Fig. 3(a), the learning sample psmmust belong to Cluster B; however, becauseEDAold〈EDBold, psmis categorized into Cluster A. After the weighting value is adjusted to update the ED toEDAnew〉EDBnew, as shown in Fig. 3(b), psmis categorized into Cluster B. In addition, the weighting value learning process in Step 6 involves adjusting the weighting values of only Clusters b and g* of a particular type. Therefore, compared with the other types of artificial intelligence involving supervised learning theorems, the ENN exhibits faster calculation and is more adaptable. In other words, when new samples are input, the ENN can rapidly identify the output values corresponding to the samples.Step 7: Repeat Steps 3–6 until all the samples are categorized. Conclude the learning epoch.Step 8: When the categorization processes of all the clusters reach convergence status, or the total rate of error Erreaches the target value, terminate the calculation process. If the aforementioned steps are incomplete, then return to Step 3.When the learning process of the ENN in the previous section is completed, the new measurement data can be used to perform cluster-type identification and categorization through the following steps:Step 1:Read the weighting matrix of the ENN.Use (16) and (17) to calculate the initial weight center of each cluster.Read the test samples.(25)Pt={pt1,pt2,…,ptq}Use the ED Eq. (20) to calculate the distances between the test samples and the postlearning clusters.Determine the value of g* such thatEDsg*=min{EDsg}. In addition, set the corresponding output node value of g* to 1 to determine the cluster types of the test samples.When all the test samples are categorized, terminate the calculation process. Otherwise, return to Step 3.Diagnosing motor fault type entails incorporating the types (Table 1) and their corresponding characteristic frequency spectra as the basis for assessment. Rotor malfunctions must be diagnosed according to the multipliers of their rotational frequencies. Identifying the three ball-bearing fault types involves observing the appearance of the sideband frequency in each main fault frequency. During the diagnosis of electric machinery faults, the air gap unbalance is observed using the one-time rotational and two-time power frequencies, rotor bar breaks are determined using the rotor-bar passing frequency and one-time rotational speed; and phase unbalance are assessed using the six-time power and one-time rotational frequencies. Therefore, a list of the fault types and their corresponding characteristics must be established in advance to promptly identify the fault types when motors malfunction. In this study, the causes of motor faults were divided into 10 types, which are represented by the symbols listed in Table 2.Where FT1–FT4 are caused by rotor faults, FT5–FT7 are caused by bearing faults, and FT8–FT10 are caused by electric machinery faults. The symbols listed in Table 3represent the frequency spectra corresponding to these fault types.In Table 3, FC1–FC10 represent the characteristic frequency spectra of rotor faults, FC11–FC13 represent the characteristic frequency spectra of bearing faults, and FC14–FC16 represent the characteristic frequency spectra of electric machinery faults.According to the aforementioned description of the relationships between the motor fault types and their corresponding characteristics, the fault types are correlated with their corresponding characteristic frequency spectral values. Therefore, the extension matter–element model can be expressed as follows:(26)R=(N,c,v)where R represents the matter–element model;Nrepresents the 10 motor fault types FTk(k=1–10);crepresents the motor fault characteristics expressed using FC1–FC16, which are defined in Table 3; andvrepresents the fault characteristic frequency spectral value. Accordingly, (26) may be rewritten as follows:(27)R=[R1R2...Rk]=[FTk,FC1,〈v1L,v1H〉FC2,〈v2L,v2H〉......FC16,〈v16L,v16H〉],k=1,2,…,10where〈v1L,v1H〉represents the lower and upper limits of the 0.5x rotational frequency values and〈v2L,v2H〉represents the lower and upper limits of the 1x rotational frequency values.According to the fault types and their corresponding characteristics listed in Table 1, the characteristic frequency spectral values of rotor faults are observed in the integral or fractional multiplier rotational frequency spectra. Specifically, the values appear at 0.5f, 1f, and 1.5f. The inner ring, outer ring, and ball damages, which are caused by ball-bearing faults, are indicated as frequency clusters. Specifically, the characteristic frequency spectral values of ball-bearing faults are a combination of the main frequency and its corresponding sideband frequencies. The characteristic frequency spectral values of air gap unbalance, rotor bar breaks, and phase unbalance, which are attributable to electric machinery faults, consist of power, rotational, and individual fault frequencies. Therefore, when motors malfunction, the fault characteristic frequency spectral values are obtained through the following approaches: (1) The spectral values of rotor faults are acquired by directly capturing and normalizing the integral or fractional multiplier frequency spectral values of the rotational frequency; (2) the spectral values of ball-bearing faults are acquired by identifying the frequency cluster distribution by using the equations listed in Table 1 and obtaining the peak values of the characteristic frequency spectra; and (3) the spectral values of electric machinery faults are acquired by directly capturing the characteristic frequency spectral values of multiplied rotational frequencies in addition to obtaining the spectral values of specific frequencies.Vibration analyzers convert the physical quantities of machine vibrations, such as displacement, speed, and acceleration, into electric voltage, charge, and current signals through sensors. These signals are then amplified and subjected to frequency spectrum analyses through fast Fourier transform (FFT). The major components of a vibration analyzer involve a vibration meter, dynamic signal FFT analyzer, vibration balance instrument, and vibration transducer. Through FFT frequency spectrum analysis, the analyzer converts waveforms into spectra to elucidate the causes of vibrations. Fig. 4depicts the frequency spectrum analyzer and its related equipment used in this study, in which a 60-Hz (1.8k=1800 RPM) frequency was incorporated as the basis of the 1f-multiplied frequency, and the frequency spectra of 0.5f, 1f, 1.5f, 2f, 2.5f, 3f, 3.5f, 4f, 4.5f, 5f, 5.5f, 6f, and 6.5f were displayed on the screen.First, a new normal motor (within tolerance) was employed for the frequency spectrum measurement to provide a reference for measuring the vibration signal spectra of the 10 motor fault types. The motor was equipped with a commercial electric drive of 60Hz, which is equivalent to the synchronous speed of 1.8k RPM for the motor. Fig. 5illustrates the measured vibration signal spectrum, which exhibited frequency signals 0.5f, 1f, 2f, 3f, 4k, 5f, and 6f at points 0.9k (on the horizontal axis), 1.8k, 3.6k, 5.4k, 7.2k, 9k, and 10.8k, respectively. Therefore, when motors function normally, the multiplied vibration signal frequencies are substantial at 1f, 2f, 3.5f, and 4f on the frequency spectrum. The analysis of this spectrum in conjunction with the 10 fault types indicated slight rotor unbalance, rotor bending, rotor looseness, and phase unbalance in the motor; however, all these problems were within tolerance [23].An analysis of the measured vibration signal spectra (Figs. 6–15) confirmed that these spectra were attributable to their fault types [23]. For example, the amplitude of the 1f signal in Fig. 6 was nearly 2.5 times higher than that in Fig. 5, suggesting a result consistent with the aforementioned analysis results. Analyzing this result in conjunction with the 10 fault types in Table 1 further confirmed that this spectrum was attributable to rotor unbalance.The capabilities of the ENN for supervised learning, parallel computing, correlation function computing, and data processing were exploited for the motor fault diagnosis test. The motor fault diagnosis system in this study was based on this theoretical framework. The ENN enabled the continuous analysis of the 10 common motor fault types and their corresponding fault vibration characteristic frequency spectral values until the entire categorization was accurate for establishing the motor fault diagnosis system. After the fault-type model was constructed, the motor fault diagnosis system was created using the ENN, and a fault diagnosis was conducted on the newly acquired motor fault data. The computing process of the proposed ENN is explained as follows:(1)Create a matter–element model of the motor fault types listed in Table 4(because of page limitations, only the matter–element model of the rotor fault type is listed here). The values of the classical region rangeVgm(=〈wgmL,wgmH〉of every characteristic (FCm=1,…,16) are the lower and upper boundaries of the measured frequency spectra of the vibration signals for various fault types (FTg=1,…,10). In addition, one can use a matter–element model to express the neighborhood region of every characteristic for describing the possible range of all fault sets. The value range of the neighborhood regionVgm′(=〈wgm′L,wgm′H〉can be determined using the maximum and minimum values of every measured characteristic.Input the learning data. Establish a diagnosis system by using the aforementioned supervised learning function and process of the ENN. If the fault types are not accurately identified during this step, then continue adjusting the weighting value until all the fault types are accurately generalized.Examine whether data are still uncategorized. If yes, then return to the previous step; otherwise, skip to verifying the identification rate. If the established identification rate is fulfilled, then the establishment of the motor fault diagnosis system is complete.Input the test data into the established motor fault diagnosis system and identify them. When all the test data are identified, discontinue the system operation.The motor fault diagnosis system was constructed using the computing and identification processes of the ENN, 10 common motor fault types, 16 types of fault characteristic frequency spectra, and 72 cases of the data of the 10 fault types, described in Section 4, as learning data. The system was used to test the 12 motor fault characteristic frequency spectrum data samples listed in Table 5; Table 6 presents the obtained results.The test results in Table 6 indicate that the proposed motor fault diagnosis technique resulted in 100% accurate identification of the fault types of the 12 data samples, verifying its applicability. In addition, the fifth sample in Table 6 reveals that in the fault-type assessment through the vibration signal spectrum analysis, theEDFT3value between the sample and FT3 (misaligned rotor) was 13.4636, which was lower than those of the EDs involving other fault types. This implied that the probability of FT3 occurrence was 100%, and the motor was diagnosed as having a misaligned rotor. Conversely, theEDFT9andEDFT10values were both 99.248, which were greater than those of the EDs involving the other fault types, indicating that this sample was less likely to have broken rotor bars or phase unbalance than other samples were.The fault diagnosis results of the proposed ENN were compared with those of other NNs. Table 7indicates that the proposed method exhibited a short learning time and higher learning and identification accuracy than did the multilayer perceptron (MLP) method with different perceptrons, thus demonstrating the superiority of the proposed technique.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
