@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Parzen window entropy based spectrum sensing in cognitive radio

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A Parzen window entropy detection technique for spectrum sensing.Performance is compared with energy and Shanon entropy detection method.In multi-node, weights are evaluated using the Differential evolution algorithm.Single node sensing achieved SNR wall of−19 db at Pd= 0.9 and Pf= 0.1.Multi-node sensing achieved SNR wall of−24 dB at Pd= 0.9 and Pf= 0.1.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Non-parametric kernel,Parzen entropy,Shannon entropy,Renyi entropy,Differential Evolution,Log-likelihood ratio,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, we propose a Parzen window entropy based spectrum sensing algorithm for enhancing the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) wall of cognitive radio primary user detection. We compute the information entropy using a non-parametric Kernel Density Estimation (KDE) method. Single node sensing is extended to cooperative sensing using the weighted gain combining (WGC) fusion method. The weights of WGC technique are computed using a Differential Evolution(DE) algorithm and compared with the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) method. In addition, the detection performance of the proposed Parzen window entropy is compared with Shannon entropy and energy detection techniques. We consider a DVB-T signal with Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) subjected to Rayleigh fading under noise uncertainty as a primary user signal for simulation. The simulation result reveals that in the case of a single node and cooperative sensing, the proposed method achieves SNR wall of−19 dB and−24 dB respectively at the probability of false alarm 0.1.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Cognitive Radio provides a promising solution to overcome the spectrum scarcity problem in wireless communications [1]. It supports the dynamic spectrum allocation feature to drive next generation communication. Spectrum sensing is the most prominent function that detects the presence of a signal in a radio channel in Cognitive Radios. There are many sensing algorithms reported in the literature [2], including matched filtering, cyclostationary detection and energy detection. Energy detection is the simplest blind detection technique which does not require apriori information of the signal. However, it fails to detect the signal in the presence of noise uncertainty [3]. If the characteristics of the signal are known apriori, then matched filtering gives ideal results. On the contrary, cyclostationary detection senses the primary user signals under noise uncertainty by exploiting the cyclic properties of the signal at the cost of more computational complexity. The Entropy detection technique seems to be a powerful technique which detects very-low-SNR signals with reasonable complexity in less time [4,5]. In entropy based detection technique, sensing performance is exploited in both time and frequency domains [5,6]. In the time domain, entropy is constant (independent of SNR) and cannot distinguish between signal and noise. As an alternative, the frequency domain can be used to detect low-SNR signals in the presence of noise uncertainty. In these methods, the average probability density function (pdf) is characterized by histogram bin-width and a number of bins. The main drawback of histogram bins is that they are not smooth and their performance often relies on the two extreme points of the histogram. In the present paper, to counteract this effect, estimation of the density directly by the kernel pdf is proposed. Furthermore, Renyi entropy is found to be a more generalized form that increases the overall detection performance, in comparison to Shannon entropy.Multiple Cognitive Radios are deployed for sensing to mitigate the effects of fading and shadowing. In cooperative sensing, the sensing reliability is increased by combining the individual decisions at the fusion center [7,8]. The sensing data sent by each cognitive user may not be reliable for detection, due to different channel characteristics. The sensing data are aggregated at the fusion center based on different fusion rules, i.e., soft and hard fusion techniques. In the case of hard fusion technique, each node sends binary decision value to the fusion center (FC), and the FC takes a decision by using either binary logic such as AND, OR or majority. In the case of soft fusion technique, the fusion center receives true information about the signal in contrast to binary values and applies rules such as random weights, equal gain combining (EGC) and weighted gain combining (WGC) to take the final decision. Among these, the WGC assigns the weights based on the SNR of each node giving optimum results. If the signal and noise variances are known apriori, then log-likelihood ratio test (LLR) is simple to implement [9]. In the LLR method, the weight of each node is calculated using received signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). If SNR is not known a priori, then evaluation of weight is critical. However, it is not always practical to expect that the receiver node will have a priori information about noise characteristics such as variance. In this scenario, an improper approximation to weight values will lead to performance degradation.In this paper, we propose a Parzen window-based entropy for spectrum sensing in cognitive radio. We investigate the effect of kernel-based entropy estimation for evaluating the detection performance in the frequency domain. Parzen window-based entropy estimation is robust because the primary user signal can be detected by considering fewer-samples compared to the Shannon entropy detection method in the presence of noise uncertainty with lower-false-alarm probability. The Differential Evolution algorithm is used to compute the weights of each node in cooperative sensing as it does not require a priori information about the noise characteristics.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the single node sensing using Parzen window entropy. Section 3 presents the cooperative spectrum sensing using Parzen window entropy along with the DE algorithm for weight estimation. Section 4 summarizes the proposed algorithm results and comparison with state-of-the-art solutions. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper.In this section, we review the spectrum sensing model of cognitive radio. The binary hypothesis test for single node sensing is modeled asH0:x(z)=w(z)H1:x(z)=h.s(z)+w(z),z=0,1,2…N−1where Hypothesis H0 is the null hypothesis having only noise component w(z) and H1 is the true hypothesis indicating the presence of primary user signal s(z) and noise. ‘h’ is the channel gain that constitutes fading parameters and N is the number of samples used for sensing. The noise is assumed to be complex-Gaussian, independent and identically distributed (i.i.d) samples with zero mean and varianceσw2represented asN(0,σw2). Similarly, the signal also exhibits the Gaussian distribution with zero mean and varianceσw2+σs2represented asN(0,σw2+σs2).In statistics, the pdf of a finite set of samples can be evaluated using non-parametric models. Kernel density estimation is one of the non-parametric approaches to estimate the pdf, p(x) for a specific point from a sample p(xn) without requiring any prior knowledge about the underlying distribution. It is also named as the Parzen–Rosenblatt window method. Let (x1, x2,…, xn) be the samples of a random variable X. The Parzen window estimator of samples (x1, x2 … xn) that are independent and identically distributed having an unknown pdf of f is [10,11](1)fX(x)=1n∑i=1nKh(xk−xi)where n is the number of Gaussian samples, Kh(.) is scaled kernel defined asKh(x)=1hK(xh)and h is the width of the kernel. The most dominant parameter that affects the density is the width of the kernel. It is also called as a smoothing parameter and is analogous to the histogram bin-width.The pdf of a kernel function is assumed to have zero mean and symmetric around the axis [12]. Several kernel functions like Gaussian, Skewed Unimodel, Kurtotic Unimodel, Bimodel, Trimodel, Claw, and Comb densities having different mean and variances have been represented in literature [13]. These target densities specify the various types of challenges to curve estimation. For a Gaussian kernel, the optimum value of h depends on the number of the Gaussian samples and variance of the samples (Table 1). As stated by Silverman’s rule [13], the width of a Gaussian kernel ish=(4σ53n)15=1.06σn−15where σ is the standard deviation of samples and n is the number of Gaussian samples. In the entropy perspective, Shannon entropy is defined as [14](2)HS(X)=−Ex[logfX(x)]On the other hand, the Renyi entropy is defined as [14](3)HR(X)=11−αlogEx[fXα−1(x)]where it reduces to Shannon entropy when α = 1 (applying l’Hospital’s rule[14]). In the discrete case, if the non-parametric Parzen window pdf is applied to Shannon and Renyi entropies, the Shannon entropy gets reduced to(4)HS(X)=−1n∑k=1nlog(1n∑i=1nKh(xk−xi))Similarly, the Parzen window estimator of Renyi entropy (Parzen entropy) with order α becomes(5)HR(X)=11−αlog[1nα∑k=1n(∑i=1nKh(xk−xi))α−1]Therefore, the test statistics for the proposed generalized non-parametric Parzen window entropy estimator is given as(6)HR(X)⋚H0H1λwhere λ is the detection threshold that relies on the probability of false alarm Pfa, expressed as [5,6](7)λ=Hn+Q−1(1−Pfa)σwwhere Hnis the estimated Gaussian noise entropy that is constant for a fixed number of kernel bins (n)[5]. The computational complexity of evaluating the Shannon and Parzen entropy is O(n2) and O(n) respectively, where n is the number of bins.The single node sensing performance can be enhanced by increasing the number of nodes or CR users. Let us assume that there are M nodes in cooperation and the Mth node having channel gain hm. The hypothesis H1 can be rewritten as(8)H0:xm(z)=wm(z),m=0,1,2,…,M−1H1:xm(z)=hm.sm(z)+wm(z),z=0,1,2,…,N−1Due to fading and shadowing effects, the received signal strength of all nodes are not same. The WGC method assigns different weights to each node while evaluating the cooperative gain at the fusion center.Under Hypothesis H0, the probability density function (pdf) of the received signal is(9)P(x,H0)=(12πσw2)N2e−12σw2∑z=0N−1x2(z)Under Hypothesis H1, the pdf is determined by the joint distribution of both independent and identically distributed samples w(z) and s(z).(10)P(x,H1)=(12π(σw2+σs2))N2e−12(σw2+σs2)∑z=0N−1x2(z)Then, according to the Maximum Likelihood ratio test the test statistics is(11)H1:P(x,H1)P(x,H0)⩾λwhere λ is the threshold. By substituting Eqs. (7) and (8) into (9), the test statistics can be rewritten as(12)(12π(σs2+σw2))N2e−12(σs2+σw2)∑z=0N−1x2(z)(12πσw2)N2e−12σw2∑z=0N−1x2(z)⩾λBy solving the above equation, Eq. (12) is reduced to(13)(σw2σs2+σw2)N2e(∑z=0N−1x2(z)σs2(σs2+σw2)σw2)⩾λThe exponential term can be simplified by applying logarithm hence it is named as log-likelihood ratio test.(14)N2log(σw2σs2+σw2)+(∑z=0N−1x2(z)σs2(σs2+σw2)σw2)⩾logλThe first term in the above expression is independent of signal characteristics. Thus, the test statistic for cooperative sensing can be written as(15)∑m=0M−1(∑z=0N−1xm2(z)θm)⋚H0H1λwhere∑z=0N−1xm2(z)is the average energy and θ =σs2(σs2+σw2)σw2is the normalized weight of the respective node [9,15]. The proposed cooperative Parzen window detection probability can be formulated by replacing the average energy with average entropy as(16)Cd(WGC)−HR=∑m=1MHR−mθm⋚H0H1λwhereHR−mis the Parzen window entropy of mth node computed using Eq. (5).Although LLR weights give optimum detection, they rely purely on the received signal characteristics.The Differential Evolution (DE) algorithm is an evolutionary computation method successfully being applied to diverse domains of science and engineering applications [16,17]. It has been reported that DE performs better than the genetic algorithm (GA) and the particle swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm for optimizing numerical benchmark functions and real life optimization problems [17]. The basic DE algorithm has four major steps, (i) initialization of the population, (ii) mutation, (iii) crossover and (iv) selection process. Differential Evolution is one of the evolutionary algorithms that generate random population by solving the fitness function iteratively to meet a desired measure of quality. Here, the cumulative sum of kernel entropy is maximized to evaluate the required probability of detection. The cooperative node weights are always said to be normalized, whose cumulative sum is equal to one. The evaluation of weights for maximizing cumulative sum of kernel entropy is formulated as an optimization problem as(17)argmax(∑m=1MHR−mθm)θ1,θ2,…,θmwhere θmis the weights associated with mth CR node. The complete pseudo-code of DE algorithm is given in Algorithm 1.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, a Parzen window-based entropy for spectrum sensing which can achieve higher SNR wall than the histogram based entropy detection method is presented. The proposed detector employs kernel pdf to calculate the Renyi entropy called as Parzen window entropy. The sensing performance is significantly improved with a fewer number of samples using the proposed technique. The sensing results of the proposed method are compared with the traditional entropy detection and energy detection methods. The single node and multi-node detection simulation result revealed that a single CR user can easily detect the signal even when the signal strength is as low as−19.25 dB and multiple CR users can detect−24.83 dB signals. Furthermore, the most appropriate weights (for WGC) are evaluated using the LLR test and Differential evolution algorithm for implementing cooperative spectrum sensing. The accuracy of the proposed sensing technique can also be tested in real time using USRP SDR as part of a future study.