@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Investigation of milling cutting forces and cutting coefficient for aluminum 6060-T6

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Predict the milling cutting force and cutting coefficient for aluminum 6060-T6 successfully.An increase in the feed per tooth increases the cutting force and reduces the cutting coefficient for shearing forces in the tangential direction.The shear angle increased with the feed per tooth and shear stress was close to the actual shear strength of the material.Variation of the feed per tooth and tool diameter did not change the magnitude of the friction angle.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Milling,Cutting force,Cutting coefficient,Shear stress,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstractImage, graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The milling process is commonly employed for machining surfaces in die/molds, propellers, and turbine blades. The quality of these machined parts greatly depends on the proper combination of work materials, cutting tools, and the cutting conditions in the milling process. However, the major disadvantages of the process are that the milling force causes machine vibration, accelerates tool wear, and degrades the dimensional accuracy and surface finish; in addition, the work material properties, tool geometry, and any changes in the cutting conditions are reflected in the output [1]. Hence, the cutting force and the cutting force model should be accurate and effective for monitoring, planning, and controlling milling operations. A mechanistic cutting force model is commonly employed for this purpose, and it is based on the assumption that the cutting force is proportional to the cross-sectional area of the uncut chip. The proportionality constant is called the specific cutting force coefficient or the specific cutting pressure, and it depends on the cutter geometry, cutting conditions, and the material properties of the workpiece. Two types of mechanistic cutting force models have been reported. In the first, the effects of the shearing due to the chip-generating process on the rake face of the tool and the effects of the rubbing and plowing on the flank face are combined into one specific force coefficient for each cutting force component (tangential, radial, and axial). This model has been used by many researchers. Its disadvantage is the considerable variation in the specific force coefficient with the average chip thickness, which complicates analytical calculations. In the second model, the shearing and plowing effects are considered separately by means of the corresponding specific cutting- and edge-force coefficients. Since the coefficients are relatively independent of the average chip thickness, this model appears to be more suitable for analytical work [2].Previous studies have contributed to the knowledge on cutting force model and cutting force coefficients. Dotcheva et al. [3] presented a new approach for the determination of cutting force coefficients. Their proposed methodology models a practical mechanism for collecting and analyzing experimental data. The surface error is the measured parameter used for defining the cutting force coefficients. The results obtained by applying the new cutting force coefficients show good agreement between the predicted and measured surface errors. Stepan et al. [4] pointed out that cutting force coefficients exhibit strong nonlinearity as a function of chip loads, cutting speeds, and material imperfections. They presented the connection between the sensitivity of the dynamics of regenerative cutting and the characteristic nonlinearity of the cutting force and mathematically modeled the nonlinear milling process. The transitions of a dynamic cutting process between stable and unstable zones were considered and experimentally illustrated by applying wavelet transformations on the measurement data. By using a mechanistic model of the milling process, Gonzalo et al. [5] presented a new method for obtaining the specific cutting coefficients needed to predict the milling forces. In their research, an inverse method was applied by considering the instantaneous cutting force values, and the equation system was solved by a constrained least squares fitting method. Furthermore, the relation of the cutting force and the specific cutting coefficients with the rake angle and chip thickness was analyzed. Srinivasa and Shunmugam [6] presented a new methodology for predicting the cutting coefficients, taking into consideration the edge radius and material-strengthening effects. They also developed a mechanistic model to predict the cutting forces in micro-end milling operations, considering the overlapping tooth engagements. Tukora and Szalay [7] presented a cutting force prediction method based on the mechanistic cutting force model, together with an algorithm for determining the cutting force coefficients in the course of a single experiment without restrictions of the cutting geometry. Campatelli and Scippa [8] investigated the influence of feed per tooth and cutting speed on the cutting coefficients to build a model capable of reliably predicting the cutting force with different process parameters. They developed a model for the tangential cutting coefficient using aluminum 6082-T4 as the test material. The evaluation of the linear contribution of the cutting speed to the shear coefficients can provide useful results; however, a more complex equation should be considered in order to maximize the predictive capability of the model. In addition, some valuable theoretical works, mathematical models and mathematics background of the Adomian decomposition methods were presented by Antonelli and Romano [9], Siddiqui et al. [10], Adomian [11], and Fatoorehchi and co-workers [12-15].In this paper, we present a method for predicting the milling cutting force and cutting coefficient for aluminum 6060-T6. We introduce two cutting force prediction methods, namely, the Altintas method and the recursive least square method, and compare the results to the cutting forces determined experimentally. In the study, the influence of the feed per tooth and tool diameter on the cutting force and cutting force coefficient was also investigated. Finally, after determining the cutting force coefficients accurately, the cutting parameters, including the friction angle and shear stress, were estimated using the oblique cutting theory.For calculating machining forces in milling processes, the Altintas model [16] was used for the evaluation of the force without considering the tool run out. This model can evaluate the force components using the following equations (1):(1)dFt=Ktcacdb+KtedldFr=Krcacdb+KredldFa=Kacacdb+KaedlIn the formulae, dFt, dFr, and dFaare, respectively, the tangential, radial, and axial cutting force elements. Further, db, dl, and acare, respectively, the chip width and length for an infinitesimal section of the chip and the cutting thickness. Ktc, Krc, and Kacare, respectively, the tangential, radial, and axial cutting force coefficients. Kte, Kre, and Kaeare, respectively, the tangential, radial, and axial edge-force coefficients [1,16]. A spiral milling coordinate system is set up as shown in Fig. 1. The positive direction of the X-axis is opposite to the feed direction; that of the Y-axis is normal direction; and that of the Z-axis is from tool point to spindle.The average cutting force derived from the integral of the X, Y-, and Z-directions is as follows:(2)Fx=−{Nbac8π[Ktccos2φ−Krc(2φ−sin2φ)]+Nb2π[−Ktesinφ+Krecosφ]}φstφexFy={Nbac8π[Ktc(2φ−sin2φ)−Krccos2φ]−Nb2π[Ktecosφ+Kresinφ]}φstφexFz={Nb8π[−Kacaccosφ+Kacφ]}φstφexwhere φ is the contact angle; N is the number of teeth; and b is the axial depth of the cut. For convenience, if slot milling the workpiece, the phases of the entry and exit points areφst=0andφsx=180. In order to avoid the influence of cutter eccentricity during measurements, the total cutting force per revolution was measured, and the results were then divided by the number of teeth. By substitutingφst=0andφsx=180into Eq. (2), the following equations are obtained:(3)Fx¯=Nb4Krcac+NbπKreFy¯=Nb4Ktcac+NbπKteFz¯=NbπKacac+Nb2KaeThe above equations can be written in the following form:(4)Fx¯=Fxc¯ac+Fxe¯Fy¯=Fyc¯ac+Fye¯Fz¯=Fzc¯ac+Fze¯From Eqs. (3) and (4), the cutting force coefficient may be expressed as shown below:(5)Ktc=4Fyc¯NbKte=πFye¯NbKrc=4Fxc¯NbKre=πFxe¯NbKac=πFzc¯NbKae=2Fze¯NbThe average milling forces are measured from repeated experiments with varying feeds during the milling process. A MATLAB (MathWorks, Inc., MA, USA) routine was used to evaluate the cutting force, given the geometrical parameters of the tool and the workpiece. In order to predict cutting forces and cutting coefficients accurately, the recursive least square (RLS) method was used to modify the cutting coefficients. The RLS method is an adaptive filter, which recursively finds the coefficients that minimize the weighted linear least squares cost function related to the input signals. RLS algorithms have high convergence speed and do not exhibit the eigenvalue spread problem.The machine tool selected for the experiments was a VMP-40A three-dimensional vertical machining center, produced by Feeler Machine Tool Ltd., with a maximum spindle speed of 10,000 rpm. The cutters were two-tooth cemented carbide flat-end milling cutters with diameters of 12 mm, 16 mm, and 20 mm with 50° helix angles and 0° rake angles. All workpieces used in this study had dimensions of 100 × 100 × 60 mm and were made of aluminum alloy 6061-T6. Dry milling was performed. The experimental milling parameters were arranged so that the spindle speed (1000 rpm), axial depth of cut (1 mm), and radial width of cut were fixed; however, the feed rate was varied linearly, and the following values were considered: 200 mm/min, 260 mm/min, 300 mm/min, 360 mm/min, and 400 mm/min.The flat end mill was clamped on the spindle of the machining center. In order to avoid any interference during the measurement, a Kistler-9257B piezoelectric milling dynamometer (load range of three-directional force: 5–5000 N) was installed on a clean, smooth worktable using outer hexagonal M8 screws. The workpiece for milling was fixed with a load of 10 N on top of the piezoelectric milling dynamometer so that the dynamic milling forces in the X-, Y-, and Z-directions could be measured. A Kistler-5018A three-channel charge amplifier was used to transform the dynamometer charge signal into a voltage signal. The charge amplifier was attached to a connecting box through its output line on both ends. In addition, the Kistler-9257B terminal of the connecting box was linked to a Kistler-5018A multi-function data acquisition card via a Kistler-5697A connecting cable so that the data acquisition card received an analog signal. The data acquisition card was inserted in the Kistler-5697A expansion slot of a PC, and the analog signal was digitized for input to the PC. Finally, the collected data were analyzed and processed with the dynamic cutting force measuring system software programmed in MATLAB R2010b (see Fig. 2). The signals were sampled at a frequency of 5 kHz. Before the measured signals of the cutting force are used, they must be filtered using software to remove noise, as shown in Fig. 3.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we presented a method for predicting the milling cutting force and cutting coefficient for aluminum 6060-T6 which is a general commercial alloy with 170–190 MPa of tensile strength. In our work, we introduced two predictive cutting force methods, the Altintas method and the RLS method, and compared their results to the experimentally determined cutting forces. In addition, the influence of the feed rate and the tool diameter on the cutting force and cutting force coefficient was investigated. Finally, after determining cutting force coefficients accurately, the cutting parameters, including the friction angle and shear stress, were estimated using the oblique cutting theory. The simulated forces obtained by the RLS method were in good agreement with the experimentally determined forces. However, the peak and valley forces simulated by the Altintas method did not match the experimental forces. An increase in the feed rate increased the cutting force and reduced the cutting coefficient for the shearing forces in the tangential directions. Further, the shear angle increased with the feed per tooth. The shear stress in the model was found to be close to the actual shear strength of the material. This means that the proposed method can also be used as an alternative means to determine the shear strength of materials. In addition, note that varying the feed per tooth and tool diameter did not change the magnitude of the friction angle. Thus, cutting force coefficients could be predicted using an average cutting force model, in combination with a series of milling tests. These findings present a theoretical basis for the study of milling chatter.