@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Motion analysis of a mobile manipulator executing pick-up tasks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Reaching Target-point by the end-effector of a mobile manipulator.The optimized trajectory, minimizing the execution time of the task is generated.Introduction of manipulability index for configuring the manipulator far from singularities.The feasibility of the computed trajectories is validated against experimentation on a real robot.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Mobile manipulator,Pick-up task,Manipulability,Optimization,Trajectory generation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents an analysis of a mobile manipulator movement executing a pick-up task. The robot has to reach a target point with its end-effector. The configuration of the manipulator and the pose of the mobile robot define the inputs of the problem.The random profile approach is applied to deal with the aforementioned issue. The trajectory which minimizes the execution time of the task is generated. Furthermore, the manipulability index is introduced in the optimization process in order to allow a comfortable configuration of the manipulator to reach the target-point. The obtained results in free and cluttered environments are presented and discussed. The feasibility of the computed trajectories is also validated against experimentation, in the case of the RobuTER mobile robot carrying the Ultra-Light Manipulator.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Robot mechanical structures are mainly classified into fixed-base articulated systems and mobile platforms. The diversity of applications leads to consider an obvious alternative that associates manipulation and mobility aptitudes. A robotic system with these capabilities is typically composed of robotized vehicle (mobile robot) carrying one or more arms.Planning framework of automated systems is commonly based on two-stage method. First, the path planning which outcomes the path points connecting the query pair, and describes geometrically the motion of the robot. Then, the path is interpolated in trajectory-generation level, with specifying to a timing law.In this article, a pick-up task is assigned to one-armed mobile robot (RobuTER/ULM mobile manipulator). A target-point (ITP) defined in 3D Cartesian space is imposed to the End-Effector (EF) of the manipulator. The movement of the mobile manipulator is complex due to its high Degrees of Freedom (DoF) number. Unavoidable mobile robot localization error also occurred due to odometry sensor and initial position of the robot [1].The redundancy caused by the combination between mobility and manipulation (offering many possibilities to reach ITP) is solved using a multi-dimensional trajectory generation methodology. The random profile approach (RPA) [2] is employed to the generated optimal trajectory to the system. Execution time (cost function) is minimized. The trajectories are generated in the joint space. Reaching singular configurations and the calculation of kinematic models are avoided. The saturation values of the actuators (velocities and accelerations of the robot actuators) and the non-holonomic constraint of the mobile system are respected. RPA allows solving varied types of trajectory problems, using diverse types of performance criteria under diverse types of kinodynamic constraints, and has the ability to find near-optimal solutions within competitive runtimes [2]. RPA is characterized by interesting attributes as versatility, efficiency and simplicity of implementation [3]. Manipulability index is introduced as additional constraint, placing the arm in regular configuration for reaching ITP. Pose error transmitted from the mobile system to the EF can be corrected by the manipulator, which is adapted to be reconfigured. The analysis of simulation and experimental results regarding the impact of the manipulability as a supplementary constraint, to the RPA algorithm (planning trajectories for RobuTER/ULM), is presented in this work.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives a brief state-of-the-art of methodologies addressing trajectory generation and pick-up tasks execution issues for mobile manipulators. Section 3 summarizes the characteristics of the experimental robotic system. Section 4 describes explicitly the difficulty to execute the prescribed task. Section 5 explains the concept of the RPA and formulates the proposed solution. Section 6 validates the proposed approach in simulation. The real motion of the robot is also analyzed when implementing generated trajectories on RobuTER/ULM.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
