@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#


@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Time harmonic acoustic problems are simulated with maximum entropy meshless methods.Maximum entropy basis functions handle dispersion errors better than finite elements.Short wavelength propagation problems can be studied with coarser discretizations.A blending with Isogeometric functions is possible on the boundary of the domain.Several examples are studied, including a 2D car cavity model defined by B-Splines.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Maximum-entropy,Meshless,High geometric fidelity,Helmholtz problems,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper explores the application of maximum-entropy methods (max-ent) to time harmonic acoustic problems. Max-ent basis functions are mesh-free approximants that are constructed observing an equivalence between basis functions and discrete probability distributions and applying Jaynes’s maximum entropy principle. They areC∞-continuous and therefore they are particularly suited for the resolution of Helmholtz problems, where classical finite element methods show a poor accuracy in the high frequency region. In addition, it was recently shown that max-ent approximants can be blended with isogeometric basis functions on the boundary of the domain. This preserves the correct representation of the boundary like in Isogeometric Analysis, with the advantage that the discretization of the interior of the domain is straightforward. In this paper the max-ent mathematical formulation is reviewed and then some numerical applications are studied, including a 2D car cavity geometry defined by B-spline curves. In all cases, if the same nodal discretization is used, finite elements results are significantly improved.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Over the last few years the acoustic properties of a product have become an important criterion in many design problems. This increasing demand on the acoustic performance raised a strong need for numerical prediction tools which allow a reliable evaluation of different design alternatives without expensive experimental studies.Several techniques are nowadays available for the simulation of the acoustic wave propagation, addressed by the Helmholtz equation. Among these, the Finite Element Method (FEM)  [1] and the Boundary Element Method (BEM)  [2] have been widely studied in the literature. The most important advantage of BEM is the dimension reduction of the physical problem. However, it requires significant computational times because it works with full, complex and frequency-dependent matrices. For this reason, the FEM is the most employed numerical technique in commercial simulation tools for interior problems. Nevertheless, some drawbacks are still present. It is well known in the FEM literature that the accuracy of the numerical results heavily depends on the regularity of the mesh used for the discretization  [3]. Although many powerful mesh generation algorithms are available nowadays  [4], this operation may take a significant part of the total analysis time, especially in three-dimensional applications. In addition, the mesh generation process can rarely be automated and therefore important human resources are required in the preprocessing stage. Another well known problem that affects the FEM is the poor accuracy in the high frequency region, due to pollution errors,  [1,5,6] which makes the short wave acoustic problem one of the still unsolved problems in the FEM environment  [7].Numerical methods with higher continuity of the basis functions, such as Isogeometric Analysis (IGA)  [8], are expected to better handle the latter drawback. In  [9] IGA is applied to the simulation of structural vibration problems and it is shown to outperform the standard FEM in the high frequency region. The main purpose of IGA is to integrate the Computer Aided Design (CAD) and the analysis stages by using the same basis functions for the geometric representation and for the numerical analysis. By doing so, the geometrical errors that are introduced by the FEM discretization on the boundary of the domain are avoided. Unfortunately IGA does not possess the same flexibility as the standard FEM in discretizing complexly shaped domains. Some modified formulations based on T-splines  [10], hierarchical B-splines  [11] and trimming techniques  [12] have been proposed for two-dimensional applications but the problem is still open in 3D. In  [13] an isogeometric boundary element method based on T-splines is proposed; with this approach the interior parametrization of the domain is no longer required, but as in the classical BEM, fully populated matrices are obtained. In contrast to this method, which is a direct BEM, the NURBS-based technique proposed in  [14] is an indirect BEM, which also allows the modeling of open boundary domains. Such boundaries are very common in vibroacoustic problems.Another family of higher order continuity schemes, whose application to acoustic problems has been recently studied, are the mesh-free (or meshless) approximation schemes  [15]. The earliest meshless methods are the somehow equivalent Element Free Galerkin Method (EFGM)  [16] and Reproducing Kernel Particle Method (RKPM)  [17]. These methods use a Moving Least Squares approach  [18] to construct the basis functions that, as a consequent drawback, are not strictly positive and do not possess the Kronecker-Delta property on the boundary of the domain, which requires additional efforts to impose essential boundary conditions  [19]. The latter problem is solved in the Point Interpolation Method (PIM)  [20] where polynomial interpolants that pass through each node are obtained. By using Radial Basis Functions, the RPIM, which is better suited for arbitrarily scattered sets of points, was subsequently developed  [21].An interpolatory approximation is also obtained in the Natural Element Method (NEM)  [22], where the basis functions are constructed using the Delaunay triangulation and the Voronoi diagram of the nodes. NEM basis functions are non-negative and possess the Kronecker-Delta property, but their evaluation requires a significant computational effort  [23].In more recent studies, the Jaynes’s maximum entropy principle  [24] was used for the construction of polygonal interpolants  [25] and then generalized for the definition of the local maximum-entropy (LME) mesh-free approximants  [26]. In contrast to the previous mesh-free schemes these approximants areC∞everywhere within the convex-hull of the computational grid, they are strictly non-negative and they possess the weak Kronecker-Delta property on the faces of the convex-hull. Additionally, it was recently shown that the max-ent formalism can be used to blend the LME approximants with isogeometric basis functions  [27]. In particular, the boundary of the domain is described with a NURBS curve and isogeometric functions are associated to the control points that define the curve. Then the LME approximants are calculated in the interior of the domain and they are blended with the NURBS functions on a thin region close to the boundary. Thanks to this approach, the IGA difficulties in the parametrization of complexly shaped surfaces are avoided and, at the same time, the geometrical error on the boundary, which like for FEM is present also for Galerkin based meshless formulations, can be avoided as well.Despite their recent introduction, many applications of max-ent methods have emerged over the last years, including thin shell analysis  [28], reduced order modeling of mechanical systems  [29], convection–diffusion problems  [30], non-linear structural analysis  [31], fracture mechanics  [32], incompressible media problems  [33], metal forming and cutting simulation  [34], biasing of molecular simulations  [35] and phase-field models applied to biomembranes  [36,37]. In more theoretical studies the continuity of max-ent basis functions has been proven by the theory of epi-convergence  [38], quadratically complete convex approximations schemes have been proposed  [39,40] and it has been shown that by removing the strictly positivity constraint arbitrary order consistency conditions can be satisfied  [41].The good performance of max-ent methods with respect to other numerical techniques in the simulation of structural vibration problems was firstly noted in  [39] and then also in  [40] and  [41]. This paper further investigates on the application of LME approximants to acoustic problems and attempts to take advantage of the blending method proposed in  [27] to study arbitrarily shaped domains, whose boundary is given by a NURBS curve.Due to the aforementioned drawbacks of the FEM, alternative methods for analyzing higher-frequency problems have been the subject of extensive research. Statistical techniques such as Statistical Energy Analysis (SEA)  [42] are often used for vibroacoustic analysis. SEA divides the problem domain into a small number of subsystems in which a spatially averaged energy estimate is obtained. It is computationally efficient, but relies on assumptions that are only met above a certain frequency limit. This restricts the use of SEA to high-frequency problems, leaving a gap in the mid-frequency range. This gap can be filled by extending the frequency range of deterministic approaches, which is what the Wave Based Method (WBM)  [43] aims to do. The WBM is a Trefftz-based approach that approximates the field variables by a weighted sum of wave functions, each of which is an exact solution of the governing differential equations. It has a higher convergence rate as compared to the FEM and therefore allows for a significant extension of the frequency range of analysis upwards. Also meshless schemes can increase the upper frequency limit and thus have been a subject of study in the last years literature. We refer to  [44–46] for the EFGM,  [47,48] for the RKPM and [49] for the RPIM. These studies prove that mesh-free methods are able to reduce the dispersion effect significantly and, by appropriately choosing certain parameters, classical FEM results can be significantly improved  [50]. More recently an improved meshless weighted least-square (IMWLS) method was applied to the simulation of Helmholtz problems  [51] and it was shown to reduce the EFGM computational times while retaining equivalent accuracy.Because the application of max-ent methods to acoustic problems has not been studied in detail yet, this paper focuses on it. It is organized as follows: in Section  2 the LME approximants are briefly introduced and the blending approach proposed in  [27] is described. In Section  3 the time-harmonic acoustic problem, governed by the Helmholtz equation, is formulated and then some numerical examples are considered in Section  4. Finally, in Section  5 some concluding remarks are given and possible future developments are outlined.In information theory the notion of entropy as a measure of uncertainty or incomplete knowledge was firstly introduced by Shannon  [52]. Then Jaynes proposed the principle of maximum entropy   [24] in which it was shown that maximizing entropy provides the least-biased statistical inference when insufficient information is available.Consider now a set of distinct nodes inℜdthat are located atxa(a=1,2,…,n), withΩ=con(x1,…,xn)⊂ℜddenoting the convex hull of the nodal set. For a real-valued functionu(x):Ω→ℜ, the numerical approximation foru(x)is:(1)uh(x)=∑a=1nϕa(x)ua,whereϕa(x)is the basis function associated with nodea, anduaare coefficients. In the max-ent approach an entropy functional that depends on a discrete probability measure{pa}a=1nis maximized, subject to linear constraints onpa. On noting the correspondence between basis functions{ϕa}a=1nand discrete probability measures{pa}a=1n, the max-ent formalism was recently applied to construct basis functions. The idea was firstly introduced by Sukumar for the construction of polygonal interpolants  [25]. The associated max-ent variational formulation was: findx↦ϕ(x):Ω→ℜ+nas the solution of the following constrained (concave) optimization problem:(2)maxϕ∈ℜ+nH(ϕ)=−∑a=1nϕa(x)lnϕa(x),subject to the linear reproducing conditions:(3a)∑a=1nϕa(x)=1,(3b)∑a=1nϕa(x)(xa−x)=0,whereℜ+nis the non-negative orthant. It is easy to prove that the aforementioned problem has a solution if, and only if,xbelongs to the convex hull of the nodal setΩ. Furthermore this solution is unique. In fact, it comes from the definition of convex hull that, if the reproducing conditions given by Eq.  (3) are verified,x∈Ω. On the other hand one can use Carathéodory’s theorem to prove that, for any pointxinΩ, at leastn−d−1nodes are not necessary to verify Eq.  (3). In addition, sinceΩis a compact subset ofℜd, by the Weierstrass extreme value theorem, the entropyHattains a maximum inΩ. Observing thatHis a strictly concave function of the basisϕ[53], the maximum is unique  [26].The aforementioned approach is suitable for polygonal meshes, where the max-ent interpolants are calculated in each polygon, but it cannot be directly applied to scattered clouds of nodes, because too many points would enter in the calculations. In order to extend the max-ent approach to the application in meshfree implementations, in  [26] the character of the basis functions was modified by introducing a Pareto optimum between the maximization of the entropy and their locality. In fact, it was noted that, according to  [54], the piecewise affine shape functions defined on the Delaunay triangulation of a set of nodes can be obtained through convex optimization by solving the following minimization problem(4)minϕ∈ℜ+n∑a=1nϕa(x)|x−xa|2,subject to the linear reproducing constraints given by Eq.  (3). Since the total width is minimized, these shape functions are the most local possible functions for a given cloud of nodes. Therefore Sukumar’s formulation was modified by introducing a Pareto optimum between (2) and (4). In particular the following optimization problem is solved:(5)minϕ∈ℜ+n∑a=1nβaϕa(x)|x−xa|2+∑a=1nϕa(x)ln(ϕa(x))again subject to the constraints given by Eq.  (3). The basis functions obtained with this scheme are known in the literature as local maximum entropy (LME) approximants. The Pareto parameterβacontrols the locality of the basis function of each node. In particular the functions become more local whenβincreases until the case ofβ→∞where the Delaunay shape functions are recovered. On the contrary forβ=0purely max-ent basis functions are obtained. Since the influence ofβadepends on the mesh size, normally a non-dimensional parameter{γa=βaha2}a=1,…,Nis preferred. Typical values ofγemployed in the literature are in the range from 0.5 to 2 (Fig. 1). Like in the previous case, the objective function minimized in  (5) is continuous and strictly convex and, therefore, the minimization problem has a unique solution if and only ifx∈Ω[26]. In particular, using the method of Lagrange multipliers, the solution of the variational problem stated in  (5) is:(6)ϕa(x)=Za(x;λ)Z(x;λ),Za(x;λ)=exp−(βa|x̃a|2+λ⋅x̃a)wherex̃a=xa−x(x,xa∈ℜd) are shifted nodal coordinates,λ(x)∈ℜdare thedLagrange multipliers associated with the constraints given by Eq. (3b), andZ(x;λ)=∑bZb(x;λ)is known as the partition function in statistical mechanics. On considering the dual formulation, the solution for the Lagrange multipliers can be written as(7)λ∗=argminF(λ),F(λ)≔lnZ(λ).In  [26] a proof of the uniqueness of the minimizerλ∗is also given. SinceFis strictly convex in the interior ofΩand the minimizer is unique, the basis functions can be computed efficiently and robustly using numerical techniques such as the Newton–Raphson scheme that, for the aforementioned standard values ofγ, converges to machine precision within a few iterations. From a theoretical point of view, the LME basis functions have global support in the domainΩ. However, according to Eq.  (6), they exponential decay in function of the distance to the corresponding node. This has the important consequence that only a small number of nodes have a significant contribution to the partition function. Therefore, in the numerical practice, a tolerance Tol0is set and for each nodexathe corresponding basis functionϕa(x)is truncated when the termexp−(βa|x̃a|2)in Eq.  (6) becomes smaller than Tol0. Since|x̃a|is the distance between the evaluation pointxandxa, this is equivalent to consider a circular support whose radiusRais given byRa=−log(Tol0)/βa=h−log(Tol0)/γa.We refer to  [26] for a more detailed discussion about the LME basis functions and the solution of the optimization problem and to  [55,56] for the computation of the first and second derivatives.As it can be observed from Fig. 1, LME approximants are endowed with features such as monotonicity andC∞smoothness. A rigorous proof of the continuity of LME and other max-ent basis functions can be found in  [38]. They also possess the variation diminishing property and satisfy the weak Kronecker-delta property on the faces of the convex hull of the nodes, which makes the imposition of essential boundary conditions in Galerkin methods straightforward. Moreover, the approximants are multidimensional and lead to well-behaved mass matrices.In  [27] it was noted that the drawbacks of IGA and LME schemes are somehow complementary and that they can be avoided by blending the two methodologies. In this section we will refer for the sake of simplicity only to a two dimensional case, where the boundary of the domain∂Ωis split into NURBS patches∂Ω=∪αΓα. Each patch is described by a parametric curveCα:[0,1]↦Γαsuch that(8)Cα(ξ)=∑iMi(ξ)Pi,whereMi(ξ)are 1D NURBS basis functions calculated on a knot span in the interval[0,1], andPi∈R2are the control points. In order to blend isogeometric and LME basis functions a ring of 2D multivariate NURBS functions associated with the boundary nodes is defined in a subsetΩ⋆of the computational domainΩ(Fig. 2). For this purpose, in each patch, a NURBS mappingS:[0,1]×[0,1]↦Ω⋆is defined as(9)S(ξ,η)=∑i∑jMi(ξ)Pj(η)Pi,jwherePj(η)are 1D NURBS functions calculated on a semi-open knot span so thatP1(0)=1. Associating to each pointx=S(ξ,η)the valueNb(x)=Mi(ξ)P1(η), a set of 2D basis functions is obtained inΩ⋆.At this point the blending with the LME approximants is realized by including the NURBS functions in the constraints of the maximum entropy optimization problem :(10)For fixedxminimize∑a∈IMEϕa(x)lnϕa(x)+∑a∈IMEβaϕa(x)|x−xa|2subject toϕa(x)≥0,a∈IME∑a∈IMEϕa(x)+∑b∈INUNb(x)=1∑a∈IMEϕa(x)xa+∑b∈INUNb(x)xb=x,whereϕa(x)are the basis functions of the nodes that lie inΩ⋆, indicated with the indexes inIME, so that the global set of indices{1,2,…,N}is given byINU∪IME. While the above optimization problem is solved for all the nodes inΩ⋆, nothing changes for the internal nodes, where standard LME functions are employed. Also in this case, the optimization problem stated in (10) has a unique solution inΩ⋆and, therefore, the calculation of the basis functions is straightforward applying duality methods. We refer to  [27] for the expression of the Lagrangian and for the computation of the derivatives.In this section we formulate the time-harmonic acoustic problem on a two-dimensional (bounded) domainΩ, as depicted in Fig. 3. The domain is filled with an acoustic fluid with speed of soundcand fluid mass densityρ0. The steady-state dynamic behavior in this system is described by the acoustic pressure fieldpa(x), which is governed by the inhomogeneous Helmholtz equation  [57]:(11)∇2pa(x)+k2pa(x)=−jρ0ωqδ(x,xq),x∈V,wherexis the position vector,kthe acoustic wavenumber,ωthe angular frequency,qthe strength of an acoustic volume velocity source at positionxq, andδ(•,⋆)the Dirac-delta function. The wavenumberkis related to the angular frequencyωby the speed of soundc=ωk. The term∇2•=∂2•∂x2+∂2•∂y2+∂2•∂z2is the Laplacian operator andjdenotes the imaginary unit (j2=−1).In order to have a unique solution, the Helmholtz equation  (11) requires one imposed boundary condition at each point on the problem boundaryΓ=∂Ω. This boundary can be divided into three non-overlapping parts, assuming three types of common acoustic boundary conditions:Γ=Γp∪Γv∪ΓZ. These parts correspond to a Dirichlet, a Neumann and a Robin boundary condition, respectively. The boundary condition onΓcan then be written as follows:(12)pa(x)=p̄ax∈Γp,(13)jρ0ω∂pa(x)∂n=v̄nx∈Γv,(14)jρ0ω∂pa(x)∂n=pa(x)Z̄nx∈ΓZ.The quantitiesp̄a,v̄nandZ̄nare the imposed pressure, imposed normal velocity and imposed normal impedance, respectively, wherenis the normal on the boundary. In the case of a (coupled) vibroacoustic problem, where a (typically thin-shell type) elastic structure is part of the boundary domain, a normal velocity continuity boundary condition can be applied on this part of the boundary. This expresses the vibroacoustic coupling condition, imposing that the normal fluid velocity must equal the normal structural velocity along the elastic structure. This paper however only considers the first three boundary conditions mentioned above.The Helmholtz equation  (11) together with the associated boundary conditions (12)–(14) fully defines the acoustic pressure fieldpa(x)in the entire problem domain.The accuracy of max-ent methods is firstly analyzed and compared to other numerical techniques in the prediction of the eigenfrequencies and eigenmodes of simply shaped geometries. Then some practical applications on complexly shaped domains with general boundary conditions are presented and finally the performance of max-ent methods is studied in the simulation of high wavenumber problems, where pollution errors are a huge challenge for the classical FEM formulation.The good performance of LME approximants in the calculation of the eigenfrequency spectrum of a vibrating membrane (which is also addressed by the Helmholtz equation) was firstly noted in  [39]. In order to maintain the analogy with vibrations of membranes and other eigenvalues problems, here we consider the homogeneous problem with Dirichlet boundary conditions:(15a)∇2pa(x)+k2pa(x)=0x∈Ω,(15b)pa(x)=0x∈∂Ω.The aforementioned problem can be either solved for the wavenumberkor for the frequencyω=kc. In the examples that follow we will assume a speed of soundc=1, in which case the eigenfrequencies correspond numerically to the related wavenumbers.If a unit square domainΩ=[01]2is considered, the exact eigenmodes and eigenfrequencies of problem  (15) are given by(16)Φmn=sin(mπx)sin(nπy),ωmn=πm2+n2,m,n=1,2,3,….In Fig. 4we can observe how the ratio between the numerical and the exact eigenfrequencies changes across the spectrum when LME approximants are used to solve the problem on a 100×100 tensor product regular grid. It is well known that these curves asymptotically converge to a given shape that can be used to determine the accuracy of the numerical method concerning the pollution error. In particular, in the case of LME approximants, the error remains below5%even in the high frequency region. It can also be observed that the quality of the approximation changes with the locality parameterγ. Low values ofγgive, according to Fig. 1, basis functions that have a larger support and therefore the approximated pressure field in each point will be influenced by a higher number of nodes. This not only improves the quality of the approximation but it also increases the bandwidth of the mass and stiffness matrices and, as a consequence, the computational times. The good behavior of LME approximants in the high frequency region can be observed also considering a comparison with IGA that, in this application, in the case ofp=1recovers quadrilateral bilinear finite elements.In addition to better managing pollution errors, LME approximants also improve the accuracy of the FEM in the estimation of the low frequency modes. In Fig. 5we can in fact observe the convergence of the LME solution for the first eigenmode and the first eigenfrequency, compared with quadrilateral and triangular finite elements defined on the Delaunay triangulation of the grid. The triangulation is also used for the numerical integration in the LME implementation, where a 6th order symmetric rule from  [58] with 12 points per triangle is employed. According to  [26] this rule is enough to ensure that approximation errors are predominant in the convergence study. Looking at Fig. 5 we can see how, forγ=1, the LME solution outperforms the FEM by more than two orders of magnitude in theL2norm of the error on the eigenmode and four in the relative error on the eigenfrequency.Because of the bigger bandwidth of the mass and stiffness matrices, the computational times are higher in the LME case. However, this drawback is compensated by the significant improvement of accuracy. For this particular application, we considered the computational times required in our implementation to compute the first eigenmode and eigenfrequency, for the grids employed in the convergence analysis in Fig. 5. A Matlab implementation with sparse matrices and the function eigs were used. In Fig. 6we can observe how the LME results are still more accurate, if compared to the FEM.As far as the computational times are concerned, it is worth mentioning that also the evaluation of the LME basis functions is more expensive with respect to the FEM. However, this is not expected to be a bottle-neck. In fact, the computational complexity of this operation is linear with respect to the number of Gauss points. But the number of Gauss points is also linear with respect to the total number of nodes. Therefore, the problem is still linear with respect to the number of nodes. On the other hand, the computation of the eigenmodes has a complexity that is higher than linear. In addition, in many acoustic applications, like the problems considered in Sections  4.2 and 4.3, the mass and stiffness matrices have to be computed only once and then a linear system of equations has to be solved multiple times. In that case the matrix assembly time is negligible anyway.An equilateral triangular domain (Fig. 7a) is also considered in order to study the accuracy of the LME approximants and the pollution error on a different geometry and a different nodes configuration. In this case, if the nodes are distributed in a regular way, a hexagonal lattice is obtained in the interior of the triangle. The exact eigenfrequencies for the problem stated in (15) are given by  [59]:(17)ωmn=2π33m2+mn+n2m,n=1,2,3,….The ratio between the numerical and the analytical frequencies is plotted in Fig. 7b. For this configuration a slightly higher peak is obtained in the high frequency region while, like for the square domain, the error remains in the order of a few percent digits in the mid-frequency region. On the other hand it is interesting to note how, according to Fig. 8, the predictions of the first eigenmode and eigenfrequency show a super-optimal rate of convergence. It is worth remarking, however, that this is only a particular result that does not hold in the general case. For instance, the super-convergent behavior is lost if a quasi-regular lattice, created with a mesh generator, is employed. From the theoretical point of view, it can only be proved that the convergence rate is at least 2:1  [60], like in linear FEM. This comes from the fact that standard LME schemes are only linear complete or, in FEM terms, the order of the approximation isp=1. Determining how the rate is influenced by the nodal distribution can be a topic of future research. In the general case, to achieve higher convergence rates, high order max-ent schemes  [41] should be employed. The analytical value of the eigenmode is given by  [59]:(18)Φ1=2cosπy3sinπ(2+x)3−sin2π(2+x)3.On comparing with finite elements, the definition of a triangular mesh is straightforward on the grid while different algorithms may be used to generate a quadrilateral mesh and therefore the results may depend on the particular method employed. For this reason only triangular elements were considered in the comparison. Like for the square domain, the LME prediction is significantly more accurate.Although the basis functions can be directly calculated from the cloud of points, max-ent and other meshless methods require anyway a mesh or some background cells to perform the integration. Therefore, like in the FEM, a geometrical error is introduced when domains with curved boundaries are studied. The simplest shape to analyze this error is a circle. If a circular domain with unit radius is approximated with ann-sided regular polygon, its area is given by(19)Ap=n12sin2πnwhich gives a relative error(20)eπ=Ac−ApAc=π−n12sin2πnπ=1−n2πsin2πn.As we will see in the following, this error often represents a limit to the accuracy of the numerical solution of a problem defined on the polygonal domain. On the other hand, if the circular domain is correctly represented, like in the case of IGA, such problem is avoided. According to Section  2, one of the most appealing features of max-ent methods is the possibility to blend LME and NURBS basis functions to preserve the correct geometric representation. Therefore the circular domain is a good benchmark to study the performance of the IGA–LME approach. Also in this case, the eigenvalue problem with Dirichlet conditions stated in  (15) is considered. For a unit radius circle the radially symmetrical eigenmodes and eigenfrequencies are given by(21)Φ0n=J0(α0nr),ω0n=α0n,n=1,2,3,…whereJ0is the Bessel function of the first kind of order 0  [61] andα0nare thenth positive roots ofJ0.In Fig. 9we can observe a comparison of the convergence in the predictions of the first eigenmode and eigenfrequency between the FEM, purely LME approximants and blended IGA–LME approximants. For the FEM solution a quadrilateral mesh was generated with the GEN4U tool  [62] starting from a regular polygon. The nodes were used also for the triangular elements analysis (where the Delaunay triangulation was generated as a mesh) and for the LME one.In the IGA–LME implementation different strategies can be used to construct the initial NURBS curve that represent the circumference and then to generate the grid. In particular, in this work, the approach presented in  [63] to construct circular arcs with rational quadratic Bézier curves was employed. In this way, according to (Fig. 2), a uniform distribution of control points is obtained on the boundary. Then, the interior grid can be generated with a standard FEM meshing tool like GEN4U. As far as the numerical integration is concerned, triangular cells defined on the Delaunay triangulation are still considered, but special quadrature rules are implemented for the curved elements on the boundary  [64], as described in  [27].Observing the convergence curves it is evident how in this application both the FEM and the LME results are limited by the geometrical erroreπ. At the same time, introducing the correct NURBS representation of the circumference, the IGA–LME approach gives results that are consistent with the previous applications.A star shaped polygonal domain is considered in order to compare the accuracy of max-ent and finite element methods in the resolution of the boundary value problem outlined in Fig. 10. According to Eqs.  (11)–(14) both Neumann and Robin condition are considered. The domain is discretized with a cloud of 374 nodes and the Frequency Response Function (FRF) is computed in the range from 0 to 2000 Hz for LME approximants and triangular finite elements. A reference solution is calculated on a 30,000 nodes FE model. In Fig. 11we can observe a comparison between the two predictions of the FRF in the center of the star. In the FEM solution, a resonance frequency shift starts around 500 Hz and then the solution accuracy rapidly deteriorates further with increasing frequency. On the other hand, the LME solution remains significantly more accurate towards higher frequencies. Although the accuracy of the peak values starts to decrease around 900 Hz, the resonance frequencies and behavior of the curve remain well preserved up to 1700 Hz. It is interesting to note that the wavelength at this frequency is 20 cm while the average mesh sizehof the cloud of nodes is 6 cm. Therefore, the loss of accuracy can be attributed to approximation errors rather than dispersion problems.In this section the potentialities of the blending between LME and isogeometric approximants are shown in a typical acoustic problem where the wave propagation in the interior of a car is studied. The problem is outlined in Fig. 12. A 2D section of a car cavity is defined by two closed B-spline curves. On using the IGA–LME approach, a cloud of nodes is generated in the interior of the cavity assuming as grid size the average spacing between the control pointsh̄. If the problem is studied with finite elements or a purely meshless approach, the mesh is generated from a polygonal shape that approximates the B-spline curves and therefore a geometrical error is introduced. In Section  4.1.4 this error was calculated analytically for the circular domain. Even if an analytical study is not possible for this application the importance of the correct geometric representation can be observed considering the error on the first ten non-zero eigenfrequencies, which is plotted in Fig. 13. In particular, the error on the frequencies computed with the IGA–LME approach is compared with the FEM error and the purely LME error. To this end, the FEM meshes are generated from the image of the knots on the boundary curves, which result in a projection of the control points on the curves. The triangular mesh is generated with the DistMesh tool  [65] and the quadrilateral one is generated with GEN4U. The former is also used for the purely LME simulation. In both cases a mesh size ofh̄is considered. A reference solution is calculated on a FEM mesh with roughly one million nodes. Fig. 13 shows how also in this case the FEM and the purely meshless solutions are limited by the geometrical error while the IGA–LME approach improves significantly the results.To confirm the validity of the IGA–LME prediction an FRF for the problem outlined in Fig. 12a is also considered. A normal velocity is imposed on the front panel in order to represent the vibrations generated by the engine. The surfaces of the seat and the roof are considered to be absorbent and therefore a Robin condition is implemented. The FRF is computed for the point P (Fig. 12) in the spectrum from 1 to 4000 Hz. The FEM model with one million nodes is again assumed for reference. Like in the previous example, the finite elements prediction presents a resonance frequency shift that starts around 2 kHz. On the other hand, the IGA–LME solution does not show any shift until 4 kHz. At this frequency, the corresponding wavelength is 8.5 cm while the average node spacing ish̄=1.81cm, which confirms again the good behavior of max-ent methods concerning both dispersion and approximation errors (see Fig. 14).The numerical examples presented in the previous sections showed that the resonance frequency shift is much more evident for FEM than for max-ent methods and therefore suggest that the latter can better handle pollution errors. In order to investigate this behavior more in detail, we consider a boundary value problem defined on a circular domain, with a radially symmetrical solution. In this case, the Helmholtz equation can be expressed in polar coordinates  [57] as(22)1r∂∂r(r∂p(r)∂r)+k2p(r)=0r∈[0R].The general solution of the aforementioned problem is given by(23)p(r)=AJ0(kr)+BY0(kr),whereY0is the Bessel function of the second kind of order 0  [61], which would be unbounded forr→0. Thus, the constantBmust be zero. A natural condition is imposed to the velocity on the boundary(24)jρ0ω∂p(r)∂r=v̄nr=R.On combining this condition with Eq.  (23) the value of the constantAis obtained and the analytical expression of the pressure is given by:(25)p(r)=−v̄nJ0(kr)jρωkJ1(kR),whereJ1is the Bessel function of the first kind of order 1.The problem is solved considering the following parameters:R=1m,v̄n=1mm/s,c=343m/sandρ=1.225kg/m3. In order to study the behavior of max-ent methods for different wavenumbers, 4 wavelengthsλ=[5m,1m,0.5m,0.1m], corresponding to a spectrum going from low to mid-high frequencies, are considered and the related wavenumberk=2πλis employed in Eq.  (22). The LME and the IGA–LME methodologies are compared to triangular elements and the distmesh generator  [65] is used for all the simulations.In Fig. 15the convergence of theL2relative error norm is plotted for the different wavelengths. We can observe how, at low frequencies (λ=5m), the LME and the FEM solutions give a very similar prediction, that is close to the geometrical error defined in Section  4.1.4. On the other hand, the accuracy is improved with the IGA–LME approach that takes into account the exact definition of the circle.The situation changes when mid frequencies (corresponding toλ=1mandλ=0.5m) are considered. In this case, both the LME and the IGA–LME solutions are more accurate than the FEM one and the geometric error is not an issue anymore. This fact is even more evident at higher frequencies (λ=0.1m), where the FEM solution is significantly affected by pollution errors. In fact, for linear finite elements, the general estimate for the relative errorehin theH1semi-norm is given by  [5](26)eh<C1kh+C2k3h2,whereC1andC2are two constants independent ofkandh. In this equation, the first term corresponds to the approximation error and the second one to the pollution error. The former can be controlled by keepingkhconstant, which gives the well known ‘rule of thumb’ of taking a certain number of elements per wavelength. However, this is not sufficient for the pollution effect, that requires finer meshes for higher frequencies. In fact, we can observe how using 10 elements per wavelength gives a relative error in the order of 10−1 for the mid frequencies (the ratioλ/his plotted on the top of the figures), and around60%for the highest frequency. On the other hand, both the IGA and the IGA–LME solutions are quite accurate if 10 nodes per wavelength are used (we prefer to say nodes rather than elements since the mesh is used only for the integration).This behavior can be better observed in Fig. 16a, where the problem is solved considering different values ofk(chosen such that the corresponding frequencyw=kcis sufficiently far from the resonance frequencies) and keepingkhconstant by fixingh=λ10. In the case of FEM, we can see how the error increases withk, according to Eq.  (26). In fact, the termk3h2gives a preasymptotic range in the convergence of the FE-solution  [6] and, on keepingkhconstant, its influence is progressively increased for higherkvalues. Therefore, in order to maintain the solution in the asymptotic range of convergence, where the FE-error is close to the approximation error, it is necessary to consider a mesh size such that the termk3h2is kept constant and the problem quickly becomes computationally challenging, even in 2 dimensions. This is not the case of max-ent methods, where the error remains in the order of 10−2 for wavenumbers in the region from 1 to 100 m−1. It is a common practice to define a non dimensional wavenumberκ=kL, whereLis a characteristic length of the domain. In this case, if we considerκ=2Rk, the max-ent error is not affected by pollution for values ofκup to 200.In both the LME and the IGA–LME simulations a value ofγ=1, which is often used in the literature, has been employed. However, if higher values ofγare considered (Fig. 16b), the dependence of the error on the wavenumber becomes evident also for max-ent methods. This is not surprising because in the limit case, whenγ→∞, the FEM results would be recovered.Although from the theoretical point of view an error estimate like the one in Eq.  (26) has not yet been found for max-ent methods, the numerical results in Fig. 16 suggest that also in this case the performance deteriorates towards higher frequencies, but with the important advantage that the asymptotic range of convergence is maintained in a much larger zone, especially for lower values ofγ. In particular, for the reference valueγ=1, the rule of thumbh=λ10is still sufficient to limit the error for much higher values ofκwith respect to the FEM.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This work investigated the application of max-ent methods to the simulation of acoustic problems. The numerical examples showed that the max-ent basis functions can handle pollution errors better than finite elements. This good behavior was observed both in the computation of the discrete eigenfrequency spectrum of simply-shaped domains and in the computation of the FRF for boundary value problems, where it was found that the resonance frequency shift is introduced at a lot smaller wavelengths with respect to the FEM. On studying the Helmholtz equation for high wavenumbers, it was also found that the rule of thumb of choosing a fixed number of nodes per wavelength can be used in a much larger zone, especially for lower values of the shape parameterγ.In addition it was shown how to take advantage of the blending between max-ent and isogeometric functions defined on the boundary of the domain. On doing so, the correct geometrical description of the problem can be preserved like in IGA and, thanks to the blending, the discretization of the interior of the domain is straightforward. The extension of this approach to three-dimensional problems, where the volume parametrization of complexly shaped geometries is still a challenge for IGA, would be an interesting topic of future research.