@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Using a modified ELECTRE method for an agricultural product recommendation service on a mobile device

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Proposed an MCDM based approach which contributes to mobile commerce marketing.Identified five criteria to assist purchasing decisions regarding agricultural products.Perceived ease of use does not play a critical role regarding mobile app.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multi-criteria decision making (MCDM),Recommendation service,Agricultural products,Mobile platform,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The present study integrates information system engineering and management methodologies to solve a real-life case problem. We develop an agricultural product recommendation service on a mobile platform, and then to understand users’ acceptance to confirm that it can be used to solve the problem. For consumers, making the decision to purchase is complex and can be full of contradictions and conflicts. This raises the need to design a product recommendation service that uses multiple criteria to assist consumers. This study employs a modified Elimination Et Choice Translating Reality (ELECTRE) method determine a ranking order which will assist consumers in deciding which agricultural product to buy. Two major findings are proposed. First, we identified five criteria that assist consumers making buying decisions regarding agricultural products. Second, we find that when the system is established on a mobile platform, perceived ease of use does not play a critical role in user acceptance.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the era of electronic commerce (EC), disintermediation and the direct selling business model are increasing in popularity. The agricultural product market is no exception. Without brokers serving as middlemen, farmers reap better profits and consumers get higher quality products. Advances in information and communication technology have promoted the development of mobile devices. The recent popularity of these devices has caused smartphones to become one of the major platforms for modern information systems (IS) and EC. The smartphone has become a popular tool with which to purchase products. Therefore, mobile commerce has become the main stream of EC development.In the context of the direct selling business model, the question of how to assist customers who are looking for suitable products is becoming a critical issue for both academics and practitioners. However, decision-making is a complex behavior, full of contradictions and conflicts. Complex problems rarely have ideal solutions. For example, producers of agricultural products are located in different geographical areas. Agricultural products also vary according to the season, so farmers’ promotional programs must reflect this variation. Cost and benefits are major considerations for consumers, but most consumers are not well versed in agriculturally related knowledge. The variety of factors which consumers take into consideration requires a comprehensive evaluation method based on multiple criteria which must be identified by the consumer.These issues are commonly encountered in general practice; the case used in the present study is a good example. However, previous studies have paid little attention to traditional agriculture, and few studies have provided applicable solutions for problems related to selecting agricultural products. Thus, we find a gap between academia and practice in this area. Motivated by the issues above, and in accordance with the requirements of the real live case, this study aims to develop an agricultural product recommendation service on a mobile platform, and to understand users’ experiences and acceptance of this system in order to confirm that it can be used to solve the problems encountered in the real life case. This study integrates the system engineering and information management perspectives to solve a practical problem in the agriculture field. Our study contributes new insights regarding information and communication technology (ICT) applications for agriculture, from a technical and management perspective, and our findings add to those of existing research on this industry.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews related studies on multi-criteria decision analysis and user acceptance of information systems. Section describes the details about the real life case. Section 4 introduces an optimal selection approach for special offers of agricultural products. Section 5 describes the implementation and verification of our system on a mobile device. Finally, Section 6 presents our conclusions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
