@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Interference-aware spectrum sensing mechanisms in cognitive radio networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Study spectrum sensing mechanisms by the optimization of network parameters and strategies.The proposed mechanisms have fewer sensing overhead.SUs can access into the spectrum holes efficiently, and transmit with a low power.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cognitive radio network,Interference temperature,Cooperative spectrum sensing,Spectrum detection,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper focuses on the spectrum sensing mechanisms, which could improve network throughput through the sensing strategy optimization and cooperative spectrum sensing methods. In order to guarantee an integrated and effective research, we take the whole channel scenarios into consideration, i.e., Single Secondary user with Single and Multiple Channels (SSSC and SSMC), Multiple Secondary users with Single and Multiple Channels (MSSC and MSMC). Moreover, according to the specific feature of each scenario, different sensing methods are adopted, i.e., optimal sensing period to maximize network throughput for SSSC, a novel sensing method to minimize searching time for SSMC, partial cooperative spectrum sensing mechanism for MSMC, and setting a spectrum pool in the fusion center to record the channel states for MSMC. Simulation results demonstrate that our methods can improve spectrum efficiency, network throughput and channel utilization, especially when the spectrum is utilized inadequately.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The rapid development of network services and applications has an increasing demand of wireless spectrum resource, which is actually limited [1–3]. Conventional access policies only allow licensed users, called Primary Users (PUs), to utilize pieces of licensed spectrum regardless of whether PUs are active or not, which will cause the underutilization of spectrum resource. To address this problem, Cognitive Radio (CR) technology was proposed and advocated [4] for enabling the Secondary Users (SUs) to access and utilize the licensed spectrum. Recently, the US Federal Communications Commission (FCC) has made a decision to permit SUs to access into the licensed spectrum under the condition that no interference is imposed to PUs [5].Spectrum sensing is a very important function in CR Networks (CRNs) [6,7]. In order to guarantee the quality of communication, spectrum sensing strategy should be conducted before the spectrum is accessed into SU to detect whether the channel is idle. The reason is that SUs can only access into the spectrum when it is idle, otherwise, the SUs should wait for some time to sense the spectrum again. Generally speaking, spectrum sensing strategy includes the following three methods:(1)Transmitter-based sensing method, where the SUs analyze the channel state to judge whether PU has occupied the channel. In order to detect the signals with weak strength, high detection sensitivity is needed, which requires high accuracy of radio frequency front end and analog-to-digital converter [8]. The complexity of this method is low, and prior knowledge of PU is not necessary. The received signals are sampled by time window after fast Fourier transform, and the signal energy can be calculated by a window function to compare with the pre-defined threshold [9]. The main disadvantage of this method is difficult to decide the judging threshold, i.e., the pre-defined threshold, since it is largely affected by the background noise.If SUs have obtained the information that some signals to be transmitted by PU, matching filter will be adopted to sense whether PU is idle. Through the comparison of the input and output of the matching filter, this method can sense whether PU exists or not [10]. The main advantage of matching filter is the objective sensing probability can be achieved promptly. However, the received information of PU (e.g., bandwidth and modulation type) by matching filter is required to be demodulated. If multiple types of PUs coexist in the network, the complexity is high when sensing the network, since the prior information and phase synchronization are required.(2)Interference temperature-based sensing method is proposed by FCC to increase the utilization of wireless spectrum. When PU and SU share the same spectrum to fulfill their communication, the transmission of PU should be satisfied previously. After that, network nodes measure the maximum interference that PU can sustain, and forecast the interference brought by SU to decide whether SU can join into network. The interference power brought by SU to PU can be measured by interference temperature.The implementation of interference temperature can be conducted by the following three steps [11]: (1) Measure the interference temperature of PU, by which SU can calculate the acceptance level of interference noise, and estimate the interference to PU when accessing into the receiver; (2) set threshold for interference temperature to guarantee the network can work regularly after SU has joined; (3) control the accumulated interference brought by SU to guarantee the interference temperature of PU does not exceed the predefined threshold.In general, there are three methods to measure the interference temperature [12,13]: (1) Self-detection method, which senses the transmission power and the interference temperature of SU, then calculates the corresponding interference brought to PU. The SU will terminate the communication if the calculated interference value exceeds the threshold. However, this method will cause the hidden and exposed terminal problems since SU is responsible for the interference control among users; (2) indirect detection method, which senses the interference level continually with fixed monitors. This method converts the interference level to interference temperature and deliveries this level to the transmitter of SU, by which SU can judge whether the frequency is occupied. To guarantee the effectiveness of the sensing value, strong relationship is required between the sensed and actual interference. However, this condition is difficult to be satisfied since the discreteness and randomness in wireless environment will result in the uncertainty of the detected interference level; (3) direct detection method, which senses the interference temperature of PU, and reports this value to each SU. Although this method can overcome the drawback of indirect detection method, it is unrealistic for each PU to have the ability to sense the interference temperature.(3)Since the received Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) value is low when the SUs are shielded, they cannot detect the existence of PU reliably. Therefore, SUs may mistakenly consider the channel is idle and access into the channel for packet transmission, which will interfere with PU. In order to solve the problem of hidden terminal, multiple SUs can conduct spectrum sensing in a cooperative method. It has been demonstrated in [14–17] that the cooperative method can largely increase detection probability in fading channel. The cooperative spectrum sensing method can be briefly divided into the following four steps: (1) Each SU conducts local spectrum detection independently, and makes binary decisions; (2) all SUs deliver their binary decisions to the receiver, which can either be an access point of Wireless Local Area Networks (WLANs) or Base Stations (BSs); (3) the receiver integrates the received binary decisions, and judges whether the frequency band of the observed PU exists; (4) the receiver sends the final judgment to each SU. Since the cooperative spectrum sensing method can reduce time consumption and alleviate the effect on multipath and shadow, it is promising to solve the problem of hidden terminal.Over the last decades, much work focused on improving the spectrum utilization of communication networks [18–22]. The authors in [19] utilized the average capacity of SU as the performance metric to investigate the random allocation scheme for both general and Rayleigh channel fading models. In [20], the authors studied the opportunistic spectrum sharing problem through the joint optimization of spectrum detection and transmission power control, and adopted a multi-state spectrum sensingmodel for detection decision. However, previous literatures mainly focused on algorithm design for spectrum sensing, and the spectrum sensing mechanism has not been well studied. Due to the limitation of detection ability, the constraints of hardware cost and power consumption, it is difficult to increase the spectrum utilization by merely adopting spectrum sensing algorithms. Therefore, spectrum sensing mechanisms are adopted to solve this problem. Our objectives are to discover the idle spectrum fleetly and increase network throughput under the condition that the interference of PU does not exceed a certain threshold. In this paper, we focus on the spectrum sensing mechanisms by the sensing parameter optimization, sensing strategy selection and partial cooperative spectrum sensing method to improve the achievable network throughput. Network performance in four scenarios are studied, namely: Single Secondary user and Single Channel (SSSC), Single Secondary user and Multiple Channels (SSMC), Multiple Secondary users and Single Channel (MSSC), and Multiple Secondary users and Multiple Channels (MSMC).The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces the spectrum sensing mechanisms for SSSC and SSMC. The spectrum sensing mechanisms for MSSC and MSMC are described in Section 3. Section 4 presents the numerical results, and Section 5 concludes this paper.In this section, we first introduce the interference temperature based spectrum sensing mechanism for SSSC, then a Markov process based spectrum sensing mechanism is designed for SSMC. We introduce some basic concepts about spectrum sensing before illustrating our mechanisms.When PU and SU share the same frequency spectrum for packet transmission in CRNs, PU is guaranteed to work primary. Thus, the network system should measure the maximum interference that PU can sustain, and forecast the interference brought by SU to determine whether other SUs can be joined into the network.The interference in wireless environment can be measured by the interference temperature, which is calculated by the summation of the noise power from different SUs to PU. The interference temperature of node i is defined as:Ti(fc,W)=Pi(fc,W)kW, where Pi(fc, W) is the interference power of node i with center frequency fcand bandwidth W. k=1.38×10−23 is the Boltzmann constant. The threshold of interference temperature Tlimitshould be set to guarantee the network system can work regularly, which is determined by the worst SNR value of PU. Once the cumulated interference exceeds network threshold, the PU cannot work. Otherwise, PU and SU can transmit packets at the same time.Spectrum sensing period (Tperiod) and spectrum sensing time (Tsensing) are two of the most important parameters in the sensing method. A reasonable Tperiodis very important since if this value is selected too large, the spectrum idle may not be detected in time; If Tperiodis set too small, unnecessary energy will be consumed due to the frequency of spectrum sensing is high. For the selected Tperiod, it is also important to select the value of Tsensing. If Tsensingis too small, the detection precision is low which is likely to bring interference to PU; Otherwise, the relative transmission time is reduced, which results in the decrease of network throughput. Therefore, the selection of spectrum sensing time is a trade-off between network throughput and the interference brought to PU. Our objective here is to present a mechanism which can select the optimal sensing time for network throughput improvement while guaranteeing the communication quality of PU.For SSSC situation, the considered carrier frequency is fc, and the bandwidth is W. For the nth sampling of the received signal, the expectation and variance of noise u(n) are set to 0 andσu2, respectively. The expectation and variance of the transmission signal s(n) are set to 0 andσs2, respectively, and they are assumed to be independent with noise u(n) of PU. After energy detection by SU, the nth output of the received sampling signal is O(n). Under hypothesis H0: O(n) obeys Chi-square distribution. The degree of O(n) equals to N, and its Probability Density Function (PDF) is p0(x). Under hypothesis H1: O(n) follows non-Chi-square distribution, and the corresponding PDF is p1(x). The non-centrality parameter equals to 2γ, where γ is the SNR value on the terminal of SU, andγ=|h|2σs2σu2. Herein, h is path loss factor,h=λ4πd2,λis the carrier wavelength and d is the distance between the transmitter and receiver.The detection and false alarm probabilities Pfand Pdcan be calculated by,(1)Pf=P{O(n)>Th|H0}=∫Th∞p0(x)dx(2)Pd=P{O(n)>Th|H1}=∫Th∞p1(x)dxwhere Th is the judgment threshold. According to the central-limit theorem, if N is large enough (N>100), the PDFs of p0(x) and p1(x) follow Gaussian distribution approximately,(3)Pf=QThσu2-1N2(4)Pd=QTh-(γ+1)σu2(γ+1)σu2N2where Q(·) is the complementary cumulative function of the standard normal distribution.For target probability of false alarm Pf_target, we can work out the judgment threshold Th by Eq. (3), which can be demonstrated as,(5)Th=2NQ-1(Pf_target)+1σu2The detection probability Pdcan be obtained by combining Eqs. (4) and (5),(6)Pd=Q(2Q-1(Pf_target)+1)-(γ+1)2(γ+1)Similarly, for target probability Pd_target, we can get the probability of false alarm Pf,(7)Pf=QQ-1(Pd_target)(γ+1)+N2γThe main objective of spectrum sensing is to detect the idle spectrum hole. According to the utilization situation of PU, we consider the channel state as “ON–OFF” switched Markov model, where “ON” expresses the channel is occupied by PU, and “OFF” presents the channel is idle. We adopt this model to state the following exponential distribution with mean valuesλONandλOFF, respectively. The probability of channel utilization isP(H1)=λON/(λOFF+λON), and the probability of channel idle isP(H0)=λOFF/(λOFF+λON).The collision duration is defined as,(8)Collision(t)=Tperiod-t-tmin0⩽t⩽Tperiod0t>Tperiodwhere t represents the return time of PU, tmin is the minimum detection time to satisfy the target probability. By Eqs. (3) and (4), we can obtain that,(9)tmin=2Q-1(Pf‾)-Q-1(Pd‾)(γ+1)γ2SinceλOFF+λON=1, we can work out the average collision duration, which is demonstrated as,(10)Collision(t)‾=∫0Tperiod(Tperiod-t)1λOFFexp-t-tminλOFFdt=Tperiod-λOFF1-exp-Tperiod-tminλOFFBy Eq. (10), we can get the probability of collision,(11)PCollision=Collision(t)‾TperiodThe optimal sensing periodTperiod∗corresponds to the minimum interference probability of PU, that is,(12)Tperiod∗=arg minPCollisionOne sensing period consists of two parts: sensing time Tsensingand data transmission time Ttrans. We select the optimal sensing timeTsensing∗to maximize network throughput by the optimization of spectrum sensing method, that is,(13)Tsensing∗=arg maxR(Tsensing)(14)s.t.Pd≥Pd_targetwhere R(Tsensing) is the network throughput. By Shannon formula, we can work out the transmission rate of PU, shown as,(15)RPU=P(H1)Wlog2(1+σs2/σu2)where P(H1) is the probability that channel is occupied by PU, and W is the bandwidth.There are two situations of SUs during the sensing period. The first one is when PU does not occupy the channel, SUs can detect the idle state of PU, and access into the channel for packet transmission. This probability can be illustrated as,(16)RH0=Tperiod-TsensingTperiod(1-Pf)CH0whereCH0=Wlog2(1+PSU/σu2), and PSUis the transmission power of SU. The spectrum utilization of SU is defined as:η=Tperiod-TsensingTPeriod(1-Pf).The second situation is that SUs do not detect that PU is occupying the channel, and the channel is considered to be idle. The probability under this situation can be expressed as,(17)RH1=Tperiod-TsensingTperiod(1-Pd)CH1whereCH1=Wlog1+PSUσu2+|h|2σs2.By combining (16) and (17), we can obtain the total data rate of SU,(18)RSU=P(H0)RH0+P(H1)RH1where P(H0) and P(H1) are the probabilities when PUs are idle and busy, respectively.To guarantee the quality of communication, the second situation stated above should be avoided. Therefore, we set high Pdand low Pfvalues. SinceCH0>CH1, the optimization problem becomes,(19)Tsensing∗=P(H0)Tperiod-TsensingTperiod(1-Pf)CH0Spectrum sensing should be conducted to detect whether the channel is idle before spectrum accessing. The SU can only access into the spectrum under the condition that the spectrum is idle, otherwise, the SU should wait for some time to sense the spectrum again, which limits the further improvement of network throughput. The proposed interference temperature based mechanism can handle this problem, that is if the interference brought by the transmission of SU is below a threshold, no matter whether PU occupies the channel, SU can transmit packets.The interference temperature based model is adopted under the condition that SUs have no prior knowledge of surrounding signals, and cannot abstract the PU signals from the interference and noise signals. Based on this consideration, the maximum transmission power of SU is,(20)Ti(fc,W)=1kWPi(fc,W)=1kW2∫fc-W/2fc+W/2S(f)dfwhere S(f) is the power spectrum density on the terminal of SU. The maximum transmission power of SU is,(21)PSU⩽kWMTlimit(fi)-1MW∫fc-W/2fc+W/2S(f)dfThe sensing model is that if free frequency spectrum has been detected by SU, it can transmit packets with high power. When SU has detected that PU is occupying the channel, it should transmit packets with low power. According to the state of PU and the detection result of SU, four situations exist when SU has accessed into the channel, which can be seen in Table 1. Herein,C00=log21+PSU0/σu2,C10=log21+PSU0(σu2+|h|2PPU),C01=log21+PSU1/σu2andC11=log21+PSU1/(σu2+|h|2PPU), where PPUis the transmission power of PU, andPSU0>PSU1. The throughput of SU is,(22)RSU=(Tperiod-Tsensing)(P(H0)(1-Pf)C00+P(H0)PfC01+P(H1)(1-Pd)C10+P(H1)PdC11)/Tperiodand the throughput of PU is,(23)RPU=P(H1)Wlog21+PPUσu2+|h|2PSU1The total network throughput is: Rtotal=RPU+RSU. By substituting (23) into (13), we can work out the optimal sensing timeTsensing∗.The main steps of our mechanism are stated as follows. Firstly, we calculate the interference probability of PU brought by SU, and select the optimal spectrum sensing period with the minimum interference to PU. Then, we conduct spectrum sensing. If the detected spectrum is free, SU can access into the spectrum for transmission with high power; If the detected spectrum is occupied, we calculate the maximum permitted transmission power of SU by the interference temperature threshold, and SU can access into the spectrum for transmission below this power. At last, SU selects the optimal period for spectrum sensing.The spectrum sensing mechanism for SSSC situation has been considered, however, SU may detect more than one channel is free in real situation. We then discuss how to conduct spectrum sensing to detect idle channel with the minimum searching time in the multi-channel situation.The considered network includes m channels and one SU, and SU can detect one channel during each time slot. Since spectrum sensing is conducted when SU has packets to transmit, it is necessary to design an effective sensing method to minimize the total detection time. If one SU is occupying the channel, and PU comes back to utilize this channel, then the SU should stop data transmission, free this channel and conduct spectrum sensing for the other m−1 channels. Therefore, it is necessary to design an effective spectrum sensing method to minimize the required spectrum sensing time Tsearchfor SSMC situation.Markov process is adopted to express the state of channel switching, where “ON” represents the channel is busy and “OFF” means the channel is idle. P10 denotes the transition probability from “ON” to “OFF” of PU, and P01, P00 and P11 can be defined similarly, which satisfies P10+P11=1 and P01+P00=1.We consider the duration time of states “ON” and “OFF” follow exponential distribution with average value εONand εOff, respectively. The transition probabilities under different situations of PU can be demonstrated as,(24)P00(t)=εOFFεOFF+εON+εONεOFF+εONe-1εON+1εOFFt(25)P11(t)=εONεOFF+εON+εOFFεOFF+εONe-1εON+1εOFFtTherefore, the channel state can be ranked according to the probability of accessing free spectrum, by which the SUs can conduct spectrum sensing.Since there are m channels to be detected, the detection period of each channel may be different. The optimal sensing period of the jth channel of SU can be selected as,(26)Tperiod,j∗=arg minPCollision,jThen, the optimal sensing time of the jth channel of SU can be determined by,(27)Tsensing,j∗=arg maxR(Tsensing,j)The spectrum searching time is defined as the total time from the moment SU starts to conduct spectrum sensing to the moment SU has found the idle channel. The average spectrum searching timeTsearch‾can be expressed as,(28)Tsearch‾=∑l=1m-1k∏j=lm-l(1-Pavailable,j)∑j=1lPavailable,jTsensing,jwhere Pavailable,jis the idle probability of the jth channel, Tsensing,jis the required spectrum searching time of the jth channel, and l is the number of the detected idle channel.The approximate value of (28) can be expressed as:Tsearch‾≈Tsensing‾/Pavailable‾, whereTsensing‾is the average spectrum searching time, andPavailable‾is the average channel idle probability. Our objective is to minimizeTsearch‾.If one SU can access into multiple channels, we adopt sequential testing method to minimize the required time for idle spectrum selection. Firstly, SU forecasts the idle probability of the next time slot according to the previous detection results, then the idle probabilities of different channels are ordered in a descending method for sensing. If the detected spectrum is idle, SU can access into the channel for transmission; otherwise, it keeps on sensing the spectrum. If no idle spectrum is detected after all the channels have been gone through, SU keeps silent for some time, then reorders the idle probabilities of the channels until the idle spectrum can be detected.In this section, we firstly consider the MSSC situation, where the frame structure is changed in the sensing period and some particular SUs are selected for spectrum sensing. Compared with the traditional cooperative spectrum sensing, our Partial Cooperative Spectrum Sensing (PCSS) mechanism has fewer sensing overhead. In the MSMC situation, a spectrum pool in the fusion center is set to record the channel states. The order of the channels bases on both channel availability and SU occupation.One of the most important problems in the spectrum sensing is the uncertainty of the end terminal. The uncertainty factors, including shadow effect and multipath fading, will result in the problem of hidden terminals. To solve this problem, spectrum sensing can be conducted by multiple SUs in a cooperative method. In this subsection, we consider the spectrum sensing mechanism for MSSC situation.Assume there are q SUs and one available channel, we consider centralized spectrum sensing, that is one base station or central node is utilized for fusion decision. Each SU, participating into the spectrum sensing, submits the sensing result to the fusion center, then the center node feedbacks the results to all the other SUs. When one spectrum hole is detected, only one SU can access into the channel for transmission in traditional cooperative mechanism. Since all the SUs have joined into the spectrum sensing under this situation, this results in that time equals to (n−1)Ttransis wasted. In this subsection, we will state our proposed PCSS mechanism, where a portion of SUs can be joined into the sensing mechanism.In order to fulfill our proposed PCSS mechanism efficiently, suitable SUs should be selected. Our proposed method has three round selection. Considering the current state of SU, we select the SU with the minimum distance to PU and the minimum error probability of PU.Round One, we classify the state of SU StateSUinto three types: (1) SU has packet to transmit and StateSU=−1; (2) SU has no packet to transmit and StateSU=0; (3) SU has packet to receive and StateSU=1. The grouping criterion follows the state of SU which changes frequently. The SU can be selected in type (2) for cooperative spectrum sensing since no packet will be sent. Compared with the traditional sensing methods, the main difference of our proposed method is the omission of data transmission, where the efficiency of spectrum sensing can be increased.However, network resource will be largely wasted if all the selected SUs conduct spectrum sensing simultaneously. In order to reduce the sensing overhead for network utilization improvement, Round Two should be conducted. We first rank the distance between SU and PU after Round One in an ascending sort, since the larger distance between SU and PU is, the less path loss exists, and the larger SNR value will be achieved. Therefore, the confidence level of the network is high.Next, Round Three is conducted to guarantee the number of SUs participating into the cooperative spectrum sensing according to the error probability. There are two kinds of situations which will generate channel errors: (1) SUs mistakenly consider the spectrum is busy while it is idle; (2) SUs mistakenly think the spectrum is idle while the spectrum has been occupied. The corresponding error probabilities are Rfand Pm=1−Pdrespectively. We can obtain the total error probability Perror, demonstrated as,(29)Perror=P(H1)Pm+P(H0)PfThe “K out of N” criteria is adopted for fusion decision, that is when the fusion decision center has received no less than K SUs that report the channel is occupied by PU, the judgment result regards the channel has been occupied by PU and the spectrum is busy. Assume the judgment result of each SU is independent, the probabilities of detection and false alarm in the fusion decision are,(30)Qd=∑j=KMCNj∏i=1jPd,i∏i=j+1M(1-Pd,i)(31)Qf=∑j=KMCNj∏i=1jPf,i∏i=j+1M(1-Pf,i)Define the number of SUs selected in Round One is num0, we can obtain that,(32)Perror=P(H1)1-∑j=knum0CNj∏i=1jPd,i∏i=j+1num0(1-Pd,i)+P(H0)∑j=knum0CNj∏i=1jPf,i∏i=j+1num0(1-Pf,i)Eq. (32) is the upper bound of the error probability. The minimum required number of SUs to perform cooperative spectrum sensing is,(33)Num_SUmin=argPerror=P‾error_targetAfter finishing the three rounds stated above, we can determine a group of SUs for cooperative spectrum sensing.In this subsection, we select the optimal sensing parameters for different SUs. Since the spectrum sensing period merely has relationship with the occupied channel by PU, the sensing periods of the K SUs are the same. The ith sensing period of SU can be shown as,(34)Tperiod,i∗=arg minPCollision,i“OR” criterion is utilized for spectrum sensing, which means if one of the detection results from SU illustrates that PU exists, we consider that PU exists. Assume the objective probabilities of the sensing and false alarm probabilities of each SU are the same, we can obtain that,(35)Pd,itar=1-1-PdtarK(36)Pf,itar=1-1-PftarKwherePd,itarandPF,itarare the objective sensing and false alarm probabilities of target SU.PdtarandPftarare the total objective probabilities of sensing and false alarm.To guarantee the confidence level judged by SUs, the objective sensing probability of each SU cannot be too low, and the probability of false alarm cannot be too high. We set these two probabilities as,(37)Pd,itar=max1-1-PdtarK,Pd_SUtar(38)Pf,itar=max1-1-PftarK,Pf_SUtarTherefore, the sensing time of the ith SU is,(39)Tsensing,i∗=arg maxR(Tsensing,i)In order to improve sensing performance and solve the problem of hidden terminals, the main steps of sensing mechanism for MSSC are shown as:(1)Network parameters initialization.Divide SUs into three groups, and select the group which does not have packet to send.Rank the SUs according to their distance to PU in an ascending order.Evaluate the error probability and work out the corresponding number of SUs with the minimum error probability.Confirm the optimal spectrum sensing period and cooperative spectrum sensing time.Conduct spectrum sensing.The situations for SSSC, SSMC and MSSC have been considered, while MSMC is the most common circumstance in real network scenario. In this subsection, we consider the case where n SUs and m channels coexist in the network, and discuss the spectrum sensing strategy in the MSMC situation. We add a storage in the fusion decision center to record the sensing result transmitted by SU, which is called spectrum pool in our work.The channel states can be classified into four situations: PU occupies the channel; SU occupies the channel; PU and SU occupy the channel simultaneously and the channel is idle. Each SU sends its sensing results to the fusion decision center and the identifier of each situation can be illustrated as:(40)StateCH,J=-1PU occupies the channel0Idle1SU occupies the channel2PU and SU occupy the channelN/AUncertain statewhere StateCH,jrepresents the channel state of the jth channel. The fusion decision center sends spectrum pool information periodically to SUs for cooperative spectrum sensing.To guarantee the communication quality of PU, the spectrum occupied by SU is sensed previously, by which PU can be prevented coming back to occupy the channel and bring harmful interference to SU. Therefore, the channel occupied by SU is sensed before ranking the order of the channel. Since the corresponding sensing time is different among SUs, the SUs need to keep periodic synchronization during the sensing period. Therefore, if more than one channel occupied by SU needs to be sensed, we should modify the sensing order as follows:(1)Find out the channels occupied by SUs. The residual of the channels are ordered in a descending method for sensing.Select the SU with no packet for transmission and is nearest to the SU that occupies the channel, where the former SU can be selected for channel detection.When SU finishes transmitting, the occupied channel is released and reports its information to the fusion judgment center. The channel state in the spectrum pool is set to N/A.Sense the remaining channels according to the spectrum idle probability, and rank them in a descending order.As the channel state of SU varies, the number of SUs participating into the spectrum also changes. Since more than one SUs and channels coexist in the network, if one SU transmits packets by accessing into the channel, other SUs who are transmitting packets simultaneously will bring interference to the activated one. Therefore, the throughput of the jth channel can be calculated as,(41)RSU=Tperiod-TsensingTperiod(P(H0)(1-Pf)C00,j+P(H0)PfC01,j+P(H1)(1-Pd)C10,j+P(H1)PdC11,j)where(42)C0β,j′=log21+PSUβiσu2+∑α≠iPSUα+|hφi|2∑φ∈APPUφ(43)C1β,j′=log21+PSUβiσu2+|hji|2PPU+∑α≠iPSUα+|hφi|2∑φ∈Aφ≠jPPUφHerein β=0 or 1,PSUαandPPUφare the transmission power on the α th and φ th channel, respectively. A is the set of the channel collection occupied by PU, andhφiis the channel gain between the ith and φ th channels.We consider that each SU can sense one channel during one sensing period. When SU accesses into the idle channel for packet transmission, the fusion decision center sets the identifier in the spectrum pool to 1, and then selects the corresponding SU for channel detection. After data transmission is finished, the channel is freed, and the identifiers in the spectrum pool demonstrated in (40) are updated.We utilize MATLAB for our simulation. Monte Carlomethod is adopted, and the number of simulation times is 100,000. We first consider the simulation scenarios in SSSC and SSMC, and then we regard the situations in MSSC and MSMC. Fixed Spectrum Assignment (FSA) and Dynamic Spectrum Access (DSA) [16] are compared with our proposed mechanism. FSA allocates spectrum to a licensed user for exclusive access. Although it worked well in the past decades, the ever increasing wireless services in recent years have unveiled its drawback: lack of spectrum scarcity. DSA is a spectrum sharing paradigm that utilizes the spectrum holes and alleviates the spectrum scarcity problem as well as increases spectrum utilization.The channel bandwidth and sampling frequency are set to 3MHz and 6MHz, respectively. The probabilities of target detection and false alarm are set to 0.95 and 0.05, respectively. Noise and the transmission power of PU obey normal distribution. The SNR value of the SU receiver is −15dB, and the duration time of PU obeys exponential distribution withλON=0.8.Figs. 1–3demonstrate the relationship between the sensing time and normalized throughput when the spectrum utilization states of channel are low, middle and high, respectively. We can observe from Fig. 1 that, when the spectrum utilization is low, the throughput of FSA is the lowest. DSA can largely increase the network throughput since SU is able to detect the free spectrum and access into the spectrum dynamically for packet transmission. Although our mechanism combines DSA with interference temperature, the increased throughput under this situation is limited. This is because despite most spectrum is idle, only a small part can be utilized for packet transmission with low power under the threshold of interference temperature. We can observe from Fig. 3 that when the spectrum utilization is high, the DSA method can largely increase throughput. This is because the opportunity to access into the free spectrum becomes small under this situation. However, SUs with low transmission power can occupy channel together with PU by adopting interference temperature, which can increase network throughput further.It should be noted that as the sensing time increases, network throughput increases at first, and then decreases. This is because when the sensing time is small, the opportunity to select the free spectrum is also small. As the sensing time increases, the opportunity for SU to access into the channel also enhances, therefore, network throughput can be improved. When the sensing time increases to some extent, although the opportunity to discover the idle spectrum enhances, the increased extent is limited. This is because fixed sensing period is utilized, and the transmission time can be reduced which results in the decline of network throughput. These three figures demonstrate the spectrum utilization can be largely increased by considering the interference temperature. Under some probability requirements of target detection and false alarm, our mechanism can choose proper sensing time, by which spectrum utilization and network throughput can be improved.For SSMC, we utilize the statistical probability model to predict the distribution of frequency spectrum. Sequential and random testing methods are conducted to compare the relationship between searching time and the number of channels. Fig. 4demonstrates the relationship between average searching time and the number of channel when the probability of idle channel is large. We can observe that the required time for sequential testing is less than that of random testing. This is because the former method detects the largest probability of idle channel, which is more likely to find the idle channel. Since the value of P(H0) is large, the probability to access idle channel is large, and random testing method is more likely to find the idle channel, therefore, the gap of searching time between these two methods does not vary too much.Fig. 5shows the relationship between average searching time and the number of channel when the probability of channel idle is small. We can observe that the gap of searching time between these two methods increases as the number of channel increases. This is because when the utilization of channel is high, the probability to sense free channel is low, then SUs wait for some time and keep sensing until the free channel can be found. Therefore, more searching time is required under this situation.We set the objective sensing probability to 0.999, and the probability of the false alarm to 0.005 for the situations, where multiple SUs exist. The objective sensing probability of SU is set to 0.8, and the probability of the false alarm under this situation equals to 0.1.The relationship between the optimal spectrum sensing time and the number of SUs, participating into the cooperative spectrum sensing, is illustrated in Fig. 6. We can observe that as the number of SUs increases, the optimal sensing time decreases. This is because the sensing time of each SU has inverse proportion with the probabilities of the sensing and false alarms. Therefore, network throughput augments with the transmission time of each SU. However, as the amount of SU increases to some extent, the reduction of the sensing time is limited. This is because the sensing probability of each SU cannot be too low, which will decrease the network reliability. In our mechanism, we not only set the probabilities of sensing and false alarm, but also set the lowest tolerance sensing value for each SU, under which we can select this tolerance value for spectrum sensing.Fig. 7demonstrates the comparison of sensing overhead between traditional and our proposed PCSS mechanism. It can be observed that as the number of SU increases, the overhead of the PCSS method does not change too much. This is because all the SUs try to join into the traditional cooperative sensing method, which will lead to a great waste of network resource, and this trend becomes obvious especially when the number of SU is large. In our proposed MSSC mechanism, only one SU participates into the spectrum sensing each time. In order to satisfy the probabilities of sensing and false alarm, we select the SU which does not have packet to send for sensing. Therefore, the network cost of our mechanism does not increase constantly with the number of SUs.Table 2demonstrates the simulation parameters for the situations including multiple SUs, where the probability ofλONdecreases constantly. Fig. 8expresses the channel utilization of different mechanisms. We can observe that MSMC and DSA mechanisms increase the spectrum utilization effectively compared with the FSA mechanism. It should be noted that on Channel 6, the spectrum utilization is only 55%, this is because no dynamic spectrum access strategy is adopted since the SNR value is too low as shown in Table 2. This will result in the false alarm is oversize and the idle spectrum cannot be detected effectively, which causes the low utilization of channel.From Fig. 9, we can see the probabilities of collision between SU and PU in DSA are larger than those in MSMC under different channels, this is because the sensing period in DSA is fixed to 100ms while this value is determined according to the channel state in the MSMC situation. The higher utilization the channel is, the larger probability the PU has to occupy the channel, which increases the collision probability between SU and PU. Our mechanism selects the SU which is closest to the SU that occupies the channel for cooperative sensing, which can detect the regression of PU, and free the channel timely to avoid network interference.Fig. 10describes the unified throughput of different mechanisms under different channel states. It can be observed that DSA mechanism can utilize idle channel more efficiently than FSA for network throughput improvement. We bring interference temperature into the DSA mechanism, so that SUs can not only access into the idle channel, but also share spectrum frequency with PU under the condition that the interference temperature does not exceed a certain threshold, which can largely increase the utilization of wireless spectrum resource.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Cognitive radio is a promising technology to resolve the spectrum scarcity problem by identifying spectrum holes opportunistically. One of the key technologies in CRNs is spectrum sensing, which can be utilized for spectrum holes detection to avoid interference brought by PUs. In this paper, we propose different spectrum sensing mechanisms, which can increase network throughput by the optimization among sensing parameters, sensing strategies and spectrum sensing methods. In the SSSC scenario, we have optimized the sensing period, and combined the interference temperature with DSA scheme to protect PUs sufficiently. In the SSMC circumstance, the channels are ranked in a descending order according to their idle probabilities, in order to minimize the searching time for spectrum sensing. In the MSSC situation, the frame structure has been changed and some SUs are selected for spectrum sensing. Compared with the traditional cooperative spectrum sensing methods, our proposed mechanism has fewer sensing overhead. In the MSMC situation, we have combined the three methods stated above, and set a spectrum pool in the fusion center to record the channel state. With our presented method, SUs can not only access into the spectrum holes efficiently, but also transmit with a low power under the condition that the interference temperature is below the threshold. Simulation results have demonstrated that our proposed methods can effectively improve spectrum efficiency, network throughput and channel utilization, especially when the spectrum is utilized inadequately.Safety problem is one of the research focuses in wireless communication. For CRNs, the common detection algorithm is to analyze the information from the receiving channel. However, this method cannot guarantee that the information from the transmitter is correct. Thus, some malicious SUs may obtain high priority bydeception. In addition, we plan to make further research on the practical MAC protocol designing to determine the access order of different SUs as part of our future work.