@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An efficient method for ECG beat classification and correction of ectopic beats

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A method based on radial basis function system for cancelling out ectopic beat by classification between normal and abnormal beats is proposed.The proposed solution addresses for ECG recordings.Several experiments have demonstrated the enhancement of the proposed method in comparison to other techniques.The results suggest that clinical information can be maintained.This method provides the best approach for obtaining both ectopic beat reduction and low distortion of the signal recordings.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
ECG,Beat classification,Ectopic beat,Radial Basic function,Classification,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The analysis of the surface Electrocardiogram (ECG) is the most extended non-invasive technique in cardiological diagnosis. The ectopic beats are heart beats remarkably different to the normal beat morphology that provoke serious disturbances in electrocardiographic analysis. These beats are very common in atrial fibrillation (AF), causing important residua when ventricular activity has to be removed for atrial activity (AA) analysis. These beats may occur in both normal subjects and patients with heart disease, and their presence represents an important source of error which must be handled before any other analysis. In this work, a method is proposed to cancel out ectopics by classification between normal and abnormal beats. The systems is based on Radial Basis Function Neural Network (RBFNN). This new approach is compared to state-of-the-art techniques for the ectopic classification and cancellation in the MIT database. The results clearly demonstrated the improved ECG beats classification accuracy compared with other alternatives and a very accurate reduction of ectopic beats together with low distortion of the QRST complex.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The analysis of Electrocardiogram (ECG) signal provides a non-invasive and reasonably priced technique to investigate the heart function for the different cardiac conditions. The main problem in heart disease diagnosis using ECG is that the normal ECG may differ for each person and sometimes one type of disease shows distinct ECG morphologies in different patients ECG signals. Also, two dissimilar diseases may have approximately the same effects on normal ECG signals. These problems complicate the heart disease diagnosis. In view of the high mortality rate of heart diseases, faithful detection and classification of ECG arrhythmias is essential for the treatment of patient in the clinics. Therefore, computer-based analysis and classification of ECG signal signifies an expert way to detect and treat different kinds of cardiac diseases [1].The presence of ventricular ectopic beats in the electrocardiogram is a sign of disturbance of the depolarization process, disorganizing the ventricles blood pumping function and preceding, in many cases, malignant cardiac arrhythmias. Although this sign of decreased heart function is helpful in the prediction of life-threatening arrhythmias, such as ventricular fibrillation or tachycardia, its presence makes difficult the study of other cardiac diseases from the ECG. To this respect, the presence of ectopic beats perturbs the impulse pattern initiated by the sinoatrial node and implies that RR intervals cannot be used for heart rate variability (HRV) analysis, which is a tool commonly used in the evaluation of the autonomic nervous system. Similarly, ectopics are a frequent and unsolved problem in atrial fibrillation (AF) longtime analysis, thus turning useless a considerable number of AF recordings that, otherwise, could be enrolled in any kind of study [1].In the last decades, the application of mathematical models and statistical analyzes for better interpretation of the physiologic cardiac events has offered many advantageous solutions for fast automatic recognition of ventricular ectopic beats. ECG recording is also used as a tool for the analysis of Atrial Fibrillation (AF), where it is needed to separate the Atrial Activity (AA) from other cardioelectric signals and the ectopic beats are one common problem for that extraction. In this regard some of the most popular methods are based on assessment of the QRS complex as the most characteristic wave in ECG. Classical techniques extract heuristic ECG descriptors, such as the QRS morphology [2–6], ECG beat classification [7,8] and interbeat RR intervals [3,9]. Other ECG descriptors rely on QRS frequency components calculated either by Fourier and Wavelet transform [10,11]. More sophisticated methods apply QRS template matching procedures, based on different transforms, e.g., Karhunen–Loève transform [12], techniques based on average beat subtraction (ABS) [13] and Matching Pursuits [14], to approximate the variety of temporal and frequency characteristics of the QRS complex waveforms. Other techniques for computerized arrhythmia detection employ cross-correlation with predefined ECG templates to identify markers for the individual wave components in one cardiac cycle [15]. Although, some of the cited studies have proved the individual advantage of using ECG templates based mainly on sophisticated mathematical transforms, other studies have emphasized the particular benefit of a number of heuristic QRS features [16].Artificial neural networks (ANNs) are a kind of powerful methods that have been applied to many areas with success such as adaptive control, pattern classification, medical research, etc. [17–23]. One of the common approaches in ECG beat classification is ANNs that have shown accurate performance in different classification tasks. Among ANNs, Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs) [24] and Radial Basis Function (RBF) [9,25] networks have been of considerable interest. Combining neural classifiers is one approach to improving the classification performance, particularly for complex problems. RBF networks are much easier to be designed and trained than neural networks. From the point of generalization, RBF networks can respond well for patterns which are not used for training. The RBF neural networks can approximate any continuous function defined on a compact set to any prescribed degree of accuracy by sufficiently expanding the networks structure [19]. The idea behind combinations is the so-called divide-and-conquer principle, according to which a complex computational task is solved by dividing it into a number of computationally simple tasks and then combining the solutions of those tasks [17,20,26]. In this paper, we present a method for ectopic beat classification and suppression using a RBF. This RBF network has been developed like hierarchically layered structure. It starts with a small number of RBF and then adds new RBF if the approximation error is larger than some predetermined threshold. They were applied on the large collection of morphological QRS descriptors used by Christov [2]. We have tested the performance of the defined classification methods for two classes, which feature with particular QRS behavior (class 1: NB, PVC, LBBB, RBBB, PB and class 2: EB), as well as independence of the content and the size of the learning set. Although EB cancellation may remove relevant medical information, this work is focused on the analysis of atrial fibrillation recordings, where the target signal is the atrial activity. As a consequence, normal and ectopic ventricular activity will be sooner or later removed.The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces the materials used in this study. Section 3, presents our proposed approach. The description of the experiments and the discussion of the results are given in Section 4, respectively. Finally, the conclusions of this paper are summarized in Section 5.The study involved all ECG recordings from PhysioNet Database (MIT-BIH Atrial Fibrillation Database, Long-Term AF Database, MIT-BIH Arrhythmia Database, AF Termination Challenge Database, MIT-BIH Normal Sinus Rhythm Database, St. Petersburg Institute of Cardiological Technics 12-lead Arrhythmia Database, Normal Sinus Rhythm RR Interval Database.) [27]. The sampling frequency is 360 Hz and the resolution is 200 samples per mV. All heartbeats were recognized by the fiducial points in the databases and the original databases’ annotations were accepted. This study also used simulated signals. These signals were created through the combination of normal sinus rhythm ECGs, containing ventricular ectopics, with AA segments extracted MIT-BIH arrhythmia database (MITDB). ECG recordings were obtained from lead V1 of patients with different cardiac diseases collected from all of the European ST-T database (EDB) and the PhysioNet Database [27]. We defined two groups of heartbeats: (i) Group 1 ‘NVBs’ for beats NB, PVC, LBBB, RBBB and PB, (ii) Group 2 ‘EVBs’ for ectopic beats.Before the ECG analysis we applied some preprocessing filters to the input ECG signal in order to prevent against artifacts that might impede the accurate measurements and classification of the heartbeats [1,28,29]. All these signals have been classified in three groups. 40% random signals have been chosen to integrate the first group, which have been employed in network training. The second group (25%) has helped to validate the proper neural working. And the third group (35%) has helped to compare ANN.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This work has presented how the proposed method has been used for ectopic beats cancellation from ECG recordings. This was evaluated using a large dataset, which can be considered very similar to the conditions met in clinical environment. The achieved high sensitivity for Group2 ‘EVBs’ and high specificity for all annotations in Group1 ‘NVBs,’ prove that the provided parameter set could be a reliable facility for automatic recognition. The proposed method can be applied to a wide number of ECG recording situations, such as multichannel ECG or long-term holter monitoring. In all these practical cases, the ANN-based system has outperformed other methods, thus facilitating clinical analysis for medical professional use. The results have shown that proposed system is able to obtain a very accurate representation of ECG, thus providing high quality ectopic beat reduction ECG recordings. As conclusion, suffice is to say that the proposed method obtains both ectopic beats reduction and low modification of QRST complex results in comparison with other methods.