@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A two-stage character segmentation method for Chinese license plate

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Characters on license plate with interferences are cut using a two-stage method.Plate frame is removed and vertical tilt is corrected before segmentation.A harrow-shaped filter with values of 0 and 1 is designed for matching.Boundaries of the remarkable space are located accurately in initial segmentation.A∗ algorithm is used for the precise segmentation of connected characters.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
License plate character segmentation,Horizontal boundaries location,Template matching,A∗ path-finding,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
As a part of character recognition, character segmentation (CS) plays an important role in automatic license plate recognition (ALPR) system. In recent years, lots of methods on CS have been proposed and they work well on their own datasets. However, it is still challenging to segment characters from images with frame, declination and quality degradation because of noises and overlapped, connected or fragmented characters. In this paper, we propose a two-stage segmentation method for Chinese license plate. At the first stage, a novel template matching method is presented using a harrow-shaped filter (HSF) bank and minimum response. It finds the locations of the segmenting points between characters roughly. Then, the accurate segmentations between connected or overlapped characters are adjusted by a variant of A∗ path-finding algorithm at the second stage. Experiments on a challenging dataset including 2334 images demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed method.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With the rapid growth in the number of vehicles, it is of great importance to develop intelligent transportation system (ITS) to improve the management of high ways, toll stations and parking lots [1,2]. As one of the most important parts of ITS, automatic license plate recognition (ALPR) system generally consists of license plate localization (LPL), character segmentation (CS) and character recognition (CR). Among them, CS aims to locate the boundaries of each character accurately so as to segment the corresponding image patch for recognition. Hence, its performance has great influence on the whole system. During the past few years, a lot of researches have been done on CS. The existing methods can be divided into three categories: vertical projection (VP) based methods [3–6], connected component analysis (CCA) based methods [7–11] and template matching (TM) based methods [12–14].Among them, the VP-based methods are the simplest and fastest. Characters are segmented directly by detecting valleys in the projection histogram. Thus, this kind of method is sensitive to noise and likely to fail in segmenting connected or fragmented characters correctly. In the methods based on CCA, character-like components are often detected and their positional relationships are utilized to segment the real characters. But in the case of connection or fragmentation, the segmentation will become difficult. Therefore, the performances of CCA based methods depend largely on the result of binarization.By contrast, methods using TM are more robust to connection and fragmentation. Usually, a square wave having the same structure with standard license plate and a score function are used for matching. When there are noises at the left and right sides of the plate or severe adhesions between characters, the results given by these methods are far from satisfaction. Therefore, a more effective approach needs to be developed to solve those problems out.In this paper, we propose a two-stage character segmentation method that takes full advantage of the arrangement structure of Chinese license plate. It consists of three main steps: image preprocessing, initial segmentation and precise segmentation. In the preprocessing step, the horizontal borders of frame are removed and vertical tilt is corrected on the binary image. Then, a bank of harrow-shaped filter (HSF) is deigned and convolved with the vertical projection in the initial segmentation stage, aiming to find the locations of segmenting points between characters roughly. Finally, the accurate segmentations between connected or overlapped characters are adjusted by a variant of traditional A∗ path-finding algorithm. The main contributions of our work are given as follows:(1)CCA and horizontal scanning are combined to remove the horizontal borders of plate frame.HSF bank and minimum response are used for rough segmentation.The connected and overlapped characters are segmented on the basis of the variant of A∗.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. First, related work is presented in Section 2. Then, Section 3 gives a detailed description of the proposed method, including image preprocessing, initial segmentation and precise segmentation. In Section 4, we discuss and evaluate the experiment results, as well as a comparison of our results with several state-of-the-art methods. Finally, the work is concluded in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we proposed a novel method for segmenting characters on Chinese license plates. Above all, a template matching method based on a bank of harrow-shaped filter (HSF) is proposed to locate rough segmenting points and then a variant of A∗ path-finding algorithm is applied for connected characters segmentation on binary image for the first time. Our approach is effective in dealing with various license plates exhibitions, such as plates with frame, vertical tilt, image degradation and low resolution. Though the time cost of our method is not the lowest among the compared methods, it is acceptable and can be reduced greatly through more efficient binarization algorithm. Besides, by altering the position of the wider space in the filter, it is feasible to apply our method to license plates in other countries as long as they have a left–right structure.Since the frame removal method presented in this paper aims at facilitating the segmentation process, we could not guarantee that the segmented characters are perfect for recognition. Thus, advanced segmentation in vertical direction is necessary. All of these will be studied in our future work.