@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Throughput improvement for delay-sensitive video broadcast in wireless mesh networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We formulate the problem as a mixed integer quadratically constrained program.We use a three-step method to build a broadcast tree and schedule transmissions.We show the effectiveness of our method by simulation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Video broadcast,Routing and scheduling,Rate-adaptation,Wireless mesh networks,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, we address the problem of broadcast routing and scheduling of video streaming for delay-sensitive applications in backbone wireless mesh networks. Given a source node and a set of destinations, we aim to build a broadcast tree and compute an optimal schedule such that the throughput for the source to broadcast streaming data to all the destinations is maximized. We divide the whole period for video broadcast into identical time frames and prove that maximizing the throughput can be converted into minimizing the length of a time frame. We propose a three-step method as a solution. Firstly, we build the broadcast tree by defining a new routing metric to select relay nodes. Then we use local search method to adjust the tree structure. Last, we propose a greedy method to schedule concurrent transmissions. Simulations have demonstrated that our method can improve the performance significantly compared with existing methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Wireless mesh network (WMN) is a promising key technology for next generation wireless communications and has recently attracted much attention from both the academic and industrial communities. A wide range of applications for broadband multimedia in WMNs, such as electronic classrooms and webcast, are time-critical [1]. These applications are bandwidth hungry and they impose a stringent requirement on communication delay. Broadcast operation is regarded as a key requirement for such kind of services by simultaneously delivering the same video content to all the receivers. In WMNs, the gateway node usually acts as the source of the broadcast and send packets to all the mesh routers that are connected to it [2]. Thus, to enhance the broadcast efficiency for video streaming in such networks is an important task. In this paper, we study the problem of rate-adaptive broadcast routing and scheduling for video streaming to improve the throughput of delay-sensitive applications in backbone WMNs.Supporting high-quality broadcast for video streaming over wireless networks is nontrivial. Since we consider rate-adaptation in our system, this is a difficult issue in data broadcasting. On one hand, if we use low data rate to broadcast the packet, more nodes will be covered at the expense of transmission delay. On the other hand, if we include less nodes in a broadcast, the transmission can be done in a much shorter time due to high data rate but it needs more relay nodes for forwarding the packets. The problem is further complicated by inter/intra-flow interference caused by video streaming. For the sake of smooth video playing at the receiver, the source node usually generates a new packet and broadcasts it to the network at regular intervals. Hence, many different packets will be transmitted in the network simultaneously. The interferences come from not only the transmissions of the same packet on different routing paths but also the transmissions of the different packets along the same routing path. Based on the difficulties mentioned above, it is necessary to design efficient broadcast routing and scheduling method for avoiding inter/intra-flow interference to improve the network performance.The problem of our concern is as follows. Given the gateway node as the source node and a set of mesh routers as destinations in backbone WMNs, our task is to build a broadcast routing tree and compute an optimal transmission schedule such that the throughput for the source to broadcast streaming data to all the destinations is maximized. We divide the whole period for video broadcast into identical time frames. In each time frame, all the non-leaf nodes in the tree can broadcast a packet to its child nodes successfully without causing interference. With the same transmission scheduling in each time frame, the broadcast of video streaming is of pipelined production. Then the objective of maximizing the total throughput can be converted into minimizing the length of a time frame.We formulate the problem of minimizing the length of a time frame as a mixed integer quadratically constrained program (MIQCP) and show its NP-hardness. A three-step heuristic method is proposed to tackle this problem. We first define a new routing metric called per receiver delay to build the broadcast routing tree. Then, we do fine adjustment of the tree structure to reduce the interference. Last, we propose a scheduling method by computing the maximum weighted independent set of the conflict graph constructed based on the obtained routing tree in the first step. Even though extensive research has been done on the issue of video broadcast [3–5], to our best knowledge, this is the first work that considers broadcast routing and scheduling for video streaming in the context of rate adaptation.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Related work is discussed in Section 2. In Section 3, we present the system model and problem formulation. The proposed broadcast routing and scheduling method is given in Section 4 and simulation results are shown in Section 5. Finally we conclude this paper in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
