@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimal mobile device selection for round-robin data exchange via adaptive multi-criteria decision analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We provide a mobile device selection approach for round-robin data exchange.When a data exchange round is finished, an adaptive function is carried out to adjust the criteria evaluation in order to obtain a more adaptive ranking order of candidate mobile devices for the next round.As a built-in system mechanism, it requires no user intervention.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Mobile device,Optimal selection,Round-robin data exchange,Adaptive,Multi-criteria decision analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstractImage, graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
As information and communication technology has evolved, data exchange has always been an essential and important process. People exchange signals, messages, or data files with each other. The relatively recent emergence of mobile devices has changed our life-style in general. People using mobile devices such as smartphones or tablet computers are constantly creating data. The popularity and mobility of mobile devices have made the exchange of data more convenient [1]. The traditional limitations of mobile devices (e.g., low computing power, limited memory and storage space, or insufficient battery life) have been mitigated with the advent of cloud computing, remote storage, and application services. Various built-in data transmission mechanisms (e.g., Bluetooth, Wi-Fi, Wi-Fi Direct, and Near Field Communication [NFC]) also facilitate the easy exchange of data between mobile devices. However, in a local wireless communication network, data exchange between mobile devices is performed as a peer-to-peer communication [2]. Each mobile device is considered as a candidate, and each has a different hardware status (e.g., central processing unit [CPU] loading, memory usage, storage space, battery life, Wi-Fi signal strength, etc.) which may affect the performance of the data exchange. The selection of a reasonable mobile device with sufficient computing resources to facilitate round-robin data exchange is an interesting process worth exploring.Real-world problems are typically hard to resolve because uniquely optimal solutions do not exist, so the condition and relevant status of the decision-maker are used to differentiate between solutions. In this study, we focus on the mobile device's system profile which indicates the status of a variety of factors, any or all of which may influence the data exchange performance between mobile devices. Multi-criteria decision analysis (MCDA) [3] is one approach to solving multi-dimensional problems. MDCA can support decision making by resolving problems encountered when selecting between various candidates. To enhance MCDA effectiveness in a round-robin data exchange scenario, an adaptive mechanism is employed to store previous rounds’ results, to evaluate the current context status, and to adaptively adjust parameters for the next selection round. Status item are the criteria which are evaluated via the multi-criteria decision analysis method to rank the candidates in order. The ranking order supports the decision-making process for selecting a reasonable candidate.To date, mobile operating systems have yet to include a built-in, automatic optimal selection mechanism to assist data exchange between devices. Users are therefore required to carry out a device-by-device selection process for each round of data exchange. However, because hardware statuses vary among mobile device systems, evaluating user selection time is an NP problem, and it depends on user preferences or considerations. This study proposes an optimal mobile device selection approach for round-robin data exchange via the monitoring of the hardware status of each mobile device's system profile. The approach can be implemented as a built-in system mechanism that does not require user intervention. At the completion of each data exchange round, an adaptive function adjusts the criteria evaluation in order to obtain a more adaptive ranking order of candidate mobile devices for the next round. The contribution of this study is to provide an approach which is easily implemented in a mobile device and can always select the optimal candidate device during a round-robin data exchange in a local wireless communication network.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces related studies. Section 3 presents a new approach for round-robin data exchange over a mobile wireless communication network. A case study is detailed in Section 4, and the experiments and a relevant discussion are contained in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 presents our conclusions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
