@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Dynamic scrambling scheme of arrayed-waveguide grating-based encryptors and decryptors for protection against eavesdropping

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Scrambling cryptography with 2-D wavelength/spatial scheme in physical layer.Increasing cardinality with cyclic and FSR property of shared AWG router.Evaluating the power assumption to prove feasible wavelength/spatial network.Larger cardinality and dynamic scrambling improve significantly FTTx security.Dynamic scrambling is superior to traditional scheme using confidential analysis.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Optical code division multiple access (OCDMA),Wavelength/spatial optical switch matrix,Arrayed-waveguide grating router (AWG),Free spectral range (FSR),Dynamic scrambling encryptor/decryptor,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
To enhance confidentiality and reduce the number of arrayed-waveguide grating (AWG) routers, a dynamic scrambling scheme is proposed in which cyclic and free spectral range (FSR) properties of AWG routers are employed to use a maximal-length sequence (M-sequence) code as the signature address code. In this paper, a changing codeword mechanism is presented in which a flexible dynamic scrambling algorithm is embedded in the encoding and decoding codebook to control the state of both the wavelength and spatial optical (or electrical) switch matrices. Hence, the code family and code changing flexibility of the proposed scheme increases substantially because of the multiple effects of the wavelength and spatial switch matrices. Compared with the existing dynamic reconfigurable AWG-based schemes without multiple changing codewords in the FSR groups and spatial domains, the confidentiality of the proposed scheme is approximately 104 times higher than that of schemes without scrambling codeword mechanisms.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Optical code division multiple access (OCDMA) techniques have attracted considerable attention in local area network (LAN) applications because they provide a burst and asynchronous multiple-access environment in both the time and spectral domains. In addition, OCDMA techniques provide strong data security and enhance user signal confidentiality [1–8]. Shake [9,10] demonstrated two strategies for enhancing the robustness of OCDMA networks against unauthorized users by increasing the code complexity (i.e., increasing the code space size) and reducing the subscribers’ transceiver power. However, a changing codeword mechanism is yet to be demonstrated.Using optical switches and simple electrical shift registers in arrayed-waveguide grating (AWG)-based encoders, one of the current authors implemented a code reconfiguration mechanism to combat code detection attacks by eavesdroppers [11]. System confidentiality is considerably enhanced if the transmitter can change the code more quickly than the eavesdropper can correctly detect the signature address code. However, the maximal-length sequence (M-sequence) code applied in the dynamic reconfigurable scheme contains few cardinality (i.e., code family) on orthogonal set. That is, the number of N wavelengths is equal to the number of N orthogonal codes as its signature address code. Hence, the changing codeword policy (algorithm) is not sufficiently flexible to enhance the degree of confidentiality (DOC) because that the register is controlled with few M-sequence code patterns [11].In this study, to increase the carrying user’s capacity of shared AWG-based encoders/decoders (codecs), the inherent cyclic and periodic free spectral range (FSR) properties of AWG routers are employed to construct a maximal-length sequence code (M-sequence code) as the signature address code of authorized users. Furthermore, a flexible dynamic scrambling algorithm is embedded in the encoding and decoding codebook to determine the state of both the wavelength and spatial optical (or electrical) switch matrices (i.e., “on” (cross) or “off” (bar)). Hence, compared with the previous scheme using optical switches and simple electrical shift registers by one of the current authors [11], authorized users in the proposed scheme are characterized by multiple reconfigurable properties of the wavelength and spatial changing mechanism to increase substantially the code family and code changing flexibility for protecting data against eavesdroppers.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the proposed encryptor and decryptor and the wavelength and spatial optical (or electrical) switch matrices for implementing the changing codeword mechanism. In Section 3, the changing codeword mechanism is presented and a flexible dynamic scrambling algorithm is embedded in the encoding and decoding codebook to control and determine the state of both the wavelength and spatial optical (or electrical) switch matrices. In Section 4, the dynamic scrambling algorithm that implements the changing codeword algorithm is presented for protection against eavesdropping. In addition, the DOC of the proposed encryptor and decryptor is analyzed. Finally, the conclusions are summarized.Fig. 1presents a schematic of the dynamic scrambling AWG-based encryptor with enhanced eavesdropping protection. The proposed encryptor is composed of the following components: (1) an AWG-based FSR group hopping encoder; (2) wavelength and spatial optical matrices controlled by an encoding codebook; and (3) a dynamic scrambling signature address code algorithm embedded in the encoding codebook.A broadband light source (BLS) is partitioned according to the FSR properties into various groups, called FSR groups, by a fiber Bragg grating (FBG) filter matrix. To implement the scrambling signature address codeword mechanism, the wavelength optical switch matrix, which is controlled by the encoding codebook, is used right behind of the FBG filter matrix. The encoding codebook is set to either “on” or “off” to determine which wavelengths are present (and absent) at each input port of the AWG-based encoder. Similarly, the spatial optical switch matrix is controlled by the encoding codebook.Authorized users are assigned an individual wavelength spectral group by using a combiner, which functions as the electrical/optical modulator. Subsequently, the spatial optical switch matrix links the input ports of the AWG encoder according to the states of the codebook of the N element chips in the electrical signal. Following the on–off shift keying (OOK) process, the presence of optical energy indicates the presence of an information bit “1” for transmission, whereas its absence signifies “0.” The resulting optical signals for each authorized user, assigned as the M-sequence code, are directed to the corresponding input ports of the N×N (e.g., 7×7) AWG-based encoder.Authorized users are characterized by multiple reconfigurable properties of both the FSR spectral group and various spatial transmission paths to encrypt data resulting from proposed scrambling mechanism. Therefore, eavesdroppers cannot precisely identify where the signature address code of the authorized user is in the FSR spectral group and M-sequence code pattern.As shown in Fig. 1, the scrambling codeword mechanism determines the state of the encoding codebook depending on the dynamic reconfiguration algorithm. In the current study, a symmetric security key, requiring the implementation of a synchronous control encryptor and decryptor, is proposed.Fig. 2presents a schematic of the dynamic scrambling AWG-based decryptor with enhanced eavesdropping protection. The proposed decryptor is composed of the following components: (1) an AWG-based FSR group hopping decoder; (2) a de-wavelength optical matrix controlled by a decoding codebook; (3) a de-spatial electrical matrix controlled by the decoding codebook; (4) a dynamic scrambling signature address code algorithm embedded in the decoding codebook.In the proposed decryptor, the FBG filter matrix is configured ahead of the de-wavelength optical switch matrix. Applying the FBG filter matrix enables authorized users to extract their desired wavelength FSR groups.The de-wavelength optical switch matrix is used to recover the assignment arriving from the FSR group of the decryptor. Similar to the wavelength optical switch matrix employed in the encryptor, the decoding codebook is set to either “on” or “off” to determine which wavelengths are present (and absent) at each input port of the AWG-based encoder. A splitter is used to partition and complement the code pattern; a pair of AWG-based decoders with prewritten M-sequence signature address codes is used to execute optical correlation processes. The desired data bit “1” or ‘0” transmitted from the authorized user is subsequently obtained using a balanced photodetector.To implement symmetric security key processing to recover the FSR group location of the authorized users, the de-spatial optical switch matrix is controlled by the state of the decoding codebook, which is the same as that of the encoding codebook; the major difference is that the de-spatial electrical switch matrix configured in the decryptor is used to recover the data bit of the authorized users.The OCDMA technique provides improved data security and enhances the confidentiality of the user signal. However, Shake [9,10] identified several weaknesses of OCDMA systems, including their eavesdropping susceptibility. Therefore, constructing effective security mechanisms for OCDMA systems is crucial when designing the physical layer. The mechanism of the proposed dynamic scrambling scheme is demonstrated in this section.Consider the simple 3×3 AWG router shown in Fig. 3; D1–D9 denotes the transmitted data of nine authorized users U1–U9, respectively. The transmitted data are partitioned into three groups according to their FSR properties: (D1, D2, D3), (D4, D5, D6), and (D7, D8, D9) corresponding to spectral wavelengths (λ1, λ2, λ3), (λ4, λ5, λ6), and (λ7, λ8, λ9), respectively.The state of the wavelength optical switch matrix is controlled by the encoding codebook from [100; 010; 001] to [010; 100; 001]. In this scenario, the “on” state occurs in input ports #1 and #2, and the “off” state occurs in input port #3. Hence, the first, second, and third FSR groups corresponding to (λ1, λ2, λ3), (λ4, λ5, λ6), and (λ7, λ8, λ9), is impinged into input ports #1, #2, and #3, respectively. The three groups appear at output ports #2, #1, and #3 of the wavelength optical switch matrix, respectively.The transmitted (D1, D2, D3) signals are modulated by using optical wavelengths of the first FSR group (λ1, λ2, λ3) under the initial state. After the encoding codebook triggers the wavelength optical switch matrix [010; 100; 001], the transmitted data of the nine authorized users are converted to the wavelength FSR group. The modulated signal of (D1, D2, D3) is changed and modulated with the second FSR group (λ4, λ5, λ6). The modulated signal of (D4, D5, D6) is changed and modulated with the first FSR group (λ1, λ2, λ3). Similarly, the modulated signal of (D7, D8, D9) is changed and modulated with the third FSR group (λ7, λ8, λ9).By applying the inherent cyclic and FSR properties of the AWG-based encoder, the M-sequence code pattern is assigned as the signature address code of the authorized users. Therefore, the same M-sequence code pattern of (1,0,1) is rearranged and impinged into input port #1 of the spatial optical switch matrix. That is, (D1, D4, D7) is characterized by the same code pattern (1,0,1) but a different wavelength spectral group with ([λ4, 0, λ6], [λ1, 0, λ3], [λ7, 0, λ9]).Moreover, the same M-sequence code pattern of (0,1,1) is rearranged and impinged into input port #2 of the spatial optical switch matrix. That is, (D2, D5, D8) is characterized by the same code pattern (0,1,1) but different wavelength spectral group with ([0, λ5, λ6], [0, λ2, λ3], [0, λ8, λ9]). Similarly, the same M-sequence code pattern of (1,1,0) is rearranged and impinged into input port #3 of the spatial optical switch matrix. That is, (D3, D6, D9) is characterized by the same code pattern (1,1,0) but different wavelength spectral group with ([λ4, λ5, 0], [λ1, λ2, 0], [λ7, λ8, 0]).Subsequently, the state of the spatial optical switch matrix is altered by the encoding codebook from the initial state [100; 010; 001] to a new state [001; 010; 100]. The M-sequence code pattern of (D1, D4, D7) changes from (1,0,1) to (1,1,0). Hence, (D1, D4, D7) is changed from the initial state ([λ4, 0, λ6], [λ1, 0, λ3, [λ7, 0, λ9]) to the new state ([λ4, λ5, 0], [λ1, λ2, 0], [λ7, λ8, 0]). The signature address code is changed to protect networks from attack by eavesdroppers. Simultaneously, the M-sequence code pattern of (D2, D5, D8) is retained the same. Similarly, the M-sequence code pattern of (D3, D6, D9) is changed from (1,1,0) to (1,0,1). As shown the new state of encoding codebook in Fig. 3, (D3, D6, D9) is changed from the initial state ([λ4, λ5, 0], [λ1, λ2, 0], [λ7, λ8, 0]) to the new state ([λ4, 0, λ6], [λ1, 0, λ3, [λ7, 0, λ9]).For the initial state of the encoding codebook, the authorized users U1–U9 are characterized by their original signature addresses ([λ1, 0, λ3], [λ4, 0, λ6], [λ7, 0, λ9], [0, λ2, λ3], [0, λ5, λ6], [0, λ8, λ9], [λ1, λ2, 0], [λ4, λ5, 0], [λ7, λ8, 0]). After the wavelength and spatial optical switch matrices are altered by the encoding codebook, their new signature address are reconfigured as ([λ4, λ5, 0], [0, λ5, λ6], [λ4, 0, λ6], [λ1, λ2, 0], [0, λ2, λ3], [λ1, 0, λ3], [λ7, λ8, 0], [0, λ8, λ9], [λ7, 0, λ9])T, as shown in Fig. 3. The changing strategy embedded in the codebook of the codec is required for simultaneously updating the transmitting changing key information over a secure (private) channel.At the receiving end, as shown in Fig. 4, the FBG filter matrix is used to separate the three groups—(D6, D5, D4), (D3, D2, D1), and (D9, D8, D7)—of the nine authorized users.For decryption, the decoding codebook that configures the symmetric security key is the same as the encoding codebook. Hence, the decoder codebook is written with the changing state in de-wavelength and de-spatial switch matrix.The state of the de-wavelength optical switch matrix is altered by the decoding codebook from the initial state [100; 010; 001] to the new state [010; 100; 001]. Hence, (D6, D5, D4), (D3, D2, D1), and (D9, D8, D7) are impinged into input ports #1, #2, and #3, respectively. They appear at output ports #2, #1, and #3 of the de-wavelength optical switch matrix, respectively. Therefore, before the AWG-based decoder (i.e., upper and lower AWG router) is employed, the located FSR group of U1–U9 is reversed and made the same as those of U1–U9 during encryption.The AWG-based decoder and photodetector are employed with the configuration reported in [11]; E1–E9 denotes the electrical signals corresponding to the nine authorized users U1–U9 after demodulation and decoding. For the code pattern in the wavelength spectral domain, the new signature addresses of D1–D9 correspond to E6, E5, E4, E3, E2, E1, E9, E8, and E7, respectively.Subsequently, the state of the de-spatial electrical switch matrix is altered by decoding the signal from the initial state [100; 01 0; 0 0 1] to the new state [0 0 1; 0 1 0; 1 0 0]. Hence, (D3, D6, D9), (D2, D5, D8), and (D1, D4, D7) are impinged into input ports #1, #2, and #3, respectively. They appear at output ports #3, #2, and #1 of the de-wavelength optical switch matrix, respectively. In this scenario, (E4, E1, E7) is impinged into input port #1 and (D3, D6, D9) appears at output port #3 of the de-spatial electrical switch matrix. As shown in Fig. 4, the new signature address of (U3, U6, U9) corresponds to ([λ4, 0, λ6], [λ1, 0, λ3], [λ7, 0, λ9])T.The new signature address of (U2, U5, U8) corresponds to ([0, λ5, λ6], [0, λ2, λ3], [0, λ8, λ9])T, and that of (U1, U4, U7) corresponds to ([λ4, λ5, 0], [λ1, λ2, 0], [λ7, λ8, 0])T. In the proposed decryptor, nine authorized users are characterized by a reconfigurable FSR spectral group and various spatial transmission paths to decryption the data by descrambling process. Therefore, the eavesdroppers cannot precisely identify that the signature address code of the authorized user is in the various FSR spectral groups and M-sequence code patterns.In Section 3.4, similar to the analysis presented in [12], the power budget of the proposed scheme is discussed and investigated by verifying a feasible configuration, and an acceptable (i.e., below 10−9) bit error rate (BER) is guaranteed. As shown in Fig. 4, an adjustable power amplifier, an erbium-doped fiber amplifier (EDFA), is configured ahead of the optical switch matrix of the proposed decryptor to satisfy the minimum sensitivity requirements of the balanced photodetector (i.e., avalanche photodiodes, APDs).Similar to the aforementioned examples, the scheme extends the configuration of the AWG router from 3×3 to 7×7; other components are used in the same configuration, as shown in Figs. 5 and 6. Using the 7×7 AWG router, the number of authorized users and the various changing scenarios are simultaneously increased in the proposed dynamic scrambling scheme, thus providing increased confidentiality to a higher number of authorized users.In the proposed scheme, the BLS is partitioned to seven groups, and each group accommodates an equal number of wavelengths N=7. For example, when the scheme uses a 7×7 AWG router and an M-sequence code where N=7, each group is assigned N=7 wavelengths. Hence, FSR group #1 (λ1–λ7) of the BLS denotes M1 and FSR group #2 (λ8–λ14) denotes M2. Using the encoding codebook to control the wavelength optical switch matrix, groups M1–M7 are assigned to various user groups G [i.e., User (G, m)]. Before the AWG router encrypts the signals, the wavelength and spatial optical switch matrices controlled by the encoding codebook alter the path toward the input port of the AWG-based encoder to change the user (G, M) for the current M-sequence code. Subsequently, individual users are randomly changed and assigned as User# (g, m), where g denotes the g-th FSR group and m denotes the m-th M-sequence code pattern.Tables 1 and 2list the initial and new states triggered by the wavelength and spatial optical switch matrices for implementing the proposed scrambling process for the presented simple example of changing the codeword according to the content of the encoding codebook.As shown in Table 1, the first row content of the encoding codebook with the initial state [1000000‖1000000] triggers the wavelength and spatial optical switch matrices. The content has a value of “1” to denote that the wavelength (spatial) switch is on and “0” to denote that the wavelength (spatial) switch is off. For the simple example, the initial state of User #(1,1) is assigned as the FSR group in G1 (λ1–λ7 wavelength range). Hence, User #(g,1) at g=1 is mapped and corresponds to the M-sequence code pattern of M1(1110010) shown in column 3 of Table 1. That is, User #(1,1) is assigned the signature address code (λ1, λ2, λ3, 0, 0, λ6, 0); User #(g, 3) at g=2 [i.e., User #(2,3)] is mapped and corresponds to the FSR group range group in G2 (i.e., λ8–λ14) and the M-sequence code pattern of M3(1011100). That is, User #(2,3) is assigned the signature address code (λ8, 0, λ10, λ11, λ12, 0, 0). Similarly, User #(5,5) is assigned the signature address code (0, 0, λ31, 0, λ33, λ34, λ35).Similarly, as shown in Table 2, the first row content of the encoding codebook with the new state [0000100‖0001000] triggers the wavelength and spatial optical switch matrices. Using the proposed scrambling process, the new state of User #(1,1) is assigned as the FSR group range in G5 (λ29–λ35). Hence, User #(g,1) at g=1 is mapped and corresponds to the M-sequence code pattern of M4(0101110) shown in the column (3) of Table 2. That is, User #(1,1) is assigned the signature address code (0, λ30, 0, λ32, λ33, λ34, 0). Thus, User #(2,3) and User #(5,5) are assigned the signature address codes (0, 0, λ17, 0, λ19, λ20, λ21) and (0, λ2, λ3, λ4, 0, 0, λ7), respectively.In the transition from the initial to next states shown in Tables 1 and 2, each authorized user [e.g., User #(1,1), #(2,3), and #(5,5)] is scrambled by the wavelength and spatial switch matrices; scrambling cause that eavesdropper cannot interpret the data bit of authorized user correctly, thus enhancing the confidentiality of the proposed scheme.During decoding, the de-wavelength and de-spatial switch matrices control the decoding codebook to correctly recover the User (G, m) for the FSR group (G) and the signature address code (M). The encoding and decoding codebook contents are changed synchronously and transmitted through a secret channel.To ensure the functioning of the proposed scheme, power arriving at the APDs must exceed the APD sensitivity. The power arriving at the APD is assumed to exceed −6.5dBm, which is same as the assumption in [11,12] (Psr=−6.5dBm). Therefore, the BER, which depends on the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), is first analyzed as shown in the following paragraphs. The primary objective of the BER analysis is to ensure that EDFA gain adequately satisfies the effective power requirement at the APD receiver Psr=−6.5dBm and that it satisfies the sensitivity requirement of the APD, which is specified as −7dBm for commercial APDs.Similar to the evaluation of the BER in [11,13,14], the proposed system contains noises, such as shot noise, incoherent phase-induced intensity noise (PIIN), and thermal noise. The effect of the receiver’s dark current is assumed to be negligible. The BER is calculated using Gaussian approximation. The light source spectra are assumed to be unpolarized and flat over a Δν bandwidth with magnitude Psr/Δν. Photocurrent variance of an ideal unpolarized thermal light generated by spontaneous emission is(1)〈i2〉=〈Ishot2〉+〈IPIIN2〉+〈Ithermal2〉=2eIB+I2Bτc+4KbTnB/RL,where e is the electron charge; I is the average photocurrent; B is the receiver’s noise-equivalent electrical bandwidth; τcis the source’s coherence time; Kbis the Boltzmann’s constant; Tnis the absolute receiver noise temperature; RLis the receiver load resistor and K is the number of active users.Thermal noise is considered by referring to [11,13,14]. When all users transmit bit “1” in the worst interference scenario, the total noisei2 is(2)〈i2〉≅2eRPsrNN+12B+Psr2NΔνN+14K(K+1)BR2+4KbTnB/RL.Therefore, the SNR in the worst interference when all users transmit bit “1”, involving substantial shot noise, PIIN and thermal noise, is(3)SNR=〈Ib=1-Ib=0〉2〈i2〉=RPsrNN+1222eRPsrNN+12B+Psr2NΔνN+14K(K+1)BR2+4KbTnB/RL.According to (3), the BER can be obtained usingBER=erfc(SNR/8)/2. Fig. 7illustrates the relationship between the BER and the number of simultaneous active users (i.e., authorized users) for code lengths N=7, 15, and 31 and the conditions listed in Table 3. The power Psr is maintained at −6.5dBm to exceed the APD sensitivity requirement of −7dBm. In addition, the data bit rates (Rb) in Fig. 7(a) and (b) are 1.25Gbps and 2.5Gbps, respectively, which are typical rates in general fiber-to-the-home (FTTH) networks.The results depicted in Fig. 7 for the maximum number of simultaneous active users decrease from K=6 to K=5 when the data bit rate is increased from 1.25 to 2.5Gbps at code length N=7 (i.e., the worst case); these results are similar to those obtained in the conventional SAC-OCDMA using an M-sequence [11,16,17]. Fig. 7 indicates that BER⩽10−9, guaranteeing that the proposed scheme functions under the considered power condition of Psr=−6.5dBm.Hence, the 7×7 AWG-based encryptor and decryptor presented in Figs. 5 and 6 is used to determine the appropriate EDFA gain. The power loss of components employed in the proposed scheme is summarized in Table 4according to manufacturer specifications and then obtain the operating power gain of EDFA.In the proposed scheme shown in Figs. 5 and 6, arbitrarily authorized users are assumed to execute point to point communication from the transmitter end (encryption) located on the optical line terminal (OLT) to the receiver end (decryption) located on the optical network unit (ONU). As listed in Table 4, the total power loss of all components is summed to obtain power loss between the transmitter and the receiver.Only the optical path is considered for estimating the optical power loss. In transmitter configurations such as that shown in Fig. 5, the transmitted power Ptof the BLS is operated between 10mW (10dBm) and 50mW (17dBm). At the transmitter end, the BLS enters the FBG filter and passes through two series of 7×7 wavelength and spatial optical switch matrices. Subsequently, the signature address code of the M-sequence pattern appears at the output port of the 7×7 AWG-based encoder, and the coded optical signal is combined and transmitted over a public network. The total power loss of the transmitter is −21.15dB (=−0.15−4.8−0.2−6−10). Hence, the power remaining after the proposed encryption is in the range −11.15 to −4.15dB, as shown in the 9th row (Marker ∗) of Table 4.In general, passive optical networks, such as FTTH networks, are considered to have an OLT–ONU distance of 10km; the total power loss is 1dB, and the power losses inside the OLT and ONU are negligible. In receiver configurations such as that shown in Fig. 6, the EDFA is configured ahead of the FBG filter matrix to adequately amplify the weakly coded signal. The received coded signal passes through the de-wavelength optical switch matrix and enters the splitter. Subsequently, the optical path appears at the output port of the 7×7 AWG-based decoder and arrives at the photodetector, where the data bit of the authorized user is recovered.The total power loss of the receiver is −18.55dB (=−0.15−2.4−10−6). Hence, the power arriving at the decryptor is in the range −29.70 to −22.70dB, as shown in the 18th row (Marker ∗∗) of Table 4.To achieve a performance comparable to that of the conventional M-sequence SAC-OCDMA, an effective power Psr of −6.5dBm is required at the APD receiver. Therefore, the EDFA is designed such that amplifier gain in the range 23.2 to 16.2dB is obtained to compensate for the arriving power in the −29.70 to −22.70dB range. Hence, boosting the EDFA gain to 16.2–23.2dB and meeting the effective power requirement Psr of −6.5dBm is essential.The BER analysis results illustrated in Fig. 7(a) and (b) verify that EDFA gain is adjustable to approximately 24dB and that a BER⩽10−9 is achieved in the worst case Psr of −6.5dBm at a data bit rate of 1.25 and 2.5Gbps.Eavesdropping entails tapping lines to eavesdrop on user data bits by using a simple energy detector or an optical wavelength filter to detect energy or wavelengths in a particular bit interval (Fig. 8). Because of scrambling (i.e., changing the initial state to the new state), the eavesdropper cannot identify the FSR group (G1–G7) or the M-sequence pattern (M1–M7) containing the user data; therefore, eavesdroppers cannot distinguish users data bits by detecting the presence of energy or a FSR group hopping pattern. Moreover, authorized users are characterized by multiple reconfigurable properties for both the FSR spectral group and the various spatial transmission paths to encrypt data in the proposed encryptor.Fig. 8 presents an example of energy distribution and FSR wavelength hopping from the perspective of an eavesdropping attack through photodetection or optical wavelength filtering. The encoding codebook changes the optical wavelength and spatial switches to scramble the authorized user data. The scrambled data enter the various input ports of the 7×7 AWG-based encoder from the initial to the new state. That is, the authorized users are modulated by various FSR wavelength groups and simultaneously configured under various M-sequence patterns. In such arbitrary initial and new states, the authorized Users #(1,1), #(2,3), and #(5,5) are transmitted as data bit “1,” whereas the other authorized users are transmitted as data bit “0.”Fig. 8(a) and (b) depicts how the wavelength and M-sequence code pattern of each authorized user is scrambled after entering the various input ports of the 7×7 AWG-based encoder in states controlled by the wavelength and spatial switch matrices. In the SAC-OCDMA scheme, the wavelengths of authorized users are combined in the coupler and transmitted over the public network. For an eavesdropper to tap the public network lines, mutative energy distribution using a photodetector is obtained as [2131221]T and [0222222]T for the initial and new states, respectively.In addition, the signature address code of authorized User #(1,1) is scrambled from (λ1, λ2, λ3, 0, 0, λ6, 0) to (0, λ30, 0, λ32, λ33, λ34, 0). Similarly, the signature address code of User #(2,3) is scrambled from (λ8, 0, λ10, λ11, λ12, 0, 0) to (0, 0, λ17, 0, λ19, λ20, λ21), and that of User #(5,5) is scrambled from (0, 0, λ31, 0, λ33, λ34, λ35) to (0, λ2, λ3, λ4, 0, 0, λ7).Generally, eavesdroppers are forced to balance a tradeoff between time and equipment costs when attempting to acquire targeted user signals: the eavesdropper must spend a substantial amount of time in determining the desired signal if equipment cost is to be reduced, whereas the signal can be obtained quickly in the absence of equipment cost restrictions. In the current analysis, the eavesdropper is assumed to deploy simple, low-cost energy detectors or optical wavelength filters over public networks to sense energy or the desired wavelength in a particular bit interval and to subsequently apply a brute-force searching algorithm to attack the authorized user [9–11].In the proposed scheme, the existing method of extending the code family [15–17] is replaced; the proposed dynamic scrambling encryptor and decryptor scrambles the signals by using changing codewords in the FSR wavelength groups and spatial paths. Because each authorized user has changing signature address codes, unauthorized users cannot track the correct signature address code because of FSR wavelength hopping (which is similar to the security mechanism of frequency hopping in wireless communications such as those executed over WiFi) even when wavelength tapping is attempted.In the example illustrated in Fig. 8, even if an eavesdropper employs N correlation filters (i.e., employs the same N-decoder architecture) to tap N channels, the eavesdropper is still challenged by a constantly changing codeword scenario implemented by the dynamic reconfiguration policy. In other words, the eavesdropper must continually change both located FSR group wavelengths and M-sequence patterns with the correlation filters to recover data bits of authorized user. Therefore, the proposed scheme increases both the cost and the complexity of eavesdroppers’ tasks when they attempt to intercept authorized user data bits. Accordingly, the proposed dynamic scrambling SAC-OCDMA scheme provides a feasible means of enhancing the security of optical channel coding in the physical layer, which can integrate the popular electrical source coding approach such as data encryption standard (DES) adopted in cryptographic schemes [18].Furthermore, it is assumed that an eavesdropper can tap the AWG-based encoder and combiner (coupler) in a private network by using a simple, low-cost energy detector or optical wavelength filter. In such a scenario, the scrambling process of the proposed dynamic scrambling encryption prevents the eavesdropper from recognizing the input port of the AWG-based encoder from which the target is arriving. In addition, eavesdroppers cannot precisely identify the FSR spectral group and M-sequence code pattern that contains the signature address code of an authorized user. Hence, eavesdroppers can intercept only discontinuous and confusing information. Moreover, because the authorized user occupies multiple wavelengths (e.g., λ1–λ7) and the same wavelength is used and superimposed by different authorized users, eavesdroppers cannot identify the signal wavelength transmitted by particular authorized users.By applying the orthogonal property of M-sequence code, the proposed OCDMA configuration is implemented by the same wavelength superposition coming from different authorized user. It implies that the transmission power of single wavelength can be reduced by using orthogonal correlation function. In proposed scheme, the eavesdropper is difficult to identify the wide spectral range of applied multiple wavelengths, thus providing enhanced confidentiality to public network.Furthermore, to enhance the confidentiality of previous reconfigurable scheme by one of the current authors [11], the proposed dynamic scrambling encryptor and decryptor is configured with multiple changing codewords in the FSR wavelength groups and spatial domains to increase the complexity of the configuration, such as the wavelength and spatial switch matrices. However, a more confidential mechanism is achieved through scrambling. Moreover, to verify the feasibility of the proposed configuration, power consumption analysis is presented in Section 3.4. Fig. 7 shows that the wavelength and spatial switching speeds of 1.25 and 2.5GHz satisfy the requirements at bit rates of 1.25 and 2.5Gbps, respectively.In the OCDMA scheme, the higher the number of users, the more difficult it is for the eavesdropper to correctly demodulate the signal. If OCDMA coding uses a very large number of codes, the eavesdropper must use a brute-force search for decoding all the signature address code (i.e., cardinality). Therefore, the size of the code space is a factor in OCDMA encoding security. In [11], where the dynamic reconfigurable scheme uses simple electrical shift registers, the registers change only the code pattern and do not use multiple changing codewords in the FSR wavelength groups and spatial domains. Hence, the code space of the proposed scheme is considerably larger. As reported in Table 5, compared with the 49 codeword changing scenarios in [11], the proposed dynamic scrambling scheme in a 7×7 AWG-based router has 343 scenarios.The multiple effects of wavelength groups and spatial domains are generated to implement the flexible dynamic reconfiguration. The probability of correct detection by eavesdroppers is substantially reduced and the proposed scheme enhances confidentiality, as shown in the Fig. 9.The DOC afforded by the proposed dynamic scrambling scheme is evaluated in a scenario where a synchronous network is attacked by an eavesdropper with knowledge of the type of encoding and the structure of the codes but not the particular codes assigned to each user. When K users simultaneously transmit a data bit of “1,” the probability of the eavesdropper detecting the data bit “1” transmitted by the targeted user equals (CKU=U!/[K!(U−K)!], where U is the total number of users in the synchronous network. The probability of correct detection, Pcor, is estimated here for various cases where no reconfiguration occurs after the initial assignment:(4)Pcor=1/CKU,where U is the user capacity of the synchronous network.Similar to the definition of DOC in [17,19], the DOC of the system is defined as the reciprocal of the average probability of correct detection; that is,(5)DOC=1∑K=0UPcor/(U+1)In WDM schemes, because the data bits of each user are broadcast to every received user in the synchronous network and because every user is assigned a unique wavelength, the WDM scheme achieves a DOC of U when configured with a 1×U AWG router. Fig. 10compares the DOCs of the proposed dynamic scrambling OCDMA scheme and three conventional schemes for synchronous networks with different user capacities. To ensure a fair comparison, the coding parameters of the four schemes are specified such that the product of the code length and the number of wavelengths are nearly equivalent. The DOC of the proposed dynamic scrambling OCDMA scheme increases considerably as the synchronous network capacity increases. The DOC of the proposed code is approximately 50 times higher than that obtained using PHC or MPHC schemes in a synchronous network with a capacity of 42 users, and the DOC is 316 times that of the PHC or MPHC schemes in a synchronous network with 272 users.The inherent cyclic and FSR periodic properties of the fine and coarse AWG routers used in the proposed scheme enable a greater number of subscribers to simultaneously share codecs. Crucially, the proposed scheme not only retains the advantages of dynamic reconfiguration but also improves data confidentiality within synchronous networks.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
