@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A design of low swing and multi threshold voltage based low power 12T SRAM cell

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel low power 12T MTCMOS based SRAM cell is proposed.Charge recycling technique used for reducing the current leakage during transition mode.Use voltage sources to reduce the dynamic power dissipation.Improving the stability of SRAM cell.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Charge sharing,Leakage,Low power,Static noise margin,SRAM,Swing voltage,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper focuses on the design of a novel low power twelve transistor static random access memory (12T SRAM) cell. In the proposed structure two voltage sources are used, one connected with the bit line and the other one connected with the bitbar line in order to reduce the swing voltage at the output nodes of the bit and the bitbar lines, respectively. Reduction in swing voltage reduces the dynamic power dissipation when the SRAM cell is in working mode. Low threshold voltage (LVT) transmission gate (TG) and two high threshold voltage (HVT) sleep transistors are used for applying the charge recycling technique. The charge recycling technique reduces leakage current when the transistors change its state from sleep to active (OFF to ON condition) and active to sleep (ON to OFF condition) modes. Reduction in leakage current causes the reduction in static power dissipation. Stability of the proposed SRAM has also improved due to the reduction in swing voltage. Simulation results of power dissipation, access time, current leakage, stability and power delay product of the proposed SRAM cell have been determined and compared with those of some other existing models of SRAM cell. Simulation has been done in 45nm CMOS environment. Microwind 3.1 is used for schematic design and layout design purpose.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The demand of battery operated high speed portable devices like notebook, laptop computers, personal digital assistants, cellular phones, etc. increase day by day. High speed portable devices require primary memory that responds faster. For that purpose, static random access memory (SRAM) is used, which is faster and refreshing is not needed again and again. Dynamic power dissipation and leakage current are the main issues of high speed SRAM cells because this unwanted power dissipation reduces the battery backup life of portable devices. So it is required to have a SRAM cell design, having both low static and dynamic power dissipations.Supply voltage is scaled to maintain the power consumption within limit. However, scaling of supply voltage is limited by the high performance requirement. Hence, the scaling of supply voltage only may not be sufficient to maintain the power density within limit, which is required for power sensitive applications. Circuit techniques and system level techniques are also required along with supply voltage scaling to achieve low power designs [1].Aggressive scaling of the devices not only increases the subthreshold leakage but also has other negative impacts such as increased drain induced barrier lowering (DIBL), threshold voltage (Vth) roll off, reduced on current to off current ratio, and increased source to drain resistance [2]. Vth roll off increases the dependence of Vth on the channel length. A small variation in channel length might result in large threshold voltage variation, which makes device characteristics unpredictable. To avoid these short channel effects, oxide thickness scaling and higher and non uniform doping need to be incorporated [3] as the devices are scaled. The low oxide thickness gives rise to high electric field, resulting in considerable direct tunnelling current [4]. Higher doping results in high electric field across the reverse biased p–n junctions (source-substrate or drain-substrate) which cause significant band to band tunnelling (BTBT) of electrons from the valence band of the p region to the conduction band of the n region. Peak halo doping (P+) is restricted such that the BTBT component is maintained reasonably small compared to the other leakage components.In another technique [5], a low area overhead adaptive body bias (ABB) circuit is proposed to compensate for aging and process variations to improve the SRAM reliability and yield. The proposed ABB circuit consists of a threshold voltage sensing circuit and an on chip analog controller for power reduction. A multi threshold complementary metal oxide semiconductor (MTCMOS) technology provides low leakage and high performance operation by utilizing high speed, low threshold voltage (LVT) transistors during active mode and low leakage, high threshold voltage (HVT) transistors during sleep mode, which reduces the static power dissipation of the SRAM circuit [6,7].In [8], a technique to reduce both the active and standby powers, especially at room temperature, has been discussed. A bit line power calculator is used to adaptively set the cell supply voltage in the active mode. A digitally controllable retention circuit regulates in the standby mode with small control power. These circuits are implemented in a dual power supply SRAM in 28nm CMOS technology. In another approach a 5T SRAM cell is proposed with fast performance, high density and low power consumption [9]. The proposed complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) SRAM cell consumes less power and has less read and write times. The cell is based on the single ended memory storage principle. This scheme is based on the static power reduction. In [10], a symmetrical topology based SRAM cell has been proposed for higher stability. In that two transistors isolate the cell storage nodes from the read operation path to maintain the data stability of the cell. This topology improves the data stability.A low power multiport SRAM with cross point write word lines shared write bit lines and shared write row access transistors approach has been shown in [11]. The design has one write, one read and two write, two read multi port SRAMs for register file applications in nanoscale CMOS technology. The cell features a cross point write word line structure to mitigate write half select disturb and improves the static noise margin (SNM). The write bit lines (WBLs) and write row access transistors are shared with adjacent bit cells to reduce the cell transistor count and area. The scheme halves the number of WBL, thus reducing WBL leakage and power consumption. In addition, column based virtual ground control is employed for the read stack to reduce the read power consumption. In [12], SRAM cell achieves low power dissipation due to its series connected drivers driven by bit lines and read buffers which offer stack effect. This approach is based on static power dissipation.In this present work a novel low power 12T SRAM cell is proposed. A charge recycling technique is used to minimize the leakage currents and static power dissipation during the mode transitions. Two voltage sources are used at the output nodes to reduce the swing voltages, resulting in reduction of dynamic power dissipation during switching activity. The different performance parameters have been determined for the proposed SRAM cell and compared with those of the other existing SRAM cells.The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses about some existing SRAM cells, Section 3 describes circuit design and working principle of the proposed novel 12T SRAM cell. Section 4 describes the detailed analysis of the characteristics of the proposed cell and comparison with other existing SRAM cells and finally, Section 5 concludes the paper.Fig. 1(a) shows the circuit diagram of a conventional SRAM cell [13]. Before the read operation begins, the bit line (BL) and bitbar line(BL‾)are precharged to as high as supply voltage Vdd. When the word line (WL) is selected, the access transistors are turned on. This will cause a current to flow from supply voltage (Vdd) through the pull up transistor TP1 of the node storing “1”. On the other side, current will flow from the precharged bitbar line to ground, thus discharging bitbar line. Thus, a differential voltage develops between the BL andBL‾. This small potential difference between the bit lines is sensed and amplified by the sense amplifiers at the data output.The 6T single ended SRAM cell [14] is shown in Fig. 1(b). This cell design uses two assist transistors, one for the memory read access (MRA) purpose and the other for the memory write access (MWA) purpose. During write operation, with the BL precharged to required value, write word line (WWL) is held high and MWA is held OFF so as to weaken the cross coupled inverter and hence, get a successful write. During read, read word line (RWL) is held high and read occurs through M6 and MRA depending upon the value stored at the node QB.The 7T SRAM [15] is shown in Fig. 1(c). Here this design uses two virtual ground rails. During write operation, the cell is disconnected from the ground rail by turning OFF the MW transistor (connected to virtual ground 1) and hence weakening the feedback in the cell and helps in faster write. During hold mode, MW transistor is held ON so that the strong feedback exists. During read, memory write (MW) and read word line (RWL) are held high; the node Q is read through the memory read (MR) (connected to virtual ground 2) transistor. This uses a separate read bit line to be read and hence has a very good read static noise margin (RSNM).Subthreshold 7T SRAM is shown in Fig. 1(d); it has single sided write operation [16]. The Write Bit line and M5 transistor are used to transfer new data (1bit) into the cell. Single sided write operation reduces dynamic power consumption while besides that, read path is separated from the storage nodes, which increases the noise margin drastically. Transistors M6, M7 are used for reading the cell data. Standby leakage is minimized by connecting transistor M7 to virtual ground.The 8T SRAM cell [17] is shown in the Fig. 1(e). This cell uses the same 6T SRAM structure for the writing operation. For read operation, it uses separate bit lines, read bit line (RBL) and read word line (RWL) as its control signals. During write operation, the PMOS and NMOS transistors of the inverters can be maintained with minimum widths as the read operation is separated. The RBL is read according to the value stored at the storage nodes when RWL is high.The vertical stacked 8T SRAM cell [18] is shown in Fig. 1(f). In this architecture resistive devices (memristors) are connected directly to SRAM storage nodes (Q and QB), to enable the storage of complementary backup data, while maintaining nonvolatile characteristics. This sharing scheme enables word line transistors RSWL and RSWR, to provide SRAM mode write assist functions beyond its original storage capability. To reduce area overhead, the two memristor devices are vertical stacked above the 8T SRAM cell.The 9T SRAM [19] is shown in Fig. 1(g). Write occurs just as in the 6T SRAM cell. Reading occurs separately through N5, N6 and N7 controlled by the read signal (RD) going high. This design has the problem of the high bit line capacitance with more pass transistors on the bit line.Fig. 1(h) shows the design of 9T SRAM cell in subthreshold region [20]. During write, the bit lines (BL) and bit line bar (BLB) are driven with the data that are needed to be stored in the nodes. The footer M9 transistor is switched OFF during write by making the signal (write/read) WR go low. This weakens the feedback and hence faster writes. During read, WR signal is kept high so that the data at the nodes stay stable. Word line (WL) is kept low and read bit line (RBL) is precharged high. Reading a stored 0 at Q occurs when read word line (RWL) goes high. During the hold mode, WL and RWL are made low with WR made high to maintain the stored data.A single ended 9T SRAM cell [21] is shown in Fig. 1(i). The 9T SRAM cell consists of transistors M1-M4, and a Read/Write port M5-M9. The word line (WL) and virtual ground (VVSS) are row based, and write word line A (WWLA), write word line B (WWLB), and Bit line (BL) are column based. In Hold mode, WL, WWLA, and WWLB are disabled and VVSS is held at supply voltage (Vdd). Data are held by cross coupled inverters, M1–M4, and are decoupled from BL.The fully differential low power 10T SRAM [22] bit cell is shown in Fig. 1(j). The design strategy of cell is the series connection of a tail transistor. The gate electrode of this device is controlled by the output of an XOR gate, inputs of which are tapped from write word line (WWL) and read word line (RWL) control signals coming from the WWL and the RWL drivers. The XOR gate and the tail transistor are shared by all the cells in a row. The tail transistor has to be appropriately up sized for sinking currents from all the cells in the row. Without this read buffer, a cell with such small drivers and series connected tail transistor would exhibit unacceptably low read static noise margin (RSNM), resulting in read instability.A P–P–N based differential 10T SRAM cell [23] is shown in Fig. 1(k). In addition to the standard 6T SRAM cell with VDD, GND, one word line, and one bit line pair, one extra signal called VGND, denoting a virtual ground signal. This VGND signal is connected to GND only during the read operation. Otherwise, it is connected to VDD. This cell is called P–P–N based since each of the cross coupled inverters is composed of three transistors cascaded in a P–P–N sequence from top to bottom. The nodes between the two cascaded PMOS transistors are called pseudo storage nodes (including pQ and pQb in Fig. 1(k)), which are separated from the true storage nodes (named Q and Qb in Fig. 1(k)). In addition to the inverter pair, there is a discharging path on each side of this SRAM cell, each of which is formed by an access transistor plus some pull down transistors that connect a pseudo storage node to the VGND. The left hand side discharging path is formed by PGL (Pass Gate Left) and PDL1 (Pull Down Left 1). The discharging path is used to discharge a precharged high bit line during the read operation.The 11T SRAM [24] is shown in Fig. 1(l). Here the cell disconnects the node to which a logical HIGH is to be written from the ground and hence facilitates the write faster. In case of reading, it uses a separate read bit line and N5, N2, N8 and N9 are ON and hence N9 and N8 give low effective resistance to the read operation and hence faster read.In order to overcome the problem associated with conventional SRAM cells and other existing SRAM cells, the authors proposes a multi threshold complementary metal oxide semiconductor (MTCMOS) based 12T SRAM architecture to achieve low static and dynamic power dissipations for read and write operations and better stability. In the proposed design two voltage sources V1 and V2 are connected to the outputs of the bit line (BL) and bitbar line(BL‾), respectively. Two NMOS transistors VT1 and VT2 are used, one connected with the BL and the other with theBL‾directly to switch ON and switch OFF the voltage sources during write operations. The voltage sources reduce the swing voltage during write ‘0’ and write ‘1’ operation at higher frequencies. This reduction in swing voltage reduces the dynamic power dissipation. The two high threshold voltage (HVT) sleep transistors S1 and S2 are used. NMOS sleep transistor S1 connects node M (also called virtual ground node) to ground whereas the PMOS sleep transistor S2, connects node N (also called the virtual supply node) to Vdd supply. The low threshold voltage (LVT) transmission gate (TG) is connected between the two virtual nodes M and N for providing charge sharing. The proposed design is illustrated in Fig. 2. Sleep transistor control signal (ST) and charge sharing control signal (CS) provide the switching activity control on sleep transistors and transmission gate, respectively. Sleep transistors disconnect logic cells from the supply and/or ground. Charge recycling technique reduces the leakage current while transistors flip its mode from active to sleep and sleep to active. Reduction of leakage current reduces the static power dissipation.Consider the configuration shown in Fig. 2. NMOS sleep transistor S1 connects the virtual ground, i.e., node M in Fig. 2, to the actual ground, whereas the other PMOS sleep transistor S2 connects the virtual supply, i.e., node N in Fig. 2, to the actual Vdd supply. During the active period, both sleep transistors S1 and S2 are in the linear region and the voltage values of the virtual ground node M and virtual supply node N are equal to 0 and Vdd, respectively.During the transition from active mode to sleep mode of the sleep transistors S1 and S2, the transistors are turned OFF, and since they are chosen to be high threshold (VT) devices, they allow very little subthreshold leakage currents to flow through them. Thus virtual nodes M and N are floating during the sleep period. Now, if the duration of the sleep period is sufficiently long, virtual ground node (M) will be charged up to some voltage value very close to Vdd (supply voltage) by the very small leakage current flowing through T3 (with T1 is ON). Similarly, if the duration of the sleep period is long enough, virtual supply node (N) will be discharged to some voltage value very close to 0 by the very small leakage current flowing through T4 (with T6 is ON). If we denote the total capacitance in the virtual ground node M and virtual supply node N by CM and CN, respectively, it is observed that during the active to sleep transition, CM is charged up from 0 to very closely Vdd while CN is discharged from Vdd to very closely 0.During the transition from sleep mode to active mode of the sleep transistors S1 and S2, the transistors are tuned ON. The voltage of virtual ground node (M) starts to fall toward 0, whereas the voltage of virtual supply node (N) starts to rise toward Vdd. Thus, CM will be discharged from Vdd to 0, while CN will be charged to Vdd from its initial value 0.These charging and discharging events on the virtual ground and virtual supply nodes produce wasteful static power dissipation from the circuit power dissipation point of view, which is equal to (CM·Vdd2+CN·Vdd2) for one complete cycle of write “1” and write “0” operations. To overcome this problem charge recycling technique has been introduced.So, to reduce the static power dissipation during switching between active and sleep modes of the circuit, a charge recycling technique [25,26] is used by employing a transmission gate TG between the virtual ground (M) and virtual supply (N) nodes, as shown in Fig. 2. The charge recycling strategy works as follows for active to sleep and sleep to active mode.Before active to sleep transition of the sleep transistors, the TG is turned ON first. Then, the voltage of M node or the capacitance CM will rise from 0 to A·Vdd (A<1), not closely Vdd (which occurs for active to sleep transition of the sleep transistors. Similarly, the voltage of N node or the capacitance CN will fall from Vdd to A·Vdd, not closely 0 which occurs for active to sleep transition of the sleep transistors. Then active to sleep transition signal ST is applied to the sleep transistors. Now the voltage of M node or the capacitance CM will raise from A·Vdd to closely Vdd and the voltage of N node or the capacitance CN will fall from A·Vdd to closely 0, provided necessary sleep period is allowed.The common voltage value of nodes M and N after charge sharing is calculated by equating the total charge in both the capacitances before and right after charge recycling as follows in (1).(1)CN·Vdd=(CM+CN)·Vwrite1Therefore,(2)Vwrite1=CN·Vdd/(CM+CN)=A·Vddwhere A=CN/(CM+CN); CM=Capacitance at node M; CN=Capacitance at node N; Vdd=power supply voltage.The common voltage value of the virtual ground M node and virtual supply node N at the end of the charge sharing is AVdd. If the energy consumptions in the sleep transistors and TG are neglected, the energy drawn from the supply by charging of capacitance CM=CM·Vdd·(Vdd−A·Vdd)=(1−A)·CM·Vdd2. Therefore, total energy dissipation for operation=A·CM·Vdd2.Before sleep to active transition of the sleep transistors, the TG is turned ON first. Then, the voltage of M node or the capacitance CM will fall from closely Vdd to B·Vdd (B<1), not 0 (as it occurs without charge recycling). Similarly, the voltage of N node or the capacitance CN will rise from closely 0 to B·Vdd, not Vdd (as it occurs without charge recycling). Then sleep to active transition signal ST is applied to the sleep transistors. Now the voltage of M node or the capacitance CM will fall from B·Vdd to 0 and the voltage of N node or the capacitance CN will rise from B·Vdd to Vdd. The common voltage value of nodes M and N after charge sharing is calculated by equating the total charge in both the capacitances before and right after charge recycling, which is given in (3).(3)CM·Vdd=(CM+CN)·Vwrite0Therefore,(4)Vwrite0=CM·Vdd/(CM+CN)=B·Vddwhere B=CM/(CM+CN); CM=Capacitance at node M; CN=Capacitance at node N.The common voltage value of the virtual ground M node and virtual supply node N at the end of the charge sharing is BVdd. If the energy consumptions in the sleep transistors and TG are neglected, the energy drawn from the supply by charging of capacitance CN=CN·Vdd.(Vdd−B·Vdd)=(1−B)·CN·Vdd2. Therefore, the total energy dissipation for operation=B·CN·Vdd2.The total energy dissipation during the transitions of active mode to sleep mode and sleep mode to active mode is shown in (5).(5)Etotal=A·CMVdd2+B·CNVdd2Energy saving ratio (ESR) due to charge recycling is ratio of total energy dissipated with charge recycling technique to the total energy dissipated without charge recycling technique, as shown in (6).(6)ESR=(A·CM·Vdd2+B·CN·Vdd2)/(CM·Vdd2+CN·Vdd2)Substituting the values of A and B in (6) and substituting for X=CM/CN, one can get(7)ESR(X)=2X/(1+X)2The optimum value for X which maximizes ESR(X) is obtained by equating the derivative of this ratio to zero, which results in X=1, or CM=CN. In other words, in order to obtain the best energy saving, one needs to have equal capacitances in virtual ground and virtual supply nodes. Then the maximum energy saving can be obtained by putting the value of X=1 in (7) and one gets energy saving ratio (ESR)=0.5. This means that a maximum energy saving of 50% can be obtained by using the charge recycling method. However, considering the power needed to turn ON or OFF the TG, the total saving ratio is less than 50%.This energy directly related to the current as shown in (8).(8)Energy=Voltage×Current×TimeSo from (8), if the supply voltage and the time are held constant then the current is directly related to energy. So as the current dissipation (leakage or unwanted current) in the SRAM cell is reduced during transition modes (active to sleep and sleep to active), the energy reduces. This reduction in leakage current reduces the static power dissipation of SRAM cell according to [27]is given in (9).(9)Pstatic=Ileakage.VddSo, from (7-9), it is clear that the charge recycling technique reduces the energy dissipation and this reduces the current leakage during transition modes and reduction in leakage current finally causes the reduction of static power dissipation of the proposed SRAM cell.During the write ‘0’ operation, bit line (BL) is low and bitbar line(BL‾)goes high. So the transistor VT2 is ON and the transistor VT1 goes to OFF condition. Thus the voltage source V2 forces the voltage swing to decrease at the output of theBL‾line. Similarly, when the write ‘1’ operation is performed, the transistor VT1 is ON and the transistor VT2 goes to OFF condition, so the voltage source V1 decreases the voltage swing at the output of the bitbar line (BL) line. The analog simulation diagram for write operations is shown in Fig. 3.During switching activity from “0” to “1” or “1” to “0” at bit line (BL) or bitbar line(BL‾), swing voltage is required. This extra voltage increases the dynamic power dissipation shown in (10). The dynamic power may be expressed as [27](10)Pdynamic=αCVddVSwingfwhere C=load capacitance; α=activity factor; f=clock frequency; VSwing=voltage swing at the output node; Vdd is the power supply voltage.So from (10), as the frequency increases the switching activity also increases and this increases the dynamic power dissipation. But voltage sources V1 and V2 reduce voltage swings simultaneously at the outputs. So as the frequency increases, simultaneously the swing voltage decreases. Due to that, at higher frequency the dynamic power dissipation is found to be almost constant for the proposed SRAM cell. Stability of the proposed SRAM cell also improves because voltage sources provide better switching capability.Sizing of the transmission gate (TG) is a factor that affects the energy saving ratio (ESR) as well as the wake up time (voltage rise time after sleep) of the circuit. In case of the original 8T configuration with sleep transistors, when there is no charge recycling, the wake up time may be defined as the time between turning ON of the sleep transistors and the voltage of the virtual ground reaching within 10% of its final value. However, in a circuit that uses charge recycling, the wake up time may be defined as the time between when the TG is turned ON to when the virtual ground voltage goes below 10% of its final value. In each active sleep active cycle, the TG is needed to be switched ON twice; once before turning the sleep transistors ON, and once after turning them OFF. Every time TG is turned ON, both the NMOS and PMOS transistors in the TG are actually turned ON, i.e., the capacitance is switched two times more. Clearly, TG is turned OFF after the charge sharing is complete. Therefore, the static power consumption of the TG for one complete active sleep cycle can be calculated. Therefore, to calculate the actual energy saving ratio (ESR), one needs to subtract the correction ratio from the ideal ESR. This correction ratio is proportional to the size of the TG. By increasing the size of the TG, the charge sharing process can be speeded up, and as a result it reduces the wake up time; however, this will also increase the correction ratio hence, decreasing the energy saving ratio of the circuit. Therefore, there is a trade off between the wake up time and energy saving ratio.In Fig. 3, left half of the diagram from time 0ns to 2.5ns shows the write “1” operation. Similarly, the next half from time 2.5ns to 5ns shows the write “0” operation. Bit line (BL), bit line bar (BBL), word line (WL), charge sharing control (CS) and sleep transistor control (ST) signals show inputs and bit line output (BL_OUT) and bitbar line output (BBL_OUT) signals show outputs during write operation.For write “1” operation, BL=High (1V), BBL=Low (0V), ST=Low, WL=High and CS=High (after 1ns it goes low again) are applied as inputs. After simulation operation the output shows BL_OUT=High and BBL_OUT=Low. Similarly, for write “0” operation, BL=Low, BBL=High (0V), ST=High, WL=High and CS=high (after 1ns it goes low again) are applied as inputs. After simulation operation the output shows BL_OUT=Low and BBL_OUT=High.The Layout designs of 8T SRAM cell and the proposed SRAM cell are shown in Figs. 4 and 5, respectively. The layout design is based on the λ rules. Here the value of λ is equal to half of the length of transistors used in the standard foundry. Because the number of transistors in the proposed SRAM cell is more, the layout area for the proposed SRAM cell is larger than those of other existing SRAM cells but lesser power and better stability in the proposed SRAM can easily dominate over this drawback.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Stability and power dissipation are the major issues in high speed SRAM cells. In this paper, a novel low power 12T MTCMOS based SRAM has been proposed, which dissipates less dynamic power during write/read operation due to less swing voltages which are provided by the voltage sources V1 and V2. The proposed SRAM cell also dissipates less static power during mode transitions due to charge recycling. Low leakage currents and the voltage sources provide better stability. Simulation has been done for power dissipations, static noise margin, access time, leakage current and power delay product for the proposed 12T SRAM cell and the results of the proposed SRAM cell are compared with those of other reported existing cells. The simulation shows that the proposed SRAM cell dissipates lesser dynamic power; has better stability; dissipates lesser current leakage during the mode transitions than the other existing SRAM cells. Although the speed decreases and the area increases in comparison with those of other SRAM cells but total low power dissipation and better stability can dominate over the drawbacks. This proposed 12T SRAM cell can be used to provide low power solution in high speed devices like laptops, mobile phones, programmable logic devices, etc.