@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A High-throughput routing metric for multi-hop Underwater Acoustic Networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We investigate performance of various topology-based routing metrics in Underwater Acoustic Network.Acquired knowledge is applied to design a new routing metric, Cubic Min to Avg Signal-to-Noise Ratio (CMAS).This metric is capable of selecting high-throughput links.Simulation results demonstrate the efficiency of the proposed metric.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Underwater,Acoustic,Networks,Routing,Metrics,CMAS,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In most wireless network architectures, a routing metric plays an important role for a routing protocol to select suitable paths (or, links) for communications. An inefficient routing metric may increase overall transmission cost per packet by selecting lossy links and thereby may lead to poor throughput. Underwater Acoustic Networks (UANs), where most of the nodes operate on battery power, prefer topology-based routing metrics over active probing based routing metrics. Considering this fact, in this paper, we investigate the performance of various topology-based routing metrics over UAN-architecture. We then apply the acquired knowledge to design a new routing metric called Cubic Min to Avg Signal-to-Noise Ratio (CMAS), which is capable of selecting high-throughput links. We evaluate the performance of the proposed metric with other available topology-based routing metrics in underwater scenario. Simulation results demonstrate that the proposed metric attains significantly higher throughput than that of the other compared metrics.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the recent years, underwater acoustic communication has received immense attention from the researchers, industries, and various militaries due to its current and future applications, like oceanography, pollution monitoring, offshore exploration, disaster prevention, navigation assistance, monitoring, coastal patrol and surveillance, etc. [1,2]. These seasonable applications are encouraging people from different corners of the globe to invest their valuable efforts in the development of this emerging field of communication. Unlike any terrestrial wireless network, acoustic signals are preferred in Underwater Acoustic Networks (UANs) over electro-magnetic or light signals due to large transmission range. However, since the transmission speed of an acoustic signal is very limited which is several magnitudes lower than electro-magnetic signals, UANs experience higher propagation delay. Moreover, an underwater channel faces higher bit error rate due to multi-path, fading, formation of shadow zones, and refractive properties of the sound channel [2]. Furthermore, limited bandwidth, limited energy and impact of the environment over channel make underwater communication more challenging than its other wired or wireless network counterparts. In such a challenging environment, selection of a suitable high throughput routing metric plays an important role in multi-hop communication. Fig. 1shows a typical model of an UAN. The term, “AUV” in the figure means Autonomous Underwater Vehicle. An AUV is basically a robot (unmanned underwater vehicle) which travels underwater without requiring input from an operator. Such a scenario needs efficient way of operation at every stage including routing issues as multiple technologies get blended and should work together during its implementation.To define formally, a routing metric is a value which is assigned to each route and used by a routing protocol to find a suitable route or a subset of routes from a set of discovered routes [3]. The objective of a routing algorithm is to utilize a routing metric to achieve one or more goals; for example, to maximize throughput, to minimize delay, to maximize end-to-end packet delivery, to minimize energy consumption, to distribute traffic load equally, and so on. Expected goal(s) may vary according to the network architecture and/or application. For instance, a wired network does not have any power supply constraint and it experiences noises in lower magnitude than terrestrial wireless networks. Consequently, most of the routing protocols engaged in wired networks utilize hop count as a suitable metric. However, in [4], it is demonstrated through experimental results that hop count metric is not a compatible metric for terrestrial networks. Active probing based routing metrics1A routing metric which does not exchange any probing packet to select a suitable path is known as topology-based routing metric, e.g., minimum hop count, minimum delay, average SNR, etc. [3].1are capable of attaining high throughput in such networks. Nevertheless, for exchanging probing packets among the neighbors, a considerable amount of energy is dissipated. Any network architecture, like a UAN, where nodes operate in battery power could not endure that energy waste. Therefore, a UAN’s architecture prefers those routing metrics that require lower energy to deliver a packet since most of the nodes operate on battery power and thereby, topology-based routing metrics2A routing metric which exchanges probing packets to select a suitable path is known as active probing based routing metrics, e.g., etx [4], rtt [5], ett [6], context-aware routing metric [7], etc.2are preferred over active probing based routing metrics. This is the core reason that we only consider topology-based routing metrics in this paper.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Existing routing metrics proposed for UANs and motivation of our work are discussed in Section 2. We describe our proposed metric in Subsection 3.1 and other metrics in Subsection 3.2 under Section 3. In Section 4, we present the underwater channel model considered in this work. Section 5 demonstrates the numerical results obtained employing the channel model discussed in Section 4. Simulation scenario and considered parameters are detailed in Section 6 along with the routing protocol where all the investigated routing metrics are embedded in. Simulation results and analyses are presented in Section 7. Our findings end with the concluding remarks in Section 8.Among all the topology-based routing metrics, the minimum hop count is embedded in most of the routing protocols of any network architecture. Likewise, routing protocols proposed in [8–10] for UANs also utilize minimum hop count metric to select a suitable path. Generally, when a hop count is minimized, the distance between adjacent nodes is maximized, which is likely to maximize the loss ratio by minimizing the signal strength [4,11]. This phenomenon is prominent in UANs where a signal can travel several kilometers3Currently, many modems are available that support transmissions over several kilometers of distance. For instance, the LinkQuest UWM2000 and UWM3000 modems support 1.5km and 3km, respectively [13], AquaComm supports ranges of 3km [12], and the Evologics S2C R 48/78 modem supports 3.2km [14]..3Moreover, because of the higher bit error rate of underwater channel, the probability of a packet loss is even higher [1,2]; which suggests an alternative routing metric.A couple of routing metrics are proposed in various literatures for UANs. In [15], a topology-based routing metric, called low propagation delay is proposed. However, a path chosen using low propagation delay metric may not be able to attain high-throughput. Analogous to minimum hop count metric, adjacent nodes may experience long distance and hence, may select a lossy link. Routing protocols proposed in [16] employ a distance-aware routing metric where next hop is that neighbor which is geographically the closest to the destination. For finding a suitable route utilizing this routing metric, it is necessary that every node must realize its physical location. However, most of the sensor nodes currently available do not have the capability of recognizing their respective physical locations. Consequently, we retrench this protocol from our investigation. Average SNR is another topology-based metric which is utilized by the routing protocols proposed in [17,18]. However, it also may select a lossy link if there exists a dominant SNR value in that link which is discussed in Section 7 in details.Though there are a couple of different routing metrics proposed for UANs, none or very few explicit investigations have been performed to understand the behavior of various routing metrics for such kind of network. Often, the works may have been done as part of other works and with smaller scale; hence, we believe that this particular issue needs more attention. Motivated by the scarcity of investigation results in such scenarios, in this paper, we take an initiative to investigate the performance of various topology-based routing metrics for UANs. The knowledge gathered from the investigation is applied to design a new routing metric, called Cubic Min to Avg SNR (CMAS) ratio metric which is capable of finding a high-throughput path. The performance of our proposed metric is evaluated and compared with other existing routing metrics.Since our proposed routing metric is a topology-based routing metric, we compare it with other existing topology-based routing metrics. In the following subsections, we describe our proposed routing metric along with those other metrics.Let graph G=(V, E) be an undirected graph which represents an underwater sensor network; where V represents a set of underwater sensor nodes and E represents their edges. SNR (Signal-to-Noise Ratio) of a received signal at vj∊V which is transmitted from vi∊V is considered as an associative weight, ω(ei,j) of ei,j∊E. A path in G can be represented as a sequence of edges, P={e1,2, e2,3,…,e(n-1),n}. By replacing every edge with their respective associative weight, we can find, P={ω(e1,2), ω(e2,3),…,ω(e(n−1),n)}.Let us assume that there are m existing paths between a pair of nodes, namely, the set, ∏={P1, P2,…Pm}. The average SNR of a path Pkcould be found as,(1)avg_SNRk=∑i=1,j=2i=n-1,j=nω(ei,j)|Pk|where |Pk| is the number of links that exist in Pk. By observing Eq. (1), it could be easily identifiable that a higher value of ω(ei,j) may influence the calculation of average SNR and hence may get selected as the suitable path. However, there may exist some poor quality links which may affect the overall throughput of the path. Again, if a path is selected based on ∀Pmax(min(Pk)), i.e., maximum SNR among the minimum SNR of different paths, there is still a possibility of selecting a lower quality path if the SNR variability is low. To extricate from previously mentioned constraint, a node could calculate a value using the following equation for all the discovered paths.(2)mask=(min(Pk))d×|Pk|∑i=1,j=2i=n-1,j=nω(ei,j)where ω(ei,j)∊Pkand d∊Z+. In Subsection 6.2, a suitable value of d is investigated for the selected scenario. A path P′∊∏ is selected if it satisfies the following condition:(3)P′=∀Pmax(mask)Eq. (3) usually selects a path whose distance between all the adjacent nodes is lower than that of other topology-based metrics. Consequently, it is capable of selecting a reliable path which can attain higher throughput.Following are the three existing topology-based routing metrics, which are considered to compare our proposed metric: Minimum Hop Count, End-to-End Delay, and Average SNR. Descriptions of these metrics are given below.Because of the simplicity of this metric, it is often preferred by most of the routing protocols designed for any network architecture [3,4]. The implicit assumption of this metric is the presence of error-free links, which is almost always the case for the wired networks, but not for the wireless networks. Using this metric, a path P′ is chosen if its hop count is minimum among all the discovered paths, i.e., P′=∀Pmin(|Pi|). No additional measurements are required for computing hop count. However, one major disadvantage of this metric is that it may select lossy links, thus lower the throughput performance. The reason of attaining lower throughput is already discussed in Section 1.This is another simple metric which considers the time between the generation of a packet to the delivery of that packet at the destination. In terrestrial wireless network, a path which ensures minimum hop count also ensures minimum end-to-end delay since propagation delay is considered negligible. However, this assumption is not equitable for UANs since propagation delay in such networks is several magnitudes higher than that of terrestrial wireless networks. Therefore, a path chosen by minimum hop count metric may not assure the minimum delay between the nodes involved in communication.Let us recall the graph representing underwater sensor network in 3.1. In this case, the delay of an edge will be considered as ω(ei,j). From a set of ∏, a path, P′ is selected if it requires the lowest time to deliver a packet to the destination, i.e., P′=∀Pmin(∑ω(ei,j)) where ω(ei,j)∊Pkand Pk∊∏.It is yet another topology-based routing metric which does not need an exchange of probing packets to find a high quality path. Like CMAS metric, SNR of an edge, e(i, j), will be considered as ω(ei,j). Since the SNR is local parameter of the physical layer, a cross-layer message is exchanged between the routing layer and the physical layer to acquire SNR of a received signal. A path, P′ is selected if it has the highest average SNR in ∏, i.e.,P′=∀Pmax∑ω(ei,j)|Pk|where ω(ei,j)∊Pkand Pk∊∏. A drawback of this approach is that a sufficiently large SNR value in a path may influence the calculation of the average, thus may select a lossy link.For underwater channel, it is necessary to take into account both the attenuation and the ambient noise to calculate the SNR at the receiving end. Attenuation is calculated based on the absorption coefficient which can be approximated through Thorp’s formula [20] and on the spreading loss [21].Thorp’s absorption coefficient, a(f) at a given frequency, f in kHz can be given as follows [22]:(4)10loga(f)=0.11f21+f2+44f24100+f2+2.75f2104+0.003,f⩾0.4.00.11f21+f2+0.11f2+0.002,otherwise.where a(f) is in dB/km. The absorption coefficient achieved for various f is shown in Fig. 2which is generated from Eq. (4). a(f) increases rapidly with frequency, thus restricts the maximum usable frequency for an acoustic link of a given distance. Combining both the absorption coefficient and the spreading loss, attenuation can be found as [23].(5)10logA(d,f)=κ·10logd+d·10loga(f)where the first term in Eq. (5) is the spreading loss and the second is the absorption loss. The spreading coefficient describes the geometry of the propagation, and κ=1.75 provides a practical value for a typical underwater channel [24].The overall power spectral density (p.s.d) of the ambient noise, N(f) of underwater channel mainly depends on four major factors: turbulence, shipping, wind, and thermal. It can be expressed then by [23],(6)N(f)=Nt(f)+Ns(f)+Nω(f)+Nth(f)where Nt(f) is turbulence noise, Ns(f) is the noise generated from the shipping activity, Nω(f) is the noise generated because of surface motion caused by wind driven waves, and Nth(f) is the thermal noise. A detailed description of various noises can be found in [23]. Relationship between “p.s.d” of the ambient noise and various f could be found from Eq. (6) and is illustrated in Fig. 3.Combination of both the attenuation and the ambient noise decays the available bandwidth with distance. Therefore, SNR of an acoustic signal of a frequency f, transmitted from a distance d, can be found as,(7)SNR(d,f)=PTA(d,f)N(f)where PTis the transmission power. For a given value of PT, the SNR in Eq. (7) is inversely proportional to the attenuation-noise factor which is illustrated in Fig. 4.Let p be the probability of success for a packet containing L bits. Assuming Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) channel, like the one described in Section 4 and considering Binary Phase Shift Keying (BPSK) modulation technique in the physical layer with independent channel error on the L transmitted symbols, we can have,(8)p=1-12erfcSNRLUsing Equation (7), we get,(9)p=1-12erfcPTA(d,f)N(f)LSince most of the modems available to date use a fixed f and a fixed PT, the only parameter that affects p is d. To find the impact of d on the performance of the end-to-end packet delivery, let us consider a network of only two nodes and place them in various positions. If T is the total number of packets transmitted to a node at a distance d, end-to-end Packet Delivery Ratio (PDR) (defined as the ratio of the number of packets correctly received by the destination and the number of generated packets) between these two nodes can be found as, pdr=T(1−p)/T.Fig. 5demonstrates the PDR as function of d for various PTwhere d varies from 1 to 2500m. For any PT, the PDR is high when the distance between the nodes is lower or lower medium. However, the end-to-end delivery starts declining rapidly at higher distance and reaches close to zero at 2500m for PT=75dBreμPa. On the other hand, the PDR falls to 0.75 for PT=80dBreμPa at 2500m distance. For higher transmission power, the PDR remains higher for every distance considered. Nevertheless, higher transmission power causes higher energy consumption which reduces battery lifetime and increases interference. Therefore, a routing metric designed for UAN’s architecture must be capable of finding a high-throughput path even in lower transmission power.For comparing the performance of various topology-based routing metrics with our proposed metric, we consider a network of 12 bottom-mounted nodes deployed in an area of 8000m×4000m×80m. The area is divided into 12 cells and every node is placed randomly within each cell. One sink is placed at a random location along with one of the short sections, illustrated in Fig. 6. Every node communicates in 25kHz band at a bit rate of 4500bps and transmission range of the modem is 2.5km. The payload of all data packets is 1000 bits. To get the realization of the channel and the physical layer, underwater channel model described in Section 4 is considered and combined with a BPSK (Binary Phase-Shift Keying) modulation technique with independent channel error. All the nodes employ a collision avoidance protocol [25] in the medium access control layer to achieve a collision free packet exchange. Since no packet is dropped because of the interference, the only factor which causes the packet error is the selection of a lossy link.We developed and implemented our simulation model using C++. All the simulations were run for a day and all the results presented in this paper were obtained by averaging over 100 realizations of the network topology. Without a routing protocol, there is no use of a routing metric. Again, a routing metric can be embedded in most of the routing protocols after necessary modifications. Since the objective of this paper is to find a high-throughput routing metrics, we do not propose any new routing protocol. Rather, we utilize an Ad-Hoc On-Demand Distance Vector (AODV) [19] like routing protocol and do necessary modification to embed various routing metrics which is detailed in the following Subsection 6.1.Since the network which is considered is a static network, the path discovery procedure is initiated only once at the beginning of the simulation. When a node has packets to transmit and there is no available route that exists for the chosen destination, the sender initiates aRoute Discoverypacket which is broadcasted after a random but sufficiently large waiting time so that it can avoid overlapping the process with another node. A restricted flooding technique is used for spreading the packet all over the network. A hop count value (which is 7 in this paper) is set in theRoute Discoverypacket.When an intermediate route receives aRoute Discoverypacket, it decreases the hop count value by 1. This packet is dropped when hop count reaches to zero. Every intermediate node which receives a discovery packet affixes necessary information in the packet along with information essential for metric calculation.For instance, if the selected routing metric is Average SNR, the intermediate node includes the SNR information in the packet. After making all the necessary changes, it rebroadcasts the packet.After receiving the firstRoute Discoverypacket, the destination deposits that packet in a buffer and starts a timer to receive other similar packets through different routes. It also includes necessary information in the received packet before deposit. Every packet received within this time epoch is kept in the buffer and any packet received after the time is deleted and is not considered. When the timer expires, it utilizes all theRoute Discoverypackets to discover a suitable path based on the chosen metric. It then prepares aRoute Replypacket and unicasts it to inform the sender regarding the selected path. When the sender receives theRoute Replypacket, it transmits all the packets through the selected path.To attain higher performance from the proposed metric, it is necessary to find out a suitable value of d in Eq. (2). For that reason, we simulate our selected scenario with various d values. The outcome of the simulation is depicted in Fig. 7. As it could be observed from Fig. 7 that when d is lower, a node attains lower throughput. A node starts attaining higher throughput whend⩾3for any transmission power considered. Therefore, we choose d=3 and name our metric as Cubic Min to Average SNR (CMAS) ratio metric.Two performance metrics are considered to evaluate the performance of the routing metrics – they are: Normalized Throughput and Packet Drop Ratio. Normalized throughput is defined as the number of packets correctly delivered in the network per packet transmission time; whereas, the packet drop ratio is the ratio between the number of packets dropped to number of packets generated. Figs. 8 and 9respectively illustrate the normalized throughput and the packet drop ratio of 4 routing metrics. From the graphs, it can be observed that with increasing power, throughput is increased for all the routing metrics. However, the strength of a routing metric lies in the selection of the best path when transmission power is low. In that instance, minimum hop count, end-to-end delay and average SNR metrics fail to exhibit their efficiency. The objective of the minimum hop count metric is to minimize the number of hops a packet must visit to reach the destination. This metric generally selects those paths which experience long distance between the pairs of adjacent nodes. As it is demonstrated in Section 5, the longer the distance is, the higher the probability of dropping a packet is, because of erroneous bit(s) reception. Therefore, the drop ratio of the minimum hop count is higher and consequently, the normalized throughput is lower when transmission power is low.On the other hand, the end-to-end delay metric attempts to minimize the delay between a source–destination pair. Analogous to the minimum hop count metric, the end-to-end delay metric usually chooses a lossy link which is shown in Fig. 9. The packet drop ratio of end-to-end delay metric is higher when transmission power is lower and decreases with increasing power. In case of Average SNR metric, throughput is the lowest and packet drop ratio is the highest among all the metrics. Because, a large SNR value in a link may influence the calculation of the average; whereas other SNRs are poor. In that circumstance, a lossy link may be selected by the average SNR metric instead of a quality link. This experience inspires us to propose the new routing metric which must avoid poor quality link.CMAS metric selects relatively high quality link among the compared topology-based routing metrics which can be observed from Figs. 8 and 9. The packet drop ratio of our proposed technique is significantly lower than that of other metrics. Consequently, it achieves higher throughput for all the transmission powers. Moreover, the throughput achieved at PT=75dBreμPa using our proposed metric is even higher than that of the other metrics at higher transmission power, i.e., PT=80dBreμPa. One drawback of this approach is that a packet transmitted through the selected path may have to visit a higher number of nodes to reach to the destination. As trade-off among various points is often needed for a solution based on a particular network setting, our approach could still be taken as efficient for UAN scenarios. In fact, the results show the gains in our approach.In several literatures, it has been demonstrated that active probing based routing metrics can attain higher throughput. However, because of their higher packet overheads, this type of routing metric is not preferred in UANs, where most of the nodes operate on battery power; instead, topology-based routing metrics are used. In fact, most of the topology-based routing metrics are unable to select a high-throughput path between a source–destination pair. Our investigations over these types of protocols also validate this claim. We applied the knowledge gathered from the investigation to design a high-throughput routing metric, called Cubic Min to Avg SNR ratio metric. We evaluated the performance of our proposed metric. The results obtained from the simulations are compared with other existing topology-based routing metrics. Simulation results demonstrate that our proposed metric attains significantly higher throughput than that of the other compared metrics. In future, we would like to investigate more on this topic to find other critical metrics and like to get the answer whether similar approach could be applied efficiently in other network settings.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
