@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A scale-free topology model with fault-tolerance and intrusion-tolerance in wireless sensor networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Two criterions of measuring the topological properties are discussed.Effect of degree distribution on topological properties is analyzed mathematically.The scale-free topology model has adjustable scaling exponent is proposed.The proposed model is robustness to random faults and selective remove attacks.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Wireless sensor network,Scale-free topology,Fault-tolerance,Intrusion-tolerance,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstractThe topology structure entropy achieves its maximum when the proper scaling exponent is found.Image, graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Wireless sensor networks (WSNs) have gained enormous attention for their wide range of applications. In many applications, it is impractical to replace the nodes as they work under harsh environment. However, the nodes in WSNs, which are deployed in harsh environments, are easy to break down because of energy depletion, hardware failure or invasion [1]. On node failure, the network connectivity will be reduced greatly, and the entire network even to be paralytic. After classical BA model (Barabasi–Albert Model) was put forward [2], the robustness of scale-free topology to node failure excited many scholars' widespread interest [3].The scale-free topology is a heterogeneous topology, that is, the degree distribution probability fulfills the power-law relation. The topological robustness is the ability of the topology to maintain its connectivity after node failures, meaning that the nodes remove [4]. It has been shown that the method of removing failure nodes (randomly or selectively) changes topology functionality [5]. In this context, the influence of random and selective node failures on the efficiency of scale-free topology is investigated.Recent researches show that the scale-free topology is robust to random faults of the node but vulnerable to selective remove attacks of the node [6]. This conclusion becomes more evident after a deal of works by Barabasi and Albert on scale-free topology [7]. So how to design and optimize the scale-free topology and how to make the scale-free topology have the strong capability of fault-tolerance to random faults and intrusion-tolerance to selective remove attacks simultaneously is particularly important and urgent.In order to improve the robustness of the scale-free topology against selective remove attacks on the basis of strong fault-tolerance, this paper proposes a new scale-free topology model BA-E (BA-Evolution) and obtains an optimal scale-free topology which can assure the topological fault-tolerance against random faults and maximize topological intrusion-tolerance against selective remove attacks. Our main contributions are summarized as follows.1.The proposed scale-free topology model BA-E has the adjustable scaling exponent for the degree distribution.Two criterions of measuring the topological properties (i.e. one for fault-tolerance against random faults, the other for intrusion-tolerance against selective remove attacks) and the effect of topological degree distribution on these properties are discussed mathematically. Then the optimal parameter of the BA-E model is derived.The proposed BA-E model with the obtained optimal parameter is implemented through simulation for fault-tolerance against random faults and intrusion-tolerance against selective remove attacks.Comparison of simulation experimental results to demonstrate superiority of the proposed BA-E model over the existing models.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, related work is described. Section 3 puts forward the BA-E model and the degree distribution of the model is deduced. Section 4 constructs the optimized mathematical model about these properties of both fault-tolerance and intrusion-tolerance, then the effect of degree distribution characteristics on topological fault-tolerance and intrusion-tolerance is discussed in detail. Section 5 makes the simulation verification. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Designing the topology which can tolerate both random faults and selective remove attacks is one of the most focused research issues in WSNs. It has been shown that the power-law scaling exponent can affect network fault-tolerance against random faults and network intrusion-tolerance against selective remove attacks. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first that propose the BA-E scale-free topology model for WSNs that it has the ability to change the power-law scaling exponent within[3,+∞)by adjusting its parameter. The adjustable power-law degree distribution improves the weak intrusion-tolerance of scale-free topology without breaking the strong fault-tolerance. The required time of the BA-E model is theoretically analyzed. According to the analysis result, BA-E model hasO((N−m0−1)(1+m))time complexity for N sensor nodes. The performance of the BA-E model is compared with three existing models in simulation experiments. The BA-E model has been shown to outperform all these contrast models. It has the stronger network fault-tolerance, and it also can maximize the network intrusion-tolerance and prolong the network lifetime. In the future, this work deserves to be considered for studying the interrelation between the fault-tolerance and the intrusion-tolerance with node faults or link faults coexistence.