@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An accurate and efficient collaborative intrusion detection framework to secure vehicular networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We design and implement an accurate and lightweight intrusion detection framework, called AECFV.AECFV aims to protect the vehicular ad hoc networks (VANETs) against the most dangerous attacks that could occurred on this network.AECFV take into account the VANET's characteristics such as high node's mobility and rapid topology change.AECFV exhibits a high detection rate, low false positive rate, faster attack detection, and lower communication overhead.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Vehicular ad hoc networks,Intrusion detection system,Detection rate,False positive rate,Detection time,Overhead,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The advancement of wireless communication leads researchers to develop and conceive the idea of vehicular networks, also known as vehicular ad hoc networks (VANETs). Security in such network is mandatory due to a vital information that are managed by the vehicle. Therefore, in this paper we design and implement an accurate and lightweight intrusion detection framework, called AECFV, that aims to protect the network against the most dangerous attacks that could occur on such network. AECFV is suitable for VANET’s characteristics such as high node’s mobility and rapid topology change. This is achieved with a help of the proposed secured clustering algorithm that considers both node’s mobility and network vulnerability during cluster formation. Clusters are constructed with a high stability and good connectivity. Cluster-Heads (CHs) are elected based on both node’s mobility and the vehicle’s trust-level. The simulation performed using NS-3 simulator shows, AECFV exhibits a high detection rate, low false positive rate, faster attack detection, and lower communication overhead compared to current detection frameworks.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Vehicle ad hoc networks (VANETs) are attracting much attention from both academia and industry. They are considered as the main system for the deployment of Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) based applications. These networks rely on a various types of data collected and/or disseminated from/to vehicles to provide multiple services, which can be sorted in three classes: (i) Road traffic management application such as driver assistance, management of traffic signals, providing information about road and traffic conditions, and route planning. (ii) Traffic safety applications such as self-driving (or autonomous car), prevention and warning of accidents, and emergency management (e-Call for Emergency-Call). (iii) Mobility and comfort application such as point of interest services for vehicles, eco-driving services, management of vehicle fleets services and machine to machine (M2M) services. Securing these networks is an important challenge, especially when traffic-safety applications are deployed. In fact, with these applications, vehicles manage vital and sensitive information that are attractive for attackers. A security mechanism is mandatory to protect VANETs against attacks.The intrusion detection systems (IDSs) have shown their efficiency to detect internal and external attacks with a high accuracy [1–5]. These systems use special agent nodes to monitor the behavior of a target node and trigger an alarm when a malicious behavior is detected. This paper describes the design and implementation of an accurate and lightweight intrusion detection framework for vehicular networks (AECFV) that takes into account the VANET’s characteristics such as high node’s mobility and rapid topology change. To handle these characteristics an effective secured clustering1Clustering architecture aims to group vehicles into a set of clusters, where cluster members communicate with a special node called Cluster-Head (CH).1algorithm is proposed. This algorithm considers node’s mobility during cluster formation, produces clusters with high stability, assures more connectivity between cluster members and elects Cluster-Heads (CHs) based on the vehicles’ trust-level. Choosing a cluster-based topology lies in the fact that it is the most appropriate structure for large-scale networks since it allows reducing the broadcast storm and hence decrease the communication overhead [2,6,7].AECFV aims to secure traffic-safety applications, where the focus is to detect and prevent dangerous attacks that could occur in this application, such as: selective forwarding, black hole, packet duplication, resource exhaustion, wormhole and Sybil attacks. It uses three intrusion detection agents: Local Intrusion Detection System (LIDS) running at cluster member level, Global Intrusion Detection System (GIDS) running at CH level and Global Decision System (GDS) running at Road Side Unit (RSU) level. To detect the malicious vehicle with a high accuracy (i.e. high detection and low false positive rates), the LIDS uses a rules-based detection and GIDS uses a hybrid detection technique (i.e. rules-based detection and anomaly detection based on Support Vector Machine – SVM). The rules based detection relies on a certain rules related to each attack to model a normal behavior and anomaly detection is based on a learning algorithm to model a normal behavior. The combination of these both techniques (i.e. hybrid detection) allow a high detection and low false positive rates [1]. Furthermore, with a help of the proposed detection techniques, a new reputation mechanism is developed that evaluates the trustworthiness level of vehicles according to their behaviors and the information they provide. AECFV suits the following requirements: fast in terms of attacks detection, lightweight in terms of communication overhead, and scalable.The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we underline previous related work and describe their main shortcomings. In Section 3, we describe our secured vehicular clustering algorithm. Section 4 presents details about our intrusion detection framework AECFV and Section 5 provides NS3 simulation results. In Section 6, we analyze various security aspects of the AECFV. Finally, we conclude the paper and give some perspectives that we envisage to carry out in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
