@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
On synergies of cyber and physical security modelling in vulnerability assessment of railway systems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Cyber-physical systems need holistic methods to discover relationships between physical and cyber components.Security threats attempt to both physical and cyber elements.Model-driven techniques accounting for joint physical and cyber-security modelling and evaluation are explored.Synergies between physical and cyber security UML profiles remarked in a case study of the railway domain.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cyber-physical systems,Vulnerability assessment,UML profile,Bayesian networks,Generalized stochastic Petri nets,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The multifaceted nature of cyber-physical systems needs holistic study methods to detect essential aspects and interrelations among physical and cyber components. Like the systems themselves, security threats feature both cyber and physical elements. Although to apply divide et impera approaches helps handling system complexity, to consider just one aspect at a time does not provide adequate risk awareness and hence does not allow to design the most appropriate countermeasures. To support this claim, in this paper we provide a joint application of two model-driven techniques for physical and cyber-security evaluation. We apply two UML profiles, namely SecAM (for cyber-security) and CIP_VAM (for physical security), in combination. In such a way, we demonstrate the synergy between both profiles and the need for their tighter integration in the context of a reference case study from the railway domain.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Cyber-physical systems emerged as a branch of the embedded systems research specifically focused on the interaction between the computational elements and the physical entities [1]. When research on cyber-physical systems overlaps with the emerging paradigms of smart-cities, Internet-of-Things and intelligent transportation, to name a few, then security issues become critical whereas distributed systems can be exposed to both physical and cyber-threats. It is a matter of fact that while researchers seem to be well-aware of the physical effects of cyber-threats, much of the research on information, on “logical”, or on “cyber” security are not related to physical sensing. However, many threats to cyber-physical systems (especially when they are isolated from the Internet) are also originated from physical intrusions, e.g., intruders accessing control terminals in technical rooms. This kind of information should be fused with the one coming from logical intrusion detection to provide a superior situation awareness and early warnings; thus, merging physical with logical access control allows to recognise otherwise undetectable identity frauds.Many safety–critical systems, as the ones used for railway control, are unreachable from the Internet but have technical equipment located in geographically distributed shelters and used for actuation, power, and telecommunications. This equipment is normally used by maintainers and other authorised personnel, but can be potentially targeted by unauthorised personnel through the same physical access points. Since trackside shelters and technical rooms are nowadays equipped with physical security and environmental monitoring devices, security threat analysis can be advantageously fed with both physical and logical elements [2].Nowadays, holistic modelling of complex systems is still a challenging research issue, being largely accepted that the more promising and scalable approaches focus on modularity and composability (both in modelling and solving). Another promising research effort aims at using as much as possible de facto standards in systems modelling, as the Unified Modelling Language (UML) together with its extensions and Domain Specific Modelling Languages (DSMLs), in order to provide a modeller with easy-to-use, reusable tools. This enables to build cohesive system views while hiding the underlying complexity of the analysis process, often based on model-to-model (M2M) transformations and orchestration of different solvers for different formalisms biased on the evaluation objectives.In this paper, we take advantage of two novel UML profiles, namely Security Analysis and Modelling (SecAM) [3] and Critical Infrastructure Protection – Vulnerability Analysis and Modeling (CIP_VAM) [4], to address the modelling of digital and physical security in combination. The approach moves from separate usage of the two profiles, through a loosely coupled one, pointing towards a fully and strictly integrated profile including the modelling potential of both SecAM and CIP_VAM. Besides, we also show how each profile benefits by the information contained in the other in the formal models generated and used for quantitative security evaluations. We combine the usage of SecAM and CIP_VAM to exploit synergies in modelling and analysis of cyber and physical security aspects: from UML models annotated by both profiles, a cyber and physical security analysis can be performed coping with the complexity of critical infrastructure protection. We finally evaluate our approach in an intrusion scenario in railway trackside/lineside shelters.The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 reviews the related work, introduces SecAM, CIP_VAM, and background needed to follow the rest of the paper. Section 3 describes the reference case study of the railway shelter used to motivate our research. Section 4 introduces the vulnerability modelling, considering separately physical and cyber security. Then, Section 5 considers them jointly, and proposes some modelling enhancements. Section 6 demonstrates the effectiveness of our approach by means of sensitivity analyses. Finally, discussion and conclusions are drawn in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
While holistic approaches in system security are theoretically able to take a picture of all the relevant system aspects and security threats, it does not seem to exist any single modelling language able to manage the complex structure and behaviours of such systems as a whole. Therefore, the only viable solution is to extend existing modelling languages and possibly to design novel hybrid formalisms.In this paper, we have addressed the limits of model-driven approaches when modelling cyber-only or physical-only security aspects in cyber-physical systems, and more specifically in railway applications. At this aim, two modelling approaches, oriented to different security-related aspects, have been chosen and jointly used. They both are based on UML profiling and quantitative model generation: the CIP_VAM approach has been enriched by AccessControl information provided considered by the SecAM approach in generating a more accurate BN model for vulnerability evaluation; the SecAM approach has been enriched by the action-triggered annotation and physical failure rates provided by CIP_VAM in generating a richer GSPN model.In this context, we have highlighted some issues in separated cyber and physical security modelling, and proposed a possible solution. We are aware that the way is still long and further steps are needed also in order to propose this solution in other applicative domains. Of course, the loosely coupled approach here presented must be improved: model transformations must be further detailed, multi-formalism techniques may be investigated to provide inter-operation between derived models, a tight integration of the two UML profiles can allow to define a more comprehensive and usable modelling language. Nevertheless, we believe that the work presented in this paper is a concrete and first step towards cyber-physical vulnerability modelling and analysis.