@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A lightweight security scheme for query processing in clustered wireless sensor networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Low-overhead secured query-processing mechanism in clustered WSN environment.Preserves security features- confidentiality, integrity and defence against replay attack.Query is sent from base station to cluster heads in encrypted form.The cluster heads register their member nodes by exchanging messages.The cluster heads send aggregated responses to the base station.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#


@&#ABSTRACT@&#
When wireless sensor networks (WSNs) are deployed in areas inaccessible by human beings, security becomes extremely important, as they are prone to different types of malicious attacks. We propose a scheme to build a security mechanism in a query-processing paradigm within WSNs with clustered architecture. This work aims to preserve the basic security features such as confidentiality and integrity as well as to protect from replay attack in presence of mote class attacker. Considering the limitations of such an attacker, the probability of attacking cluster head and member nodes is higher than attacking the base station. Paying attention to this fact, in all communication between cluster head and member nodes, the key is neither transmitted nor pre-deployed. Performance of the scheme is evaluated and compared through qualitative and quantitative analyses; results show the present scheme’s dominance over the competing schemes.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
WSNs unlike traditional networks are much more susceptible to attacks mainly due to the nature of their deployment and mode of communication. Attacks in sensor networks are of two types viz. active and passive attacks [1,2]. Active attacks are those where the adversary listens to and modifies the communication taking place in the network. Examples of such attacks are denial-of-service (DoS) attacks [2,3], node replication attacks, routing attacks, etc. Passive attackers only eavesdrop on the communication taking place without actively participating in disrupting the communication. Therefore, such networks require high security measures that must ensure proper protection of the network. Further, conventional security mechanism intended for the resource-rich networks such as local area network does not fit into the resource-starved network like WSN. In presence of such limitations it becomes imperative to devise lightweight security solutions for WSNs. Public key cryptography which requires complex computations creates a barrier in designing lightweight solutions [2]. However, symmetric key cryptography requiring relatively less computations and storage may be used as a security solution in such a scenario.In this work, we propose a lightweight security scheme capable of maintaining the basic security features of the network as well as thwarting replay attack using symmetric cryptography. The scheme is an improved version of a security scheme SQPS (Secured Query Processing Scheme) proposed in one of our previous works [4]. The proposed strategy deals with securing the network at every step of communication within the network. Performance of the scheme is measured primarily by analyzing it in terms of cracking probability and cracking time as well as through calculation of storage, computation and communication overheads. Subsequent to this analysis, the scheme is also evaluated through simulation taking authentication rate, data freshness and packet delivery ratio as parameters. Both analytical and simulation results are compared with one existing competing scheme and the earlier version of the present scheme. In analytical results, performance shows significant improvement in terms of computation and communication overheads at the cost of slightly increased storage overhead, that is affordable now-a-days in motes [5] with improved specification. This proves the suitability of the proposed scheme for a resource-constrained network like WSN. On the other hand simulation results show improved performance of the scheme in replay attack detection without compromising the network performance in terms of packet delivery ratio.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 deals with related works. In Section 3 network and system assumptions are described in details. This is followed by Section 4 that gives a detailed description of the proposed scheme. Performance analysis of the scheme along with a detailed comparative study is done in Section 5. In Section 6, concluding remarks highlighting future scope of the work are presented.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
