@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Energy-efficient image transmission in wireless multimedia sensor networks using block-based Compressive Sensing

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Energy efficient CS methodology for image transmission in WMSNs is proposed.Unique encoding algorithm for CS measurements with the Bernoulli matrix is formulated.Experimental analysis in the Atmega 128 of Mica2 to compute the execution time.Optimal range of communication distance for the proposed methodology is evaluated.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
WMSN,CS,Mica2,Atmega 128,Encoding,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Wireless multimedia sensor networks (WMSNs) are capable of retrieving audio, image and video data in addition to scalar sensor data. The lifetime of these networks is mainly dependent on the communication and computational energy consumption of the node. In this paper, compressed sensing (CS)-based image transmission is proposed to reduce the energy consumption considerably with acceptable image quality. A unique encoding algorithm is formulated for the CS measurements attained with the Bernoulli measurement matrix. The proposed CS method produces better results at a lower sparsity range. Experimental analysis is performed using the Atmega 128 processor of Mica2 to compute the execution time and energy consumption in the hardware platform. The proposed CS method has a considerable reduction in energy consumption and better image quality than the conventional CS method. The simulation results show the efficiency of the proposed method.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
WMSN is a network of wirelessly interconnected sensor nodes equipped with multimedia devices capable of retrieving video streams, images, audio streams and scalar sensor data. The availability of inexpensive hardware such as CMOS cameras and microphones has led to the development of WMSNs. WMSNs are able to store, process in real-time, correlate and fuse multimedia data originated from heterogeneous sources [1]. WMSNs are resource constrained and have high bandwidth demand. It is essential to reduce both computational and communication energy consumptions involved in image transmission to increase the lifetime of these networks. Recently, CS has been widely used, allowing the entire signal to be determined from relatively few linear measurements. It is used to capture and represent compressible signals at a rate significantly below the Nyquist rate. It simultaneously senses and compresses the data at low complexity. In this paper, CS is used for reducing the energy consumption in WMSNs.Candes and Wakin [2] proposed a new sampling theory that simultaneously combines sampling and compression procedures during acquisition. The use of CS theory can recover sparse signals and images from far fewer samples or measurements than traditional methods present in the WMSN. The hardware architecture proposed for the real-time implementation of CS acquisition has less complexity compared to the conventional digital camera [3]. Hence, the implementation of a CS-based real-time image acquisition system has a promising future. The sparse vector can also be estimated from coarsely quantized and noisy measurements by CS [4–6]. This can further reduce the energy consumption of the image transmission process.Romberg [7] described the combined usage of the low-pass discrete cosine transform (DCT) and the noiselet coefficients for image acquisition. The image is reconstructed by minimizing the total variation (l1 minimization). Han et al. [8] proposed that the image could be divided into dense and sparse components, which are encoded by the CS technique. The correlation between these two components is studied by using an autoregressive model. Projection onto convex sets (POCS) is used to reduce the decoding computational complexity and the number of random measurements needed for CS. Xiong et al. [9] suggested an adaptive measurement matrix to reduce the dimension of block compressed sensing (BCS)-based image representation and to improve the recovered image quality. CS-based image transmission and recovery for wireless sensor network (WSN) applications are discussed in [7–9]. However, the energy consumption of the transmission is not evaluated in any target platforms. Chen et al. [10] used CS for image compression and implemented the CS-based compression algorithm on the Intel XScale PXA270 processor. Mamaghanian et al. [11] proposed a CS-based solution for electrocardiogram signal compression in wireless body area networks. The lifetime evaluation of the mote has been performed in the shimmer platform.Karakus et al. [12] proposed a framework for CS-based signal recovery, and the energy consumption was determined by using the Atmega processor. The effects of acquiring, processing and communicating CS-based measurements on WSNs are analysed and compared to conventional approaches. CS prolongs the network lifetime for sparse signals, and it is more advantageous for WSNs with a smaller coverage area. Based on the programming logic, operations are decided and the energy consumption is analysed. The total energy consumption has been computed based on the energy consumed by each instruction. However, the entire process is not validated in the target platform. Alternatively, we have extended the energy analysis procedure to incorporate image transmission in WMSNs. However, for image applications, the sparsifying basis and measurement matrix plays a major role in determining the energy consumption. The optimal measurement range required to achieve an acceptable image quality suitable for WMSN applications is also suggested. Further, a new encoding algorithm is developed that uniquely suits the unquantized measurements obtained using the Bernoulli sensing matrix. Experiments are performed on the Atmel Atmega 128 Processor of Mica2 for analysing the energy consumption.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides an overview of CS. In Section 3, the proposed framework is discussed in detail. In Section 4, the performance evaluation is explained. Image recovery analysis and the corresponding simulation results are discussed. Energy analysis for image transmission and its validation in the target platform is also explained. Conclusions are provided in Section 5.Consider a real valued, finite length, one-dimensional signal X∈RN. Using the N×N basis matrix ψ=[ψ1|ψ2|…|ψN] with the vectors{ψi} as columns, a signal X can be expressed as(1)X=∑i=1NSiψi=ψSwhere X is an N×1 column vector with coefficients Xi, i=1,2,…,N and S is a vector of coefficients representing X in ψ basis. The process of measurement in CS [13] can be defined as,(2)y=φX=φψS=ΘSwhere φ is an M×N random matrix, Θ=φψ and y is an M×1 measurement vector. It is assumed that M<N. The number of measurements depends upon the sparsity and incoherence [14]. Low coherence between measurement basis φ and representation basis ψ results in fewer measurements. The number of measurements M for the perfect reconstruction of a K-sparse N dimension signal [13] is given by(3)M⩾α·K·logNKwhere α is some positive constant affecting the probability of recovery. Signal X could be recovered exactly by solving the minimum l1-norm optimisation problem. The reconstruction process is formulated as,(4)S^=minS‖S‖ℓ1subject toy=ΘS,X=ψS^This methodology can be made in-built during the acquisition process itself. The signal can be recovered at the receiver with the help of measurements by using recovery techniques such as convex optimisation, linear programming, POCS [7] and greedy algorithms – orthogonal matching pursuit (OMP) [13], regularized OMP (ROMP) [15], stage wise OMP (STOMP) [16], basis pursuits (BP) [17], and compressive sampling matching pursuit (CoSaMP) [18]. The Bernoulli measurement matrix (±1 entry with equal probability) and OMP are used for acquisition and recovery of an image in this paper.The input image is divided into 8×8 blocks and is, processed and transmitted by the following methods: transform coding (TC), conventional CS (CCS) and proposed CS (PCS). PCS is compared with TC and CCS [12]. The entire framework for the energy analysis of the image transmission is shown in Fig. 1.The image is captured, divided into blocks of size 8×8 and transformed using DCT, yielding N transform coefficients. To obtain a K-sparse approximation of the signal, the K largest values with their corresponding locations are identified [12]. The retrieved elements (A) are encoded using the Huffman table as used in the joint photographic experts group (JPEG) standard [19] and are transmitted to the receiving end. At the receiver section, decoded K values are placed in their corresponding locations, and then the inverse DCT (IDCT) is applied. The recovered image quality depends on the value of K.The image is captured, divided into blocks of size 8×8 and sparsified using DCT, which is then given to the CS process. CS measurements are obtained by taking the M random projections (Y1) of the image as in Eq. (2) using φ1ψ and are encoded using the Huffman table (EY1) as used in the JPEG standard. The measurements (Y1) are generated by multiplying the image vector X (64×1) with a random M×N Gaussian matrix [12], having binary entries and ψ the DCT coefficient matrix.In the receiver section, the recovery from encoded measurements EY1 depends on the sparsity of X and the properties of the measurement matrix. If the number of measurements M is large enough, then the signal X can be recovered properly. OMP is a greedy recovery algorithm and can recover a signal with K non-zero entries in dimension N given M random linear measurements of that signal. φ1 is a Gaussian measurement matrix, satisfying the restricted isometry property (RIP) [14]. OMP constructs an approximation by going through an iteration process. For the first iteration, the residual vector will be the measurement vector. At each iteration, the column vector of φ1, which mostly resembles the residual vector, corresponds to a non-zero entry of X. Thus, one non-zero entry of the signal X is estimated. Subtracting that contribution from the observation vector y and repeating eventually yields all of the non-zero entries of signal X. Compared with other alternative methods, a major advantage of the OMP is its simplicity and speed. IDCT is taken for the values obtained from OMP, and the image is recovered. The recovered image quality depends on measurements M.In this method, the image is captured, divided into blocks of size 8×8 and sparsified using binary DCT (BinDCT) [20], which is then given to the CS process. The eight-point BinDCT of the C1 configuration is used to obtain the multiplierless transform with dyadic values. BinDCT-C1 needs 23 shifts and 42 additions to obtain the transformed coefficients [20]. Although there will be a reduction in the reconstruction quality, BinDCT-C1 is adopted in PCS to achieve energy efficiency. CS measurements are obtained by taking the M random projections (Y2) of the image.(5)Y2=φ2X=φ2ψWS=ΘWSThe measurements are obtained by multiplying the random M×N Bernoulli (random±1) matrix and DCT coefficient matrix. The DCT coefficient matrix is multiplied with a weighing matrix (W) to extract the requisite sparse elements. W is a binary matrix of size 8×8, having K number of ones along the diagonal in the requisite indices. The measurements are retrieved with only addition operations against floating point multiplications involved in the conventional measurement process using the random Gaussian matrix. The measurements are encoded (EY2) using the proposed encoder, which is explained in Section 3.3.1.In the receiver section, the recovery from the decoded measurements Y2 is performed using OMP. The reconstruction process is formulated as:(6)S^=minS‖S‖ℓ1subject toy2=ΘWS,X=ψS^IDCT is obtained for the values obtained using OMP, and the image is recovered. The recovered image quality depends on measurements M.The measurements obtained with PCS have more repetitive elements with a large magnitude. The encoding algorithm is developed by considering this unique characteristic and is shown in Table 1. Encoding is performed on a block-by-block basis. The measurements in each block are encoded consecutively by using the Coding Block_n (Yn) algorithm, where Ynare the measurements of the nth block of an image. The elements occurring more than once are considered duplicates and are removed from Ynto generate the non-duplicate sequence (An). The original sequence is represented based on the number of non-duplicate elements and their position in An.The code word (Code_n) of the proposed encoding algorithm is the concatenation of Pn, Sn, and Vn. The non-duplicate elements (An) and the new sequence (Bn) are encoded to obtain the actual codeword. Because the number of non-duplicate elements (length (An)) varies from block to block, it is indicated with a binary value (Pn). The number of bits used to represent Pnis derived using t=ceil (log2 (length (An))). Anare encoded using the modified lossless entropy coding (LEC) algorithm as shown in Table 1, whose output is Sn. The prefix value used in the dictionary of the LEC algorithm [21] has been reversed entirely as shown in Table 2because larger numbers occur frequently in the measurements.Bnare converted to binary form with the most significant bit indicating the polarity bit, and the result is represented by Vn. If only two elements are present in An, the elements are represented with two bits, with MSB indicating the polarity and LSB having 1 for one element and 0 for the other element. The proposed encoding algorithm is explained with an example in Table 3, indicating the coding of an individual 8×8 block measurements for sparsity K=2. The bits required to represent the measurements of a block using the Huffman and LEC algorithms is calculated and presented in Table 4.It can be clearly observed that the proposed encoding algorithm has a 66% reduction in bits versus the Huffman [19] and LEC algorithms [21] while operated on the same measurements.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
