@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A smart system to manage the context evolution in the Cultural Heritage domain

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Model the context evolution by means of a graph approach.Design a Context Evolution System (CES) to manage the context evolution and the consequently tailoring of data and services.Improve user experience by means of this kind of system.Our apporach is suitable within the Cultural Heritage domain.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Context modeling,Context-aware system,Cultural heritage,Smart environments,Internet of Things,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Nowadays intelligent and pervasive environments are characterized by a great number of devices and sensors that develop continuously and capture enormous amounts of data. Designing a context-aware system able to provide the most tailored services to users according to their behaviors, preferences and needs is still a research challenge. In such environments, although the context is very complex, dynamic and full of data captured and produced, users aspire to automatically receive contextualized services. The Cultural Heritage domain represents a domain where exchanged and produced data can be opportunely exploited by a set of applications and services in order to transform a static space into a smart environment. In this perspective, this paper presents a context-aware system named Context Evolution System (CES) able to represent and manage the evolution of the context through its instances; such an evolution is driven by occurring events and opportunely modeled by a graph structure. To assess the proposed solution, a Cultural Heritage case study of a real temporary art exhibition named the Beauty or the Truth and located in Naples (Italy) is presented and discussed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Environments defined as intelligent and pervasive identify places where there is a widespread use of embedded devices, sensors, mobile applications and services. Such an environment enables the creation of a dynamic ecosystem in which a large amount of data is constantly produced and captured. In the last decade, Service-Oriented Architecture (SOA) systems have been widely applied to integrate sensors, devices and software applications [1,2] in this kind of environments. Fully realizing the great potential of all these service-provisioning scenarios, context-awareness, defined as the ability to provide services with full awareness of the current execution environment (the context), is widely recognized as one of the key points in the design of modern mobile and ubiquitous systems [3–6]. However, the context and its continuous evolution are essential aspects to be considered if we want to establish which of the available services are the most appropriate to be delivered. The context surrounding a user is rich of information since produced data, and user behaviors, preferences and needs continuously and rapidly changes. When we talk about context and the modeling of its instances, several factors such as location, time, environmental parameters, user behaviors and preferences, and the relationships among context instances should be clearly specified. Modeling the context through its evolution represents a crucial requirement in order to determine a correct context-switch and consequently a dynamic selection of useful data and services. Indeed, a model simplifying the manipulation of complex context-aware systems is a crucial need for the specification and analysis of the services. Such a context model allows an explicit representation of the evolution in the context along with the processing flow of context-aware services. Several context modeling approaches [7] such as the key-value, graphical, mark-up scheme, object-oriented, logic-based, and ontology-based models have been studied to specify the acquisition, management, and relationship of context. The pervasive computing research community is constantly appraising the benefits of a formal modeling of context and its evolution, since context modeling can strongly reduce the complexity of context-aware applications [8]. The Cultural Heritage domain and its spaces represent a world wide resource of inestimable value and such a value gains increasing importance when embedded into the digital ecosystem of a Smart City [9]. In particular, it is a domain characterized by a wide public participation; either in a museum, at an art exhibition or in an old town centre the context is represented by people interacting with cultural items and spaces, nowadays equipped with several ICT technologies. In this scenario, people (citizens, tourists, etc.) and objects (buildings, rooms, artefacts, etc.) equipped with appropriate devices (GPS, smartphones, video cameras, sensors, RFID, etc.) give rise to continuous context evolutions in which all the mentioned entities, and others, can produce, communicate and share data.Nowadays, cultural spaces represents complex environments, in which ICT tools and applications are widespread; people equipped with mobile devices can interact with cultural objects, sharing and producing data, but at the same time they require useful personalized services to enhance the quality of their cultural experience. In this paper we present a smart context-aware system to model the context evolution, adopting a graph structure, named Context Evolution System (CES). In our system, the activation of the most appropriate services to be provided to users is driven by occurring events. Developing smartness within this kind of environment means not only introducing innovative and sensing technologies but also transforming the captured data into useful information to deliver customized services to users. Enhancing the quality of a cultural experience depends on different factors; to assess the usability and the user satisfaction, a real case study in the Cultural Heritage domain is presented and discussed. In detail, we show an example of context evolution modeling inside an art exhibition named The Beauty or The Truth, located in Naples within the monumental complex of San Domenico Maggiore, Italy. Inside the exhibition spaces, ICT technologies such as sensors and a mobile application are deployed to enable the smartness of this kind of space. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the background of the proposed approach and the related works. Section 3 details the CES system with its components. Section 4 details the proposed context evolution model based on a graph approach. Section 5 discusses the case study and the experimental results. Section 6 concludes the paper with some considerations and challenges.The development of advanced services for smart and pervasive environments is still complicated by the high dynamism of the designed systems, which have to deliver meaningful information to users often in real-time, depending on their movements in the physical space, and on their interactions with sensors and devices, and accounting for their past choices and current needs. In particular, useful information for users depends on several parameters such as location, interests, network performance, the semantics of the content, multimedia features, and other context information, and so on. Moreover, it would be useful for a user, when inside this kind of space, to receive a set of the most appropriate services and information in order to navigate the physical space in terms of browsing activities and consequently improve his/her experience.In this perspective, context-aware computing enables a system to interact with users through devices sensitive to the environment [10,11]. Accordingly, the authors in [12] envisioned scenarios where users would look for relevant POIs by querying services through mobile phones and standard Internet protocols. In 1994, Schilit et al. [13] pioneered the term context-aware pervasive systems. Their work detailed a model of computing in which several diverse mobile and stationary systems interact with the user in order to determine, according to the user’s location, POIs and people that are near, as well as changes in those objects over time. In [14], the goal of context-aware computing is to provide relevant information and/or services to the user, where relevancy depends on the user’s task. One of the most important criteria in context-awareness system is to efficiently represent the relationships and dependencies among the contexts via well formalized methodologies.In the last decade, a number of context modeling and reasoning approaches have been developed, ranging from very simple early models to the current state-of-the-art context models. As is well known, the model specifies the acquisition, management, and relationship of the context [7]. The context is characterized as the information that can be used to characterize the situation of an entity [15]. Several types of data gathered by sensors or other devices are captured, interpreted and converted to inferred contexts by a specified rule or algorithm. The context model has to satisfy various requirements [8]; heterogeneity and mobility, relationships and dependencies, timeliness, imperfection, reasoning, the usability of modeling formalisms, and efficient context provisioning.In a broader sense, the context can be defined as follows: context is any information that can be used to characterize the situation of an entity. An entity is a person, place, or object that is considered relevant to the interaction between a user and an application, including the user and applications themselves[14].Considering the Cultural Heritage domain, the authors of this paper have already experienced the design and the application of location-based services and technological tools applied to such environments (especially indoors) as reported in [16–19]. Moreover, service discovery in pervasive and smart environments has been addressed in [20,21]. Early discovery approaches were based on the functional description of services, for instance service category, semantic description and key words. These prototypes aimed to transfer a smartness to cultural sites, applying different communication technologies, sensor boards and multimedia services. The proposed Context Evolution System aims to enrich the Cultural Heritage platform developed in our previous works, in order to enhance the user’s cultural experience and satisfaction during museum and art exhibition visits.In this paper, we consider the case of a visitor or a group of visitors who intend to enjoy an exhibition of real sculptures named The Beauty or The Truth, located in the monumental complex of San Domenico Maggiore, Naples (Italy). Here, a set of services and multimedia information, both before and during the cultural experience, have been modeled and delivered including the booking, ticketing and multimedia guide services, all by means of mobile devices.Modeling the context through the evolution of its instances is a complex operation, requiring a modular architecture to support this activity and to manage the general conditions. In this section the Context Evolution System architecture and its components are presented and detailed. Fig. 1illustrates a functional overview of the proposed system, composed of the following main components:•Services engine: this component represents the core of the CES system; it is an engine responsible for events management and the context switching. Moreover, it is composed of three sub-modules:Events detector: this module is responsible for (i) capturing events (e.g. a sensor detecting too high a temperature within a room, a sensor detecting a visitor in proximity of a cultural item, a sensor detecting an emergency situation, etc.) and (ii) activating the Context Switching Computation module.Context Switching Computation: this module, triggered by the Events Detector, is responsible for the context-switch and the dynamic selection of Contextual Data Views (useful data to be presented) and the Basket of Services (useful services to be offered).Visiting paths generation: this module is responsible for arranging items in appropriate visiting paths provided to visitors (e.g. cultural objects arranged in a cultural path within an exhibition).Services deliverer: this component is responsible for the services adaptation and delivery to users. For instance, consider the situation in which a user is located in proximity of a cultural item: (i) as a first step, its presence will be detected by a deployed sensor (an event), (ii) the context changes and the Services Deliverer enables the multimedia guide service in order to provide multimedia information to the user through its mobile device.Knowledge base and user LOG: these components can be considered as repositories that manage respectively (i) multimedia data, in order to propose objects and content of interest to users arranged in the shape of visiting paths, and (ii) captured users behavioral logs.Context manager: this component is responsible for managing the current context by constantly storing the overall information (data) characterizing the context at a given moment (e.g. environmental data, user data, time information, etc.).The rationale behind this system’s design derives from two main requirements: (i) to simplify the access to and enjoyment of cultural items and spaces, (ii) to adapt this system to the different environmental characteristics and needs. The modularity of the proposed approach guarantees the applicability of the system in different scenarios, such as the smart transport domain. Indeed, the Visiting Path Generation module can be replaced by one or more different modules in order to manage different situations.In the digital ecosystem of a Smart City [22], people (citizens, tourists, etc.) and objects (buildings, rooms, artefacts, etc.) equipped with appropriate devices (GPS, smartphones, video cameras, sensors, RFID, etc.) can constitute a particular network in which all the mentioned entities, and others, can communicate and share knowledge. However, the application of technological instruments is not sufficient to effectively define as smart a space; exchanged and produced data have to be opportunely exploited by a set of applications and services in order to develop the required smartness. From a more general point of view, the network entities can be seen as composed of a set of Single Smart Spaces – S3, each needing particular ICT infrastructures and services to transform the physical spaces into useful smart environments.In the scenario described above, we define a Single Smart Space, S3, as a large sensor capable of observing the reality in order to facilitate its transfer into the digital world, since it produces represented and stored knowledge.An S3 must be able to manage:•the set of sensors perceiving the real world and providing a constantly updated vision of it;the set of sources which are useful for context awareness applications and services ;the monitoring of the reality in order to develop the capacity for intervention based on the produced diagnostics;the individuals interacting within the environment;the end-users as the set of actions or recipients that ensure the sustainability, both in economic terms and also more simply in terms of the perceived quality of life;the governance of the space in terms of the possibility of action, aimed at improving the effectiveness and efficiency of interventions;the knowledge produced and adequately stored and classified.The features of an S3 are summarized in Fig. 2; the arrows indicate the interaction directions among them. This kind of space aims to provide the necessary smartness to create a dynamic cultural space. Accordingly, an S3 produces, at a given moment, data and services that represent a context instance; occurring events can consequently change and evolve the context enabling several context switches to be managed.As mentioned above, a Single Smart Space can opportunely exploit the smartness of a space, through managing the context evolution. Now, we want to represent the evolution of the context that in our hypothesis is driven by events corresponding to particular occurring situations (e.g. a sensor detects too high a temperature value inside a museum room, etc.) and software services (e.g. booking an exhibition visit, using a mobile multimedia guide, etc.). Indeed, the occurrence of situations or the activation of services determines a context-switch and at the same time the dynamic selection of useful data, grouped in (Contextual Data Views), and services, grouped in a (Basket of Services). These can be opportunely exploited as a result of data and service tailoring. In our case, we adopt a graph structure, named the Context Evolution Graph (CEG), able to model the context and its evolution among its instances.In the following, we formalize the CEG structure. Given a setC={c1,…,cn}of contexts, a setE={e1,…,em}of events, a setS={S1,…,Sk}of baskets of services and a setV={v1,…,vh}of contextual data views, we can model the context evolution as a labeled graphCEG=(C;Σ;lc;ls),where (C, Σ) is a directed graph, lc: c ∈ C → (v, S) is a function that associates each context with the related contextual data view and basket of services and ls: t ∈ Σ → e is a function that associates each edge in Σ⊆C × C with a particular service (or a services composition) that can be activated or a given situation that can occur in the current state, initiating the context-switch. In the case of events corresponding to services activation, a constraint is generated, in other words the activated services have to belong to the Basket of Services related to the current contextTo better understand the proposed approach based on a graph structure modeling the context evolution, we consider a Cultural Heritage scenario, detailing three situations of context evolution managed by the CEG. Consider the first situation, illustrated in Fig. 3, where an user wants to book a visit to an art exhibition by means of a dedicated mobile app installed on its device.CASE 1: In the initial state, no useful contextual data are associated to the user; the only available service is the the art exhibition booking one. This service allows a visit booking for a particular date requiring some preliminary information about the visitor profile (age, gender, etc.) . Once a visit for a given date has been booked, the switched context instance contains information about the user profile in terms of his/her level of expertise and preferred language and the documentation type (images, video, audio) that will be provided to the mobile application; the ticketing service is now available. After the activation of the ticketing service, the user can buy the ticket and download the mobile application.CASE 2: Fig. 4presents the second situation modeled by the CEG structure, representing a visitor inside the art exhibition environment. On the date of the visit, the user can activate the accounting service that registers his/her presence inside the exhibition. Consequently, the visitor can start his/her visit and a proximity_detection service is now available This service allows the visitor to detect the nearest cultural object, enabling an innovative interaction with this object through multimedia facilities. A multimedia guide service will be activated only if the user device, for example, scans a QR-code related to a picture or if a sensor detects its proximity to a cultural item; the user may possibly share images and feedback on social networks about its cultural experience using the comment service. During the visit, the user can be accompanied among the exhibited artworks by the multimedia guide service, observing and interacting with the pictures and sculptures. At the end of the visit, the user can terminate the experience by activating the exit service and additionally can choose to save his cultural path (observed pictures, multimedia information, etc.) in a digital shape using the visit saving service. If during a visit an emergency event occurs, the user has to follow the instructions provided by the assistant service (e.g. how to reach the closest exit and/or change the visit path).CASE 3: Finally, Fig. 5presents the third situation regarding a context evolution modeling during an art exhibition scenario, from a supervisor user perspective. At the beginning, the exhibition supervisor can activate the configuration service, in order to define the sensors deployment inside the cultural space in terms of type, activation time and location. After this deployment, the supervisor can activate the monitoring service that gathers all sensed data. Subsequently, it is possible to activate the event detection service in order to analyze the collected data and to detect particular emergency situations or situations requiring particular maintenance activities. In both cases, recovery services have to be activated to solve the related problems (e.g. an employee can be informed about the maintenance activities to execute, a critical situations in which all the visitors are encouraged to exit).As an assessment scenario, a wide case study is discussed; it consists of an art exhibition of 271 sculptures divided into 7 thematic sections and named the Beauty or the Truth.11http://www.ilbellooilvero.it.This exhibition shows, for the first time in Italy, the Neapolitan sculptures of the late 19th century and early 20th century, through the major sculptors of the time. The sculptures are exhibited in the monumental complex of San Domenico Maggiore, located in the historic centre of Naples, Italy. The environment provides a Wi-Fi connection with a mobile-based access to a multimedia collection containing: digital reproductions of sculptures by Francesco Jerace and other artists, educational videos, audio guides and textual and hypermedia documents with descriptions of authors and sculptures. The user’s visit starts with preliminary booking and ticketing phases; after these steps have been completed, the visitor can walk within the exhibition rooms .When he/she is particularly close to a sculpture, its mobile device, equipped with a mobile application named OPS Opere Parlanti Show (The Talking Artwork Show), is detected by the sensor node placed on the cultural item. Once the user’s mobile device has been detected, the CES captures this event, performs a context switch arranging useful multimedia data and activating the most appropriate available services. The multimedia content (texts, audio, video and images) of the exhibited cultural items are stored in the knowledge database of DATABENC,22http://www.databenc.it.the high technology district for the Cultural Heritage in Campania (Italy).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Managing the context, as a complex entity, within a smart and pervasive environment is a crucial task in order to successful deliver useful data and services to people living or acting inside this kind of space. In this perspective, formalizing a structure to address this issue can represent a suitable solution to design a system able to capture sensed data in order to create a useful mechanism of data and service delivery. The presented Context Evolution Graph can be used to manage the evolution of context instances driven by events, adopting a graph structure. Moreover, a context-aware system, the Context Evolution System, able to detect an occurring event, perform a context switch and provide useful data and appropriate services to the users has been presented and assessed. The key features of such an approach are that: (i) it exploits an event-driven methodology to change the context data views and the basket of available services, and (ii) it establishes a new context evolution model by using a graph structure. Furthermore, we have investigated the effectiveness of the proposed approach within a real experimental scenario in the Cultural Heritage domain. To assess behaviors, the users’ satisfaction and the feasibility of our system, we have performed several trials. Our experimental results have shown that our approach can be considered as quite promising and encourages further research in this direction. Our research contribution currently focuses on improving the CEG model and consequently the CES system features to provide an instrument fully configurable and customizable.