@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A direct hybrid finite element–wave based modelling technique for efficient analysis of poroelastic materials in steady-state acoustic problems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A hybrid modelling technique for efficient analysis of Biot’s poroelastic materials.Efficient analysis performance for addressing singularities in poroelastic domain.Domain with singularities and/or complex geometry discretised into finite elements.Geometrically moderate domain partitioned into convex wave based subdomains.Direct interface coupling of finite element and wave based poroelastic domains.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Hybrid modelling,Poroelastic materials,Wave based method,Finite element method,Biot’s theory,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This work proposes a hybrid modelling technique for efficient analysis of poroelastic materials, which are widely used for noise reduction in acoustic problems. By combining the finite element method and the wave based method in a direct manner, the proposed hybrid technique maximises the advantages and compensates the drawbacks of both numerical methods. The considered poroelastic domain described by Biot’s theory is divided into two groups of domains according to their geometrical characteristics and boundary conditions. The group with complex geometries and/or boundary conditions leading to singularities is discretised into a large number of small finite elements. The other group consisting of large, geometrically moderate poroelastic domains is partitioned into wave based subdomains where the field variables are expanded with analytical poroelastic wave functions. Both groups modelled by the finite element method and the wave based method, respectively, are combined in a hybrid framework in this work to ensure their interacting dynamic behaviours. The properties of the hybrid model are investigated and are compared to existing modelling methods for some numerical examples. The proposed direct hybrid modelling technique provides stable predictions and exhibits fast convergence performances for the analysis of poroelastic materials, especially when singularities arise in the poroelastic domain.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Sound has a powerful effect on humans and their environments as it determines to a large extent the general appraisal of products and spaces although these impressions may often be subjective. With increasing noise exposure in modern society, noise has been recognised as one of the most severe environmental hazards in our everyday life  [1]. Recognition of this noise problem has produced many noise regulations  [2–4], as well as growing consumer demands for quiet products. Although the direct treatment to block noise sources should be the first approach to solve noise problems, noise sources are often too diverse to control completely and/or simultaneously. Passive treatments that reduce noise transfers have shown to be effective in many cases and circumstances. Appropriate use of sound absorptive porous materials (mathematically described as poroelastic materials) in vibro-acoustic systems allows for noise from a variety of sources to be effectively dissipated such that it can no longer transfer to the target regions.Because of the complicated physical phenomena involved and large degrees of freedom required for numerical implementation, poroelastic materials are often represented in merely phenomenological or mathematically simplified models for Computer Aided Engineering (CAE) applications. As poroelastic materials are key components for dissipation of acoustic energy in vibro-acoustic systems, however, there is a strong need for a development of efficient and accurate modelling technique to fully describe their dynamic behaviours to meet the regulations and demands of noise problems.For the numerical modelling of poroelastic materials, conventional element based approaches, such as the finite element method (FEM)  [5] and the boundary element method (BEM)  [6], are most commonly used, similar to other applications in vibro-acoustic modelling. Since the element based approaches discretise the considered problem domains or their boundaries into a large number of small elements, geometrically complex domains can easily be represented. However, a larger number of smaller elements are required when considering higher frequencies as wavelengths shorten. Consequently, a huge increase of the degrees of freedom is inevitable to model large sized problems. Such high sensitivity to the system size (i.e., computation load) depending on the frequency of interest and the problem dimension makes the element based methods limited to relatively small sized problems and/or low-frequency ranges for practical CAE applications. This limitation is even more critical for poroelastic materials, which require a larger number of degrees of freedom in the numerical implementation due to their more complicated constitutional material behaviours and accompanying mathematical descriptions with their inherent strong frequency dependency and short wavelengths.The wave based method (WBM) has been developed as an alternative deterministic approach to mitigate the difficulties in the element based models. Following the initial work by Desmet  [7], wave based (WB) models provide efficient and accurate analysis of various steady-state vibro-acoustic problems, governed by generalised Helmholtz equations (e.g., see  [8,9]). The WB approaches have quite advantageous properties as compared to the element based approaches. Based on an indirect Trefftz approach  [10], the dynamic field variables in WB models are described using wave functions, which exactly satisfy the governing differential equations. As such, there is no approximation error inside the wave based domains in contrast to the interpolation and pollution errors  [11,12] that arise for the element based approaches.Instead of discretising problem domains into a number of small elements, WB models partition them into large convex subdomains, where the number and size are not dependent on the frequency of interest. Embedding a priori known information on the physics of the problem in the field variable description leads to a higher convergence rate for WB models. Therefore, WB systems are much smaller than those resulting from the element based approaches and consequently have a much lower computation load. On the other hand, WB models typically have a difficulty addressing geometrical complexity, because of the sufficient, but strong condition that the subdomains should be convex to guarantee convergence  [7]. Thus, the WB models show to be most efficient for rather moderate geometries. It is also noticeable that other wave-form solutions satisfying the governing equations exactly have also been used to deal with general convex or non-convex domains similar to the WBM  [13,14].The same properties hold when the WB approach is applied for poroelastic problems. Analysis of poroelastic domains having a simple and convex geometry is very fast and accurate by using a WB model  [15,16]. However, it is difficult to expect such high efficiency when the geometry of poroelastic domains becomes more complex. The efficiency and accuracy of the poroelastic WB model reduce significantly when stress singularities are present at (for example) the corner(s) of poroelastic domains, even in relatively simple configurations. Although for the combination of sliding edge boundary conditions enrichment functions have been proposed to enhance the accuracy and efficiency of the WB model in cases of singularities  [17], this problem remains for other combinations of boundary conditions.In addition to the WBM, it is noticeable that some other methods based on wave solution expansions, are applied for the analysis of poroelastic materials. Nennig et al.  [18] applied the method of fundamental solutions (MFS) for the analysis of acoustics waves scattered by finite poroelastic objects using the fundamental solutions of the Helmholtz equations, resulting from the decoupled Biot’s equations. Especially, the scattering by an infinite array of periodic porous scatterers was investigated. Chazot et al.  [19] applied the partition of unity finite element method (PUFEM) for the analysis of interior acoustic fields with poroelastic materials. In PUFEM, the fields of the solid phase displacement and fluid pressure in poroelastic materials are represented by a finite element plane wave approximation, which uses the plane wave solutions in various propagating directions as well as the classical shape functions. Gabard and Dazel  [20] developed a plane-wave discontinuous Galerkin method (DGM) to predict sound absorption in poroelastic materials by casting Biot’s equations into a set of the conservation equations. Although these methods have their own characteristics in the modelling of poroelastic materials, they all could, including the WBM, be categorised as Trefftz approaches from the mathematical viewpoint.This paper intends to address the geometrical disadvantages of the poroelastic WB model by combining it with another numerical method. There have been previous attempts to combine the WBM with other numerical modelling methods to strengthen its capability and simultaneously incorporate the merits of other modelling approaches. Among them, the hybridisation of the WBM with the FEM has been done to resolve the geometrical complexity problem of acoustic domains, as shown in the representative work of van Hal et al.  [21] and Van Genechten et al.  [22] for 2D and 3D vibro-acoustic problems, respectively. Recently, Jonckheere et al.  [23] proposed a hybridisation method for efficient analysis of acoustic cavities coupled with poroelastic trim materials. In the work, the coupling terms between the WBM for acoustic cavities and the FEM for Biot’s poroelastic materials were derived to accomplish the hybridisation.In this article a new hybrid modelling technique for efficient analysis of poroelastic materials is proposed, by combining the existing wave based method  [15] together with the finite element method. The proposed hybrid finite element–wave based (FE–WB) modelling technique benefits from the computational efficiency of the WB approach, as well as from the geometrical flexibility of the FE model. The considered poroelastic problem domain is divided into two groups according to their geometrical characteristics and boundary conditions. The group of relatively large and simple geometries is treated by using a WB model, whereas those incorporating complex geometries or abrupt changes in boundary conditions are discretised with finite elements.Since the different methods are used to model one physical problem domain, the two sets of system equations should be assembled to a total system equation. In the assembly process, mathematically exact coupling conditions should be properly imposed along the interfaces between two groups. We propose to directly couple the poroelastic quantities appearing in the interfaces of the WB subdomains along with those from the FE counterparts. After solving the total system of equations, two separate postprocessing steps are performed to obtain the dynamic field variables for each group.To verify the proposed direct hybrid FE–WB technique, numerical studies are performed. A rectangular poroelastic domain coupled with an acoustic domain serves to investigate the general properties of the hybrid FE–WB modelling technique compared with existing FE and WB approaches. A non-convex poroelastic domain with a set of specific boundary conditions is also investigated to show the capability of the hybrid FE–WB technique to address poroelastic corner singularities.Section  2 provides mathematical descriptions of the considered acoustic problems involving poroelastic materials briefly. Section  3 reviews the FEM and WBM for numerical modelling of poroelastic materials. A careful review of the WBM for modelling the wave propagation in poroelastic media  [15] is necessary to support the mathematical background of the proposition in this work. Section  4 presents the direct hybrid FE–WB poroelastic model. As the key aspects of the present hybridisation, the procedures to couple the physically relevant quantities at the interface between two differently modelled poroelastic subdomains and the resulting assembly of different system equations are described in detail. In Section  5, numerical examples illustrate the validity of the proposed hybrid FE–WB modelling technique. Section  6 summarises this paper and provides some general conclusions.A general two-dimensional (2D) configuration of an acoustic problem involving poroelastic materials considered in this work is shown in Fig. 1. An acoustic domainΩaand a poroelastic domainΩphave their own boundaries, and are coupled along the interfaceΓap. The poroelastic domain may consist of subdomains filled with different poroelastic materials (Ωp=Ωp(α)∪Ωp(β)). The steady-state behaviour of the acoustic system is analysed by considering two distinctive governing equations expressed in their own generalised coordinates according to the material domains.We assume that the system is linear, the fluid is inviscid, and the process is adiabatic. In an acoustic domainΩa, the steady-state acoustic pressurepa(r)at positionrunder the time-harmonic assumption (ejωt; withj2=−1, the angular frequencyωand the timet) is governed by the Helmholtz equation  [24]:(1)∇2pa(r)+k2pa(r)=−jρ0ωδ(r,rq)q,where∇2denotes the Laplacian operator andδdenotes the Dirac-delta function.k(=ω/c)is the acoustic wavenumber with the speed of soundcand the density of the acoustic medium (air in this work) is indicated asρ0. In Eq. (1),qandrqdenote the prescribed volume velocity and the position of a possible acoustic point source. Possible types and expressions for acoustic boundary conditions along∂Ωacan be found in  [22,25–27].According to Biot’s theory  [28,29], wave propagation in biphasic poroelastic materials is mathematically represented by two coupled vectorial differential equations. Depending on the generalised coordinates, two forms of the Biot’s equations have widely been used: the so-called(us,uf)and(us,pf)formulations whereusandufare the solid and fluid phase displacement vector fields, respectively, whilepfis the interstitial pressure field in pores. These formulations are mathematically identical, but they have respective strengths in practical applications. The(us,uf)formulation is advantageous for analytical derivations of physically relevant quantities and it has been used to derive the poroelastic WB model, whereas the(us,pf)formulation is strong for the element based numerical modelling due to a lower number of degrees of freedom needed.With the generalised coordinates(us,uf), the Biot’s equations are given by  [28,30]:(2a)∇⋅σs(r)+ω2ρ11∗us(r)+ω2ρ12∗uf(r)=0,(2b)∇⋅σf(r)+ω2ρ12∗us(r)+ω2ρ22∗uf(r)=0,whereσs(r)andσf(r)are the partial stress tensors of the solid and fluid phases, respectively. The effective mass densitiesρ11∗,ρ12∗andρ22∗account for the inertia coupling and viscous dissipation effects between the solid and fluid phases [31].When the dynamic behaviour of a poroelastic material is described in the generalised coordinates(us,pf), the Biot’s equations are rewritten as  [32,33]:(3a)∇⋅σˆs(r)+ω2ρ∗us(r)+γ∗∇pf(r)=0,(3b)∇2pf(r)+ω2ρ22∗Rpf(r)+ω2ρ22∗γ∗ϕ2∇⋅us(r)=0,whereρ∗(=ρ11∗−(ρ12∗)2/ρ22∗)is the combined effective density andγ∗(=ϕ(ρ12∗/ρ22∗−Q/R))is the coupling coefficient with the porosityϕ. Here the coefficientsQandRdescribe the coupling effects between the volumetric change of the solid phase and that of the interstitial fluid in a poroelastic material, respectively. In Eq. (3),σˆs(r)is the stress tensor of a poroelastic material in vacuo, andpf(r)is related to the stress tensor of the fluid phase byσf(r)=−ϕpf(r)I. More details on the Biot’s equations and the material coefficients can be found in  [28,30,32–34]. Note the poroelastic material coefficients constituting the Biot’s equations in this work are expressed by the Johnson–Champoux–Allard model  [34–36], which is most widely used for poroelastic materials for acoustical applications.Specific dynamic states of a poroelastic material boundary can be defined by six physical quantitiesuns,uss,unf,σns,σss, andσf(more generalised expressions areuns,uss,ϕ(unf−uns),σnt,σst, andpf(=−σf/ϕ), respectively) where the subscriptsnandsindicate the normal and tangential directions defined on the surface, respectively  [37,38]. Among them, three quantities should be explicitly imposed at each point of the boundary to make a well-posed problem of a poroelastic material. For the expressions of the possible boundary conditions of a poroelastic domain, the reader is referred to  [23,33,34].The hybrid FE–WB modelling technique proposed in this work consists of three procedures to model a considered poroelastic problem domain: (i) a finite element modelling, (ii) a wave based modelling, and (iii) a direct coupling between the two models, as shown in Fig. 2.To model a poroelastic material domainΩpby using the FEM, the weak integral form of the Biot’s equations in Eq.  (3), which is formulated by the(us,pf)generalised coordinates is employed  [33]:(4a)∫Ωp[σˆs(us):es(δus)−ω2ρ∗us⋅δus−(γ∗+γˆ)∇pf⋅δus−γˆpf∇⋅δus]dΩ−∫∂Ωp(σt⋅n)⋅δusdS=0,(4b)∫Ωp[ϕ2ω2ρ22∗∇pf⋅∇δpf−ϕ2Rpfδpf−(γ∗+γˆ)∇δpf⋅us−γˆδpf∇⋅us]dΩ−∫∂Ωpϕ(uf−us)⋅nδpfdS=0,where(δus,δpf)are the admissible variations of the primary field variables. The normal vectornis pointing outward from the poroelastic boundary∂Ωp. Arguments of the position vector(r)were omitted for simplicity.Becauseusandpfare the work conjugates ofσt⋅nandϕ(uf−us)⋅n, respectively, the continuity of nodal variables, as imposed in the standard FE procedure, results in the natural satisfaction of the interface coupling between two dissimilar poroelastic FE subdomain  [33,39]. This is why the(us,pf)weak integral form of Eq.  (4) is used for the FE part of the proposed hybrid model in this work rather than other possible forms of the Biot’s equations.Following the general Galerkin’s weighted-residual approach with the approximated expressions ofusandpfusing shape functions and nodal values, a system of equations for the discretised poroelastic FE domain can be expressed as:(5)[KssKsfKfsKff][uspf]=[fsff],whereKssandKffare the assembled dynamic stiffness matrices of a FE modelled poroelastic domain regarding the assembled column vectors of nodal solid displacementsusand fluid pressurespf, respectively.KsfandKfsare the coupling matrices between them, andfs,ffare the assembled external force vectors. For expressions of the element stiffness matrices and the external force vectors of a poroelastic material, the reader is referred to  [32,33].Analysis of poroelastic materials in the framework of the WBM was initiated by Desmet  [7]. After this early work, Deckers et al.  [15–17] further developed the WBM as a deterministic numerical method for efficient analysis of poroelastic materials. We outline the procedures and some key figures of the WB formulation of poroelastic materials in this section based on the previous works, because the mathematical descriptions of the poroelastic WB model are necessary to build the hybrid FE–WB system in the next section.A sufficient condition for WB models to converge towards the exact solution is the convexity of the problem domain  [7]. Since a poroelastic domainΩpmay not be convex, the domain should be partitioned intoNΩpnon-overlapping convex subdomains,Ωp(α)(α=1,2,…,NΩp). To ensure the continuity along the interface between two adjacent poroelastic subdomainsΩp(α)andΩp(β), the coupling conditions are explicitly imposed on each of subdomains.To take into account the three kinds of Biot’s waves in poroelastic subdomains, being two longitudinal ones and one shear wave, the Biot’s equations need to be decoupled into three Helmholtz equations. Applying the divergence and curl operations to Eq. (2), the displacement field can be described by a set of strains, consisting of two dilatational strains,e1s(r)ande2s(r), and one rotational strainΩs(r)[30], or a set of potentials, consisting of two scalar potentials,φ1s(r)andφ2s(r), and one vector potentialψs(r)[34].The solid phase displacement vector is written as:(6)us(r)=cl1∇ς1s(r)+cl2∇ς2s(r)+ct∇×χs(r),whereς1,2s(r)are eithere1,2s(r)orφ1,2s(r), whereasχs(r)is eitherΩs(r)orψs(r). The coefficients(cl1,cl2,ct)are(−1/kl12,−1/kl22,1/kt2)for the strains or(1,1,1)for the potentials, wherekl1,kl2, andktare the wave numbers of the two longitudinal and one rotational waves, respectively, in a poroelastic material [28,30,34]. The fluid phase displacement vectoruf(r)can be expressed in a similar way. Substituting Eq.  (6) into the Biot’s equations (Eq. (2)), one can obtain three decoupled Helmholtz equations, which can be found in  [15].From the WB principle, the three field variablesς1s(r),ς2s(r), andχs(r)(the component ofχs, normal to the surface) in Eq.  (6) can be approximated by solution expansions. Adopting a generic expressionum(r)for the three field variables with the subscriptmdenotingς1s,ς2sorχsdirectly, they can be expressed in terms ofnm(α)wave functionsΦwm(α)(r)(wm=1,…,nm(α)) in each poroelastic subdomainΩp(α)[8,15]:(7)um(α)(r)≃uˆm(α)(r)=∑wm=1nm(α)uwm(α)Φwm(α)(r)=Φwm(α)(r)uwm(α).Note that this approximation is only valid as we consider 2D poroelastic subdomains. The wave function contribution factorsuwm(α), which belong to each of the wave functions, are gathered in the vectors of degrees of freedomuwm(α), and the row vectorsΦwm(α)(r)collect thenm(α)wave functionsΦwm(α)(r).For 2D bounded poroelastic subdomains, four sets of wave functions are introduced for each of the three field variables, indicated by superscriptsa,b,c, andd[15]:(8)∑wm=1nm(α)uwm(α)Φwm(α)(r)=∑wm=1nma(α)uwma(α)Φwma(α)(r)+∑wm=1nmb(α)uwmb(α)Φwmb(α)(r)+∑wm=1nmc(α)uwmc(α)Φwmc(α)(r)+∑wm=1nmd(α)uwmd(α)Φwmd(α)(r),wherenm(α)=nma(α)+nmb(α)+nmc(α)+nmd(α)andmcan beς1s,ς2sorχs.The wave functions for 2D poroelastic subdomains are defined as  [15]:(9){Φwma(α)(x,y)=sin(kxwma(α)x)e−jkywma(α)y,Φwmb(α)(x,y)=cos(kxwmb(α)x)e−jkywmb(α)y,Φwmc(α)(x,y)=e−jkxwmc(α)xsin(kywmc(α)y),Φwmd(α)(x,y)=e−jkxwmd(α)xcos(kywmd(α)y).The only requirement for these wave functions to be exact solutions of one of the three decoupled Helmholtz equations is that the wave number components in Eq.  (9) satisfy the associated dispersion relations, given by(kxwma(α))2+(kywma(α))2=(kxwmb(α))2+(kywmb(α))2=(kxwmc(α))2+(kywmc(α))2=(kxwmd(α))2+(kywmd(α))2=kj2wherekjis one of the Biot’s three wave numbers,kl1,kl2, orkt. One can select the wave number components as:(10a)(kxwma(α),kywma(α))=(kxwmb(α),kywmb(α))=(wm,1(α)πLx(α),±kj2−(kxwma(α))2),wm,1(α)=0,1,2,…(10b)(kxwmc(α),kywmc(α))=(kxwmd(α),kywmd(α))=(±kj2−(kywmc(α))2,wm,2(α)πLy(α)),wm,2(α)=0,1,2,…where the constantsLx(α)andLy(α)are the dimensions of the smallest bounding rectangle circumscribing the considered poroelastic subdomainΩp(α). Desmet  [7] showed that this set of wave functions forms a complete set and that the WB models will converge towards the exact solution given that the subdomains are convex.This infinite set of wave functions must be truncated into a finite set to apply the WB model in a numerical scheme. Generally, the upper limitwm,⋆(α)in Eqs.  (10a) and (10b) may be chosen by(wm,⋆(α)π)/L⋆(α)⩾Tmaxj(kj)withTa user defined truncation factor, typically1⩽T⩽6[8,15]. Using this truncation rule, the approximation fields in adjacent subdomains exhibit a similar spatial resolution along the interfaces.The three Helmholtz equations decoupled from Biot’s equations are always satisfied with the three approximated field variables in Eqs. (7) and (8), with properly selected wave number components in Eq. (10), irrespective of the values of the unknown wave function contribution factors. However, the resulting dynamic fields may violate the imposed boundary and interface continuity conditions. To expand every field variable considered in the poroelastic boundary and interface conditions, differential operators, as defined in Appendix are applied to the strains (or potentials). Similarly to WB approaches for general vibro-acoustic domains, the residuals on the boundaries and interfaces of the poroelastic subdomains are minimised in an integral sense by using the Galerkin’s weighted residual formulation as listed in Eq.  (A.3). Enforcing that the integral equation should hold for any weighting function results in a WB system of equations, which is fully populated, complex, and generally nonsymmetric  [15]:(11)[A(1,1)C(1,2)⋯C(1,NΩp)C(2,1)A(2,2)⋯C(2,NΩp)⋮⋮⋱⋮C(NΩp,1)C(NΩp,2)⋯A(NΩp,NΩp)][[uwς1(1),uwς2(1),uwχt(1)]T[uwς1(2),uwς2(2),uwχt(2)]T⋮[uwς1(NΩp),uwς2(NΩp),uwχt(NΩp)]T]=[∑βf(1,β)∑βf(2,β)⋮∑βf(NΩp,β)]whereA(•,•)are the system matrices of poroelastic subdomains,C(•,•)are the coupling matrices linking the wave functions of two adjacent subdomains.f(•)are the loading vectors resulting from non-homogeneous boundary conditions.The wave function contribution factors may be calculated by solving Eq.  (11). The field variables can be postprocessed by substituting the obtained wave function contribution factors into the expansions of Eqs.  (7) and (8). Then, derived variables can be computed by applying the corresponding differential operators in Eq.  (A.2) to the wave function sets with the calculated contribution factors. More details on the procedures to build the WB poroelastic model can be found in  [15].Following the description of the FE and WB approaches for poroelastic materials in the previous section, we propose a hybrid FE–WB modelling technique in this section. A study on the feasibility of the hybridisation between the FE and WB techniques in modelling of poroelastic materials was initially performed by Lee et al.  [40] for enhancing analysis efficiency.Analysis of poroelastic materials in the hybrid FE–WB modelling technique will generally require the following steps:1.Division of the poroelastic problem domain into two groups of subdomains according to their geometrical characteristics and boundary conditions.Construction of the system equations for both the FE and WB subdomains, separately.Construction of the coupling matrices by imposing the interface coupling conditions directly between the FE and WB subdomains.Construction of the total system matrix by assembling the FE and WB ones together with the interface coupling matrices.Solution of the hybrid FE–WB model to obtain the nodal responses (in the FE part) and the wave function contribution factors (in the WB part), and postprocessing of the dynamic variables in each part.As shown in Fig. 2, we consider two poroelastic subdomains, each of which is modelled by the FEM and the WBM, individually. The following conditions for the physical quantities defined on the poroelastic boundaries should be ensured at every point along the interface of the two differently modelled poroelastic subdomains  [37,38]:(12)us(fe)(r)−us(wb)(r)=0,ϕ(fe)(uf(fe)(r)−us(fe)(r))⋅n(fe)−ϕ(wb)(uf(wb)(r)−us(wb)(r))⋅n(wb)=0,σt(fe)(r)⋅n(fe)+σt(wb)(r)⋅n(wb)=0,pf(fe)(r)−pf(wb)(r)=0,wheren(fe)andn(wb)denote the outward normal vectors defined on the surfaces of the FE and WB modelled poroelastic subdomains,Ωp(fe)andΩp(wb), respectively. The first condition expresses the continuity of the solid phase displacement and the second one ensures the mass flux continuity (i.e., the normal component of the volumetric velocity). The third equation implies the continuity of the total stress components on the surface defined by the normal vector, and the fourth one imposes the pressure continuity across the interface between the FE and WB subdomains. Note that the coupling conditions in Eq.  (12) are still valid when the FE and the WB subdomains contain different kinds of poroelastic materials.If we define the residual functions at the interface (r∈ΓI(fe,wb(α));α=1,2,…,NΩp), then the coupling conditions of Eq.  (12) can be expressed as:(13){Runs(fe,wb(α))(r)=uns(wb(α))(r)+uns(fe)(r)=0,Russ(fe,wb(α))(r)=uss(wb(α))(r)+uss(fe)(r)=0,Runfs(fe,wb(α))(r)=ϕ(wb(α))(unf(wb(α))(r)−uns(wb(α))(r))+ϕ(fe)(unf(fe)(r)−uns(fe)(r))=0,Rσnt(fe,wb(α))(r)=(σns(wb(α))(r)+σf(wb(α))(r))−(σns(fe)(r)+σf(fe)(r))=0,Rσst(fe,wb(α))(r)=σss(wb(α))(r)−σss(fe)(r)=0,Rpf(fe,wb(α))(r)=σf(wb(α))(r)/ϕ(wb(α))−σf(fe)(r)/ϕ(fe)=0,where the subscriptsnandsindicate the normal and tangential directions on the interface withn(=n(wb(α))=−n(fe)). The subscripts in the residual functions are adopted here to clearly indicate the physical quantity related to each of the residual functions.For the six conditions listed in Eq.  (13) three conditions should be imposed on each side of the interface of a poroelastic subdomain to provide a well-posed boundary value problem. In the present hybridisation of the FE and WB modelled subdomains, the first and second conditions from Eq.  (13), together with the sixth one, are directly imposed on the interface of the WB modelled subdomainΩp(wb(α)). The remaining third, fourth, and fifth conditions are accounted for on the counterpart interface of the FE modelled subdomainΩp(fe). The selection of residual functions for each subdomain is assigned by considering the effectiveness of building the weighted residual formulation: the quantities associated with the three conditions on the FE interface side appear directly in the surface integrals shown in Eqs.  (4a) and (4b).For the residual functionsRuns(fe,wb(α))(r),Russ(fe,wb(α))(r), andRpf(fe,wb(α))(r), the corresponding wave based weighting functionsσ̃nt(α)(r),σ̃st(α)(r), andũnfs(α)(r)can be defined in terms of the strain fields given in Eq.  (A.1) by applying the differential operators from Eq.  (A.2):(14){σ̃nt(α)(r)=(Lσns(α)+Lσf(α))[ẽ1s(α)(r)ẽ2s(α)(r)Ω̃s(α)(r)]T,σ̃st(α)(r)=Lσss(α)[ẽ1s(α)(r)ẽ2s(α)(r)Ω̃s(α)(r)]T,ũnfs(α)(r)=ϕ(α)(Lunf(α)−Luns(α))[ẽ1s(α)(r)ẽ2s(α)(r)Ω̃s(α)(r)]T,where the strain fields in the weighting functions are expressed in terms of the same set of the wave functions as used in the field variable expansions in the WB subdomain:(15)[ẽ1s(α)(r)ẽ2s(α)(r)Ω̃s(α)(r)]≃[Φwe1s(α)(r)Φwe2s(α)(r)ΦwΩs(α)(r)][ũwe1s(α)ũwe2s(α)ũwΩs(α)].Similarly, for the remaining three residual error functions that are imposed on the interface of the FE part,Rσnt(fe,wb(α))(r),Rσst(fe,wb(α))(r), andRunfs(fe,wb(α))(r)in Eq.  (13), the corresponding finite element weighting functionsδuns(r),δuss(r), andδpf(r)may be expressed by using the same set of shape functions in the eth element as used in the interpolation of the(us,pf)fields:(16){δuns(r)≃δuns,e(r)=Ne(r)δuns,e,δuss(r)≃δuss,e(r)=Ne(r)δuss,e,δpf(r)≃δpef(r)=Ne(r)δpef,whereδunsandδussdenote(δus⋅n)and(δus⋅s), respectively, withn⋅s=0.Using the residual error functions in Eq.  (13) and the corresponding weighting functions from Eqs.  (14) to (16), a weighted residual integral equation of the hybridisation of the FE–WB subdomains can be derived as:(17)∫ΓI(fe,wb(α))(σ̃nt(α)(r)Runs(fe,wb(α))(r)+σ̃st(α)(r)Russ(fe,wb(α))(r)−ũnfs(α)(r)Rpf(fe,wb(α))(r))dΓ−∫ΓI(fe,wb(α))(δuns(r)Rσnt(fe,wb(α))(r)+δuss(r)Rσst(fe,wb(α))(r)−δpf(r)Runfs(fe,wb(α))(r))dΓ+∫∂Ωp(wb(α))∖ΓI(fe,wb(α))(terms on boundaries of a WB subdomainΩp(wb(α)))dΓ−∫∂Ωp(fe)∖ΓI(fe,wb(α))(terms on boundaries of a FE subdomainΩp(fe))dΓ+∫Ωp(fe)[terms in a FE subdomainΩp(fe)]dΩ=0,where the first surface integral term shows the imposition of the three residual functions on the interface of the WB modelled part, whereas the second surface integral term denotes the consideration of the remaining three residual functions onto the interface of the FE modelled part. The third and fourth surface integrals in Eq.  (17) are derived on the boundaries of the WB and FE subdomains except the FE–WB interface, respectively. Their full expressions are listed in Eq.  (A.3) and Eq.  (4), respectively. The last volume integral builds a FE stiffness matrix of the poroelastic subdomain, as given in Eq.  (4).An algebraic equation for the hybridisation of the FE–WB modelled subdomains can be derived by substituting the field variable expansions and the weighting function expansions in both the FE and WB parts into the weighted residual formulation in Eq.  (17):(18)=whereQ••(α)are the coupling matrices between the FE subdomainΩp(fe)and the WB subdomainΩp(wb(α))with phase (or modelling method) indicators•=s,f(orw). The coupling matrices originate from the first two surface integral terms in Eq.  (17). Based on the mathematical derivations shown here, one can obtain the system matrices in Eq.  (18) by following the well-known standard procedure for the weighted-residual approximation.As the hybrid system equations in Eq.  (18) are composed of several submatrices, which have distinctive characteristics due to the two modelling approaches applied, a strategy to solve the system equations in a stepwise procedure rather than considering the whole matrix at once is recommended for efficient solving. A technique used in the hybrid FE–WB modelling for steady-state acoustic problems  [25,26] is employed for the present hybrid FE–WB approach for poroelastic materials.The system equations of the direct hybrid FE–WB technique for poroelastic materials in Eq. (18) can be expressed in a general matrix form as:(19)whereKFandAWare the FE and WB system matrices, respectively, andQFW,QWFare the coupling matrices. The vectorsuFanduWare the assembled vectors of the FE nodal responses and the WB wave function contribution factors, respectively. The vectorsfFandfWare the assembled force vectors related to each modelling approach. The specific shape of the submatrices in Eq.  (19) allows efficient solving of the total hybrid system of equations through a stepwise procedure. A three-step solution procedure is applied  [25,26]:1.The FE nodal degrees of freedomuFare eliminated from the system of equations by application of a sparse matrix solver.•From the upper part of the matrix equations in Eq. (19), it follows that(20a)uF=KF−1(fF−QFWuW),where•−1is the inverse of a sparse matrix•.Substituting Eq.  (20a) into the lower part of the general matrix equation (Eq. (19)), we have(20b)(−QWFKF−1QFW+AW)uW=fW−QWFKF−1fF.Introducing two sparse linear systems(20c)KFH=QFW,and(20d)KFh=fF,which can be solved forHandhefficiently with dedicated sparse solvers, allows Eq. (20b) to be expressed as:(20e)(−QWFH+AW)uW=fW−QWFh.Eq. (20e) is solved to obtain the wave number contribution factorsuW.The FE nodal degrees of freedomuFare retrieved by matrix multiplications. From Eqs. (20a), (20c) and (20d),(20f)uF=−HuW+h.This section considers the numerical analyses of two acoustic problems involving poroelastic material domains, modelled by the proposed direct hybrid FE–WB technique. The calculated results are compared with those through the FE and WB approaches to investigate the efficiency and accuracy of the proposed technique.Parameters of the poroelastic materials used in the examples are listed in Table 1for static flow resistivity,σ(kg/m3s); porosity,ϕ; tortuosity,α∞; viscous characteristic length,Λ(μm); thermal characteristic length,Λ′(μm); bulk density of the solid phase,ρ1(kg/m3); bulk Young’s modulus of the frame material,Es(Pa); Poisson’s ratio,ν; and loss factor,ηl. The properties of air, which fills pores in the poroelastic materials as well as the acoustic cavity are set to: thermal conductivity,k=2.57⋅10−2W/mK; specific heat,cp=1.005⋅103J/kg K; gas constant,Rg=286.7m2/s2K; temperature,T=293.15K; ratio of specific heat,γ=1.4; fluid kinematic viscosity,νf=15.11⋅10−6m2/s; and fluid density,ρf=1.205kg/m3. All the examples were numerically implemented using Matlab 2010  [41].As the first example, the proposed hybrid FE–WB modelling technique is applied to an acoustic problem consisting of a bounded acoustic cavity and a rectangular poroelastic domain, as shown in Fig. 3(a). The acoustic cavity is excited by a normal velocity field with a unit magnitude on one boundary and assumed to be hard backed on the other external boundaries. The bottom of the cavity is coupled with the rectangular poroelastic domain, filled with either poroelastic material 1 or 2 of Table 1. On the external boundaries of the poroelastic domain, sliding boundary conditions are imposed.As illustrated in Fig. 3(b–d), the acoustic system is modelled by three different methods in this example: the FEM, the WBM, and the proposed hybrid FE–WB (HYB) technique. For the HYB model, the rectangular poroelastic domain is partitioned horizontally into two subdomains of the same dimensions, and each of them is modelled by the WB and FE methods, respectively, as shown in Fig. 3(d), whereas the acoustic cavity itself is modelled by the WBM. We must consider two types of interfaces for this HYB model: one type betweenΩa(wb)andΩp(wb), and the other one betweenΩp(wb)andΩp(fe). The latter interface (i.e.,ΓI(fe,wb)) is discussed in the previous section with the associated mathematical derivations. The interface coupling conditions between the WB acoustic and WB poroelastic domains can be found in  [23]. Calculations in this example were performed on a 2.30 GHz Intel Xeon based Windows system (Server 2008 R2) with 384 GB of RAM.The frequency responses of the acoustic system are calculated using the three different models. The acoustic and poroelastic domains in the FEM model shown in Fig. 3(b) are discretised by using 8-node quadratic quadrilateral elements (Q8)  [5]. Fig. 4(a) shows the increasing number of finite elements for each material domain with respect to the considered frequency. Although the poroelastic domain is smaller than the air domain in the y direction, the poroelastic domain is discretised into finer FE meshes along that direction because the wavelengths of the three Biot’s waves are much shorter than that of sound in air. More than six elements per wavelength are used in the acoustic and poroelastic domains to obtain the frequency responses from the FEM model in the considered frequency range.For the WBM model in Fig. 3(c), the truncation factors are set toT=2for the poroelastic domain andT=8for the acoustic domain. A high truncation factor is employed for the acoustic domain to provide a sufficient number of wave functions, which are coupled with wave functions of short wavelengths in the WB poroelastic domain. The numbers of wave functions used in the poroelastic domain are shown in Fig. 4(b, c) for two kinds of poroelastic materials. For the HYB model, shown in Fig. 3(d), the WB acoustic and poroelastic domains have the same numbers of wave functions as in the WBM model, while the poroelastic FE domain is discretised into half the number of elements along the y direction due to the reduced dimension as compared to the FEM model. Note that the numbers of wave functions and finite elements for the three models are large enough to yield meaningful predictions in this example.The frequency responses calculated with the HYB model at every 5 Hz interval are shown in Figs. 5 and 6for the two different poroelastic materials 1 and 2, respectively. The calculated values of the acoustic pressures (pa) at point A and the y-directional component of the solid phase displacement (uys) at point B agree well with those from the FEM or the WBM models within the frequency ranges of interest, and for the different poroelastic materials.To investigate the numerical cost of the various steps in the present hybrid FE–WB procedure, the CPU times are measured separately and compared over the considered frequency range, as shown in Fig. 7. For the HYB procedure, we distinguish the following five steps:1.Meshing the FE domain into finite elements and building the FE system matrix.Calculating the wave numbers and wave functions, and building the WB system matrix with the enforcements of the boundary and/or interface conditions.Building the HYB system matrix and handling the total system matrix for the efficient solving process.Solving the sparse matrix equations in Eqs.  (20c) and (20d).Solving the dense matrix equation in Eq.  (20e).Fig. 7(a) and (b) show the CPU time of each step according to the considered poroelastic material. Since the rectangular FE poroelastic domain is discretised with the same number of FE degrees of freedom regardless of the poroelastic material, the numerical costs for preparing and building FE model are the identical for each frequency in the two figures. In Fig. 7(a) and (b), the CPU times for preparing and solving the WB model are quite shorter than the times for these processes in the FE model, even when the number of wave functions is increased without increasing the number of FE degrees of freedom, as is the case for the poroelastic material 2 as indicated in Fig. 4(c). This clearly demonstrates the advantage of the WBM in numerical efficiency.It is obvious that the consideration of more wave functions (or finer FE meshes as well) leads to more numerical costs in the hybridisation step. Fig. 7(a) and (b) also show that solving the sparse matrix equations in Eqs. (20c) and (20d) to obtain auxiliary matricesHandhtakes much longer time than solving the dense matrix equation in Eq. (20e) in the stepwise procedures for solving the HYB models in Section  4.3. The stepped patterns over the frequencies are due to the gradual refinement of the FE meshes at every 100 Hz in the FE poroelastic domain as indicated in Fig. 4(a). The numerical costs for the present HYB procedures over the frequencies are in agreement with the results found in the previous works  [26,44].Convergence curves of the HYB model shown in Fig. 3(d) are calculated at selected frequencies and compared with those from the FEM and WBM models for poroelastic materials. In the FEM model, the acoustic and poroelastic domains are discretised regularly and the refinements of the FE meshes for a convergence test are listed in Table 2. For the WBM model, the number of wave functions used to expand the field variables is listed in Table 3. The numbers of the FE degrees of freedom and wave functions increase gradually according to the considered set. Table 4lists the number of wave functions in the WB part together with the mesh refinement of the FE poroelastic part in the HYB model. The WB acoustic domain in the HYB model is constructed with the same number of acoustic wave functions as that in the WBM model listed in Table 3 since they have the same dimensions. Smaller numbers of poroelastic wave functions are assigned to the WB poroelastic domain in the HYB model because the size of the WB poroelastic domain in that model is half size of the poroelastic domain in the WBM model. Similarly, the number of elements in the y-directional finite element refinements of the FE domain in the HYB model reduces to half as those for the FEM model.The convergence rates of the HYB poroelastic model are calculated in two ways in this example. Firstly, the FE part in the HYB model is discretised into some given number of finite elements and the number of wave functions increases gradually in the WB part according to the set (wb-[#]) in Table 4. The given FE meshes are selected to correspond to fe-5, fe-7, and fe-9 in that table. Secondly, the numbers of wave functions are fixed in the WB part and the FE part is refined by increasing the set number (fe-#) in Table 4. In this case, the individual numbers of wave functions are fixed to be the set of wb-[6], wb-[9], and wb-[12].For comparison of the convergence rates of the three different models, the averaged relative prediction error〈ε〉of a generally expressed physical quantityqis calculated as a function of CPU time:(21)〈ε〉=1Nm∑j=1Nmεj=1Nm∑j=1Nm|q(rj)−qref(rj)||qref(rj)|,whereq(rj)is the calculated poroelastic quantity through one of the three models, andqref(rj)is its reference values. The reference values in this example are selected to be those obtained from the full WB model with the set#13from Table 3, which contains the largest number of wave functions considered. In Eq. (21)Nmis the total number of response points considered in the rectangular poroelastic domain, at which the considered physical quantities are calculated. In this example, we considerNm=144locations, which are defined by a grid through:{0.05,0.10,0.15,…,0.40,0.45and0.55,0.60,0.65,…,0.90,0.95}along the x direction and{0.02,0.04,0.06,0.08and0.12,0.14,0.16,0.18}along the y direction, such that 72 postprocessing locations are obtained in the WB as well as the FE parts in the poroelastic HYB domain. The CPU time is the sum of the time required for system building and solving in each method. MD Nastran 2010  [43] was used as a solver for the convergence tests in this work.Figs. 8–10show the convergence curves of the FEM and WBM models from Tables 2 and 3, and the HYB model under the conditions in Table 4. The poroelastic material 1 is used for the convergence tests in this work. Fig. 8 shows the convergence curves of the HYB model at 200 Hz by increasing the numbers of wave functions in the WB part, while the number of finite elements in the FE part remains fixed. Fig. 9 shows the convergence curves in the opposite case with fixed number of wave functions in the WB part, and the FE meshes gradually refined. Fig. 10 compares the convergence curves of the HYB model for the frequencies of interest at 200 and 400 Hz.As seen in Figs. 8 and 9, the WBM model yields the best efficiency as compared to the FEM and HYB models. The averaged relative prediction errors for the WBM model plummet down at the start of the test and converge towards very high accuracy with the implementation of very large numbers of wave functions. This is due to the simple geometry considered, being in the favour of the WBM. The convergence curves of the HYB model have elbow shapes as can be seen in Fig. 8, where they start as fast as those of the WBM model, but stagnate at certain accuracies. The level of the stagnation in the prediction accuracy of the HYB model is determined by the finite element mesh in the FE part.When finer meshes (i.e., a larger number of degrees of freedom) are applied to the FE part (the three FE meshes fe-5, fe-7 and fe-9) the prediction accuracy of the HYB model is improved to converge further, as shown in Fig. 8(a–c). Due to the increased number of degrees of freedom in the FE part, more CPU time is required for the HYB model with finer meshes, but their convergence slopes at the beginning of the calculations still correspond to those of the WBM model for the considered physical variables. Therefore, the elbow-shaped convergence curves of the HYB model are shifted to the right and downward with respect to the FE mesh refinement. For the different poroelastic quantities under consideration, the pressures in pores(pf)show the highest convergence rate, as shown in Fig. 8(a), because the pressure fields are the main variables in this acoustic problem. The derived quantities, which require spatial derivations in the FEM and HYB methods, such as the solid stress component(σxxs)converge to lower prediction accuracies, as shown in Fig. 8(c).The convergence curves of the HYB model by refining the FE meshes with the fixed number of wave functions in the WB part are shown in Fig. 9. These curves have a different behaviour as compared with those in Fig. 8. There is no elbow-shaped convergence curve for the physical quantities and the accuracies of the HYB models converge close to those of the FEM models. For larger numbers of wave functions in the WB part, the slopes of convergence curves are steeper, which means more CPU time in the calculation. But the effect of the different number of wave functions reduces according to the refinement of FE meshes. Hence, the prediction accuracies are determined by the finest FE mesh regardless of the WB part in the present convergence test. For the quantityuxsshown in Fig. 9(a), the three models show similar prediction accuracies, but the prediction accuracies of the HYB model for the derived quantitiesuyfandσxysare much lower than those of the WBM model, as shown in Fig. 9(b, c). Although the prediction accuracy of the HYB model is determined by its FE mesh, the model yields an increased solution efficiency compared to the FEM model for the same prediction accuracy. Note that the prediction accuracies of the HYB model may also be affected by the coarsest WB model, which is the opposite case of those considered in Fig. 9. A small number of wave functions applied in the WB part tends to result in another elbow-shaped convergence curve, even with the increase of meshes in the FE part.From the results shown in Figs. 8 and 9, it is remarkable that the WBM model used here in the acoustic problem involving a rectangular poroelastic domain leads to very accurate results, as indicated in the grey-coloured, dotted curves in Fig. 8 or 9. As it is more accurate than the FEM model, the fineness of the FE subdomain determines the final accuracy of the HYB model. For more complex geometries, however, this would not be the case and the WBM would be the restricting method as will be shown in the next example.Fig. 10 shows convergence curves of the three models at 200 and 400 Hz. The FE meshes and the numbers of wave functions listed in Table 4 are used. Fig. 10(a) shows some typical properties of the convergence rates of the FEM and WBM models according to the frequency change. With increasing frequency, the convergence curves of the FEM model shift upwards, denoting a deterioration of the prediction accuracy due to the interpolation and pollution errors. This means that finer FE meshes must be employed to obtain the same prediction accuracy at a higher target frequency. On the other hand, the WBM model converges to a similar level at the different frequencies, which displays the well-known beneficial property of WBM models.The requirement of a finer FE mesh for a higher frequency is clearly shown in the convergence curves of the HYB models as well. In Fig. 10(b) with increasing numbers of wave functions for given FE meshes (fe-5 and fe-9), the convergence curves for the considered quantities at 400 Hz converge to lower prediction accuracies than those at 200 Hz. Although increasing numbers of wave functions are employed in the HYB model for the calculations, the given FE meshes determine the lower prediction accuracies at higher frequency. In case of the fixed number of wave functions with refining FE meshes, the convergence curves in Fig. 10(c) start with similar performances at the two frequencies because the influence of frequency is limited in the WB part, as discussed in Fig. 10(a). Refining the FE meshes, however, the beneficial effect from the WB part reduces and the FE degrees of freedom, which are affected by the considered frequency, determine the prediction accuracy of the HYB model.From these observations of the present HYB model from Figs. 8–10, we may substantiate that:•The prediction accuracy of the HYB model for poroelastic materials increases steadily with an increasing number of wave functions in the WB part until the prediction accuracy reaches some saturation where the error remains constant.The saturation of the prediction accuracy in the HYB model is strongly determined by the fineness of the FE mesh.In spite of the strong dependency of the prediction accuracy on the FE part, the HYB model may yield higher solution efficiency rather than the FEM model due to the efficient performance of the WB part.It is expected that investigation of a relation between the number of wave functions and the FE discretisation could consolidate our understanding of the convergence properties of the present hybrid technique. First of all, we can evaluate the optimal number of the wave functions in the HYB model from the calculated convergence curves. As discussed before, once the convergence curves start to form elbow shapes, any further enrichment of wave functions in the WB part does not help improve the prediction accuracy of the HYB model, but just increases the numerical cost; the FE part of the model cannot follow the highly wavy features of the wave functions with shorter wavelengths. The number of wave functions corresponding to these elbow points in the convergence curves can indicate the minimum (optimal) number of wave functions in the considered HYB model for the given FE meshes. In Fig. 8(b) they are found to be the sets of wb-[5], wb-[7], and wb-[9] (Table 4) for the considered FE meshes fe-5, fe-7, and fe-9, respectively. Note that Fig. 8(b) is used in this evaluation because the prediction accuracies of the HYB and FEM models are directly reflected in the predictions ofuxs, as this is a primary variable in the FEM, whereasσxxsis a secondary variable which requires derivative of the polynomial shape functions.A quantitative relation between the optimal number of wave functions and the FE discretisation in the hybrid technique can be evaluated by comparing the shortest wavelength used in the WB part and the number of elements in the FE part along the interfaceΓI(fe,wb). The given FE meshes fe-5, fe-7, and fe-9 discretise the interface of a lengthL(1m) shown in Fig. 3(d) into 100, 160, and 240 Q8 elements in the x direction. In the corresponding optimal wave function sets wb-[5], wb-[7], and wb-[9], the considered shortest wavelengths are0.0333m,0.0200m, and0.0143min the x direction. Based on this, one can calculate number of finite elements per wavelength along the interface for which saturation occurs. They are approximately 3.3, 3.2, and 3.4, for the three considered convergence curves. These values obtained from the present hybrid technique are in line with the classical observation that 3 or 4 quadratic elements per wavelength would suffice to limit the interpolation errors  [45,46].An acoustic problem involving an L-shaped poroelastic domain, as shown in Fig. 11, is considered as the second, more complex validation example. In contrast to the rectangular poroelastic domain considered in the previous example, the L-shaped poroelastic domain must be partitioned into at least two convex poroelastic subdomains for the WB model. Although it is difficult to say that such partitioning of the domain represents sufficient geometrical complexity, the L-shaped poroelastic domain does provide a special phenomenon in the analysis, i.e., singularities at the corner of the poroelastic domain.As discussed in  [16,17], singularities occur at the discontinuities along the poroelastic boundaries. They arise when the internal angle formed by the two sides of a corner in a polygonal poroelastic domain exceeds a critical value, which is strongly dependent on the imposed boundary conditions. In the present example, the corner S, indicated in Fig. 11(a), between the sliding poroelastic boundaries with an internal angle of 270° leads to corner singularities.While the singularities on the stress field and the fluid phase displacement field can be found in this example, WB approaches have been observed to be profoundly impacted in their prediction accuracy by the existence of such singularities due to the global nature of the applied wave functions  [17,47]. On the other hand, the singularities do not severely interfere with the overall prediction accuracy for FE models due to the local support of the FE shape functions. While some special treatments of the corner singularities have been proposed for the WB acoustic  [47] and poroelastic  [17] domains by considering additional enrichment wave functions, they depend on the boundary conditions and internal angles.The proposed hybridisation of the FE and WB approaches is expected to be beneficial to model poroelastic materials having arbitrary geometries and various boundary conditions. The roles of the two methods are geometrically separated in the HYB model; geometrically complex parts, or parts with discontinuity singularities, such as the neighbourhood of the corners, are discretised into finite elements to account for the singularities. The remaining geometrically moderate regions are partitioned into convex WB subdomains. Calculations in this example were performed on a 2.66 GHz Intel Xeon based Linux system with 32 GB RAM.The steady-state analyses of the considered acoustic problem are performed with three different models, as shown in Fig. 11(b–d). The WBM model is constructed with one WB acoustic domain and three WB poroelastic subdomains, which is one of the possible choices of partitioning to comply with the convexity requirement. Table 5lists the increasing number of wave functions, which have been applied to the WB domains. Since the three WB poroelastic subdomains have the same dimensions, the identical number of wave functions is imposed to each of them.Figs. 12 and 13show the absolute values of the fluid phase displacement component and the solid phase stress component in the L-shaped poroelastic domain at 200 Hz, calculated with the WBM model having different numbers of wave functions. The three sets, wb-5, wb-20, and wb-30 in Table 5 have been applied to the WBM model. In these contour plots, many ripples are clearly visible and the fields of|uxf|and|σyys|are unstable. The occurrence of ripples in the system responses is a consequence of the singularities at the corner S. The three WB poroelastic subdomains hold the corner in common, and so the ripples develop and spread along their interfaces. Since the WB system equations are constructed by the weighted integrals along the boundaries, the ripples appear at most of the poroelastic boundaries as well as on the interfaces. For a larger number of wave functions, the continuity across the interfaces is improved, but the ripples do not disappear and hence the presence of the singularity deteriorates the overall prediction accuracy of the model.When the L-shaped poroelastic domain is modelled by the present hybrid FE–WB technique, the problems in the solution stability and prediction accuracy observed in the WBM model are effectively solved, even with the corner singularities. The HYB model A shown in Fig. 11(d), is constructed by using WB acoustic and poroelastic subdomains, for which the same number of wave functions as those in the WBM model is used, together with the FE domain as shown in Fig. 11(e). The FE domain is configured by combining two identical trapezoid FE subdomains. The two trapezoids are discretised such that every side is meshed with 100 quadratic quadrilateral elements (Q8), corresponding to fe-(a) in Table 6. With increasing number of wave functions (wb-5, wb-20, and wb-30) and fixed FE mesh (fe-(a)), the contour plots of|uxf|and|σyys|through the HYB model A at 200 Hz are shown in Figs. 14 and 15, respectively. In contrast to the response fields from the WBM model, both|uxf|and|σyys|are more accurately calculated with the HYB model in the L-shaped poroelastic domain, although some ripples are still observable in the contour plots of|σyys|. The field discontinuity across the interface between the WB acoustic and poroelastic subdomains and between the WB and FE subdomains is difficult to identify in these figures.From the results shown in Figs. 14 and 15, some remarkable properties of the present HYB model are observable:•The contour plots for each field are quite similar regardless of the numbers of applied wave functions.→Stable analysis of poroelastic materials can be performed with a relatively small number of wave functions in the HYB model.The occurrence of ripples is prevented by modelling the corner with the finite elements.→The FE domain in the HYB model manages the discontinuity singularities well.The calculated field values at the corner are very close for different numbers of applied wave functions when the same FE mesh is used.→The prediction accuracy of the HYB model is highly dependent on the fineness of the FE mesh.The first property is directly related to the analysis efficiency of the HYB model. The second one implies that the hybridisation of the WB and FE methods is a very effective strategy to resolve difficulties caused by the singularities at poroelastic boundaries. Regarding the last property, which is confirmed again with convergence curves at the end of this section, Fig. 16shows the fields from the HYB model A with the finer mesh, fe-(b) in Table 6 and the fixed WB set, wb-30. Compared to Figs. 14(c) and 15(c) from the coarser mesh (fe-(a)) with the same set of wave functions, higher values of field quantities are calculated at the corner, which imply a better representation of the singularities.The representation of singularities in the HYB model is affected by the configuration of the FE domain as well as the fineness of the FE mesh. Fig. 17(b) shows a HYB model B, where the FE and WB poroelastic subdomains are partitioned differently compared to the HYB model A (Fig. 11(d)). The total area of the FE domain is the same in both HYB models. The FE domain in the HYB model B is considered as a combination of three squares as shown in Fig. 17(a). These FE square domains are very suited to be discretised by quadratic quadrilateral elements. All four WB poroelastic subdomains in this model contain the same numbers of wave functions, which is set to be that for each WB poroelastic subdomain of the HYB model A.Fig. 17(c, d) show the fields of|uxf|and|σyys|calculated with the HYB model B when the FE mesh fe-(6) in Table 7and the wave function set wb-20 in Table 5 are applied for the FE and four WB subdomains, respectively. Although small ripples appear, the fields in the contour plots are stable, and higher values are calculated at the corner. In particular, the value of|σyys|at the corner S increases significantly in the HYB model B, compared to the HYB model A (Fig. 16(c)). Note that there are much less FE degrees of freedom in this HYB model B than the HYB model A, which has fe-(6) (Table 7) compared to fe-(b) (Table 6). Although it has less degrees of freedom in finite elements, the HYB model B produces a better representation of the singularities at the corner. Thereby, the square configuration of the FE domain in the HYB model B has a significant influence in treating the singularities.To investigate the solution efficiency and prediction accuracy of the hybrid FE–WB technique for modelling the L-shaped poroelastic domain, the HYB model C shown in Fig. 18(b) is selected for a convergence test. This model has the same FE poroelastic domain as the HYB model B, but the WB poroelastic region is divided into rectangular WB subdomains, which showed better solution stability in the WB part according to numerical tests. The HYB model C is compared to the FEM model (Fig. 11(b)) having the finite element refinement as listed in Table 8and the WBM model (Fig. 11(c)) with increasing number of wave functions in Table 5 for convergence studies. The FE mesh in the HYB model C is set as fe-(6) or fe-(8) in Table 7, and the number of wave functions applied to the WB poroelastic subdomains is increased as listed in Table 9. The numbers of poroelastic wave functions used in the HYB model C are modified from those in Table 5 to take into account the configuration change inΩp(wb(1)): the number of wave functions in the x direction is doubled.The averaged relative prediction errors ofuxfandσyysare calculated atNm=120equidistant locations in the L-shaped poroelastic domain: 12 locations in the FE part as shown in Fig. 18(a) and 108 locations in the WB part. The reference values of the quantities in the convergence curves are selected as those from the FEM model with the mesh set of fe-14 in Table 8.Convergence curves of the FEM and WBM models, and the present HYB model C at 200 Hz are shown together in Fig. 18(c, d). The WBM model fluctuates considerably and does not converge to specific, stable values of〈ε〉for eitheruxforσyys. The deterioration in the solution efficiency and prediction accuracy is caused by the weakness of the WBM model to handle the singularities at the corner. Similarly, the existence of singularities also reduces the prediction accuracy of the FEM model, although the convergence curves are relatively smooth and linear in the logarithmic scale. The convergence curves of the HYB model C, calculated with constant number of finite elements and increasing the number of wave functions, have the typical elbow shape, and converge further when a finer mesh is applied in the FE part, as shown in Fig. 18(c, d). The convergence curves of the HYB model stagnate at specific levels corresponding to the accuracies of the FEM model having the same mesh as the FE part in HYB model C. Although the convergence tests are performed for a specific frequency, it can be reasonably expected that the general convergence properties observed in this example are valid for other frequencies in the proposed FE–WB technique for analysis of poroelastic materials.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The commonly used finite element method and the recently established wave based method for modelling of Biot’s poroelastic materials were combined into a hybrid finite element–wave based technique. In the proposed hybrid FE–WB modelling technique, an arbitrarily configured poroelastic problem domain is divided into two groups of poroelastic subdomains. The group containing geometrical variations including corner singularities is discretised into poroelastic finite elements, whereas the other group including only moderately complex geometries is partitioned into a small number of large and convex wave based poroelastic subdomains. Two types of system equations resulting from each of the modelling approaches were assembled directly, ensuring the continuity of relevant physical quantities on the interface by applying mathematically exact coupling conditions between differently modelled poroelastic domains.Numerical examples of differently shaped poroelastic material domains showed the characteristics of the proposed technique and were compared to the solutions from the existing full FEM and WBM models. With the dependency of the convergence rates of the hybrid models on the properties of each modelling method, the fineness and configuration of the FE part predominantly determined the prediction accuracy of the hybrid models. The performance of the proposed hybrid FE–WB technique was outstanding for the analysis of poroelastic materials containing corner singularities: (i) stable and un-rippled contour plots were obtained from the proposed hybrid models contrary to the unstable and rippled outcomes from the WBM model; (ii) convergence rates of the hybrid FE–WB models were higher than those of the FEM model and a higher accuracy as compared to the WBM model is obtained for the considered example.