@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A distributed algorithm for inter-layer network coding-based multimedia multicast in Internet of Things

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A method to save bandwidth for multimedia multicast in IoT.A distributed algorithm of joint rate control and multicast layer flow allocation.The inter-layer network coding is more stable than the intra-layer ones.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Internet of Things,Multimedia multicast,Inter-layer network coding,Flow optimization,Distributed algorithm,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
With the development of the Internet of Things (IoT), more and more devices that have diverse computing and communication capabilities are interconnected. For multimedia multicast in the IoT, a fixed flow rate cannot meet the quality-of-service requirements of heterogeneous devices and each device may not get the information from all other devices. In order to satisfy the heterogeneous requirements, we develop a distributed algorithm to solve the inter-layer flow optimization problem based on network coding for multimedia multicast in the IoT, by using primal decomposition and primal-dual analysis. We also apply Lyapunov theory to prove the convergence and global stability of the proposed iterative algorithm. Numerical results demonstrate that the proposed algorithm has better flexibility, stability, and implementation advantages than the previous intra-layer ones.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Traditional internet has connected billions of computers together, through which people can exchange information conveniently. Today, in the era of the Internet of Things (IoT), machine themselves communicate with other machine or human. Although there is no standard identification of the IoT, [1] provided a good description as follows: “Things have identities and virtual personalities operating in smart spaces using intelligent interfaces to connect and communicate within social, environment, and user contexts”. Around us, a lot of “things”, such as sensors, actuators, and smart phones are connected to create a ubiquitous communication environment. The “things” can realize some communication functions by discovering their neighbors to cooperate with them [1,2].Multimedia communication in the IoT is a very hot topic, since the “things” are creating, transmitting, and receiving multimedia information everywhere. However, the devices such as smart phones, sensors, and personal computers are different from each other in the capabilities of processing and the rate of receiving. So if the multimedia information is transmitted at a fixed rate, it may exceed the bandwidth budget of some devices and the quality-of-service requirements of some devices may not be satisfied.Two kinds of quality-of-service requirements for multimedia services in heterogeneous networks were proposed in [3]: first, it must be able to effectively use all the available bandwidth; second, it must control the place of computation. Therefore, the first question of multimedia communication is how to make full use of the available bandwidth. One method to save bandwidth is to use the multicast scheme. In a multicast process, the receivers are divided into several multicast groups based on their requirements. For the heterogeneous receivers in the context of the IoT, multi-rate multicast is preferred, because different devices in the same multicast group could request different quality-of-service [4].Network coding is an effective technology that can improve the throughput. It extends the functionality of nodes from storing/forwarding packets to performing algebraic operations on the received data [5]. A large number of studies have shown that network coding can dramatically improve the throughput of traditional routing, the transmission efficiency of information, etc [5–7].Naturally, people has considered to combine the multi-rate multicast scheme with network coding. For the multi-rate multicast problem, most researchers consider the situation that flow rates for each multicast session or the link capacities are fixed. However, for the desired data rates of the receivers, the construction of optimal multi-rate multicast network codes is sometimes NP-hard [8], or may even not exist [9]. In such cases, flow control is needed to make full use of bandwidth while avoiding congestion and maintaining certain fairness among the competing flows in the network. For flow rate control, at present some researchers have proposed layered multicast schemes [10,11] applying network coding to improve performance of layered multicast based on traditional routing [12]. In general, they divide the network into different layers and construct single-rate multicast network coding for each layer [13,14]. However, these methods only apply network coding inside one layer, therefore cannot realize the full potential of network coding.The second question of multimedia communication is where to perform the computation. In the context of the IoT, the number of intermediate nodes and sink nodes are increasing at a very fast rate. Any node in the multimedia transmission network does not know the capabilities of all other nodes, and even the network topology itself is varying from time to time. The authors in [15] suggested that “the computational part can be developed using distributed processing or cloud computing”. The inter-layer network coding scheme in [16,17] has greater flexibility in optimizing the data flow compared to previous methods, and thus achieves higher throughput. But this scheme cannot be applied in the context of IoT, because it is not a distributed algorithm. Therefore, in this paper, we study the distributed flow rate control problem for multimedia multicast based on inter-layer network coding in the IoT.The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:•We study a method to save bandwidth and perform the computation efficiently for multimedia multicast in the IoT.We introduce the concept of transfer price specially for inter-layer network coding-based multicast flows, which is a Lagrange multiplier in the proposed algorithm. It, together with congestion price proposed in [16,17], are buffered in virtual queues at each node to determine the flow control strategy. In the scheme proposed in [16,17], the interactions of transfer price and congestion price emerged from multicast flows and the inverse of the derivative function of utility are not well expressed. We adopt an alternative iteration method which has been successfully used in [11] and extend it to inter-layer network coding-based rate control relying on current transfer price and congestion price. Therefore the problems encountered in rate control, which was solved by the direct solving method for intra-layer network coding [13], are avoided.We propose a distributed algorithm of joint rate control and multicast layer flow allocation. We use a partially-primal and dual gradient-based approach complies with the adaptive control of signal transmission mechanism to solve the optimization problem, while reducing the required control information. Furthermore, we mathematically proves the convergence and the globally stability of the proposed algorithm for the network coding-based multi-rate multicast, by using Lyapunov theory.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly discusses the related works. Section 3 describes the details of the system model and the formulation of the flow optimization problem for multi-rate multicast based on inter-layer network coding. Section 4 proposes the distributed algorithm for the flow optimization problem and proves that the proposed algorithm is globally stable. In Section 5, numerical examples are provided to illustrate the convergence, performance improvement, and implementation advantages of the proposed algorithm. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
