@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Metaheuristic Algorithms for Healthcare: Open Issues and Challenges

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A brief survey of metaheuristics for healthcare system is given.A learnable big data analytics framework for healthcare system is presented.Open issues and future trends of metaheuristics for healthcare system are addressed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Metaheuristic algorithm,data,healthcare,and smart home,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Inspired by the observation that a healthcare system usually involves various intelligent technologies from different disciplines, especially metaheuristics and data mining, this paper provides a brief survey of metaheuristics for healthcare system and a roadmap for researchers working on metaheuristics and healthcare to develop a more efficient and effective healthcare system. This paper begins with a discussion of changes for healthcare, followed by a brief review of the features of “up-to-date technologies for healthcare.”. Then, a learnable big data analytics framework for healthcare system is presented which provides a high performance solution to the forthcoming challenges of big data. Finally, changes, potentials, open issues, and future trends of metaheuristics for healthcare are addressed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
As observed by the world health organization, people aged over 60 years of the world population will be increasing from 841 million today to 2 billion in 2050 [12]. With the advance of medical treatment available for all, it is expected that the longevity will become a norm of humans. How to provide a convenient environment to elderly or ill people and children has therefore attracted the attention of researchers from different disciplines [9,25,31,45–47,53,76]. That is why healthcare system has become an active research area today. With the advance of information technology and smart home applications [25,28,51,71], the focus of healthcare system has undergone several changes over time, such as personal digital assistant (PDA), data mining, internet of things, and cloud computing. From the viewpoint of data analytics, PDA is used in a smart home healthcare system [51] (e.g., as the gateway of the smart home healthcare system) for integrating different types of data captured by sensors and for analyzing the data thus obtained to find out information that is useful in supporting a decision-making system at the initial stage. Nowadays, personal systems and smart handheld devices are also used for integrating and analyzing data of healthcare system. According to the observation of [53], in the early stage, i.e., 1990s, the focus of healthcare is on the collection and monitoring of physiology information and on the support of decision-making. Starting from 2000, due to innovative technologies and products, video for monitoring and analyzing human behavior, teleconsultation, nursing, wearable biosensors, smart home, and even sleep analysis have become the promising research topics. For example, we can buy an Apple Watch to monitor our physical condition, to adjust our exercise and sleep habits.It is estimated that healthcare system will cost American people about 1.3 trillion dollars in 2015 and will be increased to 4.5 and 5 trillion dollars in 2019 and 2022, respectively [1,6] and that the healthcare system in China costs about 350 billion dollars today and will be reaching 1 trillion dollars in 2020 [67]. The similar situations can also be found in other developed countries (e.g., United Kingdom, France, and Japan) in which the public health spends more than 5% of the economy [4]. This indicates that the gradually increasing cost of healthcare system will strongly impact the budget of a government and the daily life of her people.Data mining and metaheuristics can provide a useful solution in the construction of a smart and intelligent healthcare system, especially for data analytics. The main reason is that more detailed data can be collected by new hardware (e.g., innovative sensors), but assessing the situation from the collected data requires a powerful forecasting and recognition tool. Since metaheuristics can be used for solving data mining problems (i.e., can be a data mining algorithm by themselves) or enhancing the performance of data mining algorithms for healthcare, they can typically be used to help us analyze unknown and known data. As a result, they will be an indispensable part of modern researches on healthcare system. The main contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows:1.This paper first gives a systematic discussion of studies on metaheuristics for healthcare system as well as provides some open issues and future research trends for the researchers interested in this area.A learnable data analytics framework is presented to provide a possible solution to the integration of various types of input data from different appliances, sensors, and devices as well as to provide an incremental solution to the big data problem a healthcare system will encounter.The roadmap (as shown in Figure 1) and the remainder of this paper are organized as follows:1.A brief discussion on the research issues and relevant technologies of metaheuristics for healthcare system are given in Section 2, to lead the audience to the problems and solutions of this research domain, e.g., the classification algorithms for recognizing whether the posture of elderly people indicates a fall or not.A unified framework, called learnable big data analytics framework (LBDAF), is presented in Section 3 to deal with the big data problem of a healthcare system. Also presented in this section is a parallel incremental data mining algorithm (PIDMA) (as a part of LBDAF) for the big data mining problem.The relevant technologies for using metaheuristics for healthcare system are discussed in Section 4. The discussions of smart devices, wireless sensor networks, and internet of things are focused on how to extract the data from people and environment; the discussions of big data mining are focused on the data analytics system; and the discussions of cloud computing system are focused on the forthcoming system environment.The possible research trends of metaheuristics for healthcare system are discussed in Section 5, to depict the important research trends of this research domain.The healthcare system will undoubtedly strongly impact the economy of a country and the daily life of her people; however, an interesting finding described in [61] is that there lacks a consensus terminology and taxonomy of devices at the national and international level now. Fortunately, some studies [9,53] attempted to provide systematic survey to help us better understand what a healthcare system is and how to realize this kind of system. In [53], Koch provides an overview to explain the focus of contemporary healthcare systems on different durations. An interesting finding by Koch is that the top 3 terms searched on the Medline database during 1990–2003 are home monitoring, home telemedicine, and information systems and home care. In [9], Alemdar and Ersoy pointed out that the body area networks, personal area networks, gateway to the wide area networks, wide area networks, and end-user healthcare monitoring applications are the main considerations of a pervasive healthcare monitoring system. These discussions explain that how to gather data from sensors, how to integrate and analyze the gathered data, and how to display the information of a healthcare system will become essential research topics for healthcare. A distinguishing feature of healthcare is that most of the studies would like to apply innovative technologies or systems, such as wireless sensor networks, internet of things, and machine to machine [25], because these technologies or systems may be used by their system to provide better services to humans.The design of such kind of healthcare system requires that several different technologies be integrated, such as network, communication, embedded system, data mining, and metaheuristics. Early studies often used PDA as a center of home healthcare system [9,51], which can be divided into five components: context provider, context integrator, context interpreter, profile manager, and context manager. A later study [62] divided the healthcare system into three tiers: wearable wireless body/personal area network (WWBAN), personal server, and medical server. From the evolution of studies [40,41,51,62], it can be easily realized that wearable devices and networks, cell phones, and personal computers have been gradually applied to smart healthcare system in recent years. This explains why this research domain usually welcomes “new technology.” An interesting example can be found in [11], where Axisa and his colleagues used several different types of sensors to create a smart clothing to detect and analyze the physiological signals (e.g., temperature, electrocardiogram (ECG), heart rate, or skin blood flow) of humans to prevent diseases. The study given in [10] further considered how to monitor the behavior and situations of people who are nocturnal in a healthcare system. To provide a more accurate predict, some recent studies [72,81] have attempted to use data mining algorithms to provide a better result for healthcare system, such as the accuracy rate of predicting the human activities. Although traditional data mining algorithms can provide useful results for healthcare system, these studies [72,81] also implied that metaheuristics can be used to improve the final results of analytics of healthcare system.The advance of computer and network technologies has brought us several possible ways to construct a useful information system for our daily life. Similar to other information systems, healthcare systems have also made great advances in recent years. With modern computer and network technologies at hand, several applications of healthcare that cannot be realized before might become the household products today. For example, a modern medication dispensing system [39] can even use robot to deliver drugs to a customer who lives in a smart home [15,18]. The other successful results [42,60,72,81] of healthcare system have also shown that modern computer, network, and intelligent technologies can be used to develop a more complete, more accurate, and more robust healthcare system. In [60], Magoulas and Prentza pointed out that machine learning technologies can be used as data analytics, and the consequence is that we can then provide many more effective and efficient monitoring, detection, and alarming services to the doctors and patients.In general, recent research issues on healthcare [53,72] can be divided into five levels: international, national/regional, hospital, home/family, and personal. A brief review of research issues on healthcare based on this taxonomy will be given in the following discussions.•International level: Investigating large-scale healthcare data at the international level typically requires support from international organizations or companies, such as some infectious diseases (SARS [3] and H5N1 [2]) which are spread out in more than one country. How to forecast the trends of infectious disease is one of the critical issues in modern healthcare data analysis. A representative example is Google, which uses the search terms of people to predict the situations of flu [5]. Another representative example is the news about the genetic tests of Angelina Jolie.11Available online at http://edition.cnn.com/2015/03/25/health/cohen-angelina-jolie-genetic-tests/Today, some companies are even able to perform the genetic test and compute the probability of cancer of an individual because we understand the structure of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) much better today than ever before. Some previous studies have shown that metaheuristics are very useful for analyzing the protein data [24,49] and infectious diseases [34].National and regional level: At this level, how to represent and keep the data of patients typically is a critical research issue [31]. Finding useful information from the data of a national or regional medical center [26,44,55,56] has been a promising research trend in recent years because a data analytics system can verify the assumption and find out interesting patterns from a sufficient amount of data. Moreover, metaheuristic-based data mining algorithms can be used to find out the relationships between symptoms and particular disease, or even the relationships between cause and effect of human behaviors and disease.Hospital level: From the hospital perspective, one of the popular research trends is to enhance the performance of medical services. For example, how to optimize medical resources is the main concern of hospital management. Some of the previous studies [68,79] attempted to use metaheuristics to solve the scheduling problem of a hospital, such as optimizing the schedule of doctors, nurses, or patients. The waiting time of patients can then be significantly reduced if metaheuristics can provide a better work plan.Home/family level: Nowadays, smart home is one of the important research issues on healthcare because the up-to-date information appliances, smart handheld devices, RFID and wireless sensor networks can now be integrated to provide a much more smart healthcare service for the people whose home has a smart healthcare system. The human activities can be easily recognized so that the system is able to provide them suitable services, such as avoiding accidents of elder people [29].Personal level: In addition to the smart home for detecting the activities of people who live there, some studies [11,62] attempted to extract the physiological information of a person from wearable devices and put it in a healthcare system so that the data can be analyzed to provide suitable recommendations and services to the person who wears the appliances or sensors.Typically, metaheuristics [16,37] can be regarded as part of machine learning and soft computing technologies. The main characteristic of metaheuristics is that, in addition to input and output, the transition, evaluation, and determination operators will be performed repeatedly until the search process converges or meets the predefined stopping condition [74]. According to our observation, metaheuristics have been used by several recent studies on healthcare system for solving the data mining problems, e.g., clustering for unknown data, classification for part of unknown data, and associate rule for interesting patterns.The genetic algorithm (GA) is one of the most popular algorithms for healthcare. Since the solution22The solution of GA is usually called chromosome or individual.of genetic algorithm for optimization problem can be encoded as integers or binary numbers, some studies [68,79] have used GA for the scheduling problems of healthcare, such as minimizing the waiting time of patients. In [79], the focus is on applying the genetic algorithm to the scheduling problem of nurses so as to find a better schedule to improve the flow of emergency department, thus the queuing time of patients can then be significantly shortened, compared to the scheduling plan by hand. To provide a better service to patients, a later study [68] considered several objectives at the same time (e.g., total waiting time of patients and scheduling of doctors) so as to maximize the effect of medical resources and to minimize the wasted costs.A promising approach in using metaheuristics for the classification problems of healthcare or smart home system is to use GA to find better weights to adjust the classifiers or to train the classification algorithms. In [33], Fatima et al. used GA to find better weights of classifiers for analyzing human activities. Another way to enhance the performance of a classification algorithm using GA is to select applicable features from the raw data (i.e., to reduce the number of dimensions) to accelerate the speed of the classification algorithm [7,57,65]. For example, in [65], GA was used to select the six most important features out of thirteen features for the prediction of heart disease. It can be easily seen that this saves more than 50% of the computation time for the same data because the feature selection procedure may significantly reduce the complexity of the data. A similar work can be found in [57] in which a parallel genetic algorithm was used to reduce not only the data complexity but also the response time of GA. Moreover, in the same study [57], the heart disease diagnosis system was built as an embedded system so that it can be used as a heart disease diagnosis appliance in our daily life. A later study [7] used GA to determine the initial weights and features for a multi-layer perception (MLP). A very interesting thing of the study [7] is the things each chromosome encodes which include random initial weight generator, number of hidden nodes, and selected features. As a result, GA can simultaneously find out better initial weights, number of hidden nodes, and features to be selected for MLP all at once during the convergence process.GA has also been successfully applied to medical resource and information management [32,43,65]. A watermarking approach, which uses GA for the copyright protection and authorization of medical images, can be found in [32] in which GA and particle swarm optimization (PSO) were used to reduce the computation time of watermark embedding. Of course, no matter which method is used, be it GA or PSO, the results are all better than those obtained by discrete cosine transform (DCT) and least significant bit (LSB) in terms of the robustness against attack. Another study [43] showed that GA can be used in medical fraud detection. More precisely, in this study, GA was used to determine better weights of features of data for a classification algorithm. Different from [32,43], the study given in [65] first modeled the medical resource management problem as a maximal covering location problem and then used GA to find out a good solution for the locations of RFID readers so as to maximize the possible coverage of RFID readers on the service floor.Different from GA which simulates the theory of evolution, the ant colony optimization (ACO) uses a different way to simulate the natural behavior of ants to find out a good solution for the optimization problem of healthcare. Although not many studies use ACO for healthcare, it does have unlimited possibilities that can be easily found in the studies [55,56]. In [56], Kuo and Shih used ACO to find out the association rules for health insurance data while in [55], Kuo et al. used ACO to cluster the similar data. These results explain that ACO is able to be used as the analytics for different data mining tasks of healthcare. Moreover, in [56], Kuo and Shih found out some interesting and useful association rules, such as “{ hyperlipidemia }⇒{ diabetes mellitus }, ” which is very helpful in enhancing the performance of prophylactic immunization.For the classification problems of healthcare, the studies [13,59,75] showed that ACO is able to improve the results of a classification algorithm. In [59], ACO was combined with fuzzy rule for classifying the elements of hepatitis. A later study [13] combined ACO with linear discriminant analysis (LDA) for understanding the gastric cancer data from endoscopy. More precisely, in this hybrid algorithm, called ACO-LDA, LDA plays the role of clustering the data while ACO plays the role of classification. A recent study [75] showed that ACO can also be applied to heart disease prediction system. In this study, Uma and Kirubakaran combined ACO and GA and perform these two metaheuristics at each iteration on the convergence process to select the better features of a classification algorithm.Similar to GA and ACO, particle swarm optimization (PSO) also has several successful results [35,77,80] in solving the classification problems or analyzing the data of a healthcare system. In [77], PSO was used for analyzing the data of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of renin-angiotensin system genes to understand the interaction of SNPs and hypertension, e.g., non-hypertension and hypertension. Another promising research trend is to use PSO as a classification algorithm to recognize breast cancer [35,80]. The study [80] used statistical methods to select useful features and then used PSO to classify the population into two classes: people who have breast cancer and people who do not have breast cancer. It is worth mentioning that the study [80] used a discrete encoding to represent the solution of PSO. As a result, some useful decision rules (i.e., breast cancer patterns) are found by the healthcare system that would aid doctors in diagnosing the breast cancer.To improve the accuracy rate of a classification algorithm, PSO is sometimes used to determine the weight of features for the classification algorithm or to select the useful features from the data. In [27], Chowdhury et al. used the PSO to determine the optimum weights of pathophysiological parameters for a diagnosis system and then realized this system on a field programmable gate array (FPGA). It can be easily observed that the study described in [27] used an adaptive concept to dynamically adjust the perception range (i.e., the impact of other particles on the position of a particle) of each particle of PSO which can be used to improve the accuracy rate of the classification results. The study given in [22] showed that PSO can also be used to select the applicable features for other classification algorithm. In this study, PSO was combined with neural network to select the features for support vector machine (SVM) to analyze the lymph node in ultrasound images.In addition to using PSO as a classification algorithm, some studies [34,50,52,82] showed that PSO can also be used for different applications of healthcare system. In [52], PSO was used to train the weight of a neural network for touch floor system to trace the position of a user. The study described in [34] used PSO to find out the best location (called the key node) of stations of mass rapid transit (MRT) to screen people to prevent the spread of infectious disease. The main characteristics of this investigation are in modeling the problem as maximizing the number of people that can be screened by key node (i.e., MRT station) and balancing the number of people on each development guide plan (DGP) zone to ensure the quality of the samples collected. Similar to GA and ACO that were used to find out a better scheduling plan for hospital, the study of [50] used PSO to find out a good sequence for the operations of all the patients by treating it as a scheduling problem. The results of [50] showed that PSO is able to find a better scheduling plan than traditional scheduling technologies, such as first come first served (FCFS). An interesting application can be found in [82] where PSO was combined with evolutionary algorithm (EA) to train the weights of recurrent neural network for water quantity prediction problem. In this hybrid algorithm, PSO and EA are performed alternately at each iteration on the convergence process, which implies that PSO can be used with other metaheuristics as the data analytics of a healthcare system.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
