@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Peak-power reduction using improved partial transmit sequence in orthogonal frequency division multiplexing systems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The major drawback of OFDM system is its high PAPR.The drawback is overcome by use of GPW and RPW with All Pass Filtering technique.The GPW and RPW generate more optimum phase factors when implemented together.All Pass Filtering technique maintains magnitude response and optimum phase shift.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OFDM,PAPR,PTS,Phase weighting factor,All Pass Filtering technique,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing (OFDM) system has lead to significant advancement in wireless communication systems. In OFDM system multi-carriers are present. During modulation the sub-carriers are added together with same phase which increases the value of Peak-to-Average Power Ratio (PAPR). High PAPR leads to more interference and reduced resolution of analog to digital converter (A/D) and digital to analog converter (D/A). The Partial Transmit Sequence (PTS) is a popular technique used for PAPR reduction in OFDM systems. The modified PTS technique proposed in this paper overcomes the drawbacks of Original PTS (O-PTS) by making use of Group Phase Weighting Factor (GPW) and Recursive Phase Weighting Factor (RPW) along with All Pass Filtering. Simulations show that the proposed scheme performs very well in terms of PAPR and achieves almost the same Bit Error Rate (BER) performance under Rayleigh fading channel.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing (OFDM) is one of the Multi-Carrier Modulation (MCM) techniques that transmit signals by exploiting the advantages of transmission through multiple carriers. OFDM technology has already paved its way into wired and wireless technologies such as the Asymmetric Digital Subscriber Line (ADSL) and the IEEE 802.11 standard [1]. In OFDM, each sub-carrier can be overlapped with the neighborhood sub-carriers. The major advantage of OFDM is that it is robust in a frequency selective fading channel which is a consequence of multipath environment and other communication interferences. The overhead in the technology increases when there is a requirement for large number of sub-carriers. However, requirement of more sub-carriers increases complexity of the modulation, synchronization and coherent demodulation adding to higher hardware cost.The high Peak-to-Average Power Ratio (PAPR) in OFDM Systems emerges as a big hurdle while migrating to this new technology. The input data stream of the Inverse Fast Fourier Transform (IFFT) should possess a uniform power spectrum, but the output of the IFFT may result in a non-uniform or spiky power spectrum. Most of the transmission energy is sparsely distributed over a few sub-carriers instead of the majority sub-carriers. This problem can be quantified as the PAPR measure.Jiang and Wu, gave a brief introduction about PAPR reduction techniques in OFDM system for wireless communication and its peak power effects in orthogonal multicarrier modulation [1]. Jayalath and Tellambura discussed about PAPR problems in the OFDM system and different reduction techniques in reducing PAPR for OFDM signal [2]. Baxley and Zhou have compared the SLM and PTS techniques for PAR reduction to obtain the desirable PAPR and good system throughput [3]. Lu et al., proposed the technique for PAPR reduction in OFDM based on transformation of partial transmit sequences which give a better performance by trading it, with that of the system complexity [4].The high PAPR in OFDM signals will reduce the resolution of the Digital-to-Analog (D/A) and Analog-to-Digital (A/D) converters, in both transmitting and receiving ends leading to reduce the efficiency of the amplifier [2–6]. Many methods have been proposed to reduce the PAPR. The literature presents distinct techniques defined in the frequency and time domains. Methods such as Block Coding, Interleaving, Selected Mapping (SLM), Partial Transmit Sequences (PTS), Phase Optimization, Tone reservation and Injection, Precoding, Active Constellation Extension (ACE), Envelope clipping, Companding and Superimposed technique were used to reduce high PAPR [1–8].The problem of high PAPR is encountered by many reduction techniques and among them Partial Transmit Sequence (PTS) proves to outperform the other methods [5].This paper mainly focuses on PTS with two phase weighting factors called GPW and RPW along with All Pass Filtering technique to reduce the high PAPR [9–11]. The technique is flexible to control PAPR without destroying the orthogonal property between the sub-carriers. The use of a proper PTS for reducing the PAPR of OFDM signals had been presented in literature [12,13]. In general, the reduction in PAPR can be achieved by the PTS with optimum phase value.The main drawback of the PTS is its high complexity put together with the problem of finding optimum phase value. The pseudorandom partition PTS is employed making use of the combination of GPW and RPW along with All Pass Filtering technique for the sake of shifting the sub-block sequences to generate new candidates. The proposed scheme can reduce the computational complexity and optimum phase search. Here in the paper, GPW and RPW combined with All Pass Filtering technique and PTS finds optimum phase value in order to reduce the complexity of optimum phase search.The proposed scheme is advantageous in two aspects: First, with the advent of pseudorandom partition method, reduction in computational complexity is achieved through the dual techniques of GPW and RPW. Second, by utilizing All Pass Filtering technique, the proposed scheme will maintain both the magnitude response and phase shift and it will also eliminate the need of multiple IFFT.This paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, the system model is introduced and the PTS technique for reducing the PAPR is briefly described. Section 3 gives the necessary conditions on the chosen GPW and RPW along with All Pass Filtering for minimizing the error probability. Section 4 discusses the results from numerical simulations. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper.In an OFDM system, a high-rate data stream is split into N low-rate data streams transmitted simultaneously by sub-carriers. Each of the sub-carriers is independently modulated and multiplexed. Then, an OFDM signal is obtained by adding up all the independently modulated sub-carriers. The IFFT generates the ready-to-transmit OFDM signal. The sub-carriers are chosen to be orthogonal so that the adjacent sub-carriers can be separated. For an input OFDM block X=[X0…XN−1]T, where N is the number of sub-carriers, the discrete-time baseband OFDM signal x(k) can therefore be expressed as(1)x(k)=1N∑n=0N-1Xnej2πkLN,k=0,1,…,LN-1where L is the oversampling factor. It was shown in [11] that the oversampling factor L=4 is sufficient to provide an accurate estimate value of the PAPR of OFDM signals. The PAPR of (k) is defined as the ratio of the maximum instantaneous power to the average power; that is(2)PAPR=10log10max[|Xn|2]E[|Xn|2]The PAPR of OFDM signal is defined as the power of a sine wave with amplitude equal to the maximum envelope value which can be computed in the frequency domain because IFFT is a unitary transformation.The transmitted time signal is usually generated by sampling the continuous time signal. The sampling at Nyquist rate might have a hopeful PAPR value. Hence, for higher value of oversampling factor better PAPR can be achieved. The oversampling factor can be realized by inserting zeros in the middle of the frequency-domain signal and passing the new-point data sequence through the IFFT unit. Therefore, the oversampled IFFT output can be expressed as(3)x̂=IFFT(X̂)=∑v=1VbvIFFT(Xv)=∑v=1Vbv·XvIn a typical OFDM system with PTS approach to reduce the PAPR, the input data block is divided by means of a pseudo partitioning scheme into disjoint sub-blocks which are represented by the vectors. All the sub-carrier which is present in another block must be zero so that the sum of all the sub-blocks constitutes the original signal. Then, the sub-blocks are transformed into time-domain partial transmit sequence. These partial sequences are independently rotated by the phase factors and combined together to create a set of candidates. Therefore, total candidates could be generated in O-PTS scheme. Finally, the candidate with the lowest PAPR is chosen by an exhaustive search of the candidates for transmission. In the O-PTS scheme, bits of side information have to be communicated explicitly to the receiver in order to recover the original symbol.In order to reduce the computational complexity of finding an optimum phase value by the conventional PTS technique, a new technique GPW and RPW along with All Pass Filtering is proposed. The technique offers an enhanced performance in the PAPR reduction compared with that of the existing technique. In proposed technique, all the sub-blocks are split into several disjoint groups and each group can obtain its own subcandidate sequence by using the same set of phase weighting factors as shown in Fig. 1. Then, the subcandidate sequence from different groups are combined together to generate the OFDM candidate sequences. Hence forth the generated candidate sequence that has the least PAPR [9].The OFDM sequence can be given by(4)x′=∑i=1vbixi+∑i=1v1bixi+∑i=r+1v2bixi+⋯+∑i=vR-1+1vbixi1<r1<r2<⋯rR-Vwhere the value of ri, i=1, 2, …., R−1, is the index of sub-block. It can be viewed that all the sub-blocks can be split into several groups and for each group the phase weighting can be self implemented. When the number of groups is obtained the subcandidate sequence from the kth group along with the number of sub-blocks in each group can be expressed by r1, r2−r1, r3−r2, where r1 must be greater than one. By using the same set of phase weighting factors, these groups can be implemented with their respective phase weighting processes which helps to obtain the respective subcandidate sequences. Then, the subcandidate sequences from dissimilar groups can be combined together by complex additions to achieve the OFDM candidate sequences and the one with the least PAPR is selected for transmitting. When the number of sub blocks is 4 (V=4) with a set of phase weighting factors given as {1,−1} (i.e., W=2) two sub-blocks in the first group are generated. The four sub-blocks can be split into two groups: one includes the first two sub-blocks and the other contains the remaining sub-blocks. After employing the phase weighting sequences, it is observed that PTS with GPW and O-PTS have the same OFDM candidate sequences.The performance of proposed PAPR reduction technique is the same as that of O-PTS. As far as computational difficulty is concerned, the complex multiplication is desired by each element in the phase weighting sequence. By which each phase weighting sequence requires the least computational complexity for generating new candidate sequence. Implementation of the proposed technique shows a reduction in computational complexity which is evident from the simulation results. The proposed method can also be modified by using All Pass Filters along with RPW favouring the generation of the optimum phase sequence.By considering all the phase weighting sequences, the relationship between phase weighting sequences can be found if the following conditions are satisfied:(i)The number of phase weighting factors is even.The set of allowed phase weighting factors isej2πKW, [K=0, 1, …, W−1].The steps involved in the generation and process of phase weighting factors are summarized as follows:(i)Phase weighting factors can be generated by using allowable phase weighting sequences.Then the phase weighting sequences can be divided into two equal parts.Different candidate sequences can be obtained by making use of the relationship between two phase weighting sequences. The common terms obtained from the two parts, which are used to compute the candidate sequences. The relationship between two phase weighting sequences from different parts must satisfy the condition that the first phase weighting factors should be same and the remaining part is opposite to each other.By using the common terms mentioned in the above step, different candidate sequences in the other part can be obtained directly by using complex additions.By Calculating the PAPR of all the candidate sequences the minimum PAPR is chosen for transmission.The two phase weighting methods can be used to reduce the computational complexity and obtain the same PAPR reduction performance as that of the O-PTS. In order to reduce the computational complexity, the combination of GPW and RPW is considered. The PTS considering the effect of combining GPW and RPW is described below:In the GPW method, all the sub-block sequences are divided into several groups and for each sub-block, the RPW scheme is implemented [10]. During the combination of GPW and RPW the implementation of RPW varies from normal implementation. If the number of sub-blocks in a group is higher than two, the third step in RPW is modified. The sub-blocks can be split into number of small troops. After splitting, each troop should include phase weighting sequences till the last phase weighting factor and the splitting is complete. The opposites of the last phase weighting factors must be in the same troop. After implementing RPW, subcandidate sequences in each group can be obtained. Finally, in terms of GPW, subcandidate sequences from different groups are combined and all the OFDM candidate sequences can be obtained.An All-Pass Filter is a signal processing filter that passes all frequencies equally, but changes the phase relationship between various frequencies. It can be done by varying its propagation delay with frequency [11]. An All-Pass Filter passes all input frequencies with the same gain, but it modifies the phase of the signals. All-Pass Filter has a gain of one and such filters are used for group delay equalization, notch filtering design, Hilbert transform implementation and musical instruments synthesis. All Pass-Filters, delay the OFDM sequence by providing delay and reduced interference. In a PTS scheme, different frequency domain OFDM sequences are generated and then transformed into time domain sequences by using multiple IFFT modules. In the proposed scheme, different OFDM sequences are directly generated in the time domain, hence the need for IFFT modules can be eliminated. Generation of the alternative time domain OFDM sequences can be performed using multiple All-Pass Filters. The general function of an All-Pass Filter is given by(5)H(Z)=∏K=1Kz-1-ck∗1-ckz-1where ck, c∗kand K are the kth complex pole, its complex conjugate and the number of the complex poles, respectively. The magnitude response|H(ejω)|and the phase response are given as angle of|H(ejω)|are given as(6)|H(ejω)|=1Thus the existing scheme has a drawback of providing lesser number of choices for selecting the optimum phase sequence in O-PTS methods. Therefore the proposed scheme which has a prime advantage that it has more PAPR reduction capability.To illustrate the performance of the proposed scheme, extensive simulations result were carried out to evaluate the performance of PAPR reduction. Error probability and Bit Error Rate (BER) at the receiver were estimated. The simulation parameters are tabulated in Table 1. The results of the simulations are based on the transmission of pseudo randomly generated OFDM symbols with the carriers for Quadrature Phase Shift Keying (QPSK) modulation technique. The Complementary Cumulative Density Function (CCDF) of the PAPR is used to measure the performance at the transmitter side. Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF) of the PAPR is one of the most frequently used performance measures for PAPR reduction techniques. In the literature, CCDF is commonly used instead of the CDF. The CCDF of the PAPR denotes the probability that the PAPR of a data block exceeds a given threshold. In [1], a simple approximate expression is derived for the CCDF of the PAPR of a multicarrier signal with Nyquist rate sampling. The CDF of the amplitude of a signal sample is given by(7)F(z)=1-exp(z)Moreover, the distribution of PAPR bears stochastic characteristics in a practical OFDM system, usually being expressed in terms of CCDF. The CCDF can also be used to evaluate and compare the performance of any PAPR reduction schemes and the CCDF of discrete-time PAPR is given by(8)CCDF(N,PAPR0)=Pr{PAPR>PAPR0}=1-(1-e-PAPR0)Nwhere N is the number of sub-carriers in an OFDM system.Therefore, there have been many attempts to derive more accurate distribution of PAPR. The CCDFs of the proposed PTS scheme with sub-block varies from 2 to 8 and phase value is used as 2 and 4. To illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed scheme, several simulations result were used to evaluate the performance in terms of PAPR reduction, estimation of error probability of the detector as well as BER. The results of the simulation are based on the transmission of randomly generated OFDM symbols. By increasing the number of sub-blocks, the proposed system requires low transmitted power.As far as PAPR reduction performance is concerned, the CCDF is used to evaluate and compare the different PAPR reduction schemes. Figs. from 2 to 7 show the performance comparison between the proposed scheme and existing O-PTS in terms of CCDF. The proposed PTS scheme has the ability to generate more candidates with the same parameters. The PAPR performance can be increased when more number of sub-blocks and phase values are selected. Fig. 2shows the performance comparison with different sub-carriers for V=8 and W=2. For fairness of comparison of the PAPR performance.Fig. 3plots the curves of the proposed PTS scheme with the candidates, which are the same as that of O-PTS scheme. The result shows that the proposed PTS scheme can obtain better PAPR performance. In Fig. 3 the CCDF of the PAPR0 is simulated for the OFDM system with various sub-carriers and with modulation techniques. This is compared with the O-PTS, as shown in Fig. 4. It can be observed that the PAPR of the proposed method is better by 3dB at the probability of 10−4.From Fig. 4, it can be found, that the 3dB improvement in PAPR0 depends on the number of sub-blocks and the modulation scheme employed. As number of GPW and RPW factors are increased, the performance of proposed PTS scheme increases for better distinction between shifted and non-shifted symbols after transmission through the channel. Moreover, computational complexity is reduced for the number of fixed sub-blocks in the proposed scheme. When the number of disjoint groups and sub-blocks are increased, more PAPR can be reduced in proposed scheme compared to O-PTS. Increases in size of each group result in more reduction in computational complexity. The performance improvement of the proposed scheme is around 2.5dB as shown in Figs. 5 and 6.When compared to O-PTS scheme, the PAPR performance of the proposed PTS scheme also improves between 1.8dB and 2.5dB with the same parameters of V=2, W=2 as shown in Fig. 7. Hence it can observed that the GPW and RPW along with all pass filter reduces computational complexity. Figs. 8–13illustrate the probability of detection failure against the Signal Noise Ratio (SNR) of the proposed scheme. Fig. 8 shows the proposed scheme with sub-block variations from 128 to 1024. QPSK modulation method is employed over Rayleigh fading channel. The proposed scheme can be implemented at the receiver’s side to improve the performance of OFDM system. It can perform better than O-PTS scheme at the receiver side. Moreover, if GPW and RPW are performed with all pass filter technique, the complexity is further reduced over Rayleigh fading channels. It can be observed that as the number of sub-blocks is increased, the performance of proposed PTS scheme also increases with more number of Rayleigh fading channels.It can be observed that as the number of sub-blocks is increased, the performance of proposed PTS scheme also increases with more number of phase values.There may be degradation in the performance of receiver due to the reduction of transmission power. Figs. 8–13 demonstrate the reliability of the detector for the proposed PTS scheme. It is obvious that a good BER performance is maintained in the proposed PTS scheme when compared with O-PTS using optimum ‘V’ and ‘W’. The BER performance of the proposed PTS scheme over Rayleigh fading channel for number of sub-blocks from 2 to 8 employing QPSK is presented. QPSK with Rayleigh fading environment provides a favorable trade-off between the PAPR reduction and the BER. Table 2gives CCDF and BER of the proposed scheme compared to O-PTS.While employing PTS scheme which can be regarded as the phase modification for each sub-carrier signal in the frequency domain, but without incurring any signal distortion, it is found that the spectrum of each sub-carrier signal is still unaffected. Thus, PTS scheme causes no change in the spectrum of original OFDM signals. The proposed scheme making use of GPW and RPW along with all pass filter reduces computational complexity and maintains the same candidate sequences as that of O-PTS. Also it causes no change in the spectrum of original OFDM signals.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
