@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Energy-aware routing algorithm for wireless sensor networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new energy aware routing algorithm has been proposed for cluster based wireless sensor networks.It achieves O(1) message complexity per sensor node and O(n) time complexity for a WSN having n sensor nodes.It efficiently forms the directed virtual backbone of cluster heads to facilitate data routing to the sink.It is successful in balancing the relaying load among the sensor nodes with respect to their residual energy.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Wireless sensor networks,Clustering,Routing,Energy efficient,Network lifetime,Energy consumption,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The main constraint of wireless sensor networks (WSNs) is the limited and generally irreplaceable power source of the sensor nodes. Therefore, designing energy saving routing algorithm is one of the most focused research issues. In this paper, we propose an energy aware routing algorithm for cluster based WSNs. The algorithm is based on a clever strategy of cluster head (CH) selection, residual energy of the CHs and the intra-cluster distance for cluster formation. To facilitate data routing, a directed virtual backbone of CHs is constructed which is rooted at the sink. The proposed algorithm is also shown to balance energy consumption of the CHs during data routing process. We prove that the algorithm achieves constant message and linear time complexity. We test the proposed algorithm extensively. The experimental results show that the algorithm outperforms other existing algorithms in terms of network lifetime, energy consumption and other parameters.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Wireless sensor networks (WSNs) have gained enormous attention for their usage in monitoring environment, security surveillance, heath and underground mines [1]. However, the main limitation of WSNs is that the sensor nodes are operated on limited power sources. Moreover, in several applications such as in battlefields, dense forest etc. sensor nodes are not easily accessible due to hostile nature of such environment and therefore they cannot be recharged. Thus energy conservation of the sensor nodes to maximize the network lifetime is one of the most challenging issues in WSNs. Therefore, a lot of research has been carried out for energy saving of the sensor nodes for the long run operation of the WSNs.One of the techniques to save the energy consumption is clustering sensor nodes [2–14]. In clustering process, sensors nodes are organized into distinct groups, called clusters and each cluster has a coordinator referred as cluster head (CH) and remaining nodes within a cluster act as cluster members (CMs). Each sensor node must belong to one and only one cluster. Sensor nodes send their sensed data to their corresponding CHs. CHs then aggregate them and send it to a remote base station called sink using single hop or multi-hop communication. Many cluster-based multi-hop routing algorithms have been developed in the literature which can be found in [15–22]. In most of these techniques, periodic re-clustering is performed to balance the energy consumption of the CHs. However, in such routing techniques, all neighbor CHs may route their data packets to a single CH which may deplete its energy quickly. As a result, the whole network may get partitioned in the very early stage. In addition to this, clustering algorithm also influences the performance of the routing algorithm owing to inefficient CH selection, uneven CH distribution and ineffective cluster formation. A sensor node cannot sustain as a CH if its residual energy is very low since the CHs are burdened with extra work as compared to their member sensor nodes. If the selected CHs are not well distributed in the network, then the distance between the CHs and their member sensor nodes is not minimal. This consumes more energy for intra-cluster communication. Furthermore, inappropriate selection by a sensor node to join a CH also leads to improper energy utilization.In this paper, we propose a new energy-aware routing algorithm, called ERA for a cluster based wireless sensor network that addresses the above mentioned issues. In our approach, all the sensor nodes are organized into distinct clusters. To select CHs, each node starts the campaign to become a CH by initiating a time delay which depends on its residual energy. To form clusters, nodes join CHs by considering their residual energy and distance. Then, a directed virtual backbone (DVB) of CHs rooted at the sink is constructed using all the CHs to facilitate the routing of the data. In data routing, each CH forwards the data packets to next hop CHs in such way that their energy consumption can be balanced. Experiments are performed on the proposed algorithm, ERA. The results are compared with existing routing algorithms such as EEPA (energy-efficient and power-aware) [18] and EADC (energy-aware distributed clustering) [23] and also with our previous works such as BDCP (backoff-based distributed clustering protocol) [14] and EMRA (energy-aware multi-level routing algorithm) [25]. The results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm in terms of network life time, energy consumption, power imbalance factor, and data aggregation.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. We review some related works in Section 2.The system models for the proposed algorithm are presented in Section 3. The proposed algorithm is described in Section 4. We present experimental results and their comparison with other existing algorithms in Section 5 followed by the conclusion in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
