@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Cooperative packet-forwarding mechanism for throughput improvement in multi-channel wireless networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a cooperative channel assignment and packet forwarding protocol.Our protocol reduces the transmission times for the low-data rate direct link users.Our protocol selects multi-hop path with min transmit time even direct path exists.Results show that our protocol notably improves network throughput over IEEE 802.11.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cooperative communication,Direct path,Fairness,Channel assignment,Path selection,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Typical MAC protocols for IEEE 802.11-based ad hoc networks employ a direct transmission strategy whenever the transmitter can directly reach the receiver (one-hop transmission). While such a design enjoys simplicity, it limits the number of admitted transmissions in a given neighborhood. Due to the performance anomaly of 802.11-based wireless networks, transmission with low data rates occupy the shared medium for longer periods of time. Occupying the transmission medium for a longer period of time results in less available transmission time for other nodes, which consequently reduces the number of transmitted packets during the same period of time, leading to a reduction in network throughput. To improve the overall network throughput, we present a cooperative multi-channel MAC protocol for single-hop wireless mobile ad hoc networks that attempts at computing the path with the minimum required transmission time for a given source–destination pair (including the channel assignment along that path). The proposed protocol attempts at improving network performance by means of cooperative communications. According to our approach, if the one-hop (direct) path between communicating nodes supports low data rate (requires longer transmission time), the source selects a multi-hop path to the destination such that the total amount of required transmission time is minimized. Through simulations, we show that our proposed protocol achieves significant throughput and fairness improvement compared to the standard IEEE 802.11-based protocol.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Due to the growing demand for wireless applications and services, increasing their supported capacity and performance has become a challenging issue. A Wireless mobile ad hoc network (MANET) consists of a group of nodes that work together in a distributed manner and are capable of movement. These nodes are connected via wireless links without the use of the existing network infrastructure or centralized administration [1]. Ad hoc networks are used in areas where infrastructure is not presented or when using infrastructures is impractical. Wireless MANETs are used in different applications, such as military, civilian, personal, and emergency applications.Typically, MAC protocols designed for IEEE 802.11-based MANETs utilize the direct path between the transmitter–receiver pair (one-hop transmission) to deliver data packets, irrespective of the supported data rate (e.g., [1–10]). Although such a mechanism is simple, however, it limits the total number of accepted transmissions in a given period of time, which decreases the overall network performance. This is because when the direct path has low date rate, the transmitter reserves the communication channel for a longer period of time preventing neighboring nodes from accessing the channel until its transmission is completed. This negatively affects network throughput and results in short-term fairness. Therefore, new cooperative MAC protocols are needed to effectively utilize the available resources and maximize network performance.In this paper, we propose a cooperative channel assignment and packet forwarding protocol that uses cooperative communication with the multi-channel capability of wireless nodes in a single-hop MANET. Our proposed protocol aims at improving network performance by reducing the required transmission time for a given transmission that suffers from low-data rate direct link through selecting a multi-hop path (including channel assignment) with the minimum total required transmission time even through a direct one-hop path between the communicating pair exists. Specifically, when the direct path between the source and destination has lower data rate than the other possible paths, the source collaborates with other nodes to deliver its data packets to the destination. Through such collaboration, several nodes (called helper nodes) participate in forwarding the data from the source to the destination. According to the mechanism used in the proposed protocol, the source selects the path that guarantees the minimum transmission time (including channel assignment and helper selection) to deliver data packets. The source, destination and helper nodes form a multi-hop path from the source to the destination. Such cooperation between source, destination and helper nodes decreases the overall needed transmission time by selecting a higher data rate path. This preserves more channels and time for potential future transmissions (allows those transmissions to proceed earlier and to access the channels more frequently), which consequently improve network throughput and fairness. According to our proposed protocol, the source selects the path that guarantees the minimum transmission time (including channel assignment and helper selection) to deliver data packets. To evaluate the performance of our proposed protocol, we conduct simulations for both single-channel and multi-channel mobile ad hoc networks. Simulation results show that our protocol significantly improves the network throughput over the standard IEEE 802.11b protocol. The results also indicate that our protocols preserve fairness.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the related work is reviewed. Section 3 introduces the system model, and Section 4 provides the SNR and transmission time analysis. The proposed cooperative packet-forwarding protocol is described in Section 5. Simulation results and discussions are presented in Section 6. Finally, Section 7 provides concluding remarks.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
