@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Person identification using vascular and non-vascular retinal features

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Novel methods for personal identification using retinal images.Vascular based method involves the use of vessel properties of retinal images with improved vessel segmentation algorithm by catering pathological lesions.Non-vascular based method uses novel structural features structure to perform person identification.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Biometric system,Retina recognition,Vascular-based retinal recognition,Non-vascular-based retinal recognition,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Retina recognition is the most stable and reliable biometric system due to its stability, uniqueness and non-replicable nature of vascular pattern. On the other hand, the complexity of vascular pattern in diseased retina makes the extraction of blood vessels very hard, which majorally effects the recognition rate. The main aim of this paper is to design a robust retinal recognition system with reduced computational complexity and to explore novel retinal features. This paper presents two different approaches for retinal recognition; one is vascular-based feature extraction with an improved vessel segmentation algorithm and second is non-vascular based feature extraction. Vascular-based method uses vessel properties of retinal images and aims to improve the efficiency of retinal recognition system. Whereas, non-vascular based method intends to analyze non-vessel properties of retinal images in order to reduce time complexity. The proposed system is assessed on two local and three public databases.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Nowadays biometrics technology plays a vital role in public security and information security domains [1]. The technique of automatic identification of an individual based on his physiological and behavioral traits is called biometric authentication. Biometric is the most reliable authentication system in digital security systems. The main contribution of biometrics is in security systems for authentication purposes [2]. Traditional methods use PIN number, passwords and keys etc., for person’s identification which provide a low level security [3]. A biometric system provides a high security access system. It also provides more reliable features than password based authentication system. Moreover, these features cannot be lost, forgotten, duplicated and require the person to be present for authentication process.In general a biometric authentication system is a pattern recognition system which compares a registered biometric sample with a query biometric sample [2]. Depending on the scenarios, a biometric system can either be an identification system (one-to-many) which determines person’s identity without his consent or a verification system (one-to-one) which verifies person’s identity. Generally it works by capturing feature sample such as acquiring digital retinal image for retinal recognition, then sample is transformed into biometric template to get the discriminative representation of the feature [1]. At the end, these samples are compared with other samples to determine the identity.A number of biometric traits are developed and used for person identification. The key idea is to use special traits for person identification such as face, iris, retina, hand and palm geometry, signature, voice etc. The critical attributes of these traits for reliable recognition are the variations of these traits across the human population, uniqueness and their immutability over time [1]. Human retina is the best characteristic when we consider the above attributes for a biometric recognition system. It provides many advantages over other traits such as blood vessels pattern in retina are unique, studies have revealed this fact that they are unique even in identical twins [4]. They ultimately make a good differentiation among people. Furthermore, they cannot be duplicated and do not change over the time [2]. Owing to these properties, retina based identification and recognition system is the most stable and accurate biometric system.A reliable and efficient retina recognition system is characterized by the accuracy of the system. However in these systems, recognition rate is greatly affected by the vasculature complexity of retinal images. Generally, healthy retina has neat pattern of blood vessels as shown in Fig. 1. Segmentation of these blood vessels is not a challenging task, as they don’t have any abnormalities in their pattern and neither do they effect the recognition rate. However, this vascular pattern becomes very complex in diseased retinal images due to the presence of pathological signs. These pathological signs appear as holes and bunches in the retinal vascular map as shown in Fig. 2. These false structures appear as false positives and cause misidentification and increase false recognition rate. Therefore, we need an automated segmentation algorithm which can remove these abnormalities before matching and can also reduce false recognition rate.Furthermore in any retinal recognition system, matching is an important phase which makes the final decision [1]. Matching greatly depends on the feature extraction phase which has great impact on the performance of retinal recognition system. In this context, this paper addresses aforementioned issues and proposes two different feature extraction methods for retina recognition. First method is vascular-based method with an improved vessel segmentation algorithm. It caters the issue of presence of false positives due to pathological structures in retinal images. This method first intends to remove false vessels due to pathological signs and segments out true vessels only. In next step, it extracts features based on vessels properties to perform matching. On the other hand, second proposed approach is non-vascular-based method which extracts novel structural features from retinal color images i.e., luminance, contrast and structure followed by matching. This paper also signifies the advantages of both methods in the light of system’s performance.Rest of the paper is structured as follows, Section 2 highlights some previous techniques on person identification using various retinal features. Section 3 explains proposed methodology and results are given in Section 4 while Section 5 concludes the paper at the end.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
