@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Subdivision based mixed methods for isogeometric analysis of linear and nonlinear nearly incompressible materials

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Inf–sup stable displacement–pressure combinations are developed based on subdivision properties of NURBS.The inf–sup stability is proven numerically by evaluating inf–sup constants.Optimal convergence rates are obtained for linear problems.Stable and accurate solutions can be obtained with fewer load steps.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Isogeometric analysis,Mixed Galerkin formulations,Nearly incompressible materials,Subdivision stabilisation,Inf–Sup stability,Elasto-plastic material models,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper addresses the use of isogeometric analysis to solve solid mechanics problems involving nearly incompressible materials. The present work is focused on extension of two-field mixed variational formulations in both small and large strains to isogeometric analysis. Inf–sup stable displacement–pressure combinations for mixed formulations are developed based on the subdivision property of NURBS. Stability and convergence properties of the proposed displacement–pressure combinations are illustrated by computing numerical inf–sup constants and error norms. The performance of the proposed formulations is assessed by studying several benchmark examples involving nearly incompressible and incompressible elastic and elasto-plastic materials in both small and large strain regime.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The isogeometric analysis (IGA) based on Non-Uniform Rational B-Spline (NURBS) introduced by Hughes et al.  [1,2] has proven to be an efficient alternative for the conventional Finite Element Method (FEM) as it offers a number of advantages in terms of both accuracy and computational efficiency. The principal reason is a higher order continuity of NURBS across element boundaries, which when coupled withk-refinement not only increases the continuity across element boundaries but also reduces the total number of degrees of freedom (DOF). Isogeometric analysis has been extended to fluid–structure interaction  [3], structural vibrations  [4], phase-transition phenomenon  [5] and other areas (see  [1]). However, the research on the application of isogeometric analysis to the problems involving incompressible and nearly incompressible materials, especially elasto-plastic materials has received a limited attention, with only few articles published on the topic  [6–11].In engineering analysis it is very common to perform simulations involving incompressible or nearly incompressible materials such as rubber, elastomers, and pressure-insensitive elasto-plastic materials. These material models often pose significant problems to the analyst, both in terms of accuracy and stability. When materials approach incompressible limit, the stiffening behaviour, often termed ‘volumetric locking’, is observed in load–displacement response. This is accompanied by a poor approximation of the pressure field, which often displays the so-called checkerboard pattern. To overcome this issue special elements and refined formulations and a combination of both have been developed. Some of the widely used techniques to overcome locking are: reduced or selectively reduced integration  [12], B-bar formulation for small-strain problems  [12–14] andF-bar formulation for large-strain problems  [15,16], and hybrid or enhanced strain or stress elements  [17–21].As NURBS offer higher-order basis functions it is expected that pure displacement formulation based on NURBS should suffice in dealing with the incompressible and nearly incompressible material models. However, literature and our experience shows that NURBS still suffer from locking phenomenon and require additional measures to deal with incompressibility. Recently, Adam et al.  [22] have studied selective and reduced integration schemes for NURBS based isogeometric analysis to deal with issue of locking. Elguedj et al.  [6,7] extendedB̄andF̄projection methods to NURBS based isogeometric analysis. In our opinion, however, whenB̄andF̄formulations are extended to higher order NURBS, the formulation and implementation becomes very complex, and loses appeal of the original methodologies that were applied to standard lower-order polynomial interpolations. Furthermore, these methods require full matrix inversions on element level and also over an entire patch, thereby making them computationally expensive. Similar arguments can be made about the macro-element projection technique used by Sangalli et al.  [23] for nearly incompressible linear elastic materials. Mathisen et al.  [10] and Taylor  [11] extended the classical three-field Hu–Washizu mixed variational formulation to isogeometric analysis to deal with problems of incompressibility. However, the classical mixed formulation when applied to NURBS finite elements does not necessarily lead to the stable formulation. In addition, the three-field formulation increases the number of DOF substantially for higher order NURBS and as NURBS result in additional DOF because of their tensor product structure, the overall size of the problem increases exponentially, requiring substantially increased computational resources. Our experience with standard FE formulations also shows that three-field formulations are superfluous for most of the material models encountered in engineering simulations and that two-field formulations with displacement and pressure as independent variables provide sufficient accuracy and stability. In this work, therefore, we focus on the two-field mixed formulations for NURBS based isogeometric analysis in both the small and finite strain regimes.The foremost problem associated with the mixed formulations is that they result in matrix system of equations with saddle-point nature. In order to obtain an accurate and stable solution the combination of approximating functions for displacement and pressure must satisfy the inf–sup or Ladyzhenskaya–Babuska–Brezzi (LBB) condition  [24]. Following the work of Rüberg and Cirak  [25,26], in the present work we develop stable displacement–pressure NURBS combinations by exploiting the subdivison property of NURBS.This paper is organised as follows. In Sections  2 and 3 we present the displacement and mixed variational formulations, respectively, in small and finite strain regimes. In Section  4 we give a brief introduction to NURBS. In Section  5 we discuss inf–sup stability criterion and construction of the stable displacement–pressure combinations, followed by the numerical evaluation of inf–sup constants. The accuracy and robustness of the proposed numerical schemes are demonstrated on a wide range of linear and nonlinear numerical examples in Sections  6 and 7. The paper is concluded with Section  8 providing a summary of the present work and conclusions drawn from this work.Consider a bodyΩwith boundaryΓembedded in three-dimensional Euclidian spaceR3. The boundary value problem of elasticity can be expressed as: Givenb0:Ω→R3,ḡ:ΓD→R3andt̄0:ΓN→R3, findu:Ω→R3, such that:(1)∇⋅σ+b0=0inΩ,(2)u=ḡonΓD,(3)σ⋅n=t̄0inΓN,whereuis the displacement vector,σis the Cauchy stress tensor,b0is the body force,nis the unit outward normal on the boundary,Γ, ofΩ,ḡis the prescribed displacement onΓDandt̄0is the prescribed traction onΓN. Here,Γ=ΓD∪ΓN. The stress tensor,σ, is related to strain tensor,ε, by the constitutive relation,(4)σ=C(ε)where,(5)ε=∇su=12(∇u+∇uT)andCrepresents constitutive function, which is linear for elastic material model, that becomes nonlinear in case of elastic-plastic material models.In Galerkin formulations it is convenient to work with strain, stress and elasticity tensors by representing them in the matrix form. Strains and stresses transformed into matrix form are written as,(6)ε={εxxεyyεzz2εxy2εxz2εyz}T(7)σ={σxxσyyσzzσxyσxzσyz}T.For a given displacement vectoruand stored energy functionW(u), the total energy functional is given by,(8)Π(u)=∫ΩW(u)dΩ−ΠextwhereΠextincludes the effects of body forces,b0and surface tractions,t̄0, and is given as,(9)Πext=∫ΩuTb0dΩ+∫ΓuTt̄0dΓ.For the system to be in equilibrium,(10)δΠ=∫ΩδεTσdΩ−δΠext=0where,(11)δΠext=∫ΩδuTb0dΩ+∫ΓδuTt̄0dΓ.By taking approximations for displacements as,u=Nuū, a Newton–Raphson iterative scheme leads to the following algebraic problem,(12)Kdū=−RuwhereNuis the matrix of shape functions, whiledūis the vector of increment in displacements. The stiffness matrixKand residual vectorRuare given as,(13a)K=∫ΩBTDBdΩ;Ru=∫ΩBTσdΩ−f(13b)withf=∫ΩNuTb0dΩ+∫ΓNuTt̄0dΓwhere,Bis the standard strain–displacement matrix for small strains, andDis termed the elastic moduli matrix.For isotropic linear elasticity,(14)D=2μI0+λmmT;σ=2με+λ(∇⋅u)mwhere,(15)I0=diag[111121212];mT=[111000]andμandλare Lamé’s constants. The derivation of elastic moduli matrix (D) for elasto-plastic material models is much involved. For a detailed discussion on this topic we suggest the reader to refer to de Souza Neto et al.  [27].The main idea behind mixed formulations is to split the measure of deformation into deviatoric and volumetric components and replace the volumetric part by an improved value. In small strain formulation total strain,ε, is the relevant measure of deformation and is additively decomposed into deviatoric and volumetric parts as,(16)ε=εdev+εvolwith,(17)εdev=Idevεandεvol=εvmwhere,(18)εv=mTε;Idev=I−13mmTin whichIis the second-order identity tensor.By defining hydrostatic pressure (also denoted the mean stress) as,(19)p=σx+σy+σz3=σTm3the total stress,σ, can be additively split into deviatoric and volumetric parts,(20)σ=σ̆=σdev+pm.Pressure,p, is related to the volumetric strain,εv, by the bulk modulus,κ, of the material, i.e.,(21)εv=mTε=pκ.By treating hydrostatic pressure,p, as an independent variable in addition to displacements,u, we can formulate the problem using Eq. (10) and the weak form of Eq. (21) as,(22a)∫ΩδεTσ̆dΩ=∫ΩδuTb0dΩ+∫ΓδuTt̄0dΓ(22b)∫Ωδp[mTε−pκ]dΩ=0.Withu=Nuūandp=Npp̄as approximations foruandpand applying Newton–Raphson iterative scheme to solve Eq. (22) leads to the following algebraic problem,(23)[KuuKupKpuKpp]{dūdp̄}=−{RuRp}wheredūanddp̄are vectors of increments in displacements and pressure respectively. The corresponding stiffness matrices and residual vectors are given as,(24)Kuu=∫ΩBTDdevBdΩ;Kup=∫ΩBTmNpdΩ=KpuT;Kpp=−∫Ω1κNpTNpdΩ(25)Ru=∫ΩBTσ̆dΩ−f;Rp=∫ΩNpT[mTε−pκ]dΩandfis the same as that given in Eq. (13). Here,Ddevis the deviatoric component ofD. For linear isotropic elastic material,(26)Ddev=2μ(I0−13mmT).LetΩbe the reference configuration of a body andωϕbe its deformed configuration. Letϕ:Ω→ωϕbe a mapping that takes a pointX∈Ωto a pointx∈ωϕ. The displacement of a point from its initial positionXto its current configurationxis given by(27)u(X)=ϕ(X)−X=x−X.The deformation gradient,F, the right Cauchy–Green deformation tensor,C, the left Cauchy–Green deformation tensor,b, and the Green–Lagrange strain tensor,E, are defined as,(28)F=∂x∂X=I+∂u∂X;C=FTF;b=FFT;E=12(C−I).For a given free-energy functionW(C), the second Piola–Kirchhoff stress tensor,S, is defined as,(29)S=2∂W∂C=∂W∂E.The boundary value problem of elasticity in large strain regime for a body with reference configurationΩcan be stated as:Givenb0:Ω→R3,ḡ:ΓD→R3andt̄0:ΓN→R3, findu:Ω→R3, such that:(30)∇X⋅P+b0=0inΩ,(31)u=ḡonΓD,(32)P⋅N=t̄0inΓN,whereb0is the body force per unit undeformed volume,Nis the unit outward normal on the boundary,Γ, ofΩ,ḡis the prescribed displacement onΓD,t̄0is the prescribed traction per unit area onΓN, withΓ=ΓD∪ΓN, andPis the first Piola–Kirchhoff stress tensor, defined as,(33)P=FS.For a given stored energy function,W, the total energy functional, in the reference configuration,Ω, is given by,(34)Π(u)=∫ΩW(C)dΩ−Πextwhere,Πextis the same as that given in Eq. (9).By taking approximations for displacements as,u=Nuū, and applying the Newton–Raphson scheme to the nonlinear system of equations resulting from the equilibrium leads to the following algebraic problem,(35)Kdū=−Ruwhere,(36)Ru=∫ωBTσdω−f.Assuming that loads are independent of the configuration of the domain, the stiffness matrixKis given by,(37)K=KM+KGwhere, material stiffness matrixKMand geometric stiffness matrixKGare given as,(38)KM=∫ωBTDBdωandKG,ab=∫ω(∇Na⋅σ∇Nb)Idωandfis the same as that given in small strain formulation in Eq. (13b). Here, the elastic modulii matrixDdepends upon the material model considered in the analysis. For the comprehensive details on the derivation ofDfrom the energy function of a material model and for the detailed description of the formulations used in this paper the reader is referred to Zienkiewicz and Taylor  [14] and Bonet and Wood  [28].The mixed formulation in the finite strain regime is based on the multiplicative split of the deformation gradient,F, into deviatoric and volumetric components such that,(39)F=FvolFdevwhere,(40)Fvol=J1/3I,Fdev=J−1/3FwithJ=detF.Using (40) the modified right Cauchy–Green tensor,C̄, and the modified left Cauchy–Green tensor,b̄, are defined as,(41)C̄=FdevTFdevandb̄=FdevFdevT.Considering displacements,uand pressures,p, as independent variables, the modified potential energy functional can be written as,(42)Π(u,p)=∫Ω[W(C)+p(J−1)−12κp2]dΩ−Πext.For all of the material models considered in the examples presented,Wcan be represented as the additive decomposition of deviatoric and volumetric parts, as,(43)W(C)=Wdev(J,C̄)+Wvol(J).Similar to small-strain formulation, by taking approximations for variablesuandpasu=Nuūandp=Npp̄and after applying Newton–Raphson iterative scheme an algebraic problem is obtained given as,(44)[KuuKupKpuKpp]{dūdp̄}=−{RuRp}where,(45)Kuu=∫ΩBTD̄11BJdΩ+KG;Kup=∫ΩBTmNpJdΩ=KpuT(46)Ru=∫ΩBTσ̆JdΩ−f;Rp=∫ΩNpT(J−1−pκ)dΩwith,(47)D̄11=IdevDIdev−23(mσdevT+σdevmT)+2(p̄−p)I0−(23p̄−p)mmT(48)σ̆=σ+m(p−p̄)andp̄=13mTσ.NURBS are the standard tools to model geometries in Computer Aided Design (CAD) industry. NURBS are a generalisation of B-Splines which are composed of linear combinations of B-Spline basis functions.Given a knot vectorΞ={ξ0,…,ξn+a+1}and degree of polynomiala, B-Spline basis functions are defined as follows:Fora=0, (piece-wise constants),Ni,0(ξ)={1ifξi≤ξ≤ξi+10otherwiseand fora≥1,(49)Ni,a(ξ)=ξ−ξiξi+a−ξiNi,a−1(ξ)+ξi+a+1−ξξi+a+1−ξi+1Ni+1,a−1(ξ).NURBS geometries are represented as a linear combination of B-Spline basis functions along with a set of control points. A NURBS curve of degreeais defined as,(50)X(ξ)=∑i=0nNi,a(ξ)Piwfor0≤ξ≤1where{Piw},i=0,1,…,nis the control polygon andNi,ais a B-Spline basis function of degreeadefined on a knot vectorΞ. Control points are represented in homogeneous coordinates as they offer many advantages in mathematical treatment as well as programming.NURBS objects in higher-dimensions are created as tensor products of univariate NURBS. A NURBS surface of degreeainξdirection and degreebinηdirection is defined as,(51)X(ξ,η)=∑i=0n∑j=0mNi,a(ξ)Mj,b(η)Pi,jwfor0≤ξ,η≤1where{Pi,jw},i=0,1,…,n,j=0,1,…,mis the control net andNi,a(ξ)andMj,b(η)are the B-Spline basis functions, respectively, on knot vectorsΞ1={ξ0,…,ξn+a+1}, andΞ2={η0,…,ηm+b+1}.Similarly, a NURBS solid is defined as,(52)X(ξ,η,ζ)=∑i=0n∑j=0m∑k=0lNi,a(ξ)Mj,b(η)Lk,c(ζ)Pi,j,kwfor0≤ξ,η,ζ≤1for a given a control net{Pi,j,kw},i=0,1,…,n,j=0,1,…,m,k=0,1,…,land knot vectorsΞ1={ξ0,…,ξn+a+1},Ξ2={η0,…,ηm+b+1}andΞ3={ζ0,…,ζl+c+1}. The reader is suggested to refer to  [1,29–31] for further details on this topic.The basic idea of isogeometric analysis is to use the same basis functions used to represent the geometry as the approximating functions for the field variables. Using the NURBS basis functions as approximating functions the field variables can be approximated as,(53)u=∑α=0Nα(ξ)ūα;p=∑α=0Nα(ξ)p̄αwhereξ={ξ,η,ζ}are the parametric coordinates,ūαandp̄αare the control variables which are similar to nodal values in standard finite element method andN(ξ)are the multivariate basis functions determined from the knot vectors and degrees of polynomial in each parametric direction.N(ξ)are computed as tensor products of univariate basis functions, as given by(54)N(ξ)=M(ξ)⊗M(η)in 2D(55)N(ξ)=M(ξ)⊗M(η)⊗M(ζ)in 3DwhereM(ξ),M(η)andM(ζ)are the univariate basis functions inξ,η, andζdirections respectively. Note thatN(ξ)is normally stored in the form of a vector.As a convention to represent NURBS approximation spaces of different orders, let us denoteQaas approximations of ordera. The continuity ofQaelements within a patch can be of any orderkwhich varies from 0 to (a−1), depending upon the multiplicity of the internal knots. All the knot vectors are assumed to be open, so a patch constructed on such knot vectors would be interpolatory at the ends and hence in case of problems modelled with multiple patches, onlyC0continuity is achieved across the patch interfaces. For further details on this topic the reader is referred to Cottrell et al.  [1].The saddle-point nature of matrix system obtained with the mixed Galerkin formulations, Eqs. (23) and (44), poses difficulties in obtaining stable numerical solutions. The combination of approximation spaces for displacement and pressure has to be chosen in such a way that it satisfies the inf–sup or LBB condition and failing to do so results in spurious oscillations in pressure. The standard practice with the Lagrange finite elements is to choose basis functions for pressure to be one order lower than those for the displacement, the Taylor–Hood element being a classical example  [32,24]. Several researchers  [6,33,34,10,11] extended this strategy to mixed formulations for IGA for solid mechanics. However,  [35,25] and our experience shows that NURBS combinationQa/Qa−1(Qafor displacement andQa−1for pressure with the same knot discretisation) is unstable with respect to LBB condition. To overcome this issue, Bressan and Sangalli  [36] developed several inf–sup stable displacement–pressure combinations for NURBS based IGA using macro-element projection technique and employed it for the analysis of linear nearly incompressible elasticity in  [37,23]. However, as such projection techniques involve element-level matrix inversions, we do not find such techniques to be computationally appealing when used in the context of higher-order elements. Moreover, as we use the mixed formulations directly, i.e., without condensation, we have difficulty in justifying the use of discontinuous spaces for pressure discretisation, as the use of such element-level discontinuous spaces seems to be in contradiction with the idea behind NURBS based IGA, namely, use of higher-order shape functions with high continuity across element boundaries. Hence, in the present work we develop inf–sup stable displacement–pressure combinations for NURBS based IGA based on subdivision properties of NURBS inspired by the stable velocity–pressure combinations proposed by Rüberg and Cirak  [25].One of the interesting properties of B-Spline functions is their two-scale relation. According to this property B-Spline basis functions on a knot-vector with knot-spacinghcan be represented as a linear combinations of B-Spline basis functions on a knot-vector with knot-spacingh/2as illustrated in Fig. 1. The coarse basis functions in Figs. 1(a) and 1(b) can be presented as a linear combinations of fine basis functions in Figs. 1(c) and 1(d), respectively.The two-scale relation can be written as,(56)Nk=SNk+1where,NkandNk+1are the basis functions, respectively, at levelskandk+1, andSis the subdivision matrix. In one-dimension, the subdivision matrices for linear and quadratic B-Splines are,(57)SQ1=[12112];SQ2=[14343414].Similarly, NURBS basis functions defined on a knot-spacinghcan be represented as a linear combination of those defined on a knot-spacingh/2. Each of the NURBS basis functions in Figs. 2(a)and 2(b) can be represented as a linear combination of NURBS basis functions in Figs. 2(c) and 2(d), respectively. The entries of the subdivision matrixSin Eq. (56) can be computed by following the definitions of NURBS basis functions.Based on the subdivision properties, we develop displacement–pressure combinations–denoted asQa/Qb-SD–in whichQaNURBS discretisation for displacement is combined withQbNURBS discretisation for pressure with the element knot-span for pressure being double than that of displacement. In other words one pressure element inn- spatial dimensions spans2ndisplacement elements, as illustrated in Fig. 3. Figures on the left are for displacement discretisation and those on the right are for the pressure discretisation.Recall that for a given displacement discretisationuh∈Uhand pressure discretisationph∈Phthe inf–sup condition is given by the inequality  [24](58)infph∈Phsupuh∈Uh∫ΩphdivuhdΩ‖uh‖‖ph‖≥βh>0.The displacement and pressure discretisation combination has to satisfy the above inequality in order to obtain stable pressure solutions using the mixed formulations. Obtaining analytical proof of inf–sup condition in a general setting is quite challenging and to our knowledge no such proofs are available yet for NURBS based discretisations. Even many of the widely used displacement–pressure combinations (and velocity–pressure combinations in fluid mechanics) in engineering practice have no analytical proofs yet. Towards addressing this issue Chapelle and Bathe  [38] proposed a numerical test. The test involves the calculation ofβhvalues over a sequence of mesh refinements. If the value ofβhdoes not decrease towards zero as the mesh is refined then the test is passed and displacement–pressure combination is considered to be stable. Otherwise, the displacement–pressure combination is considered unstable.The value ofβhis computed as the square-root of the smallest non-zero eigenvalue (λh) of the following generalised eigenvalue system(59)KpuGh−1Kupp̄=λhMhp̄where,(60)Gh=∫Ω∇NuT:∇NudΩ(61)Mh=∫ΩNpTNpdΩ.In this work we demonstrate the stability characteristics of different combinations of NURBS spaces by computing numerically the inf–sup constants for Cook’s membrane and a thick-walled cylinder. Two different examples are chosen in order to demonstrate the robustness of the proposed spaces for geometries that are represented by non-rational as well as rational polynomials.The standard Cook’s membrane is composed of a nearly incompressible elastic material and loaded by edge load under plane strain conditions. Geometry and boundary conditions of the problem are shown in Fig. 4. The initial mesh consists of a single element with linear NURBS and it isk-refined to obtain the meshes shown in Fig. 5. Numerical values of inf–sup constants computed for the different meshes for different orders of NURBS basis functions are presented in log–log scale in Fig. 6. It is evident from these graphs that all the displacement–pressure combinations with subdivision,Qa/Qa-SD andQa/Qa−1-SD, are inf–sup stable and those without subdivision,Qa/QaandQa/Qa−1, are not.The geometry and boundary conditions of the problem are shown in Fig. 7. As the geometry includes portions of the circle it can be represented exactly with quadratic and higher-order NURBS. An initial mesh of one element withQ2NURBS isk-refined to generate successively refined meshes shown in Fig. 8. The computed values of inf–sup constants, shown in Fig. 9, follow the same trend as that observed in Cook’s membrane example: for a particular order of NURBS numerical inf–sup value remains constant with mesh refinement for subdivision stabilised displacement–pressure combinations and it approaches zero for those without subdivision. In other words, the displacement–pressure combinationsQa/Qa-SD andQa/Qa−1-SD are inf–sup stable and the combinationsQa/QaandQa/Qa−1are not.In all of the examples considered to demonstrate the performance of the proposed formulations, an initial coarse geometry is defined and then k-refinement of isogeometric analysis as introduced by Cottrell et al.  [1,2], is followed to achieve the desired refinement. According tok-refinement, order of the polynomial is increased first and then required knot insertions are performed. We note that this new type of refinement procedure has no analogue in the standard FEM. The refinement has the advantage that it reduces the number of control points and also increases the continuity across the newly inserted knots (element boundaries).In the present work we have used a direct solver (PARDISO  [39]) to solve the resulting matrix system.The first example is the analysis of thick-walled cylinder subjected to internal pressure. Plane strain condition is assumed because of the geometry of the problem and only quarter portion of the cylinder is modelled, as shown in Fig. 7, due to the symmetry of geometry and loading conditions. For this problem analytical solutions for displacement and stress are available  [40]. Analytical expressions for radial displacement (dr), radial stress (σrr), hoop stress (σθθ) and shear stress (τrθ) are given as:(62)dr=pri2(ro2−ri2)E[(1−ν−2ν2)r+(1+ν)ro2r](63)σrr=pri2ro2−ri2[1−ro2r2](64)σθθ=pri2ro2−ri2[1+ro2r2](65)τrθ=0whereris the radius at an arbitrary point in the domain. These analytical solutions are used to compute error norms in order to assess the convergence properties of the proposed numerical scheme.The convergence studies are performed on successively refined meshes for two different values of Poisson’s ratio,ν=0.4andν=0.49999, in order to demonstrate the robustness of the proposed displacement–pressure combinations in both the compressible and nearly incompressible regimes. Convergence graphs ofL2-norm of absolute error in displacement,L2-norm of absolute error in stress and energy norm error are shown in Figs. 10 and 11, respectively, forν=0.4andν=0.49999. The mesh parameterhis considered to be the maximum of all element diagonal lengths in the physical domain. These graphs indicate that optimal convergence rates are obtained for both the displacement–pressure combinations,Qa/Qa-SD andQa/Qa−1-SD. Even though the pure displacement formulation results in better than optimal convergence rates in displacement forν=0.49999, the stresses obtained are of a very poor quality, as can be observed from Fig. 11 and the contour plots Figs. 12(a) and 13(a). The two-field mixed formulation with the proposed displacement–pressure combinations results in smooth stress field of substantially reduced errors along with maintaining optimal convergence. The contour plots of radial and hoop stresses shown, respectively, in Figs. 12 and 13, illustrate that the proposed displacement–pressure combinations produce stress fields without any spurious oscillations.Cook’s membrane is a standard benchmark problem used to assess the quality of finite element formulation for incompressible solids. In [41,15,16] this problem was studied in the context of standard finite element formulations for large strains, while  [6,33,34,10,8] have studied it using NURBS based isogeometric analysis. Geometry, material and boundary conditions of the problem are shown in Fig. 4. The material is assumed to be linear elastic. The value of load,F=100N/mmis uniformly distributed along the edge of the membrane. Analysis has been performed on successively refined meshes as discussed in 5.4.1, for different orders of NURBS and for different mesh densities for each order, using both the displacement and mixed formulations in order to study their relative performances.Fig. 14shows vertical displacement of the top right corner, (point A in Fig. 4), displayed against the number of elements per side for different orders of approximations. As expected, lower order elements with pure displacement formulation suffer from severe locking. Note that even with pure displacement formulation the stiffening effect of locking disappears as the element order is increased. Mixed formulation has clearly helped to improve the accuracy of the result for lower order elements (linear and quadratic), even though it has less significant effect on higher order elements. All of the displacement–pressure combinations studied, with and without subdivision, give improved results over displacement formulation. However, contour plots of hydrostatic pressure, shown in Fig. 15, illustrate that pressure plots obtained with displacement–pressure combinations without subdivision contain spurious oscillations, validating the observations made in Section  5.4.1 by computing the inf–sup constants and proves thatQa/Qa−1NURBS combinations without subdivision are unstable. Based on the results obtained so far we conclude that the combinationQa/Qa-SD is the best choice. The remaining examples in this paper are presented with this combination.This example demonstrates the application of IGA to the determination of the limit load of a strip footing. The problem has been studied by de Souza Neto et al.  [27] using the standard FEM. The problem consists of a long rectangular footing on top of a soil half-space. The footing is subjected to a vertical pressure,P, and the purpose of the present analysis is to determine the collapse pressurePlim. The soil is assumed to be weightless and is modelled as the von Mises perfectly plastic material. Due to the long length of the footing, the present problem is solved by assuming a plane strain state. Because of the symmetry of the problem geometry and loading, only one half of the cross-section is considered. The geometry, material properties, boundary conditions and loading are shown in Fig. 16(a). The footing is assumed to be rigid and footing/soil interface is assumed to be frictionless. This requires prescribing the vertical displacementuat the control points under the footing and allowing their horizontal displacement to be unconstrained. A total displacement ofu=0.002mis applied and the problem is solved by incremental increase of the displacement. The response is measured in terms of the normalised pressure (P/c), wherePis total reaction on the footing and the cohesion or shear strength,c, for the von Mises model is given as,c=σy/3. The results from numerical simulations are compared against the theoretical limit calculated by Prandtl and Hill based on the slip-line theory. For the chosen material properties theoretical limit value is given asPlim=5.14c.The problem is modelled using two patches so that Dirichlet boundary conditions are applied exactly after refining the mesh usingk-refinement. The initial mesh is modelled using quadratic NURBS with a single element in each patch and the initial control points used are as shown in Fig. 16(b). The initial control points are chosen such that the mesh will be suitably refined at the region of interest near the footing and coarse away from it. Analysis is performed on the mesh shown in Fig. 16(c) for different orders of NURBS using both the displacement and mixed formulations.Figs. 17(a)and 17(b) show the computed normalised pressure (P/c) against normalised settlement (u/B), respectively, for displacement and mixed formulations and the relative errors in normalised pressure are tabulated in Table 1. Even though the computed collapse loads are within the acceptable limits for both the displacement and mixed formulations, the accuracy of slip line resolution obtained with displacement formulation is very poor as shown in Fig. 18. The use of mixed formulation alleviates this problem and improves the accuracy of slip line resolution as shown in Fig. 19. Contour plots of hydrostatic pressure for both the displacement and mixed formulations shown in Figs. 20 and 21indicate again the superior performance of the subdivision based mixed formulation.The geometry, loading and boundary conditions of the problem are same as those used in small strain example. For the purpose of nonlinear analysis the material is modelled using the generalised Neo-Hookean hyperelastic material model in which the stored energy function can be additively decomposed into distortional and volumetric parts, given by,(66)W(J,b̄)=12μ(Ib̄−3)+12κ(12(J2−1)−lnJ).In order to match the material properties in linear range given in Fig. 4, we take,κ=40.0942×104MPaandμ=80.1938MPa. A load value ofF=100N/mmis chosen and it is assumed that the load is conservative, meaning that a fixed load value and direction, equal to that in the reference configuration, is assumed to act during the entire deformation. Similar to small strain formulation, analysis is performed for different discretisations using both the displacement and mixed formulations and the variation of the vertical displacement of the top right corner with respect to number of elements per side is presented in Fig. 22.In order to evaluate the performance of the present methods, results obtained with the standard linear quadrilateral element with Fbar formulation of de Souza Neto  [15], denoted byQ1-Fbar, are also presented. Lower order NURBS elements with pure displacement formulation suffer from severe locking problem and accuracy of the results improves with increasing the order of approximation. Mixed formulation substantially improves the accuracy of results as observed in small strain formulation. Higher order NURBS elements with mixed formulation give converged solution even for very coarse meshes.Table 2shows the evolution ofL2norm of residue over different iterations for the last substep of 4×4 mesh with quadratic NURBS for both the formulations. Fig. 23shows contour plots of hydrostatic pressure for cubic NURBS for 32×32 mesh. Clearly, mixed formulation gives a smooth variation of pressure when compared to the displacement formulation. It is worth noting that as the von Mises equivalent stress is independent of hydrostatic pressure, both formulations give almost identical smooth plots, as shown in Fig. 24.In this example, the same Cook’s membrane as in previous example is considered but with a different material model and load value. The material model consists of uncoupled stored energy with Neo-Hookean hyperelastic model for the elastic deformations and a plasticity model with associative flow rule based on the von Mises yield criterion with isotropic nonlinear hardening for the plastic portion. Neo-Hookean material model is the same as the one used in the previous example and the nonlinear isotropic hardening law is given by,(67)k(α)=σ0+(σ∞−σ0)[1−exp(−δα)]+Hα,withδ>0.The material properties are: Bulk modulus,κ=164.21GPa, shear modulus,μ=80.1938GPa, initial flow stress,σ0=450MPa, saturation flow stress,σ∞=715MPa, saturation exponent,δ=16.93and linear hardening coefficient,H=129.24MPa.A load value ofF=20kN/mmis used. Similar to the previous example, analysis is performed for different orders of approximations for all five meshes using both displacement and mixed formulations and a similar pattern in the convergence of results is observed. Variation of the displacement of top right corner against the number of elements per side, for different orders of approximations, is shown in Fig. 25. Clearly, mixed formulation substantially improves the accuracy of the results. Figs. 26 and 27show the contour plots of equivalent plastic strain and von Mises equivalent stress, respectively, for cubic NURBS for both displacement and mixed formulations.This problem has been studied by Reese et al. [42] and since then has been used as a standard benchmark problem to study the performance of various finite element formulations to deal with incompressibility in finite strains. Elguedj et al.  [6] and Kadapa et al. [33,34] studied this problem in the context of isogeometric analysis. This problem consists of a block resting on a rigid surface and subjected to pressure loading at its middle portion. The geometry, boundary conditions and loading are as shown in Fig. 28. Due to the symmetry of geometry, boundary and loading conditions, only half of the model is considered for the analysis. The material is modelled using Neo-Hookean material model with the following strain energy function,(68)W(J,b̄)=12μ(Ib̄−3)+14λ((J2−1)−2lnJ)−μlnJwith material parametersλ=400889.806MPaandμ=80.1938MPa. The load is assumed to be conservative. The quantity of interest is the compression level (vertical displacement) of top middle, point A in Fig. 28. Variation of compression level is studied for different loading conditions, i.e. differentp/p0values withp0=20, for different orders of NURBS approximation spaces using the proposed mixed formulation. Results obtained forQ1/Q1-SD NURBS are compared with those obtained using the standard 4-node linear-quadrilateral element of FEM with Fbar formulation, denoted asQ1-Fbar, (see de Souza Neto et al.  [15]). Convergence is obtained, for all the considered loading conditions, with a mesh of 16×16 and is shown in Fig. 29. Fig. 30shows the variation of compression level for different loading conditions,p/p0=20, 40, 60, using both the displacement and mixed formulations for different orders of NURBS spaces. Again, convergence is obtained with 16×16 meshes, except forQ1NURBS.Q1NURBS for all the meshes andQ2NURBS for coarse meshes suffer from sever locking problems and increasing the order of NURBS improves the accuracy. Similar to the Cook’s membrane response, mixed formulation substantially improves the accuracy even for coarse meshes and improvement in accuracy, with mixed formulation, becomes negligible for higher order NURBS with fine meshes. However, it has been observed that mixed formulation converges with substantially less number of load steps compared to the pure displacement formulation. Therefore, use of mixed formulation reduces the overall computational time and also gives more accurate results and smooth variation of stresses. Figs. 31 and 32show, respectively, the contour plots of hydrostatic pressure and von Mises equivalent stress, for 32×32 mesh with cubic NURBS forp/p0=60.In this example we study the plane strain localisation of a strip subjected to uniform extension. This problem has been studied by several authors  [17,10,15,16,19,11] and is considered as standard benchmark problem for testing the behaviour of finite element formulations for incompressible plastic materials at finite strains. The geometry and loading conditions are as shown in Fig. 33. The material model and material properties are the same as those used in Cook’s membrane with finite strain plasticity. Due to obvious symmetry only quarter portion of the model is considered for the analysis. In order to trigger strain localisation, a width reduction of 1.8% is introduced in the centre of the bar. A total vertical displacement ofu=5.0is applied on the top edge and the problem is solved in several load steps. Figs. 34(a)and 34(b) show the plots of variation of necking displacement and necking force, respectively, with respect to the variation of applied displacement for different orders of NURBS spaces.Contour plots of stress component (σyy), pressure (p) and equivalent plastic strain (α) are shown in Figs. 35 and 36, for linear and quadratic NURBS, respectively. The mixed formulation with the proposed displacement–pressure combination improves the quality of results substantially for linear elements and the improvement for quadratic NURBS is not so pronounced as the results obtained by displacement formulation are already of good quality.In this example we present the performance of mixed methods under severe mesh distortions, using the torsion of a square prism. This problem was studied by Lipton et al.  [43] usingF̄formulation with NURBS and Kadapa et al.  [33,34] using mixed formulation. Geometry and boundary conditions of the problem are as shown in Fig. 37(a). Rotation (θz) on the top face is applied in the form ofXandYdirectional displacements. Material model and material properties are the same as those used in Cook’s membrane with Neo-Hookean hyperelastic material. A 4×4×16 mesh is studied with subdivision stabilised displacement–pressure combinations with linear, quadratic and cubic NURBS.The quantity of interest in the present example is the maximum angle of twist that a mesh can sustain before failing to converge. Failure angles for the different discretisations considered in the study are presented in Table 3. Analyses performed with mixed formulation have shown exceptional reduction in computational time when compared with the displacement formulation. Mixed formulation converges with increments of 10 deg while displacement formulation needs an increment of 1 deg and sometimes even less. On average, 10-fold reduction in computational time is achieved using mixed formulation. This reduction in computational time proves to be extremely beneficial in large-scale engineering simulations. A typical deformed shape of the bar along with von Mises stress distribution for an intermediate configuration (atθ=720deg) is shown in Fig. 37(b).This example is used to demonstrate the performance of the finite element formulations to deal with the issue of “shear locking” of shells. This problem was studied by  [44,41,45]. The geometry, loading and material properties are as shown in Fig. 38. As the Poisson’s ratio is only 0.4 no volumetric locking is expected; however, because of the geometry, this problem suffers from shear locking. Due to symmetry of geometry and loading conditions, only a1/8th portion is considered for the analysis, as shown in Fig. 39(a), along with boundary conditions and loading and a typical mesh used. Due to circular cross sections the initial geometry has to be modelled with quadratic NURBS. The load is assumed to be conservative and a Neo-Hookean material model with the following energy function is used,(69)Ψ(J,C̄)=12μ(tr[C̄]−3)−μlnJ+12λ(lnJ)2.While only one element is considered in the thickness direction in  [44,41,45] we consider two elements in the thickness direction in order to use the proposed subdivision-stabilised displacement–pressure combination. Meshes with densities 2×4×2, 4×8×2, 8×16×2 and 16×32×2, are analysed with linear, quadratic and cubic NURBS using both the displacement and mixed formulations. The 2×4×2 mesh implies that there are 2 elements in axial direction, 4 elements in circumferential direction and 2 element through the thickness.The quantity of interest is the vertical displacement of point A shown in Fig. 39(a). Variation of the vertical displacement at point A, for different discretisations, as shown in Fig. 40illustrates the convergence pattern. It is worth mentioning that displacement formulation suffers to converge with the large load increments for this problem also while the mixed formulation converges in only 5 load increments. The deformed shape along with the contour plot ofσyystress for 16×32×2 mesh withQ2/Q2-SD is shown in Fig. 41.In this work we have presented robust two-field mixed variational formulations for both small and finite strain problems to deal with the issues of incompressibility in the context of NURBS based isogeometric analysis. Inf–sup stable displacement–pressure combinations are developed based on the subdivision properties of NURBS. The inf–sup stability of proposed displacement–pressure combinations is demonstrated by computing the numerical inf–sup constants for Cook’s membrane and thick-walled cylinder. The convergence of the proposed discretisations is demonstrated, numerically, for linear elastic thick-walled cylinder. Some important features of the present work can be summarised as:•The formulations are straightforward two-field mixed Galerkin formulations. They are simple, elegant and easy to implement.Higher-order NURBS basis with higher continuities across element boundaries are used for both the displacement and pressure discretisations thereby preserving the salient feature of NURBS based isogeometric analysis.The formulations do not involve any element-level or patch-level matrix inversions.Optimal convergence rates are obtained for the linear problems.The solution can be obtained with large load increments.Performance of the proposed formulations is demonstrated by studying a wide range of benchmark problems. Numerical results show that higher order NURBS with mixed formulations perform excellently even for coarse meshes. The robustness of the proposed method for problems involving severe mesh deformations is demonstrated on the torsion of square prism. Moreover, the results obtained in the present work clearly show that two-field mixed formulations are sufficient enough to obtain accurate numerical solutions for all the material models considered without any need to employ the three-field mixed formulations.All the examples studied in the present work are based on full tensor-product meshes generated with NURBS. The main disadvantage of the tensor-product meshes is that they lack local refinement capability because of which the domain has to be refined globally. This global refinement results in unnecessary DOF far away from the zone of interest, as observed in strip footing collapse example, thereby increasing the total size of the system. Hence, in order to increase the efficiency of the mixed formulations studied in the work, we suggest extending the proposed formulations to the local refinement schemes  [46,47].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
