@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
LED image display system with mobile APP control

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Three LED lighting strips perform the LED imaging function on the wheel.The LED lighting strip is controlled by the mobile APP via a Wi-Fi wireless network.It can work normally with wheel speed up to 35km/hr.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
LED,Wi-Fi wireless network,Image display,Embedded system,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstractImage, graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
As environmental awareness increases, people are increasingly using bicycles rather than cars, motorcycles or other fuelled vehicles to travel short distances. Numerous people ride bicycles on the road as their main leisure activity. Today's roads also have dedicated road cycling lanes. Bikes are unlike other form of conveyance, because they only have faint lights. Insufficient lighting at night commonly puts cyclists in danger. In Taiwan, approximately 170 people have died from cycling accidents in the last three years. More than half of fatal cycling accidents happen at night. No traffic law requires cyclists to use sufficient lighting. The main cause of cycling accidents is insufficient lighting on bicycles at night, which causes collisions with cars.Most bicycles have a reflecting board mounted in the rear of them, but its range is less than 30 m. When the reflecting board is covered with dust, it becomes much less reflective. Both sides of the bicycle lack lighting to warn other vehicles from perpendicular directions. Therefore, it is necessary to equip lights on both sides of the bike wheels to avoid side impact caused by other vehicles. Many wheel-based LED lights are designed to meet the requirements and many bikes are also equipped with strips of LED lights. A very bright LED strip helps other people notice the bike at night. The use of such a strip can reduce the chances of a cycling accident. Additionally, the wheels of a bicycle can be designed to display graphics or text by the appropriate colors of the various LEDs. This design does not only increase driving safety, but also improves the appearance of the bike.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 surveys previous LED applications in image display. Section 3 introduces the proposed system architecture. Section 4 describes the hardware and software of the system. Section 5 summarizes experimental results obtained using the proposed system and compares them with those obtained using other systems. Section 6 draws conclusions and makes recommendations about future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The proposed LED image display system can effectively display six patterns by rotating the LED light strips that are mounted on the bike wheel, on account of human visual persistence. A polymer lithium-ion battery supplies power for thirty-six hours to efficiently display the patterns on the wheel of a bicycle. A remote APP design is used to control the patterns displayed on the wheel via a Wi-Fi wireless network. The mobile control and pattern generation programs are designed to select the pattern(s), calculate angle-related information, and transmit control signals to activate LED lighting instantaneously. Experimental results reveal that the system can operate normally when the wheel speed does not exceed 35km/hr. But when the wheel speed exceeds 40km/hr, the patterns are incorrectly displayed during 7% of the rotations. The proposed system is also compared with different LED bicycle wheel light products. All of the previous designs have not provided the ability to change patterns via wireless network. The best bike riding speed of the previous products for displaying the images or words correctly is between 10–30km/hr. Our proposed design has the lowest price compared with previous designs. It also has better performance with regard to the ratio between working hours and battery capacities, as well as the mobile APP control capacity. To increase the resolution of the patterns in the future, more LED chips will be attached close to each other and a speedy signal transmitting protocol will be developed.