@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An augmented virtual fixture to improve task performance in robot-assisted live-line maintenance

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We introduce the concept of augmented virtual fixtures to reduce tracking error.We experimentally validate effectiveness of the proposed scheme.The application, targeted in this paper, is live transmission line maintenance.The proposed scheme shows a marked improvement over the virtual fixture mode alone.Specifically, for presented experiments, our scheme reduces position error by 71%.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#


@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Virtual fixtures can be used in haptic-enabled hydraulic telemanipulators to facilitate certain tasks. Using this concept, however, the operator may tend to move the master fast due to relying on the virtual fixture. As a result, the slave manipulator could start to lag due to latency in the hydraulic actuation control system. This paper describes how to mitigate the position errors between master and slave robots by overlaying an augmentation force on the master that is collinear but opposite of the master instantaneous velocity. The magnitude of this force is proportional to the position error at the slave end-effector. Experiments, conducted on a teleoperated hydraulic manipulator to perform several live-line maintenance tasks, show that the augmented scheme exhibits less position error at the slave side, better task quality, but longer task completion time as compared to the virtual fixture alone.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Human-operated machines, equipped with hydraulic manipulators, are widely used in industry [1]. Examples include excavators and underwater manipulators [2–4]. These machines are remotely controlled by human, which extends their ability to perform tasks, especially when the environment is unsafe. A human-controlled manipulator system is generally composed of master side where an operator utilizes a hand-controller, slave side where a manipulator emulates behavior of the hand-controller, a communication channel connecting slave and master sides and, a feedback control system. The feedback system can be built upon the operator’s sensation about the slave site (telepresence) [5].When the assigned task implies a contact with the environment (force tracking), or the slave needs to follow a particular trajectory (position tracking), the use of haptic sensation can be helpful to enhance operator’s performance [6–11]. For example, when teleoperated manipulators are used for repetitive tasks, a virtual fixture force can be applied to the operator’s hand to enhance task performances [12]. Within this context, Kang et al. [13] used the concept of virtual fixtures to provide passive constraint to the operator’s motion. They found that virtual fixtures could improve accuracy and task completion time for performing decontaminating and decommissioning. Abbott et al. [14] discussed design of two types of virtual fixtures: ‘guidance virtual fixtures’ (GVFs) that help the operator move the haptic implement along a pre-defined trajectory and ‘forbidden-region virtual fixtures’ (FRVFs), which prevent the haptic implement from penetrating into forbidden regions (defined at the master or the slave manipulator workspace). Marayong et al. [15] employed vision-based virtual fixtures to provide different levels of guidance to the operator. In this work, the complete guidance offered the best improvement in both execution time and error reduction in tasks involving general path-following. Eduardo et al. [16] implemented the concept of impedance-type FRVFs to help operators keep the manipulator out of a defined forbidden region of the workspace. A FRVF was also implemented in a latest study on a teleoperated hydraulic manipulator, performing live-line maintenance tasks [17]. Results of qualitative evaluations by six hydro linemen showed that the concept of virtual fixtures was simple to use, reduced the physical load, and did not require long training. In the above studies, the haptic force was produced based on the information at the master site, and no feedback information was obtained from the slave manipulator.Although the virtual fixture force keeps the operator’s hand on the defined virtual path, an accurate motion at the slave side cannot be guaranteed. For instance, the position tracking of the slave manipulator can easily be violated due to fast motion of the operator’s hand at the master side reflecting the mismatch between the master dynamics and the dynamics of the slave. Particularly, in hydraulic telemanipulators, since hydraulic actuators exhibit significant nonlinear characteristics [18], the requirement of position tracking is generally more challenging than that of their electromechanical counterparts. Thus, in order to mitigate the position errors between the master implement and the slave end-effector, we propose the addition of another force, which is proportional to the magnitude of the position error at the slave end-effector, but in the direction opposite to the operator’s hand velocity vector at the master implement. When position error at the slave end-effector is evident, the augmentation force is activated alerting the operator to slow down the hand movement. Using this scheme, the combined virtual fixture and augmentation force reduces position errors at both the master device implement and the slave manipulator end-effector.Note that the concept of using position error, in slave manipulators, to provide a haptic sensation is not new and has been implemented in few research studies with different goals [19,20]. Abbott and Okamura [21] compared several FRVFs on four common telemanipulator control architectures. A single degree-of-freedom teleoperated system was used to simulate working near a known forbidden region. One of the evaluations relates to combining the position error at the slave manipulator with the slave interaction force with the environment, to produce a haptic force. Kontz et al. [22] proposed a strategy that commands the haptic device to generate a slave position-referenced force that couples the motion of a haptic device to the excavator bucket movement. Hayn and Schwarzmann [23] implemented a slave position-referenced force for the operation of a hydraulic excavator, whereby the positions of the haptic device (master) and the hydraulic manipulator (slave) were used to provide reference positions for each other. The utilization of the conventional slave position-referenced force concept in the above studies, results in producing a haptic force which is parallel to, and in proportion with, the position error vector at the slave end-effector. Indeed, this force indicates to the operator whether the slave is moving ahead or behind the intended desired trajectory. However, it does not serve to slow down the hand’s motion. In this paper, we propose to redirect the force generated based on the magnitude of the slave position error, to be parallel with, but in opposite direction of, the operator’s hand instantaneous velocity. The intention is to slow down the operator’s hand, thereby reducing the following (tracking) error caused by the mismatch between the dynamics of the master device and the slave manipulator. We will evaluate the performance of this new concept when combined with virtual fixtures in a live-line maintenance application.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The experimental setup and coordinate mapping are described in Section 2. This section allows the readers to understand the system and maintenance tasks, investigated in this paper. The description of, and need for augmenting the currently used virtual fixtures concept is described by presenting preliminary experimental results in Section 3. Effectiveness of the application of the proposed concept is then evaluated in Section 4, by emulating several live transmission line maintenance tasks. The concept is further compared with the conventional slave position-referenced force mode. Evaluation criteria used are position error at the master implement, and position error at the slave end-effector. Conclusions are provided in Section 5.Fig. 1shows the test rig developed to examine the performance of proposed augmented virtual fixture scheme. This system comprises an industrial hydraulic manipulator (slave side), and a widely used the PHANToM Desktop haptic device (master side) that allows the operator to control the manipulator end-effector trajectory [24]. The first four degrees of freedom (DOFs) of this manipulator are used to perform live-line maintenance tasks, and the last two DOFs are deactivated. The active motions are rotations about arm (θ1s), shoulder (θ2s), main elbow (θ3s) and extended elbow (θ4s) axes (Figs. 2a and 3a) [24]. The slave manipulator end-effector (P→es) emulates motion of the haptic device implement (P→im). A typical live-line maintenance task, designed to loosen or tighten a nut, is depicted in Fig. 1c. This test rig has been constructed for an ongoing research that aims to employ robots to work cooperatively with linemen at service interruption free maintenance and inspection of live transmission lines.Fig. 2a shows coordinate frames of the hydraulic manipulator. The PHANToM Desktop haptic device is shown in Fig. 2b. Superscripts ‘s’ and ‘m’ indicate the parameter belongs to manipulator (slave) or haptic device (master), respectively. Subscripts ‘e’ and ‘i’ stand for the end-effector and implement, respectively. Frames{ximyimzim}and{xesyeszes}are the coordinate systems attached to the master device implement and the slave manipulator end-effector, respectively. The fixed (global) coordinate system is denoted by{xoyozo}.Now let the position vector of manipulator end-effector beP→es=xesyeszesT. Using the inverse kinematics solution, the angular displacements of the slave manipulator joints (θ1s,θ2s,θ3s,θ4s) are determined as follows:(1)θ1s=tan-1yesxes(2)θ2s=tan-1k2k1+tan-1k12+k22-k32k3(3)θ3s=tan-12l2k2c2-2l2k1s2k12+k22-l22-l32(4)θ4s=-θ2s-θ3swhereci=cos(θis)andsi=sin(θis). Note thatk1=xesc1+yess1-l1-l4,k2=-zes, andk3=(k12+k22+l22-l32)/(2l2). Note that in order to allow the manipulator to move along given trajectories, the tool located at the end-effector must remain horizontal, which results in Eq. (4). Furthermore, due to the square root function in Eq. (2), the inverse kinematics solution produces two solution sets. The acceptable one is chosen according to the joint workspaces. Table 1shows the workspace of each joint of the slave manipulator with respect to the home position. Home position is where the shoulder, main elbow and extended elbow links are horizontal.With reference to Fig. 2, to control manipulator’s end-effector, the coordinated-mode mapping system is chosen, in which the haptic implement position,{ximyimzim}, is mapped into the manipulator end-effector position,{xesyeszes}. As the haptic device moves, its position vector (P→am) is continuously recorded, and scaled by a factor (ks). This gives the desired position of the manipulator end-effector,P→ds:(5)P→ds=ksP→amwhereP→ds=xe,dsye,dsze,dsTandP→am=xi,amyi,amzi,amT. Given desired vectorP→ds, the vector of joint angular displacements is calculated using Eqs. (1)–(4). On the other hand, the actual vectorP→asis obtained by substituting actual joint angular displacements, measured by Hall Effect sensors,θas, and using forward kinematic equations of the manipulator. In practice, the desired and actual values of joint angular displacements are not necessarily equal due to limitations of the control scheme used, and difference between responsiveness of each link. Therefore, the position error (E→es) appears at the slave end-effector, which is defined as:(6)E→es=ee,xsee,ysee,zs=xe,as-xe,dsye,as-ye,dsze,as-ze,ds=xe,as-ksxi,amye,as-ksyi,amze,as-kszi,amE→eswill later be used to define augmented virtual fixture force.A typical impedance type virtual fixture is depicted in Fig. 3. As shown, the generated force,F→VF, is proportional to the error between the actual (point A) and desired (point D) positions of the haptic implement,E→im[14,17].(7)F→VF=GVFE→imwhere GVFis called the virtual fixture impedance matrix, which represents the ability of virtual fixture in providing different levels of fixture compliance. The higher the values of diagonal terms in this matrix, the more force is generated to keep the operator’s hand on the intended trajectory. The haptic implement position error (E→im) is the difference between the actual and desired positions (see Fig. 4):(8)E→im=ei,xmei,ymei,zm=xi,am-xi,dmyi,am-yi,dmzi,am-zi,dmThe virtual fixture is employed in unilateral mode, where there is no feedback from the slave side [17]. This scheme helps the operator keep the hand along the virtual fixture path, and corrects motion of the master device implement [24]. However, this is not adequate to ensure that position error at the slave manipulator end-effector maintains low. Since the virtual fixture scheme provides no feedback from these sources, even if the operator moves closely along the virtual fixture path, the accurate motion of the slave manipulator cannot be guaranteed. The slave end-effector errors can also originate from other sources such as speed of the operator’s hand motion along tangential trajectory at which no restriction in motion is applied by the virtual fixture [14,17].Preliminary experiments were performed that show how the operator’s hand speed affects the position error at the slave end-effector as well as the haptic implement. The tests were conducted on the test rig shown in Fig. 1. In these tests, an operator was asked to move the haptic implement along a circular trajectory (see Fig. 1c) with four different speeds, which resulted in different task completion times. The measured times were: 30.58s, 22.50s, 13.52s and 8.77s. For each speed, the position errors at the master implement and the slave end-effector were recorded and compared. The impedance matrix of the virtual fixture, GVF, was set toGVF=diag[1500N/m1500N/m1500N/m].Fig. 5a and b shows position error at the haptic implement and slave end-effector, respectively, under different hand speeds and along the circular path shown in Fig. 1c. As observed, by increasing the hand speed, no obvious changes on the value of position error at the haptic device can be noticed, i.e. the ranges of position error are almost similar. The maximum position error was about 1.7mm, which indicates the virtual fixture was able to keep the operator’s hand close to the desired track. However, the position error at the manipulator end-effector significantly increased beyond the error inherently originated from the controller response (see Fig. 5b).The solution to reduce position error at the slave end-effector, proposed in this paper, is to add an augmentation force to the virtual fixture force. The augmentation force alerts the operator to slow down the haptic implement (hand) motion when position error becomes larger than the accuracy expected from the controller at the slave end-effector. The direction of this force should be apposite to the haptic implement (hand) instantaneous velocity. Indeed, this force allows the operator to realize position error at the slave side. The augmentation force is defined as:(9)F→AU=-GAUE→es-E→thresholdsv̂insmE→es>E→thresholds0E→es⩽E→thresholdsAs shown in Fig. 6,E→esis the vector of position error at the manipulator end-effector, and is expressed by three components in framex0y0z0. Note that due to inherent error of the controller, the augmentation force is only generated when the position error is greater than a threshold.E→thresholdsis defined based on the steady-state positioning error at the slave end-effector that originates from the manipulator’s controller as well as the resolution of the sensors. WhenE→es⩽E→thresholds, the haptic device does not produce any augmentation force. WhenE→es>E→thresholds,F→AUis proportional toE→es-E→thresholdsin terms of magnitude, and parallel tov̂insm, which is the unit vector of haptic implement instantaneous velocity. The negative sign indicates the augmentation force is in the opposite direction of the hand instantaneous velocity. GAUis a diagonal matrix. The threshold is considered to prevent repeated activation-deactivation cycles.Fig. 7shows how the augmented virtual fixture force is calculated using the virtual fixture and the augmentation forces. As illustrated in Fig. 7, while the virtual fixture force (F→VF) pulls the operator’s hand toward the haptic desired path, the augmentation force (F→AU) slows down the operator’s hand motion. The augmented virtual fixture force (F→AVF) is then calculated as:(10)F→AVF=ρVFF→VF+ρAUF→AUwhere ρVFand ρAUare positive weighting factors to adjust the relative effect of virtual fixture and augmentation forces, respectively (ρVF+ρAU=1).The block diagram of the augmented virtual fixture scheme is illustrated in Fig. 8. As observed, the actual position vector of the haptic implement (P→am) is multiplied by scalar ksto indicate the desired position of the slave manipulator end-effector. The actual position of the haptic implement (P→am) is continuously recorded to determine position error at the haptic implement,E→im. Next,E→imis multiplied by the master impedance, GVF, in order to calculate the virtual fixture force (F→VF). On the slave side, the actual position of the haptic device is multiplied by the scaling factor, ks, in order to calculate the desired position of the manipulator end-effector,P→ds. The actual position of the slave manipulator end-effector,P→as, is calculated by substituting the actual angular displacements of joints (θ→as) into forward kinematic equations of the manipulator. Having manipulator end-effector position error vector, the augmentation force,F→AU, is calculated using Eq. (9). The combined virtual fixture and augmentation forces form the augmented virtual fixture force.Two sets of experiments are presented in which eight operators were asked to perform maintenance tasks, using the PHANToM Desktop haptic device. Four tasks were performed using the experimental setup. They were: pulling out a cotter pin (Task A, Fig. 9a), loosening or tightening a nut (Task B, Fig. 9b), connecting or disconnecting a ball and socket joint (Task C, Fig. 9c) and, twisting tie wire (Task D, Fig. 9d). Fig. 9 shows virtual fixture paths along which the operators were asked to move the hydraulic manipulator end-effector.The experiments were first conducted using the virtual fixture force only (ρVF=1, ρAU=0). Next, the augmented virtual fixture force was applied (ρVF=0.5, ρAU=0.5). The impedance matrix of the force augmentation scheme was a diagonal matrix,GAU=diag[150N/m150N/m150N/m], the values of its elements were determined to give a feeling of an unsaturated force whenE→imhas its maximum value during the test. Effectiveness of each mode was evaluated using two indices: (i) position error at the haptic device implement, and (ii) position error at the manipulator end-effector.The operators were asked to hold stylus of the haptic device like a pen, and try to trace each path. The experiments were repeated 10 times by each operator, for each force mode. A total number of 2(force modes)×4(tasks)×10(trials)×8(participants)=640 trials were collected. Although the operators were asked to repeat particular tasks, some deviations from trajectories were unavoidable.The nonlinear PI (NPI) controller, developed earlier [25], was employed to control each joint of the manipulator. This controller produced maximum steady-state error reflecting a threshold of 1.54mm, 1.06mm and 2.07mm at the end-effector alongx0,y0andz0, respectively; thus,E→thresholds=(1.54mm,1.06mm,2.07mm)T.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we introduced a simple, yet effective method, which aims at reducing the tracking (following) error in teleoperated hydraulic manipulators by overlaying an augmentation force onto the conventional virtual fixture force on the master. The augmentation force is proportional to the difference between the desired and actual positions of the slave end effector; its direction is collinear but opposite to the master instantaneous velocity vector. Indeed, while the virtual fixture force serves to pull the operator’s hand back on track when it deviates from the haptic predefined path, the augmentation force guides the operator to slow down her/his hand motion when the slave position error exceeds beyond a threshold. Effectiveness of the proposed scheme was experimentally evaluated on a hydraulic manipulator performing several live-line maintenance tasks. Evaluation indices were position error at the haptic device implement and position error at the hydraulic manipulator end-effector. Two sets of tests were performed: (i) tests using only conventional virtual fixture force generated by the haptic device, and (ii) tests when the virtual fixture force was augmented by an additional force reflecting the error observed at the slave side. The augmented virtual fixture showed a marked improvement over the virtual fixture mode alone, in that it resulted in lesser position error at the manipulator (slave) side. Specifically, for the tests conducted here, the augmented virtual fixture mode reduced position error at the manipulator end-effector by at least 71%, and this was done by guiding the operator to slow down the hand motion allowing the slave manipulator to catch up with the commands coming from the master haptic device. As expected, as a downside, the task completion time increased up to three times when the augmentation force was added to the virtual fixture force.