@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A traffic-aware street lighting scheme for Smart Cities using autonomous networked sensors

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
TALiSMaN detects road users and sets streetlight brightness appropriately.A utility model is detailed to quantify the usefulness of street lighting.Street lighting schemes are evaluated with StreetlightSim.TALiSMaN offers comparable usefulness as conventional lighting schemes.TALiSMaN consumes 2–55% of the energy of conventional/state-of-the-art schemes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Adaptive street lighting,Smart streetlights,Smart Cities,Networked sensing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Street lighting is a ubiquitous utility, but sustaining its operation presents a heavy financial and environmental burden. Many schemes have been proposed which selectively dim lights to improve energy efficiency, but little consideration has been given to the usefulness of the resultant street lighting system. This paper proposes a real-time adaptive lighting scheme, which detects the presence of vehicles and pedestrians and dynamically adjusts their brightness to the optimal level. This improves the energy efficiency of street lighting and its usefulness; a streetlight utility model is presented to evaluate this. The proposed scheme is simulated using an environment modelling a road network, its users, and a networked communication system – and considers a real streetlight topology from a residential area. The proposed scheme achieves similar or improved utility to existing schemes, while consuming as little as 1–2% of the energy required by conventional and state-of-the-art techniques.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With approximately 90 million streetlights installed worldwide, street lighting has become a ubiquitous utility that can be found in most urban areas [1]. Effective street lighting can reduce both crime and traffic collisions [2,3], and encourage socio-economic activities at night. Several studies have shown that the installation of street lighting improves the perception of personal safety and security [4,5]. To realise a sustainable and liveable city, the concept of Smart Cities has been proposed. Key to this vision is that of a Smart Environment, requiring sustainable and efficient management of the environment and its limited natural resources through information and communication technology (ICT) [6]. Although the benefits of street lighting are clear, sustaining its operation has become a concerning issue to local governments, both financially and environmentally. Electric street lighting consumes 114TWh annually, leading to the emission of 69 million tonnes of CO2[1]. With rapid urbanisation, the financial and environmental burden of street lighting is expected to grow as the number of streetlights is predicted to increase by over 300% in the coming decade [7].Conventionally, streetlights remain lit continually overnight. The start and end of this period is typically triggered by a clock with a predefined schedule, or an integrated light sensor indicating when the surrounding environment becomes dark. However, this conventional or ‘always-on’ lighting scheme can result in energy wastage, especially when street lighting is not required or full brightness is no longer necessary. Examples of this include the middle of the night when very low traffic volumes are expected. Thus, the use of time-based dimming approaches, such as Philips Chronosense and Dynadimmer [8], has been proposed whereby selected streetlights are completely switched off or dimmed at specific hours. Warwickshire County Council, UK, anticipate annual savings of £0.5m (∼$0.85m) and 3000 tonnes of carbon reduction if their streetlights are operated on this basis [9]. Although time-based dimming schemes show substantial savings both financially and environmentally, they overlook the original purpose of having street lighting. The reduction or suppression of street lighting during specific hours may severely impair road users’ ability to navigate or to avoid obstacles [10], and lead to more accidents and crimes during these hours.Recent advances in sensing and communication technologies have encouraged their adoption in streetlight control and monitoring, permitting fine-grained management of streetlight operation [11–13]. Remote- and sensor-controlled street lighting offers significant prospects for saving energy, as the continual adjustment of lighting levels is possible. In general, a remote control centre performs the necessary management and regulation of streetlight operation, such as dimming for energy conservation and monitoring the health of the streetlights. In some cases, streetlight operations are adaptively adjusted based on ambient information, such as weather and traffic conditions, collected by a local sensor array. Most of the proposed remote- and sensor-controlled street lighting schemes adopt long- and/or short-range wireless communication networks to establish a communication link between the remote control centre and an individual streetlight. Jing et al. [14] proposed the use of cellular networks and wireless sensor networks (WSNs) in their streetlight monitoring, control and diagnosis system. In their proposal, a centralised control centre governs the entire streetlight network, and a remote terminal unit (normally installed at the streetlight transformer stations) serves as a gateway between the centre and the sensor nodes. Cellular network based Internet connectivity is proposed to relay the commands and the status of the streetlights between the control centre and the gateways, and eventually propagate to the intended streetlights via the WSN. This use of communication networks can be found in many similar works [11–13]; however, many of these rely on a remote control centre that typically comes with a relatively high price tag [15]. Furthermore, they are also subject to a single point of failure as their performance depends upon the reliability of the long-range communication network.For traffic-aware street lighting, a variety of different sensing mechanisms have been reported to allow autonomous adjustment of lighting level based on detected road users. Sun et al. [16] demonstrated the use of a multi-sensor module to prolong the operational hours of their standalone solar-powered streetlight. This module utilises a microphone and passive infrared sensor to allow detection of passing humans. A similar method was also adopted by many recent works [17–21], where a presence-detection module controlled the streetlights from a distance. Their sensors, however, had a limited sensing range which limited the effective range of their proposed method [22]. Instead of detecting the presence of road users, Müllner and Riener [23] proposed the use of a pedestrian tracking solution via a combination of Global Positioning System (GPS) and Internet-enabled smartphones. This combination allowed the system to track the precise location of a pedestrian, and hence fade-in and -out streetlights within a defined radius of them. Such usage of smartphones provides a potential mechanism for precise traffic-aware street lighting, but solutions are inherently limited to owners of such devices. This is illustrated by the fact that only 39% of people in the UK own smartphones, with a significant bias towards younger age groups (16–34years old) [24]. Enabling GPS sensing and Internet connectivity in a smartphone has been shown to increase power consumption by 600mW [25] and 650mW [26] respectively. Considering a smartphone’s limited battery capacity, such a power consumption can deplete a typical battery in a few hours. In addition, the issues surrounding location-privacy may also prove to be major obstacles of such traffic-aware street lighting schemes.In recent years, many research projects have considered the use of ICT to allow precise and adaptive control of streetlights to conserve energy. This includes our early work in this field [27], where we proposed an algorithm which adjusted streetlight brightness in response to nearby road users, reducing the energy consumption by 30% compared to state-of-the-art schemes. Importantly, many of these existing works (including our own) were primarily aimed at reducing energy consumption, with very little consideration given to the associated impact of such schemes on the usefulness of the streetlights. More recently, we reported on StreetlightSim [28], a simulation environment that models both road traffic patterns and adaptive networked streetlights. To evaluate the usefulness of street lighting we also presented StreetlightSim’s ‘utility’ model, which quantifies the utility, or usefulness, of street lighting from different road users’ perspectives.In this paper, we propose TALiSMaN, a distributed Traffic-Aware Lighting Scheme Management Network. We present a number of novel contributions over our previous work and the state-of-the-art:•We propose a new adaptive street lighting algorithm (based on that we proposed in [27]), TALiSMaN, which tailors its operation to different road users. This is based on the utility model we presented in [28], and we present a more complete description of this here.Instead of requiring a centralised controller, TALiSMaN has been designed to operate autonomously over a short-range mesh network (i.e. a network of decentralised and distributed networked streetlights).TALiSMaN is evaluated against existing and state-of-the-art techniques, through the simulation of a scenario using real traffic and geographical data. Results are analysed for both energy consumption and streetlight utility. This is the first work that has used this holistic approach to the evaluation of lighting schemes.Application-based simulations show that TALiSMaN is able to provide improved or comparable streetlight utility to existing street lighting schemes, but with a significant improvement in energy efficiency (requiring only 1–55% of the energy, depending on traffic volume).This paper is structured as follows: Section 2 presents the diverse requirements of street lighting from different road users’ perspectives, and derives a model for streetlight utility. Subsequently, Section 3 presents the details of TALiSMaN, which utilises WSNs to manage streetlights to minimise energy consumption while maximising utility. The proposed lighting scheme is evaluated by simulating a real streetlight topology from a residential area in Southampton, UK, and considers a range of different road traffic volumes. Section 4 details the evaluation scenario and parameters adopted in this paper, and Section 5 presents the performance of the proposed lighting scheme in terms of the achieved streetlight utility and consumed energy.Effective street lighting enables road users to see more clearly, better and further for a variety of different activities. In some studies, the ergonomic comfort of lighting is also considered to address the psychological needs and well-being of its users [29]. To minimise the energy consumption of streetlights, the most straightforward option is to turn them off altogether (but this defeats their purpose); ideally, streetlights would only be turned on when they are useful. In this section, we consider what constitutes effective street lighting, from both a motorist’s and pedestrian’s perspective. These stakeholders are considered to be the major beneficiaries of street lighting. Subsequently, we detail a model (previously proposed in [28]) that quantifies the usefulness of street lighting, referred to as ‘streetlight utility’.From a pedestrian’s perspective, effective street lighting should assist them in obstacle avoidance and navigation, identification of other pedestrians (facial recognition), and make them feel safer [30,31]. Obstacles can cause pedestrians to fall, potentially resulting in serious injuries. Thus, an effective street lighting scheme should improve their ability to detect obstacles in their path. As intuition would suggest, obstacle detection is improved as illuminance increases [32,33]. However, pedestrians begin to avoid obstacles at a distance of between 6 and 7m, regardless of this [34]. Facial recognition of other pedestrians requires considerably higher illuminance compared to obstacle detection. It is reported that a streetlight at the minimum lighting level for a pedestrian should allow recognition of other road users at a distance of 4m [30]. Nevertheless, pedestrians prefer to avoid collision with another at a distance of around 8–9m [34].We model the utility of street lighting for pedestrian obstacle detection, navigation and facial recognition by incorporating the aforementioned requirements. This is given byUped(avoid), as shown in Eq. (1), whereγ(x,t)is the ratio of illuminance level at x metres ahead of a pedestrian at time t to the minimum required illuminance level for the road the pedestrian is travelling on. This assumes that the illumination within a 10m segment of road is equally important for obstacle detection, navigation and facial recognition. In the UK, BS EN 13201-2 [35] outlines the minimum required illuminance levels for different residential roads which range from 2 to 15 lux. Generally, illuminance levels with lower values are adopted for quieter residential roads.(1)Uped(avoid)(t)=110∫010γ(x,t)dxStreet lighting for pedestrians’ perceived safety was studied by Haans and de Kort [36] using three different light distributions: conventional, ascending, and descending. In a conventional light distribution, all streetlights in the test location delivered the same illuminance. In a descending light distribution, the streetlights in the subjects’ immediate vicinity delivered a higher illuminance, while those further away were incrementally lower. An ascending light distribution is the opposite of this. Based on their practical experiments, subjects expressed that they had a similar, and in some cases, better sense of safety while the streetlights were in a descending distribution. Amongst all the light distributions studied, the ascending light distribution was least favoured by subjects. Thus, streetlight utility for perceived safety,Uped(prospect), is given by:(2)Uped(prospect)(t)=1300∫-150150z(x,t)dx(3)z(x,t)=ε(x,t),ε(x,t)⩽11,ε(x,t)>1(4)ε(x,t)=γ(x,t)1-0.2|x|30,-150⩽x⩽150wherexis the distance in metres from a pedestrian at time t,z(x,t)is the ratio of illuminance level at location x metres from a pedestrian at time t to the illuminance level required at illumination zone where location x is located.In this model,Uped(prospect)considers a lit road segment 150m before and after a pedestrian. These road segments are subdivided into five illumination zones (each segment covers a 30m length of road, the typical coverage of a single streetlight) where each zone requires different minimum illuminance levels. The minimum illuminance of the nearest zones are at 100% according to the minimum required illuminance level for the road the pedestrian is travelling on. For each zone further away from the pedestrian, their minimum illuminance values are gradually decreased by 20%. The road segments that are outside these illuminance zones are not required to be lit.Over a period of time, a pedestrian will perform both obstacle detection and navigation/awareness. Hence, the overall streetlight utility for pedestrian is given by:(5)Uped(t)=αUped(avoid)(t)+(1-α)Uped(prospect)(t)whereαis the weight of the time spent by pedestrian looking at the footpath. In this paper, we adopt a value ofα=0.45. This is based on the findings of Davoudian and Raynham [31], who found that pedestrians spend 40–50% of their time looking at the pavement.From a motorist’s perspective, street lighting helps to extend and broaden their visual range beyond that offered by vehicle headlamps. This allows them to detect potential hazards in their direction of travel. In general, an effective street lighting scheme considers the average luminance, luminance pattern (also known as uniformity), threshold increment and surround ratio [30]. Amongst these factors, average luminance and uniformity affect motorists’ ability to detect potential hazards. The effect of various illuminances and uniformities on hazard detection has been extensively studied [37–40]. These studies report that motorists perform better at hazard detection when luminance and uniformity are increased. Hazard detection is normally associated with the proximity of the hazard to the vehicle in either time or in distance, in which appropriate manoeuvres can be carried out to avoid a collision and thus reduce the probability of injury to oneself or other road users. This distance is reflected as the stopping distance where a motorist must be able to stop their vehicle safely after a potential hazard is detected [41]. Usually, the stopping distance is between 60m and 160m based on factors including the vehicle’s speed, road surface conditions, and the motorist’s reaction time.To model the streetlight utility for a motorist, we consider that they require a segment of road ahead of them to be illuminated, hence allowing them to detect potential hazards within their travelling path and bring their vehicle to a stop. As this road segment is typically between 60m and 160m, a value of 100m [41] is adopted in our model as it includes most of the stopping distances required in a residential road. In the UK, residential roads typically have a speed limit of 30mph (approximately 15m/s or 50km/h). Assuming that the illuminance level within this road segment is equally important, and this road segment is lit at the minimum required illuminance level for the road a motorist is travelling on, the streetlight utility for a motorist,Umot, is modelled by:(6)Umot(t)=1100∫0100γ(x,t)dxwhereγ(x,t)is the ratio of illuminance level at x metres ahead of a motorist at time t to the minimum required illuminance level for the road where the motorist is travelling on.In the next section, these utility models are considered in the design of a traffic-aware adaptive lighting scheme. This scheme aims to maximise the utility of the streetlights, and minimise their energy use.Based on the proposed utility models, two observations can be reached: (1) the lengths of the required lit road segments are finite, i.e. 150m and 100m for pedestrians and motorists respectively; and (2) within these required lit road segments, pedestrians and motorists require different light patterns. TALiSMaN exploits these properties by progressively adjusting the illuminance of streetlights according to different road users’ needs, and improves their energy efficiency by minimising their energy use. TALiSMaN detects road users and shares the information with nearby streetlights. Upon receiving the information, they cooperate to create optimum lighting conditions that meet the road users’ needs, and avoid illuminating the road at higher levels as this simply wastes energy.The different user needs for street lighting and the proposed utility models in Section 2 were considered, and translated to a relationship between a streetlight’s proximity to the road user and the desired illuminance. This is summarised in Table 1. Instead of relying on a remote centralised control centre for managing streetlight operation, we propose to implement TALiSMaN over an autonomous WSN. Each streetlight incorporates a wireless sensor node with a short-range wireless communication module. This allows it to form a multi-hop WSN with neighbouring streetlights to exchange information. The network is time-synchronised, and each streetlight is pre-programmed with its own location information and unique identification, which are shared with others during network setup.The streetlights are equipped with a light controller and a road-user sensor [16,22]. The light controller modulates the lamp output to switch the streetlight on, off, or adjust its illuminance. To allow near-instant response to continually changing illuminance requests, it is assumed that each streetlight uses a dimmable light-emitting diode (LED) lamp, and that its beam pattern covers the limited area of a single road segment. Although these sensor-based methods provide less accuracy in detecting road-user positions than GPS-based systems [23], they do not require the road-users to be instrumented with dedicated smartphone apps or other hardware, while still providing a substantial energy saving.The following subsections explain the operation and implementation of TALiSMaN.In order to enable progressive control of the streetlight illuminance, based on the either presence detected by local sensors or information relayed by neighbouring nodes, four different operational states are defined in TALiSMaN: ‘Lamp on by sensor’, ‘Lamp on by neighbour’, ‘Lamp on by delay’ and ‘Lamp off’. Amongst these operation states, ‘Lamp off’ and ‘Lamp on by sensor’ are shared between neighbouring sensor nodes using the on-board wireless communication module. Fig. 1shows the state machine of these operation states during operational hours.When TALiSMaN shifts to ‘Lamp on by delay’, the state delay counter is reset and activated (see Section 3.3 for state delay counter). The operation state will remain here until the state delay counter expires or a road user is detected by a local road-user sensor. Once the state delay counter expires, the received neighbours’ operation states are evaluated, and operation state shifts to ‘Lamp on by neighbour’ only if neighbours are on. At this state, the streetlight remains switched on and its illuminance is adjusted to deliver the required lighting pattern (see Section 3.2 for detail). The streetlight is switched off if none of the local or the neighbouring road-user sensors have detected the presence of any road users. While the operation state is ‘Lamp on by neighbour’ or ‘Lamp off’, the operation states from neighbouring nodes are evaluated as each packet is received.For TALiSMaN, the illuminance of the streetlights is adjusted for energy conservation while maintaining the optimum usefulness of having street lighting. However, creating the lit road segment that satisfies different road users’ needs requires coordination between several streetlights. This is due to the assumptions that a road-user sensor has a limited detection range and the coverage from the streetlight beam pattern is finite. The coordination between streetlights is facilitated by sharing the road users’ presence information with other sensor nodes within the required lit road segments. By sharing this information, the relative distance to the detected road users can be approximated using the Euclidean distance to the nearest sensor node. While the precise location of a road user is unknown, the receiving nodes assume that the detected road users are at the ‘best-case’ distance from them. This approximate relative distance,daproxassumes that the road user is always located at the nearest edge of the sensor range, see Figs. 2 and 3.The following sections detail the modulation of streetlight illuminance output upon detection of a pedestrian and a motorist.Fig. 2shows the development of the required lighting pattern after a pedestrian is detected by a road-user sensor at streetlights2. After the presence of the pedestrian is shared amongst the sensor nodes at streetlights1tos8, the illuminance of the respective streetlights,Lpedis progressively modulated according to the following algorithm:if operation state is ‘Lamp off’ thenLped=0if operation state is ‘Lamp on by sensor’ or ‘by neighbour’ thenLped=1-0.2Zped(daprox)if operation state is ‘Lamp on by delay’ thencurrentLped(daprox)remainswhereLpedis the required illuminance of the streetlight based on the approximate relative distance (m) to the detected pedestrian, anddaproxandZpeddetermines the illumination zone of the streetlight according todaprox.In Section 2.1, five different illumination zones were considered for pedestrians, and the required illuminance of each zone sequentially reduced by 20%. To allow streetlights in different illumination zones to operate at these required illuminance levels,Lpedis sequentially reduced by a factor of 0.2 per zone. Since each illumination zone is 30m in length and a pedestrian requires a lit road segment of 150m before and after them,Zpedhas maximum value of five. The illumination zone of a streetlight,Zpedwith respect todaproxis given by:(7)zped(daprox)=0,daprox30=0daprox30-1,0<daprox30⩽55,daprox30>5(8)daprox=0,drad⩾ddetddet-drad,drad<ddetwhereddetis the Euclidean distance (m) to the nearest sensor node that detects the pedestrian anddradis the maximum detection range (m) of the road-user sensor.As the difficulty in detecting potential hazards increases with darker lighting conditions [10], the streetlight illuminance required by a motorist,Lmotis always at 100% for a road segment 100m ahead of them. Since the road-user sensors are assumed to be unable to detect the direction that the detected motorist is travelling in, both road segments before and after the motorist are lit. Fig. 3illustrates the development of the required lighting pattern upon detection of a motorist by a road-user sensor at streetlights1. After the presence of the motorist is shared between streetlightss1tos5, their illuminance is modulated according to the following algorithm:if operation state is ‘Lamp off’ thenLmot=0if operation state is ‘Lamp on by sensor’ or by neighbour’ thenLmot=1-Zmot(daprox)if operation state is ‘Lamp on by delay’ thencurrentLmotremainswhereZmotis the function that determines whether a streetlight is within the required road segment need to be lit.Zmotis given by:(9)Zmot(daprox)=0,daproxdavg⩽100davg1,daproxdavg>100davgwheredaproxis the approximate relative distance (m) to the detected motorist (see Eq. (8)), anddavgis the average distance to the next adjacent streetlight (assumed to be 30m).Whenever pedestrians and motorists are detected simultaneously, the illuminance output of the streetlight is set tomax(Lped,Lmot). This is to ensure that an optimum lit environment can be provided both to pedestrians and motorists.Void regions result from gaps in sensor coverage between streetlights. When road users travel into them, they can potentially cause unnecessary adjustment of streetlight illuminance. To reduce the impact of void regions, a state delay counter is adopted to prolong the TALiSMaN operation state at ‘Lamp on by delay’ until the road user is believed to have left the void region and entered the sensing range of the next streetlight. This feature also mitigates the latency of the communication network, which is particularly relevant when neighbouring sensor nodes detect the presence of road users simultaneously and compete for the communication channel to disseminate the information.In this paper, the expiration time of the state delay counter,texp, is given by:(10)texp=dadj-2dradv,dadj⩾dradwheredadjis the distance (m) to the furthest adjacent streetlight,dradis the detection range (m) of the sensor node and it is assumed to be 13m [22] andvis the expected slowest travelling speed (m/s) of a particular road user.Considering that only the presence of the road users is known, we use the road user’s slowest travelling speed to computetexp. We assume that the slowest travelling speed of a motorist on residential roads is 4.5m/s (10mph). For pedestrians, 0.73m/s is assumed to be the slowest walking speed after considering the 5th percentile of the pedestrian walking speed distribution (mean walking speed is 1.34m/s and standard deviation is 0.37m/s) [42]. If both motorists and pedestrians are detected at any one moment, the pedestrian’s slowest walking speed is always used to computetexp.To evaluate the efficiency and effectiveness of TALiSMaN, it requires the modelling of vehicles, road networks, algorithms, and communication systems. However, existing tools were not available for this. Therefore, StreetlightSim [28], a simulation environment combining the OMNeT++ and SUMO simulation tools was created to model both traffic patterns and networked streetlights. This environment is used in this paper to evaluate the performance of TALiSMaN against existing works. StreetlightSim is open-source and freely available to the community [43]. Fig. 4(a) shows StreetlightSim simulating 112 streetlights based on the topology shown in Fig. 4(b). As illustrated by Fig. 4(a), only those within the required lit road segments are switched on (shown by white dots) upon detection of road users. Each lighting scheme is simulated over ten repeated simulation runs for every combination of traffic patterns and traffic volumes specified in Section 4.2.The following subsections detail the simulation scenario and parameters adopted in this paper.An actual streetlight topology located in a residential area was modelled for this evaluation. The locations of these streetlights were identified using an aerial photograph. Fig. 4 shows the topology of the streetlights (represented by dots) in a residential area in Southampton, UK. In total, there are 112 streetlights placed over approximately 3.5km of residential roads. For the purposes of evaluation, each streetlight is assumed to be equipped with a 25W LED lamp which can illuminate a 30m road segment. The streetlights are assumed to start operation at sunset and finish at sunrise the next day. Based on these observations, the distance between streetlights varies – for example as a result of roundabouts and junctions. Thus, a near-optimal streetlight utility is achieved, as shown in Fig. 8.The energy consumption of the different lighting schemes is influenced by the duration of their operation. This is dependent upon the geographical location, season, weather, and local environment. Therefore, our simulation scenario limits operational hours from 16:00 to 08:00 (16h) for clarity of evaluation. These operational hours represent one of the longest streetlight durations required during winter months in the UK.To approximate the volume of actual road traffic in the residential roads (represented by shaded lines in Fig. 4(b)), five different daily traffic volumes are considered during simulations. These values are 180, 438, 1347, 3508 and 6554 vehicles per day which represent the minimum, 1st quartile, median, 3rd quartile and maximum ‘annual average daily traffic flow’ (AADF) values respectively for residential roads in Southampton, UK [44]. Since AADF only accounts for vehicular traffic, an additional 14% is added to these values to represent pedestrian traffic; this value is based on data supplied by Southampton City Council [45]. Two traffic profiles, namely weekday and weekend, are considered during simulation as they demonstrate distinct traffic trends, see Fig. 5. The mobility of a simulated pedestrian and a simulated motorist is governed by a total of 100 random routes. The mobility speed of these road users varies according on route traffic conditions but is limited to maximum 1.9m/s for a pedestrian [42] and 30mph for a motorist (the speed limit on residential roads in the UK). Detailed information on generating and injecting road traffic during simulations can be found in our previous work [28].A range of different approaches have been proposed to reduce the energy consumption of street lighting, as outlined in Section 1. In our evaluation, we evaluate and compare TALiSMaN against the state-of-the-art approaches listed in Table 2. The Conventional (or ‘always-on’) lighting scheme is also included in our evaluation to serve as a benchmark for streetlight utility.As discussed in Section 3, the illuminance of the streetlights is individually controlled by a wireless sensor node, based on the presence of road users. To enable the effective detection of road users, these nodes are assumed to be equipped with a multi-sensor array. Details of the sensor array, however, are outside the scope of this research. The sensing range and sample rate vary considerably between technologies [22]. For the purposes of evaluation, Table 3summarises the parameters that are adopted in our simulations.Information on detected road users is time-sensitive, so it has to be relayed to neighbouring sensor nodes with minimal delay. If this information is relayed too late, the performance of TALiSMaN will be reduced, because streetlights will respond less quickly to road users’ movements, reducing utility and/or increasing energy consumption. To address this need, we assume that all the sensor nodes operate using an IEEE 802.15.4 non-beacon enabled mode and adopt carrier sense multiple access (CSMA) with collision avoidance as their media access control layer protocol [47]. While operating in this mode, sensor nodes are always active and ready to relay any information as required. Table 4summarises the communication parameters adopted during the simulations. Since the focus of this work is on the energy efficiency of street lighting schemes and their respective streetlight utility, the simple path loss radio propagation model from the MiXiM framework was used in this work. To account for random variation in the channel, log-normal shadowing is also applied.During simulations, the necessary information for TALiSMaN’s operation is communicated using a 19 byte packet: 4 bytes for the packet source and destination address, 1 byte for the message type coding, message versioning, command coding, command data length and data, 4 bytes for the packet timestamp, and 2 bytes for the packet checksum. Given that the travel direction of the detected road users is not available to TALiSMaN, and to allow sensor nodes to create the lighting conditions that offer optimum streetlight utility collaboratively, information on detected road users is relayed to any sensor node within a 150m radius of the source node. However, this requires a network protocol to govern end-to-end information routing at the network layer of the WSN. As information on the detected road users is delay-sensitive, retransmission or guaranteed delivery of this information is not the focus of this protocol, but it should allow propagation of the information to all the sensor nodes within the confined distance with minimum delay. Therefore, a flooding protocol is adopted in our simulations. Nevertheless, uncontrolled flooding can lead to unnecessary network congestion and increased delays, which would consequently affect the performance of TALiSMaN. Therefore, the flood is constrained to discard packets once they have reached a distance of 150m from the source node. During simulations, propagation errors and packet collision are introduced which cause packets to be discarded prematurely (see [49] for the details of radio propagation errors and packet collision).To prevent the WSN from generating and forwarding redundant information, nodes only propagate the streetlight’s operational state when a road user is detected. After a detection, nodes continually report their operational state to neighbouring streetlights at rate of 2Hz, while the road user continues to be within its sensing range. 2Hz was chosen based on the simulation scenario considered, i.e. a 30m average distance between two adjacent streetlights and a residential road with a speed limit of 30 mph (48km/h); therefore allowing each passing road user to be detected at least twice. Due to the routing protocol adopted (packet flooding) and the high network congestion that results (packet loss of between 23% and 29% was experienced during simulations), nodes are programmed to continue to generate and forward packets for an additional 15s after a road user is detected within its the sensing range. This extra forwarding mechanism increases the probability of streetlights receiving the latest operational state from the streetlights; as shown in the results below, this can be seen to deliver streetlight utility to all road users of greater than 90% (see Fig. 8a).In this section the performance of each lighting scheme is presented in terms of the streetlight utility experienced by simulated pedestrians and motorists, and the total energy consumed by 112 streetlights over a week (5days for weekday traffic and 2days for weekend traffic).To illustrate the behaviour of TALiSMaN, Fig. 6shows the lighting conditions of a road segment at different timestas a result of a simulated pedestrian travelling towards streetlights12. Att=2, the presence of the pedestrian is detected by streetlights8and this information is shared between neighbouring streetlights, i.e.s3tos12. Upon receiving the information, the brightness levels of these streetlights are adjusted to create the lighting pattern needed by the pedestrian. As the pedestrian travels towards streetlights12, these optimum lighting conditions are shifted to the right along with presence detected by streetlights9tos12. Under such lighting conditions, TALiSMaN offered near-optimal streetlight utility to the pedestrian.Fig. 7shows the power output of a streetlight while operating TALiSMaN. During early operational hours, the power output of the streetlight is consistently 25W. This trend is due to the near-continuous stream of road traffic during these ‘rush hours’ preventing streetlights from switching off. The same trend can be observed as it approaches the morning rush hour. The streetlight is mostly switched off between midnight and the early morning as road traffic is lower compared to other operational hours. Although the streetlight is mostly switched off during these hours, TALiSMaN still retains the near-optimal usefulness of lighting to its users, as shown in Fig. 8(g).Fig. 8 shows the distribution of average streetlight utility experienced by each simulated road user from 16:00 to 08:00 the next day, when streetlights operate using the different lighting schemes. From the simulation results, none of the evaluated lighting schemes are able to offer perfect streetlight utility (100%) in any of the streetlight operational hours for both the simulated pedestrians and motorists. This is even the case for streetlights that are always switched on at 100% illuminance output while operating the Conventional lighting scheme. This result, however, is expected as some of the road segments between two adjacent streetlights are larger than streetlight beam pattern (30m) can cover. Owing to this, there are small sections of unlit road that have prevented perfect streetlight utility being achieved. In general, the streetlight utility experienced by the simulated motorists is higher than those experienced by the simulated pedestrians. This is due to StreetlightSim’s placement of streetlights at the centre of roads, and their circular beam pattern. Therefore, simulated pedestrians encounter larger unlit road sections compared to simulated motorists.It can be seen that all simulated road users experience at least 90% utility during operational hours when using the Conventional lighting scheme. Similar trends can be observed when TALiSMaN is in use. Although Zoning has a similar performance in terms of pedestrian utility, motorist utility is severely impacted (this is to be expected, as it is not designed for these users). While motorists are not tracked by the scheme, their experienced utility was evaluated based on the lighting intended for pedestrians. Thus, the utility experienced by motorists is not consistent across streetlight operational hours (it varies between 0% and 95%), and reduces when pedestrian traffic is low, i.e. during early morning. For Multi-sensor, all streetlights are always at 40% illuminance, and this is increased to 70% and 100% illuminance output when a motorist or pedestrian is 20m and 10m away respectively. Thus, it is unable to create the lighting conditions that can satisfy both the requirements of the pedestrians and the motorists, and has a reduced utility when compared to the Conventional and TALiSMaN lighting schemes. The increased traffic volume between the hours of 16:00–20:00 and 06:00–08:00 causes streetlights to constantly switch on at higher illuminance output, and hence higher utility can be observed at these times.Philips Chronosense, Part-night and Dynadimmer are considered to be time-based dimming lighting schemes, as their illuminance is regulated according to predefined timetables. Owing to this, streetlight utility experienced by simulated road users also fluctuates according to their predefined timetable. For Part-night, all streetlights are switched on with 100% illuminance output except between midnight and early morning when they are switched off completely. Thus, Part-night has a similar utility to Conventional and TALiSMaN lighting schemes except during this period.Philips Chronosense allows illuminance to be reduced to a predefined value at a predefined time. In our simulations, we consider this to be reduced to 65% between the hours of 22:00 and 05:00 (a typical setting of Philips Chronosense [8]). Correspondingly, the utility provided during these hours is also reduced to 68–72% and 60–65% for the simulated pedestrians and motorists respectively. For the remaining hours, this scheme offers similar utility to the Conventional and TALiSMaN lighting schemes. Compared to Philips Chronosense, Philips Dynadimmer allows multiple predefined illuminance output as summarised in Table 2. As shown Fig. 8(d), streetlight utility experienced by the simulated pedestrians and motorists varies according to five different streetlight operational periods. As the maximum illuminance output of the lighting scheme is set at 90%, none of the simulated pedestrians or motorists are able to experience streetlight utility above 90% as demonstrated by other lighting schemes evaluated in this paper.To evaluate the energy demand of various street lighting schemes, the energy model shown in Eq. (11) is developed, wheree(N)is the energy consumed by a streetlight afterNdiscrete timesteps,φis the illuminance output of the streetlight (%),Pmaxis the maximum power rating of the light source (W), andTis the duration of a single timestep n.(11)e(N)=∑n=0NPmaxφTThis model assumes that the streetlight energy consumption is directly proportional to its illuminance output, e.g. when the streetlight illuminance output is reduced to 80%, the streetlight energy consumption is also reduced to 80% based on its maximum power rating,Pmax.Fig. 9shows the total energy consumption of 112 streetlights in one week for different traffic volumes while operating different lighting schemes. The results show that the energy consumption of time-based dimming schemes, i.e. Conventional, Chronosense, Part-night and Dynadimmer is not dependent on traffic volume. Thus, their energy consumption remains constant while evaluated with different traffic volumes. As expected, Conventional is the least energy efficient of the lighting schemes considered. This is expected since the streetlights are always switched on at 100% illuminance. Chronosense, Part-night and Dynadimmer reduce illuminance at specific hours, hence reducing the energy consumption by 15%, 34% and 37% respectively, compared to Conventional.In general, the energy consumption of the streetlights when operating traffic-aware lighting schemes, i.e. Multi-sensor, Zoning and TALiSMaN, increases with larger traffic volumes. This trend, however, is anticipated since these lighting schemes are designed to save energy by turning off or dimming lights when less traffic is present. As a result of increasing traffic volumes, a near-continuous stream of traffic is developed within the detection range of each sensor. Hence, the time each streetlight spends active is also prolonged, and thus energy consumption is also increased. The effect of increasing traffic volumes to Multi-sensor, however, is less pronounced compared to other traffic-aware lighting schemes. This is due to the streetlights operating Multi-sensor being constantly switched on at 40% illuminance output even when a road user is not detected.Amongst all the evaluated lighting schemes, Zoning consumes the least energy for all the scenarios but its energy was expended for only a small proportion of road users, i.e. the pedestrians (14%). This is because it was originally designed to address the needs of pedestrians. Owing to this, Zoning failed to provide a streetlight utility comparable to that of other schemes (see Fig. 8). TALiSMaN required almost 3× more energy compared to Zoning. This result is justifiable because TALiSMaN aims to provide optimum lighting conditions that fulfil different road users’ needs for street lighting. While Zoning may have application to areas with pedestrian-only traffic, for example some commercial areas and parks, it is clearly not applicable to those that have a mix of pedestrians and motorists. Furthermore, while Zoning requires pedestrians to carry GPS-enabled smartphones, TALiSMaN provides reasonable energy savings without any such demands. Therefore, the adoption of TALiSMaN in residential areas is more viable when compared to Zoning because traffic in such places normally comprises both pedestrians and motorists. Therefore, disregarding Zoning, TALiSMaN can be seen to consume between 2 and 55% (depending on traffic volume) of the energy required by Multi-Sensor, the best-performing state-of-the-art technique. Furthermore, compared to conventional (or ‘always-on’) lighting scheme, TALiSMaN only consumes 1–2% of the energy.Both Zoning and TALiSMaN exchange information between streetlights via a radio communication network. To evaluate the worst-case energy overhead of this, we consider that each streetlight has an IEEE 802.15.4 transceiver which is active for up to 16h per day, consuming 100mW for both data transmission and reception [50]. This represents an overhead of 1.25kWh per week for both schemes, which is only 2–3% of the 40–65kWh of energy saved by TALiSMaN compared against the Multi-sensor lighting scheme.Fig. 10shows the weekly energy consumption of various lighting schemes according to seasonal change in different months of year while evaluated with a traffic volume of 6554 vehicles per day. The operational hours of the streetlights are based on average sunset and sunrise times in Southampton, UK [51]. As the energy consumption of the streetlights is partially influenced by duration of streetlight operation, all the lighting schemes exhibit a trend with summer months having the lowest energy consumption over a year, and reach their peak during winter months. The length of daytime (i.e. when the streetlights are not switched on) is typically longer in summer months than winter months, hence shortening the required operational hours of the streetlights. In addition, road traffic during these hours is also expected to be lower (see Fig. 5). Owing to these, energy consumption during these months is significantly lower compared to other months. Although energy consumption is reduced during summer months, traffic-aware lighting schemes still outperform comparable time-based lighting schemes.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we proposed a distributed Traffic-Aware Lighting Scheme Management Network (TALiSMaN) to create lighting conditions that maximise the utility of the streetlights, and improve their energy efficiency by minimising their energy use. TALiSMaN was simulated and its performance analysed and compared with state-of-the-art lighting schemes. We demonstrate that streetlights using TALiSMaN have a lower energy consumption than existing schemes, while offering comparable utility to conventional (or ‘always-on’) lighting. Based on the simulation results, TALiSMaN provides an energy saving of 45–98% (depending on traffic volume) compared to the state-of-the-art schemes evaluated. While the Zoning lighting scheme has a relatively low energy consumption, it typically cannot offer comparable streetlight utility to TALiSMaN. Our future work is currently investigating (1) novel communication protocols which are better suited to TALiSMaN’s network architecture and traffic patterns, and (2) the extension of TALiSMaN to consider energy-management for off-grid streetlights; these have become popular in areas where access to mains power is restricted.