@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Opportunistic large array concentric routing algorithms with relay nodes for wireless sensor networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The optimal number layer of concentric circles is calculated by the distance.We calculate the optimum number of relay nodes to forward the data.Analysis of the characteristics of the energy model.Our proposed architectures can effectively reduce energy consumption of nodes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Geographic,Relay node,Energy consumption,Optimum,Concentric circles,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstractImage, graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In recent years, with rapid technology development, increasingly sophisticated micro-embedded electronic devices and advances in wireless networks, more literature is being generated on wireless sensor networks (WSNs) applications. WSNs are comprised of a large number of wireless sensor nodes. These wireless sensor nodes require environmental monitoring and sensing abilities, and must be small and easy to deploy in a variety of environments, with a wireless communication function, low power consumption and low cost characteristics. Their applications include: home security, video surveillance, lighting control, industrial applications, environmental monitoring, battlefield surveillance, biological detection [1,2], and so on. In addition to the application of WSNs, another research direction is the energy efficiency of wireless sensors. Since WSNs are scattered in various places, a large number of these wireless sensors will have sensed data sent to the base station (BS) or a sink [3,4]. Additionally, Chen et al. [5] proposed LEACH architecture with IBCA and the hybrid architecture with IBCA to further extend the system lifetime. These two architectures can achieve the distribution of energy loads, and reduce energy consumption when data is transmitted by sensor nodes.Chen and Lai [6] suggested that sensor nodes (SNs) sending data to the sink node without calculating the distance may consume too much energy. In order to reduce the energy consumption of SNs, the multi-hop approach is used to find the relay nodes. These sensor nodes are called relay nodes. Muruganathan et al. [7] discussed a method for direct transmission protocol. This agreement must consider wireless sensor nodes and the distance to the sink. When the wireless sensor nodes send data directly to the sink, they consume too much energy, thereby affecting the wireless sensor node energy consumption rate. Therefore, in order to reduce energy consumption, help from other sensor nodes in forwarding data nodes can reduce the transmission distance; these sensor nodes are called relay nodes, with one turn passed to the next in one direction, they send data to the Base Station (BS) or sink, in a process called multi-hop transmission [8, 9] or indirect transfer. The multi-hop process not only consumes less energy but also extends the WSN life-time. Since wireless sensor energy is derived from a battery, once the battery is depleted of its limited power, the wireless sensor ceases to work properly [10].These two transmission types have the same purpose which is to shorten the data transmission path to the sink, so the sensing node uses the forwarding method to adjacent nodes rather than direct transmission mode, thereby consuming significantly less energy; minimum energy consumption extends the lifecycle of WSNs. On the issue of energy efficiency, the current WSNs relevant agreements or algorithms' [11] main purpose is to reduce the wireless sensors' transmission energy consumption, and thus extend the reach of the whole life cycle of WSNs.Kailas et al. [12] proposed an Opportunistic Large Array (OLA) algorithm to find numerous relay nodes. OLA refers to a large group of data forwarding relay nodes, which relay node data without coordination between themselves; when the node receives a broadcast from the source node, the node receiving the broadcast message sends the data broadcast until the destination node is reached. OLA is a kind of cooperative transmission routing. The drawback of the OLA algorithm is that it consumes too much unnecessary energy.Thanayankizil et al. [13] proposed the Opportunistic Large Array Concentric Routing Algorithm (OLACRA) to improve Kailas et al.'s protocol. OLACRA is sink-centered, forming a concentric architecture. When the source node wants to transmit data to the sink, it will broadcast the message to the inner layer to form the OLA area. A source node uses OLA areas to transmit data to the sink node. However, if the number of layers is excessive, the outer layer will become very large. If the outer layer becomes too large, the link between the inner and outer layers may not be established. If no link has been established, then no data can be transmitted. This study therefore aims to change the OLA form to establish the node's link, with appropriate relay nodes not consuming too much energy. Thus, two architectures are proposed including an Opportunistic Large Array Concentric Routing Algorithm with Geographic Relay Nodes (OLACRA-GRN) architecture, and an Opportunistic Large Array Concentric Routing Algorithm with Relay Nodes (OLACRA-RN) architecture in order to determine the appropriate reduction of the number of relay nodes and layer size. By improving these aspects, the proposed algorithm can reduce node energy consumption of nodes.The remainder of this paper is arranged as follows: Section 2 consists of an investigation of related research regarding WSN data transmission methods; Section 3 provides details regarding the proposed OLACRA-GRN architecture for improving transmission; Section 4 provides details regarding the proposed OLACRA-RN architecture for improving transmission; Section 5 contains the simulation results; and Section 6 offers conclusions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In WSNs, an efficient routing protocol is a very important issue. This paper proposes OLACRA-GRN and OLACRA-RN architectures. First, the OLACRA-GRN architecture was proposed to achieve an appropriate reduction in the number of relay nodes and layer size resulting in reduced energy consumption of nodes. OLACRA-GRN is divided into two phases. Phase I is an analysis of the energy consumption; it requires the calculation of the distance d between source node and sink node. If dis smaller than d0, then that direct transmission is better. Otherwise, it must execute phase II. Phase II find several suitable relay nodes to transmit the data. OLACRA-RN is divided into three phases. Phase I is energy consumption; Phase II is optimal number of concentric circle hierarchy, which obtains the optimum number of concentric sectors K; Phase III find suitable relay nodes to forward the data. The first OLACRA-GRN architecture must know the geographic information of relay nodes in order to calculate the best transmission route and reduce energy consumption. However, the OLACRA-RN architecture does not require the geographic information of relay nodes. The energy consumption of our two proposed architectures is similar, and both architectures outperform the OLACRA architecture in this regard.In the simulation results, our proposed architectures were compared with OLACRA-T and OLACRA-FT. As can be seen, OLACRA-GRN and OLACRA-RN in FES save 5% of the energy. As can be seen, OLACRA-GRN and OLACRA-RN in PDR improved by 80% in regard to the success rate. Our proposed architectures scores significantly higher than the OLACRA-T and OLACRA-FT due to the analysis of energy consumption and employment of the transmission relay node selection method. Each relay node transmission requires minimal energy consumption, thus reducing the total energy consumption of transmission; relay nodes are easily found, so packets can be successfully transmitted by relay nodes.