@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Bandwidth efficient cluster-based data aggregation for Wireless Sensor Network

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Cluster head is elected according to the highest energy among the CM, number of neighbor nodes with one hop connectivity.Network uses random distribution of heterogeneous nodes with mobile sink.Packets are generated at variable rate by each node and aggregated at CH and then at sink.It uses the perfectly compressible aggregation function on data generated by nodes.The performance is measured in terms of PDR and throughput to show the effective utilization of bandwidth.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Bandwidth,Clustering,Data aggregation,Energy consumption,Throughput,Wireless Sensor Network,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A fundamental challenge in the design of Wireless Sensor Network (WSNs) is the proper utilization of resources that are scarce. The critical challenge is to maximize the bandwidth utilization in data gathering and forwarding from sensor nodes to the sink. The main design objective is to utilize the available bandwidth efficiently. The proposed Bandwidth Efficient Cluster-based Data Aggregation (BECDA) algorithm presents the solution for the effective data gathering with in-network aggregation. It considers the network with heterogeneous nodes in terms of energy and mobile sink to aggregate the data packets. The optimal approach is achieved by intra and inter-cluster aggregation on the randomly distributed nodes with the variable data generation rate. The proposed algorithm uses the correlation of data within the packet for applying the aggregation function on the data generated by nodes. BECDA shows significant improvement in PDR (67.44% and 26.79%) and throughput (41.25% and 26.16%) as compared to the state-of-the-art solutions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Recent advances in technologies allowed the development of small devices with the capability of sensing, processing and transmission.These devices act as sensors and can be integrated into Wireless Sensor Network (WSNs). Many applications have been emerged to use WSNs especially for the environmental, health monitoring, vehicle tracking system, military surveillance, and earthquake observation [1]. The most-distinguishing attributes of nodes used in WSNs are the limited power supply, storage capacity and communication bandwidth required. In WSN, bandwidth utilization and energy saving is a very important criterion for any existing and new applications. Normally, data collected from WSNs are large which makes it essential to eliminate redundant data, minimize the number of transmissions and improve the energy consumption. The effort to reduce the number of data packet transmission with the in-network processing is called data aggregation. The elimination of redundant data by use of aggregation at cluster head (CH) results in a reduction of communication cost. In this context, the energy consumption, network lifetime, communication bandwidth and transmission cost of the WSN affect significantly. The variation in lifetime and bandwidth also depends on the changes in network topology and the method of aggregating data packets.BECDA considers the WSN model that refers to cluster-based aggregation, since clustering improves the scalability by stabilizing the network topology [2,3]. The additive and divisible aggregation function at CH results in a decrease of data packet count from the node to the sink. It saves energy, improves the network lifetime and bandwidth utilization [4]. Also, data aggregation with in-network processing makes it possible to enable energy savings with better bandwidth utilizations.The paper proposes a novel BECDA to reduce the number of transmissions of data packets from nodes to the mobile sink. It focuses on the symmetric aggregation functions at cluster head, which are perfectly compressible. The aggregation function considers the correlation of random data generated by cluster member nodes in the cluster region. Each node in the network generates data by use of a random function with the standard deviation in the range of 0 and 1. The performance of BECDA is measured by aggregating the variable rate of data packets generated with consideration of throughput, energy consumption, PDR, and bandwidth utilization. BECDA shows significant improvement in throughput and PDR as compared with TTCDA and EECDA with aggregation of data packets.The remaining part of the work is elaborated in different sections as follows; Section 2 presents a review of related works. Section 3 described the assumptions and proposed network model used for BECDA. Section 4 discusses the details of the BECDA. Section 5 gives the parameters used in the simulation and evaluates the results. Finally, paper is concluded in Section 6 with future works.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
