@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Incompressible smoothed particle hydrodynamics (SPH) with reduced temporal noise and generalised Fickian smoothing applied to body–water slam and efficient wave–body interaction

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We conduct truly incompressible SPH simulations for free-surface flows.We further develop a stabilising particle shifting algorithm.An improved free-surface boundary treatment is presented.Slamming cases, and a novel, efficient wave–structure interaction technique are presented.Accuracy is good, pressures are virtually noise free.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Incompressible SPH,Free-surface flow simulation,Fluid–structure interaction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Incompressible smoothed particle hydrodynamics generally requires particle distribution smoothing to give stable and accurate simulations with noise-free pressures. The diffusion-based smoothing algorithm of Lind et al. (J. Comp. Phys. 231 (2012) 1499–1523) has proved effective for a range of impulsive flows and propagating waves. Here we apply this to body–water slam and wave–body impact problems and discover that temporal pressure noise can occur for these applications (while spatial noise is effectively eliminated). This is due to the free-surface treatment as a discontinuous boundary. Treating this as a continuous very thin boundary within the pressure solver is shown to effectively cure this problem. The particle smoothing algorithm is further generalised so that a non-dimensional diffusion coefficient is applied which suits a given time step and particle spacing.We model the particular problems of cylinder and wedge slam into still water. We also model wave-body impact by setting up undisturbed wave propagation within a periodic domain several wavelengths long and inserting the body. In this case, the loads become cyclic after one wave period and are in good agreement with experiment. This approach is more efficient than the conventional wave flume approach with a wavemaker which requires many wavelengths and a beach absorber.Results are accurate and virtually noise-free, spatially and temporally. Convergence is demonstrated. Although these test cases are two-dimensional with simple geometries, the approach is quite general and may be readily extended to three dimensions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Smoothed particle hydrodynamics (SPH) is an attractive method for simulating unsteady flows with free-surfaces due to its Lagrangian form. Free-surface tracking or capturing is not required and hence arbitrarily complex free-surface deformations can be handled automatically. For this reason, SPH has received considerable attention in simulating complex hydrodynamic problems. In virtually all such cases, the working fluid (water) can be considered incompressible.Traditionally, the simulation of incompressible fluid flow by the SPH method has been through a weakly compressible SPH formulation (WCSPH). In this approach, the pressure is treated as a thermodynamic variable and is calculated using an artificial equation of state. The sound speed is set to be sufficiently high to limit density variations to within a small fraction of the actual fluid density. In practice, this high sound speed places a limitation on the maximum permissible time-step size through the Courant–Friedrichs–Lewy (CFL) constraint. A particular weakness relates to noise in the pressure field since a small perturbation in the local density will yield a large variation in the local pressure. This can make WCSPH formulations ineffective for accurate force and pressure prediction, although recent developments which create more uniform particle distributions have improved this [1,2]. A review of the SPH method can be found in [3] while a review of the classical WCSPH formulation applied to free-surface flows can be found in [4].To overcome the limitations of the WCSPH formulation, a truly incompressible approach has been adopted based on the projection method of Chorin [5] for a general time-stepping solution of the incompressible Navier–Stokes equations. The method decouples the momentum and continuity equations and enforces a divergence-free velocity field, thereby satisfying the continuity condition for an incompressible fluid. The method initially solves the momentum equations without a pressure gradient, generating an intermediate velocity field. A Poisson equation for the pressure is then derived such that the divergence of the intermediate velocity field is balanced by the divergence of the pressure gradient term. The final velocity field at the end of the time step is thus made to be divergence free. Cummins and Rudman [6] were probably the first to apply the Chorin projection method to SPH. They have demonstrated their method for internal test-cases such as vortex spin-down and Rayleigh–Taylor instability. It was found that satisfactory agreement with finite difference simulations could be attained. However Cummins and Rudman noted error accumulation and inhomogeneous particle distributions. Xu et al. [7] found that this inhomogeneous particle distribution can lead to instability in the solution, often leading to divergence, particularly at high Reynolds number. Comparisons between WCSPH and incompressible SPH (ISPH) have been made by Lee et al. [8] for confined flows, and Hughes and Graham [9] for free-surface flows.Shao and Lo [10] proposed an alternative formulation in which density invariance is enforced directly rather than a divergence-free velocity field. Shao [11] demonstrates good agreement against experimental data for wedge entry cases, although the pressure field is quite noisy [7]. Since the density is nearly homogeneous (i.e. the particles are uniformly distributed) stability issues do not occur.Hu and Adams [12] proposed an algorithm whereby density invariance and a divergence-free velocity field are both enforced, necessitating the solution of two Poisson equations at each time step. Several internal iterations may also be required to maintain density invariance if the particle spacing is tending to become highly inhomogeneous. The computational costs associated with the method can therefore be high, but the method appears stable.Xu et al. [7] followed the approach of [6], imposing a divergence-free velocity field. In order to avoid instability through clumping or stretching, particles are shifted slightly across a streamline to give a more uniform distribution at the end of each time-step, with hydrodynamic variables being corrected to account for their change in position through interpolation. The shifting vector is based on an averaged distance vector between the particles within its kernel support. Xu et al. demonstrate that their method yields high accuracy and approximately uniform particle distributions for internal flows involving vortex spin-down and lid driven cavities. Since the shifting distance in a time step is typically an order of magnitude smaller than the particle advection distance, any interpolation errors tend to be negligible. This approach has also been applied with the weakly compressible method with adaptive particle sizing, reducing the pressure noise [2]. The δ-SPH also produces more uniform particle distributions, reducing pressure noise [1].Lind et al. [13] found that the method proposed in [7] suffers from instabilities for flows with a free surface. A crude fix is to artificially introduce high viscosity for particles close to the free surface. This is clearly undesirable since it is in violation of the required physics. Instead Lind et al. [13] proposed a shifting algorithm based on Fick’s law of diffusion. The method was shown to be highly accurate and stable, with virtually spatially noise-free pressure predictions for free-surface cases involving both impulsive flows and long-term wave propagation. No special treatment of the free-surface particles was required, other than minimising shifting of the free-surface particles themselves in the direction normal to the surface.The implementation of solid boundary conditions in [13] was however simple and not well suited to complex geometries. In the present study, we use a more versatile body boundary condition and apply the method to the challenging problems of cylinder and wedge slamming into initially still water and to regular wave impact on a horizontal cylinder. Slam and wave impact loading are important practical problems with highly distorted free-surface motion, relating to wave impact on ships, offshore and coastal structures, floating bodies such as wave energy or wind turbine support systems, and fast vessel slam loads. It will be shown that for such problems the shifting algorithm of [13] needs to be generalised to provide stable shifting in different regions of the flow. In practice, this entails the use of a local shifting coefficient for each individual particle. Importantly, it will also be shown that spurious temporal noise may be produced in these situations and a method for reducing this is presented.For wave propagation problems, the conventional scheme for generating waves through a wave paddle representation requires a large domain with absorption at the other end as in Lind et al. [13]. Here, this is replaced with several pre-determined wavelengths in a periodic domain, thus reducing computational expense considerably.This paper is structured as follows. Section 2 outlines the ISPH algorithm, boundary conditions and the diffusion based shifting algorithm. In Section 3, we present results for an internal flow, cylinder slam, wedge slam and wave–cylinder interaction. These results provide validation of the ISPH algorithm. Finally, conclusions and closing remarks can be found in Section 4.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we have applied the incompressible SPH method with diffusion-based shifting for stability to the problems of cylinder and wedge impact on still water and wave impact on a cylinder. To achieve stable and accurate results we have provided a general method for setting the diffusion coefficient for shifting, based on the particle spacing, time-step size, and local fluid velocity magnitude.We also present a new method for significantly reducing the temporal noise from free-surface effects that may occur in an incompressible SPH simulation. In this method the effect of particles in a narrow region close to the free surface, defined by the divergence of the position vector, is introduced smoothly into the pressure Poisson equation rather than as a step change. It has been shown that this approach drastically reduces temporal noise for various fluid–structure interaction cases; with the step change the temporal (as distinct from spatial) noise can be considerable.For the cylinder drop case, the cylinder motion is accurately predicted and the jet-like flows are qualitatively similar to experiment. For the constant-velocity wedge impact cases surface pressures agree well with asymptotic solutions. Importantly, pressures are almost noise-free, both in space and time.For the wave impact cases we use the novel and efficient approach where the initial conditions are several wavelengths of a progressive nonlinear wave field within a periodic domain into which the cylinder is introduced centrally. The loads quickly become cyclic, after the first wave period, and there is good agreement with experiment. This is much more efficient than the usual numerical wave flume approach where waves are generated by a paddle at one end of the flume which must be many wavelengths long.To the authors’ knowledge, the predictions for these test cases are more accurate than has previously been obtained by other SPH methods and, although they are two-dimensional with simple geometries, the approach is quite general and may be readily extended to three dimensions.