@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimal and suboptimal adaptive algorithms for rate and power transmission in OFDM-based Cognitive Radio systems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Investigate adaptive rate and power allocation in OFDM-based Cognitive Radio system.Investigate an optimal adaptive rate and power transmission algorithms.Proposed novel suboptimal algorithm for power allocation.Compare proposed suboptimal algorithm with optimal and conventional algorithms.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cognitive Radio,Adaptive modulation,Power allocation,OFDM,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper investigates an optimal adaptive rate and power transmission algorithms for Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing (OFDM) – based Cognitive Radio (CR) systems. The aim was to study the problem of maximizing the overall rate achieved by the Secondary User (SU), while keeping the interference powers introduced by the SU on the spectrum band of Primary User’s (PU) below the specified thresholds and considering the total transmit power budget constraints. In addition, the novel suboptimal power allocation algorithm was proposed and consequently the maximum modulation level according to allocated power based on maximizing the overall achievable rate was obtained. The performance of the proposed suboptimal algorithm is compared with the optimal and existing algorithms including uniform loading and water filling algorithms. Numerical results revealed that the proposed suboptimal algorithm had a better performance than the uniform loading and water filling algorithms.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With the rapid growth of wireless technology and increase in the number of wireless users, the frequency spectrum is becoming a more and more rare resource [1]. The Federal Communication Commission spectrum policy task force has reported that the traditional frequency band allocation to users may be inefficient, because the demands of frequency band highly vary along space or time domains [2]. CR has been proposed as a novel technology to enhance spectral efficiency by exploiting frequency holes in dynamically varying environments [3,4].Adaptive resource allocation is a powerful technique to improve the performance and spectrum efficiency in a CR [5]. Using adaptive resource allocation, a CR can change its transmission power and modulation level based on spectrum bands of PUs and fading channel variations to maximize the achievable capacity of SU [6]. Due to the coexistence of the PU and SU in adjacent spectrums, Adjacent Channel Interference (ACI) is introduced in both PU and SU transceivers and thus decreasing their performances. Therefore, the transmission power of Secondary User Transmitter (SUT) must be less than the power budget. Also, the amount of interference introduced by a SUT on a Primary User Receiver (PUR) must be less than an interference power threshold [7].Considering the high advantage of dynamically allocation of frequency holes, OFDM is a proper modulation scheme for the SUs [3,4]. In order to improve the system performance in OFDM-based Cognitive Radio systems, modulation level and power needs to be adaptively assigned to each subcarrier according to its subcarrier state variation [8]. More powers and bits per symbol must be allocated to the subcarrier with higher channel fading gain, and less powers and bits per symbol to noisy subcarrier [9]. Adaptive modulation and bit loading are efficient techniques for reliable transmission [10]. The concept of adaptive modulation is to match the modulation type and modulation level to channel state variation [11]. The basic idea behind adaptive modulation is to guarantee that the most effective mode is always used over channel state variation [12]. Adaptive power allocation scheme changes the allocated power to fading channel states while satisfying the Bit Error Rate (BER) requirement [11].The current study investigates the Multi-Quadrature Amplitude Modulation (M-QAM) adaptive modulation and power allocation in an OFDM-based CR system to maximize the overall transmission rate of the SU. From the study conducted in [13], if perfect channel state information is available in SUT, a superior power allocation policy can be designed for SU so that to improve the performance of a CR system. Therefore, it is assumed perfect channel state information is available in SUT and the SUT is aware of instantaneous channel power gain between SUT and Secondary User Receiver (SUR) and channel power gain between SUT and PUR. Similar to [14], it is also assumed that different PURs can impose different interference threshold constraints to the CR system. Additionally, the study was expanded on the behavior of uniform loading and water filling algorithms. Due to complexity of optimal algorithm and low efficiency of uniform loading and water filling algorithms, a novel suboptimal power loading algorithm is suggested; thus the calculation of the maximum modulation level can be allocated to each subcarrier according to the allocated power. In the proposed suboptimal algorithm, the allocated power and modulation level of SU at each subcarrier are obtained adaptively based on several factors including; channel path gain between SUT and SUR, channel path gains between SUT and PURs, interference threshold, spectral distance between ℓth bands of PU and ith subcarrier of SU and noise variance and interference introduced by PUs on subcarrier of SU. Finally, the proposed suboptimal algorithm is compared to the optimal, uniform loading and water filling algorithms. Simulation results indicated that the proposed algorithm had a better performance than conventional power loading algorithms for the OFDM-based system including water filling and uniform loading. Also, it is found that the complexity of the proposed suboptimal algorithm is less than the optimal algorithm.Subsequently the current study proceeds further as follows: Section 2 presents related works and Section 3 presents the system model, while Section 4 describes the problem formulation. In Section 5, a suboptimal algorithm system is suggested and Section 6 describes two conventional power allocation algorithms in OFDM-based systems, including uniform loading and water filling. Numerical results are presented in Section 7 and the paper is concluded in Section 8.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A novel suboptimal power loading algorithm was proposed and formulated by analyzing an optimal adaptive rate and power loading algorithm for an OFDM-based Cognitive Radio system. Results of the allocated power obtained from different algorithms were used by Eq. (3) to calculate the maximum modulation level. Simulation results indicated that the maximum achievable total transmission rate of the suboptimal algorithm was greater than water filling and uniform loading algorithms. The optimal algorithm performed an uppermost complexity while uniform loading exhibited an undermost complexity. The water filling algorithm showed a comparable complexity to the proposed algorithm, while the proposed algorithm is more efficient than water filling and uniform loading algorithms specially in low interference threshold or high power budget due to the fact that in these states the proposed algorithm can be allocated more power to each subcarrier while satisfy the constraints in Eqs. (8) and (9).