@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimized energy limited cooperative spectrum sensing in cognitive radio networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A bi-threshold cooperative spectrum sensing method for energy efficiency and throughput enhancement is proposed.We present a convex optimization analysis.The method shows a good tradeoff between energy consumption and throughput.Both energy efficiency and throughput can be improved, for a wide range of SNRs.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#


@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In cognitive radio networks, it is well known that the cooperative spectrum sensing can overcome damaging effects of fading and shadowing. However, it also increases the amount of energy consumption which is a critical factor in low powered wireless communications. In this paper based on bi-threshold energy detection, we maximize the network throughput such that the energy consumption is below a predefined value and also sufficient protection of primary users against interference is guaranteed. Convex optimization analysis is presented to jointly obtain the optimal values of sensing time and detection thresholds. Simulation results show that the proposed method is very flexible such that a good tradeoff between achievable throughput and energy efficiency can be established, while it often outperforms the conventional sensing method significantly.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In existing static spectrum allocation policy, a specific frequency band is assigned to each licensed user. Spectrum scarcity on the one hand and growing demands for spectrum on the other hand, make this policy inefficient and point out the necessity of using some dynamic spectrum managements [1]. Cognitive radio (CR) is reputed to be an encouraging technology, resolving the spectrum scarcity problem by allowing the secondary users access idle frequency bands, opportunistically and without deleterious interference to primary users (PU) [2].One of the most important functionalities of each CR network is spectrum sensing, with the aim of recognizing idle frequency bands in order to enhance the spectrum efficiency [3]. Among various spectrum sensing methods, the most common is energy detection, because it has low implementational complexity and require no information about PU [4]. The energy detection process is carried out by comparing a threshold with the test statistics, which is an estimation of received PU signal energy. The performance of local spectrum sensing by individual CR nodes, is degraded in presence of fading and shadowing. Cooperative spectrum sensing has been proposed to overcome the problems associated with fading and shadowing effects [5,6].Cooperative spectrum sensing usually is accomplished in two consecutive phases, sensing and reporting. In sensing phase, each CR node measures the received signal energy and makes one bit local decision regarding the activity of PU. In reporting phase, all the local decisions are sent to a common receiver referred to as the fusion center (FC), which extracts the global decision based on some fusion rules. Such a cooperation method is known as decision fusion. Another cooperation method is data fusion, in which the measured energy by each CR node is sent to the FC, normally without much processing.The network life time is a crucial parameter of energy limited wireless technologies, such as wireless sensor networks (WSN) [7] and mobile ad hoc networks (MANET) [8], that are often battery powered. Recently, equipping such networks with cognitive capabilities are proposed which are known as CR-WSN and CR-MANET, in order to utilize the benefits of CR technology [9,10]. Cooperative spectrum sensing in CR networks leads to more detection accuracy, but at the same time causes the CR network to consume more energy due to more data and control signal exchanges. Therefore, it is necessary to develop energy efficient methods to prolong the network life time.In cooperative spectrum sensing method, the PU detection is performed at each CR node usually by using one threshold value [11]. We refer to such method as conventional sensing, throughout this paper. In contrast, bi-threshold detection [12] is proposed to reduce the energy consumption of cooperative spectrum sensing in CR networks. In bi-threshold cooperation, by using two threshold at each CR node, only reliable local decisions are reported to the FC and thus the energy consumption can be reduced significantly. The sensing result is unreliable, when the estimated amount of received energy at a CR node falls between high and low threshold values. Since such results are not allowed to be sent to the FC, the energy consumption of reporting phase will decrease. As a result the total energy consumption will decrease, as well.It is obvious that more energy can be saved as the probability of unreliable sensing increases. However, this leads to more performance loss rather than conventional sensing method which uses one threshold. It is shown in [13] that increasing the probability of unreliable sensing, worsens the complementary receiver operating characteristic (CROC). In other words, for a given value of missed detection probability, the false alarm probability increases which degrades the throughput. Thus, the tradeoff between throughput and energy consumption needs to be investigated in cooperative bi-threshold spectrum sensing method.In this paper we adapt and optimize the bi-threshold cooperative sensing in a CR network. It is interested to know how much throughput and energy saving can be achieved, simultaneously. We investigate the problem of throughput maximization, subject to the following constraints:1.PUs are immune enough against CR network interference.Energy consumption of cooperative spectrum sensing is limited to a desired value.We use the decision fusion as the cooperation mechanism, due to the lower communication load and energy consumption [6]. An optimization problem is formulated to jointly optimize detection parameters including sensing time, high and low thresholds such that a good tradeoff between throughput and energy efficiency can be made. Under practicable conditions we show that the problem is convex.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 the related works are summarized. In Section 3 the system model is introduced and the problem is formulated. Section 4 deals with convex optimization of the problem. Section 5 presents the simulation results, followed by conclusion in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
