@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Cooperative weighted-fair control strategy for spectrum self-coexistence in multi-cell WRAN systems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We investigate the self-coexistence problem in a multi-cell WRAN system.We propose an adaptive traffic-aware exclusive channel allocation scheme.The proposed scheme is based on a cooperative max-min weighted fair mechanism.Compared to other schemes, results reveal that our scheme provides significant performance gain.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multi-cell system,Traffic-load estimation,Spectrum management,IEEE 802.22 standard,WRAN system,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The emerging IEEE 802.22-based Wireless Regional Area Network (WRAN) is the first wireless standard based on the Cognitive Radio (CR) technology. WRAN is designed to offer wireless access services in a large coverage area by allowing Secondary Users (SUs) to opportunistically exploit the under-utilized licensed portion of spectrum that is primarily allocated for TV services. To enable efficient WRAN communications, the operation of a WRAN system should address two types of coexistence problem: incumbent co-existence and self-coexistence. In this paper, we investigate the self-coexistence problem in a multi-cell WRAN system that adopts an exclusive spectrum sharing policy. Specifically, we present an adaptive channel allocation scheme based on a cooperative max–min weighted fair allocation strategy. The proposed scheme is based on a centralized sensing mechanism that identifies the available spectrum opportunities for the WRAN cells. Our scheme dynamically allocates the available spectrum (idle channels) to the WRAN cells based on their expected traffic loads such that the total number of simultaneously admitted SU transmissions in the WRAN system is maximized. The expected traffic load is accurately estimated using a sample mean estimator based on previously monitored traffic in each cell. Simulation results indicate that our scheme is quite robust to traffic estimation error. Compared to reference spectrum allocation schemes, simulation results indicate that the proposed scheme effectively exploits the available spectrum opportunities by increasing the total number of served SU transmissions, which consequently results in a significant enhancement in the overall WRAN system performance.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Cognitive Radio (CR) technology has been considered a promising means for addressing the spectrum scarcity problem through efficient dynamic spectrum access. CR provides unlicensed Secondary Users (SUs) with the ability to coexist with licensed Primary Radio (PR) users in a non-interfering mode. To enable efficient coexistence, SUs must perform spectrum sensing to determine idle channels, spectrum decision to select the best idle channel/channels, spectrum sharing to coordinate access among SUs, and spectrum mobility to vacate the occupied channel/channels when a licensed user appears. Specifically, SUs should have a cognitive capability to sense the RF environment, a self-organizing capability to analyze and learn from the sensed information and a reconfigurable capability to adapt their operating parameters according to the surrounding RF environment [1–5].The IEEE 802.22 standard for a Wireless Regional Area Network (WRAN) system is considered as the first wireless standard based on CR technology. The WRAN system is a point to multi-point wireless access system that aims at providing wireless broadband access to users in rural and remote areas with an average coverage range of 33km for each WRAN cell [6,7]. The WRAN system opportunistically utilize idle VHF/UHF TV channels ranging from 54 to 862MHz to provide services with a performance that is comparable to that of DSL services. Specifically, the WRAN system consists of several WRAN cells. Each cell has its own Base Station (BS) that only serves the SU subscribers (called Customer-Premises Equipments (CPEs)) located within its coverage area. WRAN systems support two modes of operation: exclusive (each BS is assigned a fixed set of orthogonal and non-overlapped channels) and non-exclusive (channels can be utilized by more than one BS) spectrum sharing [7]. To enable efficient WRAN communications, the operation of a WRAN system should address two types of co-existence problem: incumbent co-existence (between licensed Digital TV (DTV) transmitters and SUs1The terms CPE and SU will be used interchangeably in this paper.1) and self-coexistence (between SUs in overlapped WRAN cells). While several studies have effectively addressed the incumbent coexistence problem (with negligible impacts on PR users) based on spectrum sensing in a cooperative or non-cooperative mode [8,9], the self-coexistence problem is still a challenging issue in a multi-cell WRAN system.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we proposed a spectrum-efficient traffic-aware exclusive channel allocation scheme for multi-cell WRAN systems. The proposed scheme (TAECA) efficiently manages the self-coexistence problem in a multi-cell WRAN. TAECA improves the overall system performance through cooperative spectrum allocation that considers the traffic conditions in the different cells. Specifically, TAECA attempts at minimizing the unnecessary blocking of SU transmissions in the neighboring WRAN cells, which consequently maximizes spectrum utilization. TAECA employs an adaptive max–min weighted fair mechanism. This mechanism allocates idle channels to the different WRAN cells based on their prevailing traffic-load conditions. We investigated the performance of TAECA under two SU traffic-load scenarios: un-balanced and balanced traffic loads. We compared the performance of TAECA with that of reference schemes (BPACA and FCA). We showed that, under unbalanced traffic load scenarios, TAECA increases the overall number of served requests by up to 45% and 28% compared to FCA and BPACA, respectively. Although, TAECA may assign less number of channels to the lightly-loaded cells, which may not be optimal from those cells’ perspective, our results showed that the average per-cell performance of those cells under TAECA is comparable to that of the other schemes. Under balanced SU traffic load scenarios, the results showed that all schemes achieve comparable performance. In summary, TAECA provides efficient spectrum utilization by effectively reducing the blocking rate and increasing the number of served SU transmissions in the system.