@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Performance and cooling efficiency of thermoelectric modules on server central processing unit and Northbridge

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The cooling efficiency of the specific cooling systems on critical server hardware is investigated.The performance of the cooling systems on server CPU is outlined.The applied cooling systems in the context of temperature and performance are compared.The superior performance rating and cooling efficiency is obtained by the thermoelectric cooler.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Thermoelectric module,CPU,Cooling systems,Server,Northbridge,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Computer systems are required to process data more rapidly than ever, due to recent software and internet technology developments. The server computers work continuously and provide services to many clients simultaneously, which results in greater heat production and high temperature that must be managed in order to avoid malfunction and failure of critical hardware. In this study, three cooling systems were used comparatively to examine the temperature and performance of the CPU and motherboard. The temperature characteristics and performance of the CPU were tested with a heat sink, water cooling system, and thermoelectric cooler. According to the test results, the thermoelectric cooling system has better cooling performance than the other two systems under continuous operating conditions. Additionally, the performance rating of the CPU was the best with a thermoelectric cooler under varying workloads.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Evolving software technology increases the demand on the computer components, such as the central processing unit (CPU) and the chipset, to operate faster. However, a faster CPU and chipset means more heat production, which may cause these components to overheat and unexpected temporary or permanent failures [1]. These undesired situations are most likely to be seen on server components, which have continuous operating conditions.A server is responsible for servicing many clients and its workload is also greater than an ordinary computer; as such, it possesses multiple CPUs or CPU cores. Multiple core CPUs are widely used and will be dominant in the future [2]. Therefore, server overheating issues have gained greater importance and a model based on selecting sensor placement locations was proposed to detect the overheating server components [3].Among the hardware components, the CPU is the most important, and is capable of managing all hardware units. In addition to being a unit that conducts arithmetic and logic operations, the CPU has also memory, audit, and control units [4]. These tasks undertaken by the CPU significantly increase the workload that causes the CPU to be the highest heat-producing hardware unit of a server. It is estimated that the power dissipation of high performance CPUs, especially the ones used in servers, will increase linearly during the next ten years [2].After the CPU, chipsets are the most important components in a server system, which control the data flow between CPU, cache memory, system data buses, and peripherals [5]. Controlling the data flow should be considered for the operation of many parts and the performance of the server. Generally, the type of motherboard is determined by chipsets, and there are two chipsets on a motherboard called Northbridge and Southbridge. Among the motherboard (MB) components, Northbridge, which is exposed to an excessive workload and heat, is the second critical component after the CPU.Therefore, various cooling systems have been developed to cool the CPU, chipset, and other computer components to protect them from overheating. These cooling applications are cooling units produced from aluminum or copper, which are called the heat sink, heat pipe, water cooling system, and thermoelectric module.In an air cooled heat sink system, heat absorbed by the cooling block is removed from the system by a fan. In order to maintain thermal balance, thermally conductive paste is also applied between the heat sink and cooled component, such as the CPU or chipset, to improve the heat transfer. Although the heat sink is generally used by computer manufacturers, it has some disadvantages that users complain about. The forced air convection formed by computer fans improves the performance of the heat sink used for CPU cooling but vibration, noise, and high power consumption problems can occur by boosting the fan speed [6]. Fig. 1illustrates a general view of an air cooled heat sink structure.A heat sink can also be used with other cooling systems such as a thermoelectric cooler. Sarkar and Mahapatra investigated the surface radiation from the heat sink in addition to the natural convection on the thermoelectric cooler. The basic schematics of this cooperation are shown in Fig. 2[7].The heat pipe system is designed with the idea of the substance deploying a high amount of heat, while its state changes from liquid to gas. The heat pipe is preferred by computer manufacturers for its high performance and reasonable price. However, the heat pipe uses the fan at a high speed in order to solve the problem of limited cooling capacity, and as a result it reveals a remarkable and undesirable noise [8]. The heat pipe cooling module has better thermal performance compared to the heat sink operating at a fan speed below 2950rpm. The heat sink model was preferable at a high speed, but the high speed makes it noisier than the heat pipe model [9].Another method, the water cooling system, has been created to cool the computer hardware, in which the materials used are more complex but more efficient in terms of cooling compared with the other cooling systems. Water cooling systems have higher heat transfer coefficients than air systems. The heat is efficiently transferred through a “water block” into a liquid, which is typically water-based [10]. The performance of a liquid cooled system depends on four factors, which are: feature size of the channels in the heat exchanger, flow rate of the liquid through the channels, surface area of radiator fins, and airflow available for heat dissipation [11]. The materials used in the water cooling system include: high thermal conductivity copper blocks, radiator, water pump, connectors, water hoses, water flow indicator, and water tank. The copper block has connector links and is mounted on the cooled server component. Water goes through the copper block with the aid of hoses to cool the desired server component. Water that warms up with component heat goes to the radiator and fan part, is cooled there and returns to the tank to complete its cycle. Consequently, the heat on the component can be reduced to an appropriate operating temperature by this cycle. The basic schematic of the water cooling is shown in Fig. 3[12].A different way to cool server hardware is thermoelectric cooling, which is generally used for cooling, heating, and electrical energy production. Some of the properties that make thermoelectric cooling attractive include: very light and compact size, quiet and vibration-free operation, free from long-term maintenance, and operation with DC voltage [10]. For many years, commercial thermoelectric modules have been available and their cost has decreased over time. Thermoelectric module technology is the most economical solution for reasons such as the fact that the thermoelectric modules are standard off-the-shelf components, the conformity of their operating voltages to series parallel electrical circuitry, easy installation, and small size [13]. Thermoelectric modules are environmentally friendly, since chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) gas or other refrigerants are not used [14]. Thermoelectric cooling could also provide efficient heat transfer and dissipation with better temperature control capacity for electronic devices. As an active cooling system, it suggests extra advantages such as high reliability, fast thermal response, and excellent flexibility; these advantages increase the use of thermoelectric cooling in electronic and photonic devices [15] (see Fig. 4).The most commonly used cooling system is the vapor compression system. However, thermoelectric module coolers are now frequently preferred in small and complex device applications such as integrated circuits [17]. Since they are compatible to integrate with coolers, the thermoelectric devices have found a wide range of applications such as fridges for hotel-use, home-bars, and similar appliances [18].The combination of three different systems, including an air cooled heat sink, water cooler, and thermoelectric cooler, can also be used for computer hardware cooling. Naphon and Wiriyasart examined liquid cooling in a mini-rectangular fin heat sink with and without a thermoelectric cooler for a CPU and they prepared the experimental set up shown in Fig. 5[19].Thermoelectric module uses the variations in the energy levels of electrons to provide heat transfer. The current between low energy level P-type semiconductors and high energy level N-type semiconductors carry the heat energy from the cold surface to hot surface. The Peltier module is formed by the serial connection of P-type and N-type elements. The Peltier effect occurs with the direct current passed through the Peltier elements. In this way, one side of the thermoelectric module cools while the other side heats [13]. The cold side of the Peltier module can be used to cool computer hardware. However, it is important that the hot side of the Peltier module be cooled to prevent damage to the hardware and itself. For this reason, the Peltier module must be combined with a cooler such as heat sink or water cooling to dissipate the heat of the hot side for effective operation.In this paper, distinct cooling systems applied to the CPU and Northbridge of the server are compared in terms of cooling efficiency and performance. The organization of the paper is as follows: the relevant studies on the thermoelectric cooler are discussed in Section 2. The identification of experimental setup is detailed in Section 3. The cooling efficiency and the performance of the specific cooling systems are presented in Sections 4 and 5, respectively. Section 6 concludes the paper.Recently, several studies have been performed with thermoelectric coolers for various purposes. Chein and Chen investigated thermoelectric cooling performance for cooling water in a tank. Heat sinks with etched silicon wafers were used as thermoelectric cooler to transfer heat on the hot side. The temperature values were examined in various time intervals and it was observed that the application of thermoelectric module on the water tank decreased the temperature overtime. The system was connected to a computer to take measurements and these measurements were very close to the calculations [20]. Gao and Rowe evaluated the cooling performances of a few thermoelectric refrigerators to find the coefficient-of-performance (COP) value. The COP value of thermoelectric refrigerators were calculated to be around 0.3–0.5 with an ambient temperature of 25°C and these simulation data were interpreted to determine if any potential improvement in the cooling performance of a thermoelectric refrigerator could be achieved in a realistic model. Ultimately, the COP value could be increased by improving module contact quality, thermal interfaces, and the effectiveness of heat exchangers [21]. Another study devised a new design method for thermoelectric cooler systems in which an experimentally formed performance curve of the thermoelectric module was used for design calculation. Automatic test equipment was also designed and built to perform the test. According to the performance test results, an empirical relation was derived for thermoelectric module performance and then the results were utilized in the system analysis of a thermoelectric cooler [22]. The maximum temperature difference and optimum current density parameters were calculated in a model designed by using micromachining and thin film technology to integrate microelectronic circuits and a cooling system. Consequently, a few milliwatts of cooling power and maximum 30–50K temperature difference were achieved by using this highly efficient thermoelectric cooler model with a thin membrane [23].The Peltier or thermoelectric cooler (TEC) module was proposed for cooling the CPU to increase the CPU cooling power and decrease the noise of the cooling system. For this purpose, optimization was used and a hybrid structure was formed by the integration of TEC with the heat sink and heat pipe with a remote heat sink. Consequently, this structure could reduce fan noise to less than 40dB with a power consumption of 130W to cool the CPU in one particular case [24]. The thermoelectric cooler and heat pipe were also combined in an experiment on cooling the CPU of a PC. The working fluid used in the heat pipe was a nanofluid and the parameters such as the type and effect of volume concentrations of nanofluids, coolant temperature, and thermoelectrically cooled CPU temperature were taken into account. The results obtained from this technique were compared with other cooling techniques and the combinations of these two cooling systems were seen as a very effective team for cooling the CPU [25].The four cooling systems mentioned above were compared separately in experiments to cool the CPU of personal and notebook computers. When the stability of the CPU temperatures, cooling time, and CPU temperatures were analyzed in terms of heat transfer, it was demonstrated that thermoelectric cooling is the most efficient cooling method among these four cooling methods. The results obtained from the experiments are shown briefly in Table 1[26].Although many applications in the past had proven the advantages of thermoelectric modules, economical reasons deterred the development. However, it is now expected that thermoelectric technology may have sufficiently developed and is widely used in microelectronics [27].In the current study, a water cooling system and two Peltier modules were used in combination within a server system. The properties of the server system are shown in Table 2.The water cooling system was used in this project in two stages. The aim of the first stage was to cool the server’s CPU and Northbridge and compare the results with the other systems in terms of performance and cooling. In the second stage, the water cooling system was used in conjunction with the Peltier module to remove the heat from the surface of the module [28].ATEC1-12706 Peltier module with 2∗90W power and 4∗4∗0.5cm size was used under 12 V DC voltage to cool the CPU and Northbridge chipset. In addition to the many aforementioned advantages, its quiet and vibration free operation characteristics were the factors that were preferred (see Fig. 6).The CPU BurnIn benchmark program was used to stimulate the operation of the server under 100% workloads. This program allows the MB and CPU to achieve the highest temperature by running consecutive work procedures. When the program runtime is set as “very long,” the CPU reaches its maximum workload and continues in this state for 15min [29].The Speed Fan Program is a popular software program that is used to monitor voltage, fan speed, and temperature values of the server hardware, change fan speeds according to temperature values, and access the S.M.A.R.T (Self-Monitoring Analysis and Reporting Technology) data of the hard disk. The temperature values can be observed in every time scale, due to the program’s statistics and logging capacities, and the CPU speed can also be increased by overclocking [30]. The temperature data were collected and saved in MS Excel format, and the temperature change over time was visualized with this program.Performance test is a software program used to benchmark the performance of the server. This program contains application tests such as integer and floating point math operations test; two-dimensional graphics functions test; reading, writing, and searching the hard disk test; memory segregation and access test; MMX (Multimedia Extensions) test; and DirectX 3D graphics test. The program calculates the evaluation score as a result of the test to provide information about the performance of the system [31].The general evaluation score formula is given below.(1)PassMarkRating=1CPURating×0.396566187+12DRating×3.128718116+13DRating×2.525195879+1MemoryRating×1.757085479+1DiskRating×1.6681588055-1Here, the rating value is generated following some procedures. After a certain weight is applied to each value, reciprocates are calculated and then the averages of the weighted values are calculated and reciprocated again [31].The evaluation score formula for CPU Rating is:CPUPassMarkRating=1CPURating×0.396566187-1(2)CPUPassMarkRating=CPURating×0.396566187In this study, the hardware temperatures of the server system are monitored with the Speed Fan program, while the CPU BurnIn program loaded the CPU to full capacity and the Performance test program provided a figure to make a meaningful assessment under different cooling conditions.Experiments that compared three different cooling systems were conducted at room temperature (25°C). The effects of different cooling systems on CPU and MB were monitored for approximately 85min. Since Northbridge is the most overheated hardware component after the CPU, the temperature of the MB is accepted as the temperature of the Northbridge.The first stage of the experiments revealed the related data in temperature–time graphs. The software was executed to run the server under perpetual workload at full capacity in this stage.In the second stage, the quantitative results obtained from the temperature–time graphs enabled us to analyze the performance of the server. The graphs were obtained by the software, executed under varying workloads.The temperature–time graphs are shown in Figs. 7 and 8for CPU and MB, respectively, and were obtained using each cooling system on the server.The average temperature of the CPU was 57.42°C from Fig. 7 and the maximum value of the temperature for the CPU was 62°C for the heat sink application.The average temperature and the maximum temperature of the MB for the heat sink were 41.08°C and 45°C, respectively. In order to perform the water cooling system experiment, the heat sink blocks on the CPU and Northbridge were removed and full copper cooling blocks were mounted on the CPU and Northbridge using a connection apparatus.The consecutive average temperatures of the CPU and MB were 47.35°C and 33.82°C from Figs. 7 and 8 for the water cooling application.With the water cooling system, the CPU and the MB achieved the highest temperature values at the peak points of 51°C and 36°C, respectively, as seen in Figs. 7 and 8.The hot and cold surfaces of the TEC1-12706 Peltier module were identified by the polarity of the 12 V DC power supply. The cold surfaces of Peltier modules were mounted on the CPU and chipset and the copper blocks of the water cooling system were mounted on the hot surfaces of the Peltier modules to dissipate the heat on these sides.Compared with other cooling systems, the average and maximum temperatures of the CPU decreased nearly 5–15°C by thermoelectric cooling. The decreased temperatures can be seen in Fig. 7 as 42.5°C for the average temperature and as 47°C for the maximum temperature.The average temperature and the maximum temperature of the MB for the thermoelectric cooler were obtained from Fig. 8 were 32.12°C and 33°C, respectively.Three different cooling methods—heat sink, water cooler, and thermoelectric cooler—were used under continuous workloads and they are compared in terms of temperature. Table 3presents the results.For three different cooling methods, the average and maximum temperature values of the CPU and MB under varying workloads were expressed in the graphs below. CPU performance was also calculated by the performance evaluation score formula as given in (2).The temperature values for heat sink application were obtained from Figs. 9 and 10are given below:CPU average temperature: 41.92°CCPU maximum temperature: 52°CThe MB average temperature: 33.63°CThe MB maximum temperature: 36°CCPU PassMark Rating of the heat sink is:(3)CPURating×0.396566187=1701.2The temperature values were also shown below for the water cooling system as follows:CPU average temperature: 38.9°CCPU maximum temperature: 47°CThe MB average temperature: 33.62°CThe MB maximum temperature: 35°CCPU PassMark Rating of water cooling system is:(4)CPURating×0.396566187=2005.4Finally, the temperature values for thermoelectric cooler were taken from Figs. 9 and 10 as follows:CPU average temperature: 33.57°CCPU maximum temperature: 46°CThe MB average temperature: 31.01°CThe MB maximum temperature: 33°CCPU PassMark Rating for thermoelectric cooler is:(5)CPURating×0.396566187=2037.2Three different cooling methods were applied under varying workloads and the performance ratings depending on temperature values as shown in Table 4.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
