@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Self-organized dynamic resource allocation using fraction frequency reuse scheme in long term evolution networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We proposed a self-organized dynamic resource allocation (SORA) scheme using FFR.SORA-FFR scheme tracks the variation of UEs distribution through the LTE network.SORA-FFR scheme dynamically allocates optimal resources to inner and outer regions.SORA-FFR scheme improved throughput of CEUs and fairness performance.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Long Term Evolution (LTE),Fractional Frequency Reuse (FFR),Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiple Access (OFDMA),Inter-Cell Interference Coordination (ICIC),Resource Allocation (RA),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Inter-Cell Interference (ICI) from neighboring cells is the major challenge that degrades the performance of Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiple Access (OFDMA) cellular mobile systems, particularly for cell edge users. An efficient technique to mitigate ICI is the interference coordination. The most commonly ICI Coordination (ICIC) technique is the Fractional Frequency Reuse (FFR), which effectively mitigates ICI by applying different reuse factors to Users’ Equipments (UEs) situated in different regions in each cell. This paper presents a novel Self-Organized FFR Resource Allocation (SORA) scheme that automatically selects the optimal RA to inner and outer regions of the cell, based on coordination between neighboring evolved NodeBs (eNBs), through a message passing approach over Long Term Evolution (LTE)-X2 interfaces. The performance of the proposed scheme is evaluated using MATLAB and compared with different combinations of RA as well as with frequency reuse-1 and reuse-3 schemes. Simulation results show that the proposed scheme improves the cell-edge performance and achieves high degree of fairness among UEs compared to reference RA schemes.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Transmission over wireless channels endures random fluctuations in signal level known as fading and co-channel interference [1]. Recently OFDMA has gained increasing interest. Due to its ability to combat the Inter-Symbol Interference (ISI) resulting from frequency selective fading, OFDMA is widely considered as a key multiple access technique for various types of wireless communication systems, including next generation cellular mobile systems such as IEEE 802.16m Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access (WiMAX) [2], LTE [3], and LTE-Advanced (LTE-A) [4]. OFDMA is a form of Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing (OFDM), which is the underlying technology. In OFDMA, the frequency selective wideband channel is divided into number of non-frequency selective parallel orthogonal narrowband sub-carriers. The orthogonally of the OFDMA narrowband sub-subcarriers ensures that the ICI can be avoided. However, Co-Channel Interference (CCI) from neighboring cells is considered as the major challenge that degrades the performance of OFDMA based cellular mobile systems, particularly for cell edge users. For next generation cellular mobile systems, the effective reuse of the available frequency resources can highly improve system capacity. With a smaller Frequency Reuse Factor (FRF), more resources are available for each cell. However, the usage of FRF-1 results in heavy ICI, especially near the cell edge, and this degrades the system performance in terms of cell coverage and system capacity. The conventional method to figure out this problem is by increasing co-channel distance using higher cluster size, which can mitigate the ICI efficiently. However, increasing cluster size decreases the available frequency resources for each cell which results in restricted data transmission rate and lower system spectrum efficiency in general. In order to improve cell-edge performance while retaining system spectrum efficiency of reuse-1, several approaches for interference mitigation are recommended by LTE standard [3]; i.e., ICI cancelation, ICI randomization, adaptive beam forming and ICI avoidance/coordination (ICIC) [5–8]. Interference reduction using ICIC achieved by applying restrictions to resource management in a coordinated way among network entities. Resources for coordination can be (time/frequency and/or transmit power). In order to effectively mitigate the ICI, the 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) introduced the use of FFR for cellular mobile systems. The FFR effectively mitigating ICI by applying different FRFs to UEs situated in different regions in each cell [9,10]. The FFR scheme statically divides each cell in the cellular mobile system into two geographical regions; i.e., inner and outer regions. The UEs situated in the inner region with the best received signal quality can use a lower FRF, whereas UEs located in the outer region with low received signal quality use higher FRF compared to UEs in the inner region. Self-Organizing Network (SON) is an automation technology designed to make the planning, configuration, management, optimization and healing of mobile radio access networks simpler and faster. In order to improve the network performance and reduce the capital expenditures (CAPEX) and operational expenditures (OPEX) for operators, SON concepts have been introduced in the LTE standards starting from the first release of the technology (Release 8) and expanding in scope of subsequent releases [11]. The 3GPP has defined a set of LTE SON use cases and associated SON functions. Among the proposed SON use cases, the management of ICI is of utmost importance. FFR schemes have been rather well studied using both theoretical analysis and system level simulations. In [12], a theoretical capacity and outage rate analysis of an OFDMA cellular system assuming FFR and proportional fair scheduling has been presented, where the users are classified as cell-center users and cell-edge users based on the geographical location. The optimization of design parameter (distance threshold or SINR threshold) of FFR has been studied using graph theory in [13], and convex optimization in [14]. It has been shown in [14] that the optimal frequency reuse for the cell-edge users is reuse-3. The average cell throughput in FFR system is derived in [15] as a function of the distance threshold for both Round Robin (RR) and Maximum SINR (MSINR) scheduling strategies. The authors in [16] introduced an analytical optimization technique to configure FFR solution for the downlink of LTE cellular system. In [17], the authors proposed a mechanism that selects the optimal size of the inner and outer region for each cell as well as the optimal frequency allocation between these regions that either maximizes the mean user throughput or the user satisfaction. Extensions and variations of the basic FFR scheme have been examined in a number of recent articles. In order to overcome the limitations of standard FFR and to address the performance of FFR in large-scale networks with irregular cell structure, the authors in [18] presented a Generalized Fractional Frequency Reuse (GFFR) scheme for flexible resource allocation. The GFFR scheme based on optimizing sub-band allocation and power assignment, the scheme adapts the utilization of the spectrum and power resource to the level of interference sensitivity of each cell-edge zone. For highly interference-sensitive cell edge zones, interference is minimized by sub-band isolation or power reduction, whereas for the other cell-edge zones more bandwidth is allocated. The authors in [19] evaluated the downlink performance of FFR in LTE networks employing a metric combining throughput and fairness. They considered different scenarios combining FFR with two different scheduling algorithms (round robin and proportional fair). Their results showed that if the fairness of the UE throughput distribution is to be maintained, FFR offers no gain if proper scheduling is employed. The authors in [20] proposed a dynamic mechanism that selects the optimal FFR scheme based on a custom metric, which is called User Satisfaction (US). Their proposed mechanism divides the cell into two regions, the inner and outer region and calculates the US metric for successive combinations of the inner region radius and inner region frequency allocation and then selects the optimal size as well as the optimal frequency allocation between these regions with main target to maximize the US metric. They compared the performance of the FFR scheme that is selected by the proposed mechanism with reuse-1 and reuse-3 schemes. The comparison shows that the selected FFR scheme leads to lower cell total throughput values. However, it gives higher US values. Moreover, their results also show that the selected FFR scheme allocates the available frequency resources between inner and outer regions in a more fair way, ensuring that all users in the cell will experience similar throughput.In this paper, a self-organized FFR resource allocation (SORA) scheme that selects automatically the optimal resource allocation to inner and outer regions of the cell is proposed. The main target of the proposed SORA scheme is to improve cell edge performance and maximize fairness among UEs. The performance of the proposed scheme is evaluated using MATLAB simulations and compared with different combinations of resource allocation to inner and outer regions of the cell as well as with other frequency reuse schemes (i.e. reuse-1 and reuse-3). The performance indicators used for comparison are the cell throughput and the fairness index.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: the system model of a multi-cell OFDMA based LTE network is described in Section 2. Section 3 presents overview of resource allocation schemes that are related to our work. Details of the proposed self-organized resource allocation scheme are presented in Section 4. Simulation results are discussed in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper.The network model considered in this paper is a downlink cellular OFDMA layout that consists of K-eNBs, where K={0,1,2,…,k,…,18} is the set of indices of the 19 eNBs in the model. The reference cell of our interest is cell 0 for which interference will be considered from all other eNBs transmitting in the same Transmission Time Interval (TTI) as eNB in the reference cell as shown in Fig. 1. We also considered a number of UEs U that are randomly distributed through the layout, where U={1,2,…,u,..,U} is the set of indices of UEs. In order to analyze the performance of the proposed system model, it is important to accurately model the effects of the radio propagation channel on the received signal, as these effects are very often among the majority sources of system performance degradation. The propagation model considered in this paper is Cost 231-Hata model, the path loss of the UE u at distance dufrom the serving eNB can be written as [21,22]:(1)PLdB(du)=46.3+33.9logf-13.82loghB-a(hm)+[44.9-6.55loghB]logdu+Cmwhere f is the carrier frequency in MHz, duis the distance between UE and the serving eNB in km, hmis the UE antenna height above ground level in meters and hBis the eNB antenna height above ground level in meters. The parameter Cmis 0 dB for medium-sized cities, and 3 dB for metropolitan areas. The parameter a(hm) is the correction factor for the UE antenna height, for suburban or rural environments a(hm) is given by:(2)a(hm)=(1.1logf-0.7)hm-(1.56logf-0.8)In 3GPP LTE standard, the available radio frequency spectrum is divided into J Resource Blocks (RBs) each RB consists of 12 orthogonal subcarriers with total bandwidth of 180kHz. Scheduling is performed by eNBs every 1ms TTI in order to allocate the RBs to all UEs within the network. One or more RB can be allocated to a UE at a time. The interference to UE within the reference cell coming from all other eNBs transmitting in the same TTI as for the eNB in the reference cell, the Signal to Interference plus Noise Ratio (SINR) of the uth UE allocated to the jth subchannel in a cell serving by the kth eNB given by:(3)SINRu,kj=Pu,kjξu,kjN0Δf+∑m≠kPu,mjξu,mjwherePu,kjis the transmitting power allocated by kth eNB to the jth subchannel to serve the uth UE in the reference cell,Pu,mjis the transmitting power allocated by mth interfering eNB to the jth subchannel to serve the uth UE in the interfering cell, N0 is the power spectrum density of Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN),Δfis the available bandwidth allocated to the uth UE,ξu,kjis the random channel gain in subchannel jth between uth UE and the kth eNB andξu,mjis the random channel gain in subchannel jth between uth UE and mth interfering eNB,ξu,kjandξu,mjcan be expressed as follows:(4)ξu,kj=10-PLu,kj(du,k)10×|Hu,j|2(5)ξu,mj=10-PLu,mj(du,m)10×|Hu,j|2where du,kand du,mare the distance between uth UE and the serving kth eNB and between uth UE and the mth interfering eNB respectively and |Hu,j|2 is the fading coefficient.Using the Shannon’s theorem, the throughput of uth UE on the jth subchannel is given by:(6)Cu,kj=Δf∗log21+SINRu,kjεwhere ɛ is the SNR gap which measures the SNR loss from the theoretical maximum channel capacity, ɛ is a constant related to the target BER and given by the following formula:(7)ε=-ln(5BER)1.5The total throughput of user uth UE in the serving kth cell can be given as follows:(8)Cu,k=∑jμu,j∗Cu,kjwhere, μu,jindicates the assignment of jth subchannel to the uth UE in the kth cell and given by:(9)μu,j=1,jthchannelisassignedtotheuthUE0,otherwiseThe main characteristic of a cellular network is the ability to reuse frequencies to increase both coverage and capacity. The main idea of frequency reuse is that the whole available frequency spectrum is divided into several narrower sub-bands; each sub-band is assigned once to a cell of each cluster consisting of several adjacent cells. The elements that determine frequency reuse are the reuse distance and FRF. Reuse distance is the distance at which frequency resource can be reused and FRF is the cluster size. One of the main objectives of OFDMA based cellular mobile networks is to achieve higher spectral efficiency; this can be achieved using frequency reuse-1. In frequency reuse-1 the available frequency spectrum is reused in each cell resulting in the worst CCI scenario. On the other hand in frequency reuse-3, the available frequency spectrum is divided into 3 equal sub-bands and each cell is given a sub-band which is orthogonal to neighboring cells’ sub-bands. The frequency reuse-3 scheme obviously reduces the CCI at the cost of spectral efficiency. Reuse-1 and reuse-3 schemes are shown in Figs. 2 and 3respectively [23,24].FFR or Reuse Partitioning (RUP) is a static ICIC scheme which effectively mitigates ICI by applying different reuse factors in different regions in each cell. In FFR scheme the available spectrum is divided into two groups, inner group with frequency reuse-1 to serve cell center users (CCUs) and outer group with higher frequency reuse to serve cell edge users (CEUs) so that effective reuse is greater than 1. An example of FFR is shown in Fig. 4. Let us assume that the available spectrum is β which is divided into inner and outer groups βFR-1 and 3. βFR-3. The inner band βFR-1 is used with frequency reuse-1 and the outer band 3.βFR-3 is used with frequency reuse-3. In this case the available frequency spectrum in each cell will be (βFR-1+βFR-3) and the effective reuse factor is given by β/(βFR-1+βFR-3) which is always greater than 1. In static FFR, no power adaptation mechanism is considered for regions with different reuse factors. All transmissions in the system are applied with equal transmission power. In downlink, each eNB evenly distribute the total power over the available sub-bands (inner and outer bands) of its cell.In this section, a detailed description of the proposed SORA scheme that automatically selects the optimal FFR resource allocation is presented. In SORA scheme, the resource allocation to CCUs and CEUs is based on the coordination between neighboring eNBs through a message passing approach over LTE-X2 interfaces [3]. The proposed SORA scheme is based on static FFR scheme which divides the cell into inner and outer regions, and then automatically selects the optimal resource allocation between these regions with the main target to improve cell edge performance and maximize fairness among UEs, considering users are randomly distributed through the network layout. In order to classify users in each cell (CCU or CEU), users’ wideband SINR measurements over reference signals are used to identify CEUs because reference signals which are transmitted over fixed resource elements at a fixed power level are relatively stable over time and give good indication of the interfering conditions that a user suffers. Thus, if user’s wideband SINR is below a given SINR threshold, this user is considered as a CEU; otherwise, the user is considered as a CCU. The SINR threshold is a design parameter. The proposed SORA scheme is a distributed ICIC scheme relies on one or more central eNBs, which exchange information potentially with all other eNBs in the network. The central eNBs thereby collect state information and distribute information relevant to coordination to all eNBs in the network. Coordinated Multi-Point transmission/reception (CoMP) as standardized in 3GPP LTE-A is an example [4]. The main idea of the proposed scheme is that in each TTI each UE measures the downlink SINR on each RB based on the reference signals received from the serving eNB and then feedbacks the SINR measurement reports to the serving eNB through Channel Quality Indicator (CQI) messages. The eNBs in the network use the SINR measurement reports to classify the users into CCUs and CEUs based on a designed SINR threshold. Each eNB then counts the number of CCUs (NCCUs) and number of CEUs (NCEUs) and then sends these numbers to the central eNB. The central eNB counts the total number of CCUs (NCCU-Total) and total number of CEUs (NCEU-Total) in the network and then calculates the ratio R=(NCEU-Total/NCCU-Total). The central eNB will send the ratio R to all other eNBs which will be used for optimal FFR resource allocation in the next TTI. The flowchart of the proposed scheme is shown in Fig. 5. The optimal FFR resource allocation to cell inner and outer regions (βFR-1, βFR-3) can be calculated as follows:(10)R=NCEU-TotalNCCU-Total=∑k=1KNCEU,k∑k=1KNCCU,k=βFR-3βFR-1=((β-βFR-1)/3)βFR-1(11)βFR-1=β3∗R+1(12)βFR-3=β-βFR-13In order to evaluate the performance of the proposed SORA scheme, an important performance evaluation indicator known as the Jain’s fairness index (FI) is used [25], the FI is given by:(13)FI=∑u=1UCu,k2U∑u=1U(Cu,k)2where Cu,kis the throughput of the uth UE in in the kth serving cell and given in equation (8).The FI is in the range between 0 and 1. The FI equals 1 (ideal value) when the allocated resources are equally distributed among UEs in a given cell and it decreases when the allocated resources are not equally distributed among UEs resulting in large variations in the throughput achieved by the UEs in a given cell.In this section, the performance of the proposed SORA-FFR scheme is evaluated using MATLAB simulations and compared with the performance of different combinations of RA to cell inner and outer regions given in Table 1as well as with the performance of frequency reuse-1 and reuse-3 schemes. The performance indicators used for comparison are cell throughput and FI. The simulation parameters are given in Table 2.Fig. 6shows the variation of the total cell throughput versus SINR threshold of the proposed SORA scheme compared with different combinations of FFR resource allocation. As seen in this figure for different resource allocation schemes given in Table 1, the total cell throughput increases with increasing both SINR threshold and number of RBs allocated to inner region. This is because higher SINR thresholds make it possible for UEs in the inner regions to use more efficient Modulation and Coding Scheme (MCS) resulting in higher throughput in the inner regions as shown in Fig. 7. The results in Fig. 6 also show that, the proposed SORA scheme tracks the variation of the distribution of CCUs and CEUs through the network layout with the change of SINR threshold and dynamically allocates optimal frequency resources to inner and outer regions. Fig. 8shows the cell edge throughput versus SINR threshold of the SORA scheme compared with different combinations of FFR resource allocation. The results obviously show that the SORA scheme improves cell edge throughput compared to all other RA schemes given in Table 1. On the other hand, allocating more RBs in the inner regions of the different FFR resource allocation schemes degrades the cell edge throughput.Since the selection of the SINR threshold should be based on the total cell throughput maximization [15,19], So a SINR threshold of 12dB is considered at which the total cell throughput of the proposed SORA scheme is maximum as shown in Fig. 6. In Fig. 9, the total cell throughput and cell edge throughput of the proposed SORA scheme are compared with that of the reference resource allocation schemes considering SINR threshold of 12dB. As shown in this figure the total cell throughput of SORA scheme is lower than that of reuse-1 and reuse-3 and has a cell throughput between the cell throughput of RA-7 and RA-8. On the other hand, the SORA scheme and RA-8 outperform all other resource allocation schemes in terms of cell edge throughput. Also, the results show that for FFR scheme, when the resource allocation index (RA-Index) increases the cell edge throughput increases and the total cell throughput decreases where more frequency resources (βFR-3) are allocated to outer region and less frequency resources (βFR-1) are allocated to the inner region as given in Table.1. Fig. 10shows the effective reuse factor of different resource allocation schemes considering 12dB SINR threshold. As shown in this figure, the SORA scheme gives higher effective reuse factor compared to all other reuse schemes except for reuse-3 and RA-8. Fig. 11shows the effective reuse factor of the SORA scheme versus SINR threshold. As shown in this figure, the effective reuse factor of the proposed SORA scheme increases with increasing SINR threshold. This is because when the SINR threshold increases the number of CEUs increases, the number of CCUs decreases and the ratio R increases.In Fig. 12, the fairness of the proposed SORA scheme is compared with the reference resource allocation schemes considering 12dB SINR threshold. As shown in this figure, the SORA scheme archives the highest FI among all other resource allocation schemes. Fig. 13shows the variation of the FI of the proposed SORA scheme versus SINR threshold. The results show that the fairness index of the proposed SORA scheme increases with increasing SINR threshold. This is because when the SINR threshold increases the number of CEUs increases and number of CCUs decreases, in this case the proposed SORA scheme allocates more frequency resources (βFR-3) to outer regions and less frequency resources (βFR-1) to the inner regions of each cell.Figs. 14 and 15show the SINR distribution for all UEs and cell edge UEs respectively. The results show that there is an improvement in the SINR performance of all UEs, in particular the CEUs of the proposed SORA scheme compared to reuse-1 scheme and their performances approach the performance of the reuse-3 scheme. In order to demonstrate the fairness comparison of the SORA scheme with other resource allocation schemes (i.e. reuse-1 and reuse-3), Fig. 16shows the throughput of the 19 UEs in the serving cell. The results show that reuse-1 scheme allocates RBs unequally among UEs, resulting in large variations in the throughput achieved by the UEs, four UEs (2, 5, 10 and 15) with high SINR values experience high throughput, while the rest of UEs with low SINR values experience lower throughput which demonstrates the unfairness performance of the reuse-1 scheme. The variations in the throughput achieved by the UEs using Reuse-3 scheme is lower than that using reuse-1 scheme which indicates that Reuse-3 scheme achieves a higher degree of satisfactory fairness performance of resource allocation compared to reuse-1. On the other hand, the SORA scheme achieves high degree of satisfactory fairness performance of resource allocation compared to reuse-1and reuse-3, whereas the SORA automatically allocates optimal resources to CEUs and CCUs and ensures that all UEs in the serving cell will experience convergent values of throughput.Using simulation parameters given in [20], Fig. 17gives a direct comparison between the proposed SORA-FFR scheme and the proposed FFR scheme in [20]. The results show that the proposed SORA-FFR scheme outperforms the proposed scheme in [20] in terms of FI and total cell throughput. The proposed SORA-FFR scheme achieves FI of 0.789 while the proposed FFR scheme in [20] achieves FI of 0.7116 (7.74% increment compared to FFR scheme in [20]). Also the proposed SORA-FFR scheme achieves a total cell throughput of 9.38 Mbps while the proposed FFR scheme in [20] achieves a total cell throughput of 8 Mbps (14.71% increment compared to FFR scheme in [20]). In addition, the proposed FFR scheme in [20] is based on the assumption of different combinations of the inner region radius and inner region frequency allocation and selects the optimal combination that maximizes the user satisfaction metric (inner region radius=131m and inner region RBs=2). On the other hand, the proposed SORA-FFR scheme tracks the variation of the distribution of CCUs and CEUs through the network layout and dynamically allocated frequency resources to inner and outer regions based on coordination between neighboring eNBs.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, a novel SORA-FFR for LTE networks is proposed. The proposed scheme is a distributed ICIC scheme that relies on one or more central eNBs, which exchanges information potentially with all other eNBs in the network. The proposed SORA-FFR scheme divides the cell into inner and outer regions then automatically selects the optimal FFR resource allocation between these regions based on the coordination between neighboring eNBs through a message passing approach over LTE-X2 interfaces. The performance of the proposed scheme is evaluated using MATLAB simulations and compared with different combinations of resource allocation to cell inner and outer regions as well as with other frequency reused scheme (i.e. reuse-1 and reuse-3). Simulation results show that the proposed SORA-FFR scheme improved throughput of CEUs, which experience the most severe form of ICI and great path losses. The results also show that the proposed SORA-FFR scheme leads to lower total cell throughput values compared to reuse-1 and reuse-3 schemes; however, it achieved high degree of satisfactory fairness performance among UEs compared to reference resource allocation schemes.