@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Physical constraint and load aware seamless handover for IPTV in wireless LANs

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A seamless handover mechanism for IPTV services in WLAN is proposed.The mechanism relies on received signal strength, congestion level and bit error rate.New method for estimation of congestion level of each access point is proposed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Wireless LAN,IPTV,Seamless handover,BER,Congestion,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In wireless LANs (WLANs), handover is usually performed based on either signal power or congestion level. However, considering only the congestion level could be insufficient for handover since it may cause traffic loss. Therefore, besides the load of access points (APs), it is necessary to consider the physical conditions of different WLANs for performing a seamless handover. This article introduces a novel scheme for seamless handover of IPTV streams in WLAN carrying IPTV traffic, called Physical Constraint and Load Aware (PCLA) handover. The PCLA can compute the load of APs for congestion detection purposes. In PCLA, a mobile node chooses the best network considering signal strength, bit error rate in the relevant environment, and the congestion of APs for making a seamless handover. The simulation results show the appropriateness of PCLA in improving handover performance.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Nowadays, Internet Protocol Television (IPTV) is a competitive service in business and commercial areas, and most service providers attempt to deploy this platform because of its attraction and economical potential [1]. IPTV is a method for delivering digital television signals (involving audio, video and data) over Internet Protocol (IP) as the transport platform via broadband infrastructure, usually in a managed network to guarantee quality of service (QoS) [2]. “IPTV is defined as multimedia services such as television/video/audio/text/graphics/data delivered over IP based networks managed to provide the required level of quality of service and experience, security, interactivity and reliability” [3].IPTV services can use wired or wireless technologies as their communication infrastructures. The IEEE 802.11n wireless local area network (WLAN) and Ultra Wideband (UWB) standards are two examples of wireless technologies that can be used. In 802.11n, data rate can increase up to 540Mbps within 50 meters range of AP (Access Point). In UWB, data rate is between 55Mbps and 480Mbps within small ranges [4].With the growth of portable devices such as laptops, notebooks, and cell phones, the demand for accessing IPTV services through wireless networks has increased. IPTV users like to access multimedia services everywhere and at any time. However, there are some challenges in wireless networks for establishing IPTV services such as bandwidth, coverage area, Quality of Service (QoS), and Quality of Experience (QoE). IPTV subscribers may be unwilling to tolerate any degradation in quality of received video, and therefore, service providers should try to satisfy users in order to increase the number of customers [5]. An architecture is proposed in [6] for guarantying the QoS of mobile IPTV users which can be implemented in different OSI layers. For improving IPTV QoE in [7], a method has been proposed based on a circular buffer which uses two application layer strategies: forward error correction (FEC) and automatic repeat request (ARQ).For transmission of IPTV packets, Real-time Transport Protocol (RTP) [8] and RTP Control Protocol (RTCP) [9] can be used. The RTP is an application layer protocol that defines a standard format for packets of multimedia systems such as IPTV. The RTCP is used for gathering transmission statistics and QoS issues. Both RTP and RTCP operate over UDP, where they can be multiplexed on a single UDP port used for each video stream [10].WLAN is currently the most popular technology for transmitting traffic in local area networks. For supporting movement in WLAN, various mobility management schemes have been introduced. Balancing traffic load among APs is a requirement, especially when multiple APs are attached to one operator's network. It has been proposed in [11] that dynamic management of mobile nodes according to the bandwidth usage of each host can distribute traffic load among APs, thus increasing overall throughput. Due to the fact that IPTV has traffic streaming nature, a seamless service method is required for uninterrupted video playing. For seamless service of IPTV, an architecture that adjusts video streams according to link capabilities has been proposed in [12]. With multiple APs available for IPTV users, handover may reconnect a mobile node (MN) from one AP to another one. Typically, a MN chooses the AP with the highest received signal strength indicator (RSSI) for handover. In this paper, we call this method RSSI-based handover (RSSIH) from now on. However, this parameter is not sufficient by itself [13]. RSSI depends on the AP transmitter power and the distance of the MN from the antenna of AP, while there are many other factors which result in bit error in the MN. This motivates us to propose a new mechanism in which the MN should take into account physical constraints and the load of APs for making better decision in its handover procedure.Our objective in this paper is to propose a new mechanism, called Physical Constraint and Load Aware (PCLA) handover, which considers various parameters involved in the handover management such as:•RSSI which is the key parameter in handover procedure and represent the magnitude of signal power that can be received from AP.BER which can represent environmental conditions that affect the quality of received data.And finally, congestion level of available APs. If traffic in an AP grows so that it becomes congested, packets destined to mobile nodes will suffer from much delay and even loss. Thus, handover of mobile users to other available non-congested APs can overcome this problem.By this mechanism, an optimum network is selected for handover with the objective of minimizing packet loss and delay of IPTV streams.Our contribution is to propose a seamless handover procedure that selects the best network for handover in WLAN by considering signal strength, bit error rate (BER), and network congestion all at the same time.This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes related research on mobility management and handover techniques. Section 3 details the proposed PCLA method for seamless handover of IPTV streams. Section 4 presents performance evaluation followed by a conclusion in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
