@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Effects of node mobility on energy balancing in wireless networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Utilizing mobility for energy balancing is the key insight of our work.We construct a Linear Programming (LP) framework that jointly captures data routing, mobility, and energy dissipation aspects.Mobility can improve the energy balancing up to a certain level.We delineate future research opportunities in the area.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#


@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Having a direct effect on network lifetime, balanced energy consumption is one of the key challenges in wireless networks. In this paper, we investigate the effects of node mobility on energy balancing in wireless networks. We construct a Linear Programming (LP) framework that jointly captures data routing, mobility, and energy dissipation aspects. We explore the design space by performing numerical analysis using the developed LP framework. Our results show that mobility has significant effects on the energy dissipation trends of wireless nodes. Mobility can improve the energy balancing up to a certain level, however extreme mobility may lead to a degradation in energy balancing of wireless networks.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The essential building elements of mobile networks are wireless devices which are typically powered by batteries with limited energy. Thus, the design of energy-aware routing protocols is one of the most important and challenging issue in mobile wireless ad hoc networks [1].From energy consumption point of view, two issues need to be distinguished: energy efficiency and energy balancing. Energy efficiency refers to reduction of unnecessary energy consumption. A routing protocol is the most energy-efficient one if it minimizes the total consumed energy to reach the destination. On the other hand, energy balancing is a different concept. It refers to the maintenance of a balance in energy consumption so that certain nodes in the network do not die earlier than others [2]. Note that if all traffic is sent through the minimum energy path, then the nodes in this path deplete their batteries prematurely. Usually, such a power consumption is undesirable. In the network, minimizing the energy dissipation of each node separately does not provide the maximum lifetime that can be achieved by using a collective energy optimization scheme. As a result, a routing protocol is required to be both energy-efficient and energy-balancing.Could we design a protocol which achieves both? Is there a protocol which is the most energy-efficient one and still consumes energy of nodes in a balanced fashion? Unfortunately, the short answer is no if certain conditions do not hold. For instance consider a network in which nodes are not mobile and the topology is static. Since multi-hop routing is generally more energy-efficient than direct transmission (a fact that follows directly from the conservation of energy), nodes in the center of the deployment area are utilized more heavily on relaying, thus exhaust their batteries earlier. Only under the assumption of a particular deployment strategy (e.g., denser deployment on the central region), energy efficiency and energy balancing do not contradict with each other.A particular topology is not a realistic assumption for a network which consists of mobile nodes. However, in order to establish the balanced energy consumption behavior while preserving the energy-efficient operation, we can benefit from one of the inherent characteristics of the network: mobility.Utilizing mobility for energy balancing is the key insight of our work. In more precise terms, the research problem in our study is the investigation of the effects of mobility on energy balancing in wireless networks. The problem has been investigated by linear programming. By developing a novel problem formulation using Linear Programming (LP), we seek an answer to the important question of whether and when mobility helps energy balancing in wireless networks. The LP-based framework that we propose in this paper evaluates and quantifies the impact of mobility on energy balancing in ideal conditions with optimal routing decisions and abstracts us away from the overhead brought by a specific protocol.The main contribution of this paper is the presentation of a general framework in which the problem space could be explored in an efficient and consistent manner.The rest of our paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the related work. Section 3 provides an informal description of the research problem. Section 4 formulates the problem using LP. Section 5 presents the results of numerical analysis. Section 6 closes the paper with the concluding remarks.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
