@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A comparative molecular dynamics-phase-field modeling approach to brittle fracture

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A link between molecular and continuum models for brittle fracture is proposed.Parameters obtained from the molecular scale are used in the continuum approach.Under this approach, the phase-field parameters acquire an entirely physical meaning.This approach can assist multi-scale modeling of materials.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Molecular dynamics,Phase-field modeling,Fracture,Aragonite,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this work, a novel comparative method for highly brittle materials such as aragonite crystals is proposed, which provides an efficient and accurate in-sight understanding for multi-scale fracture modeling. In particular, physically-motivated molecular dynamics (MD) simulations are performed to model quasi-static brittle crack propagation on the nano-scale and followingly compared to macroscopic modeling of fracture using the phase-field modeling (PFM) technique. A link between the two modeling schemes is later proposed by deriving PFM parameters from the MD atomistic simulations. Thus, in this combined approach, MD simulations provide a more realistic meaning and physical estimation of the PFM parameters. The proposed computational approach, that encompasses mechanics on discrete and continuum levels, can assist multi-scale modeling and easing, for instance, the simulation of biological materials and the design of new materials.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In engineering and material science, much attention has been given in recent years to the prediction of material failure. One of the most interesting and challenging problems in fundamental fracture research is how to improve the understanding of brittle fracture processes, which occur primarily in high-strength materials with poor ductility and toughness. By definition, brittle fracture is the breakage of interatomic bonds without noticeable plastic deformation. This type of fracture occurs when the local strain energy becomes larger than the energy necessary to pull the atom layers apart. In order to be able to predict and study this fracture behavior, a wide diversity of experimental, mathematical, and most recently, computational methods have been proposed for different (length) scale levels, such as nano-, micro- and meso-scale. For each of these groups, the main focus is still efficiency and accuracy of the models.At the atomistic level, molecular dynamics (MD) simulations are increasingly becoming powerful tools to investigate crack initiation and propagation. Due to their real time scales (pico seconds), MD methods are perfectly suited to study the very high-speed crack propagation of highly brittle materials. All-atom MD simulations have been extensively used to study crack propagation  [1] for a variety of inorganic crystals, such as Si3N4   [2], SiO2   [3], 3C-SiC  [4], and GaAs  [5]. Although these studies have provided valuable in-sights into crack dynamics, a systematic analysis of mechanical properties at an atomistic scale, as well as a link to the macroscopic continuum mechanical approaches is still not well established.Although MD simulations are efficient to study material on the nano-scale, they become impractical when the investigated systems have significantly larger dimensions, i.e., huge number of molecules, or if the considered time range is relatively long. Nowadays, typical MD simulations can be performed on systems containing hundreds of thousands, or perhaps, a few millions of atoms for simulation times ranging from a few hundred nanoseconds up to a millisecond. These numbers are certainly respectable, but one may run into conditions where size and/or time limitations become important. The challenges related to the limited dimensions or time scales can be tackled using continuum mechanical methods, where atomic details of the material are disregarded. In fact, as it has been shown in numerous other studies  [6–9], the mechanical behavior of a given continuous material can be reproduced in a different scale by using mechanical parameters derived directly from atomistic MD simulations.Due to its versatility, the phase-field modeling (PFM) has emerged as a powerful tool in continuum mechanics to model fracture and many other multi-phase material evolutions. Although phenomenological, PFM has proven to offer a good trade-off between numerical treatment, accuracy, and computational costs. The pioneering works of Griffith  [10] and Irwin  [11], as well as the variational formulations presented in  [12,13], have helped to build a well-established energy-based framework for brittle fracture, which has continued to be developed and enhanced during the past decades.In order to provide for a robust numerical implementation of this approach in typical finite element codes, a phenomenological phase-field variable, which approximates the crack–material sharp interface by a diffusive transition zone, needs to be incorporated. The idea of diffusive interfaces stems from physics and has been used by, e.g., Cahn and Hilliard  [14] to describe interfaces in a heterogeneous system by a partial differential evolution equation. Crack propagation models for quasi-static, dynamic and cohesive brittle fracture have successfully been established in  [15–20], to mention some. Nevertheless, it is seldom to find a thorough physical explanation or validation of the phase-field parameters. Moreover, there have not been any attempts to implement the PFM for brittle fracture into an atomistic scale level, neither have there been material properties derived from all-atom simulations, which could help to illuminate a physical explanation to the PFM parameters.The aim of this research work is to create a link between the understanding of brittle fracture of a highly brittle material at an atomistic scale and its macroscopic mechanical features. Therefore, the fracture behavior of an aragonite (CaCO3) tablet, under quasi-static assumptions, is studied using MD simulations and PFM. To this end, the key mechanical properties, e.g., Lamé constants (λe,μe), phase-field transition width (ϵ), and the mechanical energy release rate (G) of aragonite crystals, are obtained from MD simulations. Subsequently, these physical properties are used to reproduce the nano-scale model with a continuous PFM approach. The combination of these methods gives a deeper understanding of brittle fracture at a discrete atomistic level, whilst concurrently helping to establish a link to continuum mechanical fracture models.In this work, Sections  2 and 3 briefly describe the molecular dynamics, as well as the employed phase-field modeling for brittle fracture. Although it does not aim to deepen in any of both theories, the explanation of the MD approach is somewhat broaden so to help the reader to understand the basics behind all-atom simulations. For the PFM, no new method is proposed in this work, and instead, the numerical experiments are conducted considering already existing and well accepted models for brittle fracture. In Section  4, a thorough description and brief evaluation of the numerical experiments in MD as well as PFM are presented. The comparison between these two approaches and the discussion of the obtained results, are carried out in Section  5. The last section is dedicated to the conclusion and outlook of the present work.MD simulation is a computational method employed for molecular systems to determine their time-dependent behavior. It is based on the numerical solution of Newton’s equations of motion for a given set of interacting particles (the interactions between particles governed by an interatomic potential, e.g., covalent bonds, angles, van der Waals potential, etc.), enabling to keep track of the evolution of the system in phase space.Aragonite, a brittle ceramic (CaCO3) and a major constituent of nacre (95% vol.), is considered in the present work due to its highly-brittle nature. Tablets of this material were modeled, as seen in Fig. 1, by using the software Visual Molecular Dynamics (VMD)  [21]. Three double-notched tablet models were built with length (l), height (h) and width (w) of 15.38×11.12×4.30 nm3 (Model I), 25.20×11.12×4.30 nm3 (Model II) and 45.5×14.88×4.30 nm3 (Model III), with crack depths of 1.84 nm, 1.6 nm and 1.56 nm, respectively. The pulling layer thicknesses (pt) for all models was considered to be three atomic layers wide. For the subsequent MD simulations, the molecular dynamics program GROMACS 5.0.4 package  [22] was used. For aragonite interactions, we implemented a newly-developed CaCO3 forcefield  [23], that describes angle, planar, dihedral, electrostatic and van der Waals interactions.The three tablet models were minimized and equilibrated in the NPT (isothermal–isobaric) ensemble for 10 ns at 300 K and 1.013 bar. The tablets did not show any significant changes neither in structural ordering nor in cell dimensions. The last frames were used to create notched systems as follows: The simulation boxes were extended 12 nm alonglandh, leaving as much empty space as required to allow the tablet extension during pulling simulations. The periodic vector through the widthwwas not extended, resulting in tablets of infinite length alongw-direction. Then, the v-shaped notches were introduced by removing atoms. The cut lines followed the (101) and (1̄01) lattice planes, which resulted in an opening angle of 84.4°. Such cut lines impose the removal of one calcium atom per carbonate group, preserving the electroneutrality of the systems.In all MD calculations, the simulation box, in which the aragonite tablets were pulled, was repeated periodically in all three dimensions using 2 fs time steps. Van der Waals interactions were calculated using a cutoff of 1.0 nm. The Particle Mesh Ewald (PME) method  [24] was chosen to account for long-range electrostatic interactions. To increase the simulation time step, we used LINCS  [25] to constrain all bond vibrations. We used Nosé–Hoover  [26,27] temperature coupling with a coupling time constant of 0.1 ps.Fig. 1 shows an aragonite notched model with loading conditions and representative dimensions. The aragonite tablet model was not constrained at any point (which allows for rigid body motions) to capture the natural behavior in simulations. In total, three tablet models were built, which are ranging from 66,720 to 276,960 atoms. All systems were further equilibrated in theNVT(canonical ensemble, amount of substanceN, volumeVand temperatureTare conserved) ensemble for 10 ns at 300 K. To avoid tablet drifting, two cuboid volumes parallel to the (100) lattice plane were restrained, each cuboid volume containing the three outermost layers of CaCO3 atoms.After completing equilibration, we performed force-probe Molecular Dynamics (FPMD) simulations  [28] to mimic an external load. The restrained layers were released and pulled outwards by moving virtual spring, which applied to the outer surfaces, with a constant velocity of 10 nm ns−1 and a spring constant of 1000 kJ mol−1  nm−2. In the FPMD simulations, the load is applied normal to the flaw axis, which in mechanical engineering is known as mode-I or opening mode fracture (a tensile stress normal to the plane of the crack)  [29]. FPMD simulations were performed until tablet rupture, which usually occurred within 13 ns for Model I, 15 ns for Model II and 21 ns for Model III. For each tablet model, five FPMD simulations were performed.The Griffith’s energy-based analysis of cracks, postulated in 1920, is considered to be the birth of the field of fracture mechanics  [10]. Herein, Griffith observed that fracture strength is always lower than theoretical cohesive strength, and explained this discrepancy due to the inherent defects in brittle materials leading to stress concentration.One of the underlying principles of fracture mechanics is that crack propagation occurs when the released elastic strain energy is at least equal to the energy required to generate new crack surface. The Griffith’s energy criterion for fracture of brittle materials can then be written as(1)σf=1α[2Eγπa]1/2,whereσfis the rupture strength, a is the notch depth,γis the surface energy,Eis the Young’s modulus, andαis a geometry correction factor. For double edge notched tension of a semi-infinite tablet with notch depth a and tablet heighth,αreads  [30](2)α=1.12+0.43[ah]−4.79[ah]2+15.46[ah]3.It is now assumed that the available external and internal energy is transferred into surface energy. In what brittle fracture regards, dissipation and kinetic energy are neglected. This results in the so-called Griffith energy balance where the energy release rateGis equal to2γin J/m2. The mechanical energy release rate in the CaCO3 geometry is the amount of energy per unit area that is supplied by the elastic energy stored in the system.The energy release rate can alternatively be calculated by integrating the stress–strain curve with respect to strainε[31,4](3)G=l∫σ(ε)dε,wherelis the model width in the loading direction, see Fig. 1, andσis the loading direction component of the stress well ahead of the crack tip. At a strain aboveεc, crack propagation at constant velocity is achieved after an initial transient  [31].The macroscopic modeling of fracture in the numerical example conducted in this work is based on a well accepted PFM for brittle fracture, which has been widely discussed in several research works, see  [15,16,32–34] for an overview.According to Griffith’s energy-based criteria to describe brittle fracture  [10], the global potential energy functionℱof a cracked linear elastic, isotropic solid material can be defined as the sum of the elastic strain energyΨelastintegrated over the whole spatial domainΩ, and the critical fracture energyG(equal to the energy required to create a unit area of fracture surface) integrated along the crack path yielding the crack energyΨcrack. Following this, the phenomenological phase-field variableϕis incorporated, which approximates the crack sharp interface by a diffusive transition zone. Thus,ℱcan be written with the help ofϕand its gradient as an integral over the whole body (cf.  [12,13,20,35]) as(4)ℱ(ϕ,gradϕ,ε)=∫V[Ψelast(ϕ,ε)+Ψcrack(ϕ,gradϕ)]︸Ψdvwithεbeing the linear strain tensor andΨis the energy density. The phenomenological phase-field or order parameterϕ, in the sense of an indicator function, represents the crack state at positionxand timetof the continuum body asϕ(x,t)∈[0,1]with{ϕ=1:unbroken,ϕ=0:cracked.The non-local quadratic approximation of the fracture energy is defined as(5)Ψcrack(ϕ,gradϕ)=G4ϵ(1−ϕ)2+Gϵ|gradϕ|2,whereϵis an internal length related to the width of the transition area between the cracked and the undamaged states. As given in  [15,32], one can motivate the degradation of the material only under tension or shear through additively splitting the elastic energy in positive and negative parts. Moreover, the degradation functiong(ϕ)can simply be defined in a quadratic form asg(ϕ)=[(1−η)(ϕ)2+η]to obtain(6)Ψelast(ϕ,ε)=g(ϕ)Ψelast++Ψelast−.Here,ηis a small number referring to a residual stiffness for numerical stability purpose. It is also worth noting thatg(ϕ)can also take a polynomial form of different degrees (cf.   [15,17,36,32]), depending on the complexity of the considered model. In Eq.  (6), the positive and negative parts of the strain tensorεdescribe the tensile and compressive modes, respectively. Accordingly, one can define the so-called isotropic reference energy function related to the undamaged elastic solid as(7)Ψelast±(ε)=λe〈tr[ε]〉±2/2+μetr[ε±2]withλeandμeas the Lamé parameters. Herein, the Macaulay brackets are defined as〈⋅〉±≔(⋅±|⋅|)/2to obtain the positive and negative parts of the given expressions. Furthermore, the infinitesimal strain tensorεis obtained through the displacement fieldu(x,t),(8)ε=12(gradu+gradTu),and its negative and positive parts are obtained through the spectral decomposition as introduced in  [16]. However, it is worth mentioning that this split is not required in the presented numerical example, which is subjected only to a monotonic tension loading. Although this PFM approach can be implemented to more complicated fracture modes, we restrict the treatment to a simplified example as the aim here is to establish a meaningful relationship between MD and PFM towards the multi-scale modeling and prediction of brittle fracture. Further examples considering different loading and fracture modes as well as more complex material setups will be addressed in further works.With the definition of the strain tensor in Eq.  (8), one can obtain the elastic stressesσthrough the derivation of the phase-field potential with respect to the strain tensor(9)σ(ϕ,ε)=∂Ψ∂ε=g(ϕ)∂Ψelast+∂ε+∂Ψelast−∂ε.Additionally, by neglecting body forces and assuming a quasi-static state, the momentum balance equation can be expressed as(10)divσ=0,allowing the computation of displacement fieldu. Finally, the evolution of the phase field is given by a Ginzburg–Landau evolution equation, derived from the energy density(11)ϕ̇=∂ϕ∂t=−M∂Ψ∂ϕ=−M[2(1−η)ϕΨelast+−G2ϵ(1−ϕ)−2Gϵdivgradϕ],whereM≥0represents a mobility constant.This type of evolution model (also termed Allen–Cahn model) has captured the attention of a great number of scientists and can be supplemented without major difficulties to account for e.g. hydraulic brittle fracture (cf.   [35]) or even ductile fracture (cf.   [37]), though there have been further studies towards different derivations of the evolution equation of the phase field. For instance, the Alber–Zhou hybrid model  [38] could speed up the computation of the interface movement and increases the accuracy of the model, in comparison to typical Allen–Cahn phase-field evolutions.As stated in the introduction, the main objective is two folded: reproduce an all-atom simulation with a PFM and establish the possibility of a correlation between the physics of the material response and the phase-field parameters. Therefore, a two-dimensional initial–boundary-value problem (IBVP) is solved using the PFM approach, where the geometry and boundary conditions (see, Fig. 2) are taken similarly to the Model I of the MD setup discussed in Section  2. In order to reproduce the boundaries of the MD simulations, boundary layers with lengthpt, Poisson’s ratioν=0and zero stress in the vertical direction were introduced at the extreme edges. The lower notch in Fig. 2 is shifted by 0.1 nm to the left from the middle of the specimen, whereas the upper notch is shifted by 0.1 nm to the right to reproduce the slight asymmetry of the MD case.For the numerical implementation of the PFM problem, we used the professional version of the finite element package FlexPDE.11Integrated FE solver of partial differential equations, see [www.flexpde.org].The numerical solution is computed considering quadratic shape functions for all variables and the time integration is carried out using the implicit 2nd-order backward difference formula (BDF2), which gives a good trade-off between accuracy and computational costs. Time-step automatic adaptivity is also employed, which is a crucial requirement as the time step decreases tremendously during the onset of fracture. Moreover, a fixed mesh, refined in the area between the notches, is implemented. A plane stress, linear elastic model is used to reproduce the MD simulation. Under these setups, two types of loading have been implemented; Firstly, a stress-controlled loading (str. ctrl.) withσ¯(t)=1tμN/nm2, which mimics the applied loading in the MD simulation. Secondly, a displacement-controlled loading (disp. ctrl.) withu¯(t)=10tnm, which is preferred in brittle fracture modeling due to the instantaneous crack propagation.The material parameters used for the PFM of the aragonite plate are summarized in Table 1. Herein, the Young’s modulusE, the crack resistance (or energy release rate)Gand the internal length scaleϵare estimated directly from the results of the FPMD simulations as will be explained in details in Section  4. The material properties such as Poisson’s ratioνand the densityρare taken from the aragonite-related literature (cf.   [39–41]), whereas the mobility parameterMand the residual stiffness parameterηare chosen in the ranges proposed in e.g.  [32,36], which agrees with a vast majority of the related literature.As stated previously, to examine the fracture behavior at atomistic scale of double edge v-notched aragonite tablets, atomistic FPMD simulations were performed. The different tablet models were loaded by moving virtual springs applied to the outer surfaces of the tablets away from each other with constant velocity. The force is obtained directly from the resultant spring force at the boundaries. Accordingly, the stress is computed by dividing the spring force by the cross sectional area comprehended between two notches. Moreover, the relative displacement of atoms was measured between the center of mass of both pulling layers. Here, the engineering strain is obtained by dividing the total displacement of the center of mass of any pulling layer by the original distance between this layer and the center of specimen. The crystals deformed during the FPMD simulations until the externally applied stress reached the ultimate tensile strengthσf, resulting in a sudden rupture. Due to the chemical structure of calcium carbonate [Ca2+][CO32−], and its arrangement in compact crystal, it is not always possible to have symmetric notches on both edges as well as notches at the exact center of all tablets of CaCO 3 models. Therefore, the v-notches in the tablets are not sharp, and the notch tips can have, either, single or double CaCO 3 units (enlarged view in Fig. 1). Thus, different crack propagations were observed in the tablet models, e.g., the crack starts at the top edge, bottom edge or at both edges simultaneously (shown in Fig. 3). For all simulations, the cracks propagated with an s-shape along the (101) and (1̄01) lattice planes, as expected.Fig. 3 shows snapshots of typical rupture processes of the CaCO3 tablet models. Model I was loaded with a constant velocity from 0.0 ns up to 12.88 ns (case a) and up to 13.056 ns in a second simulation (case b), without observing crack initiation. However, in the next 0.012 ns the crack initiated and sudden failure occurred. Moreover, Model III was loaded up to 21.046 ns showing no crack initiation until the next 0.014 ns where abrupt rupture occurred, which is typical of brittle fracture behavior (e.g. aragonite). Therefore, the modeled CaCO3 tablets feature the mechanical properties of a brittle material, as desired.In what follows, the discussion focuses mainly on the outputs of the MD Model I (case: b), especially for derivation of the PFM parameters. To start with, the energy release rateGis calculated using the MD results together with either Griffith’s criterion given in Eq. (1) or by use of Eq. (3). Both equations yield that the fracture of the CaCO3 tablet occurs at a valueG≈2.091J/m2. This value is slightly lower than the theoretical values ofGfor CaCO3 (2.10–3.74 J/m2), which can be found in the literature  [39–41], though this difference is negligible. Therefore,G=2.091J/m2is adopted for the PFM of the CaCO3 tablet.Fig. 4depicts the stress–strain curve obtained from FPMD simulations. To avoid model dependency in MD simulations, five different aragonite tablet models were considered, and the stress–strain curves were jointly analyzed (the red line indicates the average stress–strain curve and the gray shaded area indicates the standard error deviation in Fig. 4). By considering the initial slope of the stress–strain curve, the recovered elasticity modulusEof aragonite ranges between 106 to 148 GPa, which is in the range of experimental and theoretical studies, see  [39–41]. Moreover, Model II and Model III predictEin the same range. With regard to the ultimate tensile strength, the resulting MD simulations value of the aragonite notched samples is 4.6 GPa. This value is slightly lower than the theoretical strength of flawless minerals, which was estimated to lie in the range of 5–10 GPa  [42].Fig. 5shows the force–displacement curves of the continuous PFM (considering a Young’s modulus ofE=126GPa) and all-atom simulations. With regard to the force at failure, the resulting MD simulations value of the aragonite notched samples is 47 μN and the nonlinear behavior, which is due to the potential energy non-linearities, is clearly observed. Although, a linear elastic model was considered for the PFM, an outstanding correlation of the results is observed. In the PFM stress- and displacement-controlled simulations, the force at failure is computed to 45.2 and 45.6 μN, respectively, though the material non-linearities are currently not accounted.To figure out the damage in the all-atom simulations, Fig. 6(a) depicts the density of atoms of Model I (in red) at different times. As expected, there are no major changes in the material density, except close to the notches where the crack is initiated and therefore, the density drops down to zero. As loading increases, a complete crack in the aragonite tablet takes place, however, some flying atoms can still be found in the cracked region. For purposes of visualization, the flying atoms, which are no longer bonded to the rest of the material, as well as the long-range interactions are eliminated. In Fig. 6(a), cracks start from both sides and describe an s-shape while propagating, which is highlighted with a dotted line.Fig. 6(b) and (c) show the PFM results of the crack initiation from the top notch in the stress-controlled case, and simultaneously from both notches in the displacement-controlled case. Moreover, the crack could also start from the bottom notch or from the top notch depending on the non-symmetric mesh of the domain, but for the same value of critical energy release rate. Nevertheless, as seen in Fig. 6(c), an s-shaped crack is recovered regardless of where the crack initiates. Evidently, this shape can be influenced either by choosing a coarser mesh, considering larger values forϵor inducing a slight asymmetry of the notches as in the all-atom simulation.The results of the PFM come to a good agreement with those of the MD simulations, as discussed in the previous section. Phenomenologically, the s-shaped crack propagation (along the (101) and (1̄01) lattice planes) is obtained in both approaches. Moreover, the ultimate tensile strength obtained in the PFM simulations falls perfectly into the ranges described in the all-atom simulations. Nevertheless, a discrepancy between the two schemes can be seen which can be traced to two main reasons: On the one side, the boundary conditions in the MD simulation allow for rigid body rotations and translations, which are constrained in the continuum model by fixing the vertical displacement of two points. This fixation causes an artificial symmetry and simultaneously stiffens the material. On the other side, the presented PFM considers a geometrically linear behavior and a linear-elastic material response in the pre-crack phase withϕ=1, which is not able to account for the inherent material non-linearities. In contrast, these non-linearities are naturally captured in the atomistic simulations, as can be seen in Fig. 5. Solutions to this shortcoming, are considered as the outlook of this work (see conclusions) and comprise the implementation of non-linear elastic material models and considering large deformations as given in, e.g.,  [43].An important outcome, particularly for the phase-field parameters, is the theoretical and numerical consistency of the critical energy release rateG, and a potential relationship between the molecular transition (distortion) zone and the phase-field transition width governed by the internal length parameterϵ. The former can be estimated by means of the Griffith’s theory or by integration of the curve, shown in Fig. 4, and with both methods, regardless of the difference in strain measures between the MD and PFM, it falls exactly into the literature value (approximately 2.1 J/m2). The latter can be seen in Fig. 7, which shows the transition zone along the length-direction of the model at each notch tip in MD and PFM simulations. For MD simulations, the normalized density is plotted with a bin size of 0.25 nm. The deformations observed in the MD results are facilitated by the unconstrained boundary conditions (allow for body rotations and translations) as well as the vibrations of each atom to get favorable (equilibrium) positions. Taking into account the density plot of the MD and overlapping it with the resultant intact-to-cracked material transition of the PFM, the correlation is easily observed. The main idea to establish a correlation between the MD crack transition zone and the phase-field parameterϵcomes from the physical meaning given to this parameter for phase transitions in material science  [34]. Here, the parameter is calculated as a function of density concentration, which is a measurable physical quantity. Though, in PFM for fracture there seems to be no universal agreement neither in value (literature refers to a range but not a concrete value) nor in physical definition of the parameter. For the factorization of the parameters towards their application in multi-scale problems, additional studies have to be carried out. This can be done for instance through several mathematical approaches as given in, e.g.  [44–46], among others. The numerical study presented in this work, delivered a “natural” transition zone of the brittle fracture in the MD simulations. Before crack initiation takes place, the change in density remains uniform. As the crack started to propagate, atoms in the crack zone detach from each other and try to find a new equilibrium position (see Fig. 3). Therefore, change in density in this zone drops down to zero. The zone between the fully cracked material and uncracked material (uniform density), is shown in Fig. 7. Given the phenomenological dissipation zone obtained from the all-atom simulations, we defined an MD transition zone, which correlates directly with the transition zone of the PFM (see Fig. 7). This result gave place to the initial hypothesis that indeed, there is a physically motivated value for the internal-length parameterϵwith potential multi-scaling applications. This could be a major advantage and breakthrough in the estimation of this parameter.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Using different levels of simplifications, continuum mechanics is able to tackle problems for structure sizes that cannot be reached by MD simulations. In spite of the conceptual differences between continuum mechanics and all-atom simulations, the combination of these two different methods is promising. Parameters for continuum mechanics can be obtained from all-atom simulations to ensure high accuracy and being closer to physics, thereby reducing empiricism. The efficiency of continuum mechanics allows to infer mechanical properties from the molecular scale, which is the key to understand a material’s interplay of the atomic structure and its overall performance.Our results provide an atomistic description of fracture of an aragonite tablet at the nano-scale level. The obtained key mechanical properties from MD simulations are quantitatively in good agreement with the literature. The ability of the PFM to reproduce an MD problem was confirmed. Through an atomistic obtention of the material parameters, the model presented a fair convergence and more important remains qualitatively and quantitatively within the outcomes of MD simulations and results reported in the literature. Moreover a correlation between the phase-field parameterϵ(which is of extreme importance for convergence) and an MD transition zone was established. Based on our study, this correlation would give way to a more realistic estimation of this parameter and give it a physical meaning. Through these findings, a theoretical dissipative zone between the undamaged and cracked material was observed. This leads to believe that in fact, brittle fracture does observe a transition zone, in a purely atomistic approach.As part of a novel approach, this work remains to have improvement areas. The outlook of this research will firstly consist of implementing a non-linear elastic model in order to better capture the material behavior from all-atom simulations. Moreover, further MD as well as PFM simulations under different setups (shear, combined loadings, dynamic case, different geometries, etc.) are required. The good agreement between the numerical results of MD and PFM allows to think that there is a correlation between the MD transition zone and the phase-field parameterϵ. This correlation could give the parameter a more physical interpretation, though further studies are needed in order to establish this relation and make it available for multi-scale modeling.