@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Dynamic security management for real-time embedded applications in industrial networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Introducing security-critical applications based on embedded control server systems for industrial networks.Establishing the security-aware task, security overhead and risk models for aperiodic real-time applications.Combining the soft real-time and security requirements into a unified framework.Deploying proportional controllers to achieve satisfied fine-grained control.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Real-time embedded system,Security management,Risk,Feedback control,Scheduling,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Widely deployed real-time embedded systems can improve the performance of industrial applications, but these systems also face the critical challenge of providing high quality security in an unpredictable network environment. We measure the time and energy consumptions of commonly used cryptographic algorithms on a real embedded platform and introduce a method to quantify the security risk of real-time applications. We propose a Dynamic Security Risk Management (DSRM) mechanism to manage the aperiodic real-time tasks for networked industrial applications. Inspired by the feedback design philosophy, DSRM is designed as a two-level control mechanism. The upper-level component makes efforts to admit or reject the arrival tasks and assigns the reasonable security level for each admitted task. With three proportional feedback controllers at the lower level, the security level of each ready task can be adjusted adaptively according to the dynamic environments. Simulation results show the superiority of the proposed mechanism.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Mission-critical industrial systems, composed of interconnected embedded systems, have to function correctly and meet dependable constraints. Typical examples of mission-critical industrial systems are power grid systems [1] and automation control systems [2]. Although digital systems and communication among them have been designed to be very reliable, networked industrial systems are still facing serious security challenges [3]. Industrial systems are generally real-time systems and are increasingly deployed in open environments where operating conditions are dynamic and security threatened. Energy efficiency is also a challenge because the supply of energy is generally inconvenient for many embedded systems. Quick energy consumption or early exhaustion of battery may lead to failure of critical task, which may result in degeneration of security quality. For industrial applications, there is a strong need to meet multiple constraints including real-time, secure and energy efficiency simultaneously. This situation is even worse when the workloads cannot be estimated in advance. Therefore, it is an imperative and significant task to design a suitable management mechanism for security-critical industrial applications operating in dynamic and resource-limited environments.Adaptive scheduling is essential towards high performance in embedded real-time systems. Incipient real-time scheduling algorithms are designed for static and priority based scheduling situations [4]. Unfortunately, these works are based on the assumption of knowing most information of applications such as the worst case execution time of each task. These mechanisms are designed in an open-loop mode and cannot be adjusted according to unpredicted situations, which will result in poor performance under dynamic working conditions. This situation gets more severer when considering security protection. For example, security-critical embedded control servers generally run in network environments where the potential threats cannot be modeled accurately. To guarantee the system performance in such unpredicted environments, several feedback control-based adaptive QoS scheduling algorithms have been developed [5]. Recently, feedback control methods have been applied in many applications, such as thermal control [6], fault-tolerance management [7] and dynamic voltage scaling [8]. To improve the security quality of real-time systems, several researchers have proposed some effective algorithms and models [9–12]. However, none of these researches considers dynamic security management for real-time embedded applications in industrial networks.Given these motivations, based on the research already published by the same authors in [13], we are interested in the design of adaptive security risk management mechanisms for the uniprocessor real-time embedded systems running in security-critical industrial networks. Taking features of aperiodic real-time user requests into account, we propose an adaptive and security risk-aware real-time scheduling mechanism. Administrators just need to appoint the desired system performance, and then the proposed design automatically monitors the system status and chooses the most appropriate cryptography algorithms to achieve satisfactory overall performance. In addition, there should be an advanced mechanism to manage tasks, i.e. admitting or rejecting some user requests. Inspired by the automatic control related work in storage system [14], a two-level control scheme is employed in this paper. The upper-level part mainly admits or rejects the newly arrival requests and then initializes the appropriate security protection. At the lower level, our proposal can change the deployed cryptography algorithms to guarantee the real-time and security performance dynamically.The primary contributions of this paper are:•Introducing security-critical applications based on embedded control server systems for industrial networks.Establishing the security-aware task model, security overhead model, and security risk model for aperiodic real-time applications.Combining the soft real-time and security requirements in a unified framework and deploying proportional controllers to achieve satisfied fine-grained control.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews mostly related work. The typical industry network applications and security protection demands are discussed in Section 3. Section 4 presents the system model. The design problem and a motivating example are given in Section 5 and then a dynamic security management mechanism is proposed in Section 6. In Section 7, we conduct simulations and analyze the experimental results. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section 8.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we are interested in the protection of security-critical real-time applications in industrial networks. We have proposed a dynamic security management mechanism which aims to reduce security risk, deadline miss ratio and task rejection ratio of aperiodic real-time tasks running on industrial server systems. To make our work more practical, we have measured the time and energy consumptions of widely used cryptographic algorithms and introduced a security risk metric to quantify the security strength of real-time tasks. To address the task scheduling problem, we have designed a two-level feedback control framework. The upper-level component focuses on task admitting and security level initiating. The fine-grained control implemented by three proportional controllers are deployed at the lower-level, which can adjust the security configuration variables and the security level of each running task according to the user requirement and system status. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed mechanism can successfully make the system metrics (deadline miss ratio, security risk ratio and rejection ratio) converged to their desired set points, and achieve up to 39.3% improvement of the overall performance comparing to the existing open-loop control mechanism.As the future work, we plan to extend our design method for periodic real-time applications with diversified security protections including integrity protection and make efforts on dynamic security management mechanisms for Distributed Control in industrial networks.