@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Load management scheme for energy holes reduction in wireless sensor networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Load management strategy for large scale wireless sensor networks.Energy efficient on demand clustering strategy.Load balancing data routing mechanism.Load balancing data routing mechanism reduces energy holes from the network.Experimental results for verifying the effectiveness and feasibility of the proposed work.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Wireless sensor networks (WSN),Load,Energy hole,Energy consumption,Data routing,Clustering,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In a wireless sensor network where sensors are arranged into a flat topology, sensors near the sink consume much more energy than sensors at the boundary of the network. Sensors near the sink relay many packets than far away sensors to the sink. After these sensors expire, energy holes are created near the sink. Therefore, other sensors cannot reach to the sink and the network becomes disconnected. In this paper, we propose some strategies that can balance energy consumption of the deployed sensors and reduce energy holes from the network by balancing the communication load as equally as possible. We performed extensive experiments on the proposed algorithm using various network scenarios and compared it with other existing algorithms. The experimental results verify the effectiveness and feasibility of the proposed work in terms of network lifetime, energy consumption, and other important network parameters.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Wireless sensor network (WSN) is a collection of low cost, low power, small sensing devices, where sensor nodes are deployed into a monitoring field without a preconfigured infrastructure [1]. After deployment, sensor nodes find neighbour nodes and organize themselves into a network [2,3]. The maximum amount of the energy of a sensor is consumed on two major tasks, viz sensing data from the monitoring environment and transmitting data to a sink or Base Station (BS) [4]. Energy consumption on sensing is dependent only on the sampling rate and does not depend on the network topology or location of the sensors. Therefore, energy consumption on sensing is constant. However, the data routing strategy is the most significant factor that determines the performance of the network [5–7]. In a homogeneous WSN, sensors near the sink consume much more energy compared to the sensors far away from the sink. Since, sensors near the sink relay many packets from sensors at the margin of the network [8], communication load of these sensors is much more compared to the far away sensors and they expire earlier than the far away sensor. After the expiry of these sensors, energy holes or communication gaps are created near the sink [9,10].Hence, far away sensors cannot transmit data to the sink and then the network becomes disconnected, but still most of the nodes can survive for a long period of time [11–14]. Thus, load distribution among the deployed sensors is one of the most critical problems in the designing of WSNs. It has a profound impact on the network lifetime and performance of the network. Therefore, it is necessary to design and develop a load balancing scheme for WSNs to prolong the network lifetime and performance of the network.Several cluster-based load management approaches have emerged in the literature review. Most of them have selected cluster head, depending on the remaining energy of the sensor nodes [2,8,15]. Cluster-based data routing strategy is more suitable for energy conservation compared to the direct data transmission. Most of the clustering approaches select cluster head dynamically in each round for better energy management among the sensor nodes. However, each round cluster head selection process imposes extra message overhead or traffic load on these approaches. An on-demand based cluster head selection strategy has selected cluster head depending on the network demand and reduces extra cluster formation overhead from the network. Thus, an on-demand based cluster head selection strategy is perfectly suitable for WSN load management scheme.In this paper, we propose a new cluster-based load management scheme, referred to as load management scheme for energy holes reduction in wireless sensor networks (LMSEHR) that can balance the energy consumption of the deployed sensor nodes and minimize energy holes creation in the WSN by balancing communication load as equally as possible. For doing this, proposed scheme does not make any assumptions like node distribution, node capacities, and network size. It does not use any location awareness Global Positioning System (GPS) to locate the position of the deployed sensor node. In this paper, we only consider deployed nodes which are varied in their transmission power and are capable of computing their remaining energy. In our proposed scheme, all sensors are organized into distinct clusters and each non-cluster head node belongs to exactly one cluster as a cluster member node. To achieve better energy management, proposed scheme selects CHs on-demand basis. The CHs are selected from the special regional nodes that can reduce extra message overhead and time delay in cluster head selection process. Furthermore, CHs communication load are balanced by the associative cluster heads. The main contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows:•We propose a new load management strategy for large scale sensor networks where communication load and residual energy of deployed sensors are used for CHs selection.We focus on the problem of minimizing energy holes within the network. Then, we mathematically derive an optimal solution based on the load balancing strategies.We propose special region based CHs selection mechanisms for energy and time saving.We also propose a load balancing data routing strategy for balance energy consumption.We carry out extensive simulations. The effectiveness and feasibility of the proposed algorithm are verified by comparing with other existing algorithms.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the related work which provides an exhaustive survey about the previous work is discussed. Section 3 states the problem of load-balancing and network model. Section 4 presents the problem formulation and the assumptions made in this paper. The proposed load management scheme is presented in Section 5. Section 6 gives simulation results and some discussions. Finally, Section 7 concludes this paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we have proposed a new energy efficient load management scheme for wireless sensor network which is not only energy efficient but also able to balance load. In the proposed scheme, cluster heads have been selected in non-probabilistic fashion based on the residual energy and communication load of the nodes. It has been shown that the proposed clustering algorithm has required O(N) time complexity for N sensor nodes. We have developed associative cluster head based simple but elegant data routing strategy that balances energy differences between the CHs and cluster member nodes. The proposed scheme has been simulated extensively using two different scenarios of WSN. Simulation results have been compared with five existing algorithms. The proposed scheme has been shown to outperform all these algorithms in terms of FND, LND, HNA including global energy loss, energy utilization in both the scenarios. In the future, this work deserves to be considered for being applied to some real-life applications such as agricultural crop monitoring or livestock monitoring.