@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Application of structural topology optimisation to perforated steel beams

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Structural topology optimisation to design steel I-section beam web openings.Numerical analysis and parametric study of local beam sections.Initial suggestion of web opening shapes by the optimal topology.Shear buckling characteristics of optimised beam webs using a nonlinear FEA.Barriers to the implementation of the topology optimisation techniques.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Castellated,Cellular,Novel web opening,Structural topology optimisation,SIMP technique,Opening configuration,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper focuses on the application of structural topology optimisation technique to design steel perforated I-sections as a first attempt to replace the traditional cellular beams and better understand the mechanisms involved when subjected to bending and shear actions. An optimum web opening configuration is suggested based on the results of parametric studies. A FE analysis is further employed to determine the performance of the optimised beam in comparison to the conventional widely used cellular type beam. It is found that the optimised beam overperforms in terms of load carrying capacities, deformations, and stress intensities. Barriers to the implementation of the topology optimisation technique to the routine design of beam web are highlighted.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The judicious placement of holes in the webs of steel beams has been employed to design lighter and stiffer beams for over 100years. The research focuses on steel I-section beams with perforations in the web which are variously known as; castellated beams (with hexagonal openings) and cellular beams (with circular openings) under the “umbrella” of perforated beams. The most important benefits when using such sections are the improved weight-to-stiffness ratio, the ability to integrate building services into the structural depth and the perceived aesthetic appeal of the beam [1]. The literature on the structural behaviour of steel I-section beams with standard circular, rectangular, and hexagonal web opening configurations is extensive [2–6]. The constant desire for improvement and mature level of understanding of the structural action of perforated steel sections has recently led to novel opening shapes being investigated [7–9]. The novel opening shapes are claimed to have beneficial fabrication, structural performance, usage in terms of service investigation and aesthetic qualities when compared to standard opening types.The aesthetics of cellular beams have long been a crucial design consideration. The switch from castellated style beams to cellular beams in the early 1990s has been attributed to the perceived aesthetic appeal of the circular opening [1,5]. More recently the “Angelina” style beam was first suggested by Claude Vasconi, an architect, with the consideration of aesthetic appeal at the fore [10,11].The progression of the design of beams with web openings, from the original castellated design to the currently used cellular design and the newly developed sinusoidal design clearly shows that ultimate mechanical performance of the section is not always the aim of development. Aesthetic appeal may justify the development of a new section in the absence of any mechanical performance gains.All of the opening shapes and configurations previously considered in the literature are constrained by the requirement that they can be manufactured by the profile cutting procedure. The profile cutting procedure, also known as castellation, is a method of manufacturing beams with web openings whereby a “parent” steel I-section is selected and a zig-zag pattern is (oxy or plasma) cut along the web of the section. The sections are then expanded and welded along the teeth of the zig-zag to form a deeper section with web openings (Fig. 1a). It is obvious that if a beam is to be formed using this process the possible geometry of the web openings is constrained. The profile cutting procedure is currently regarded as the most economical and standardised method of fabricating beams with web openings. The only exception being when wide elongated web openings are considered.More recently an alternative fabrication technique, plate assembly (Fig. 1b), has been adopted by several leading fabricators of cellular beams. The plate assembly technique offers significantly increased design freedom in terms of the shape and layout of web hence elongated web openings can be accommodated as well as non-periodically spaced web openings of various sizes and shapes. It is, however, considered an expensive solution due the long welding line along the plates (web and flanges) and the demanding requirements for accuracy when the perforations are engraved.Nowadays the latter fabrication method is considered as more advantageous and adaptive to the needs of the architect and design engineer, hence it becomes more and more prevalent and efficient for steel construction.To this point, no research found in the literature presenting any formal structural optimisation studies that have been performed with the aim of improving the design of steel I-section beam web opening shapes used in civil engineering and particularly building applications. Previous advancements in web opening configurations have rather relied upon engineering intuition and experience. Structural topology optimisation is a design tool which can be used to determine information on the optimum number, shape and size of openings within a user defined structural domain.The placement of openings within the web of steel I-section beams improves the mass-to-stiffness ratio of the section. An improved weight-to-stiffness ratio enables the realisation of longer spans without incurring a significant cost penalty in terms of material usage and deflections due to self-weight.The main aim of the present research study is to investigate the potential for different web opening configurations in structural perforated beams using formalised structural optimisation techniques. Specifically, structural topology optimisation is to be applied to the design of the steel beam web as a first attempt to replace the conventional cellular beams, investigating the alternatives for perforated beams which fulfil certain boundary criteria as well as visualise the structural mechanisms involved when the beams are subjected to bending and shear forces.The objectives of this study are (i) to apply a structural topology optimisation technique to the design of a steel I-section beam web; (ii) to investigate the structural behaviour of a simply supported beam subjected to vertical shear actions with a topology optimised web, using nonlinear finite element (FE) analysis; (iii) to invent an effective opening configuration for a wide variety of beam cross-sections found in practice through an extensive parametric study; (iv) to establish a nonlinear FE analysis technique which can be used to determine the web buckling load of the topology optimised beam web concept; and (v) to parametrically investigate the local buckling behaviour of such thin-walled perforated webs while changing the geometric characteristics of the new web opening architecture and compare with existing web opening designs.Within the literature very limited information exists regarding the optimisation of cellular beams. Erdal et al. [12] conducted an investigation into the optimum combination of parent section, number of openings and size of openings for a cellular beam. The problem, as described, is a discrete programming problem and both harmony search and particle swarm optimisation techniques were investigated. The response of the beam, bending capacity, shear capacity and deflection, were calculated using design equations given by BS5950 [13].An alternative approach has been presented by Lagaros et al. [14]. The design of a steel framed structure, incorporating cellular beam elements, was considered. The cross-sectional dimensions of the sections were defined as size variables whilst the number and size of web openings were defined as shape and topology optimisation variables, respectively. A FE simulation of the frame was employed to determine the structural response. The authors found it necessary to use an evolutionary based optimisation algorithm due to the mixed, discrete–continuous design variables.Later, Tsavdaridis and D’Mello [7] have presented a parametric optimisation study on an elliptically shaped web opening. The parametric study involved the FE analysis of models with various permutations of the elliptical opening geometric parameters θ and R. Shear-moment interaction curves were produced for various combinations of the geometric parameters. It was reported that the elliptical opening configuration showed enhanced structural performance in comparison to circular and hexagonal web openings.Kingman et al. [15] have presented the first part of this study in 2013 on structurally optimised perforated beams. The completion of parametric studies as well as the investigation and development of realistic web models with practical opening configurations is further conducted in the current study to acknowledge the potential for use of such optimised beams and the sensitivity of their geometric characteristics.Structural optimisation can be divided into three distinct problem categories; topology, shape and size optimisation [16]. A degree of overlap exists between the three categories, and arguably a combination of two or more of the categories previously defined constitute a fourth category. The most succinct explanation of the three methods is pictorial (Fig. 2).It can be seen that of the three methods topology optimisation is the most general, yielding information on the number and shape of openings within a generalised material continua. Potential overlap between the three categories is also apparent since it may be possible to derive a structural topology based on sizing optimisation, provided that the minimum size of a member is defined as zero.Structural optimisation techniques are most commonly applied to the design of automotive and aerospace structures where weight savings are critical. The application of structural optimisation techniques to the design of building and civil/structural engineering structures is, however, a more challenging proposition. These challenges are discussed in this paper.Design optimisation techniques are generally best applied to products intended for mass production where even small savings, per product, can lead to substantial savings over a large production run [17]. It is, however, generally the case that civil engineering construction projects are of a one off nature and the standardisation of components is limited. Civil engineering structures and components are generally designed based on precedent works and experience.The civil engineering industry is inherently conservative when considering newly suggested products or techniques [18]. This conservative nature is a direct result of the large risks associated with civil engineering project in terms of both safety and finance. The general perception being that to deviate from precedent leads to unacceptable risks. If a new design is suggested the benefits, in terms of cost saving, must be such that it makes the perceived risk of adopting the new design acceptable.A further technical challenge of applying design optimisation techniques, within the field of civil structural engineering, is the wide range of disparate and complex design requirements. An elegant design example, presented by Nolan [19], demonstrates that it is often the case that designs will be constrained by factors that are not easily quantifiable, such as manufacturability or aesthetic appeal. Within this context, focusing on an optimisation study, the design of a mass produced component such as perforated beams, may present an opportunity to find material and cost savings within building structures. Moreover, design regulations for such innovative structural elements should be established in the near future to support their use in practice.Initially, a topology optimisation study was performed on the web of a simply supported steel I-section beam of a 5m span. A typical UB 305×165×40 was selected on the basis that it is a fairly common section to find in practice and mainly in building applications. Thereafter, the structural behaviour of the optimised beam was compared to a similar beam but with circular web openings, by carrying out a nonlinear FE analysis. The topology optimisation studies were performed using Altair Engineering’s Optistruct software. The comparative nonlinear FE analysis studies were performed using ANSYS v.14.0.Structural topology optimisation is concerned with the identification of the optimum number and location of openings, within a defined designable structural continuum to fulfil a given objective, subject to applied loading and constraints. Numerous techniques for the solution of structural topology optimisation problems have been suggested [20–23]. The first solutions to a topology optimisation problem were produced by Michell [24]. Michell’s solutions, for cases of simple loading and boundary conditions, provide optimal topologies for truss-like structures. The basic premise of the Michell’s solutions is that it is most efficient for structural elements to follow the lines of principal stress within the ground continua. Further analytical solutions have been identified for simple topology optimisation problems [25–27]. However, the complexity of problems of interest to practicing engineers makes the use of analytical solutions impractical.Rozvany [28] identified the work of Rosow and Taylor [29], on the design of variable thickness sheets, as the first attempt to derive an optimal topology using numerical techniques. The use of FE analysis, coupled with optimisation algorithms, has become the standard procedure for solving topology optimisation problems. Sigmund and Peterson [30] conceptualised the use of FE meshes in topology optimisation problems thus; “one may consider the design domain as a black and white television screen divided into a lot of small pixels (finite elements), and by turning material on and off in each pixel, one can produce a picture of the optimal structure” [30]. Rozvany [28] and Eschenhaur and Olhoff [31] presented thorough reviews and critiques of contemporary topology optimisation techniques. Eschenhaur and Olhoff [31] suggested that topology optimisation techniques can be defined into two broad categories; material- or micro- approaches and geometrical- or macro approaches.Micro approaches, and specifically the Solid Isotropic Material with Penalisation (SIMP) technique, are the most widely utilised [28]. The SIMP technique, after Bendsøe [32], is a micro approach where the optimal structural topology is sought by varying the density of the material within the designable domain. A FE analysis of the structure is performed to determine the structural response of interest which may include; stress, displacement, compliance and buckling load, amongst others. Numerous developments and extensions of the SIMP method have been developed, accounting for a wide variety of structural behaviours.Evolutionary Structural Optimisation (ESO), a macro approach, proposed by Xie and Steven [20] is currently the only potentially viable alternative to the SIMP method. The basic concept of ESO is to remove material, in the form of finite elements, from areas of the designable domain that are underutilised. This type of macro approach differs from the aforementioned material approaches in the respect that the FE mesh itself is altered during the optimisation process. Criticisms of the ESO method [28,33] focus on its heuristic nature. Improvements and extensions of ESO have been suggested, most notable Bi-directional Evolutionary Structural Optimisation [34], but the basic criticism remains unaddressed.Newly developed structural topology optimisation techniques, including; the bubble method [21], level-set method [22] and topological derivative methods [23], can be described as macro approaches. Whilst many of these techniques are potentially improvements on currently available methods, none are currently at a stage of development that allows their commercial application [28].It is generally desirable to develop the so called 0-1 design where the final distribution of material, within the design space, is comprised entirely of either solid material or voids. The solution of the 0-1 problem directly has been attempted, for instance the ESO technique. It is however, generally the case that the application of such techniques is computationally prohibitive due to the number of finite elements necessary to model the design space. The SIMP technique addresses this problem by defining the material within each finite element as a continuous design variable. It is worth to mention that by converting the design variable from discrete to continuous, it is possible to use more computationally efficient mathematical programming methods for the solution of the original problem [35].Intermediate density material, which neither takes the value of solid nor void, is generally not desirable since it is not possible to realise such intermediate densities within a real world structure. In order to avoid the presence of intermediate densities, within the final design, a penalisation is used to disproportionately decrease the benefit derived by the presence of intermediate density material. Penalisation of intermediate densities is achieved, within SIMP, by relating the stiffness of the material to the density thus:E=ρPIn practical implementation it has been found that by specifying a large value of P, it may result in convergence to a local minima and a poor final design. A continuation method, whereby the value of the penalisation factor is gradually increased through the iterations, has been implemented but does not guarantee convergence to a global optimum 0-1 design [36].Two basic approaches to topology optimisation using the SIMP technique exist:•Minimum Compliance Design: The minimisation of a specific performance measure subject to a constraint on the available resources. Usually the compliance of the structure will be defined as the optimisation objective with a constraint on the available material.Minimum Weight Design: The minimisation of the mass of the structure with constraints on specific performance measures. The specific performance measures will usually be defined as stress, displacement, buckling load factor or any combination thereof.Both of the approaches have been examined in the literature. The efficacy of the two approaches is debated with numerous advantages and disadvantages associated with each as shown below.The SIMP technique [34] is currently cited as being the most prevalent method of solving topology optimisation problems with the firmest mathematical basis [28,31].A FE model of the steel beam section was created to determine the structural response of the entire beam for use in the optimisation algorithm. The beam was modelled using shell elements with a nominal size of 10mm. A linear elastic material model was used with Young’s Modulus and Poisson’s Ratio of 200GPa and 0.3, respectively. Uniform pressure loading was applied to the top flange of the beam. Constraints were applied to the end of the lower flange to model the support conditions. A standard linear static FE analysis approach was employed herein.The maximisation of structural stiffness subject to a constraint on the available material has been shown to be effective when attempting to identify conceptual designs [37]. The optimisation approach taken was, therefore, the one of minimising compliance subject to a constraint on the available material.It is worth to mention that the implementation of the SIMP technique, for the solution of practical problems, results in numerical complications [30]. The main numerical complications are the mesh dependency and the checkerboard problem. As a high number of finite elements used to discretise the design space, an increased number of openings within the design space will be present in the final design. Numerous techniques have been suggested for generating mesh independent solutions including; perimeter constraints, local density gradient constraints, filtering of densities, filtering of sensitivities and MOnotonicity based minimum LEngth scale (MOLE) controls. Whilst all of the methods listed control the geometry of the final solution, the MOLE technique, after Poulsen [38], allows an explicit statement of the minimum desired member size. The added advantage of this technique being that manufacturability can be directly incorporated into the topology optimisation problem.Consequently, in order to prevent the emergence of small scale features in the topology optimisation results, the so called minimum member size control was used in this study. A minimum member size of 30mm was specified in order to prevent any design features at a scale smaller than this from emerging in the topology optimisation results.As it was aforementioned, the SIMP technique was used to solve the topology optimisation problem. In order to identify a discrete solid-void final design using the SIMP technique, it is necessary to specify an appropriate value for the intermediate density material penalisation factor [35]. The most appropriate penalisation factor for this specific problem was investigated through sensitivity studies and it was found that a factor of 4 was satisfactory.The topology optimisation study was performed initially considering variations in the maximum available material constraint. The material constraint is specified in terms of a volume fraction, where the maximum material allowed in the final design is described as a fraction of the material present at the beginning of the optimisation. Volume fraction constraints of 0.5, 0.4 and 0.3 were studied. A penalisation factor of 3 was initially specified as it was recommended [39].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
