@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Fast and efficient lossless adaptive compression scheme for wireless sensor networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A fast and low memory data compression scheme is proposed for WSNs.The scheme performs compression losslessly using 8 variable-length code options.The scheme which uses a very simple data model is fast and computationally simple.The scheme is efficient and requires no coding dictionary.The scheme achieve better compression performance than previously proposed schemes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#


@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The number of wireless sensor network deployments for real-life applications has rapidly increased in recent years. However, power consumption is a critical problem affecting the lifetime of wireless sensor networks (WSNs). A number of techniques have been proposed to solve this power problem. Among the proposed techniques, data compression scheme is one that can be used to reduce the volume of data to be transmitted. This paper therefore proposes a fast and efficient lossless adaptive compression scheme (FELACS) for WSNs. FELACS was proposed to enable a fast and low memory compression algorithm for WSNs. FELACS generates its coding tables on the fly and compresses data very fast. FELACS is lightweight, robust to packet losses and has very low complexity. FELACS achieved compression rates of 4.11 bits per sample. In addition, it achieved power savings up to 70.61% using the real-world test datasets.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Wireless sensor networks (WSNs) are very large scale deployments of tiny smart wireless sensor devices working together to monitor a region and to collect data about the environment. Sensor nodes are generally self-organized and they communicate with each other wirelessly to perform a common task. The nodes are deployed in large quantities (from tens to thousands) and scattered randomly in an ad-hoc manner in the sensor field (a large geographic area). Through advanced mesh networking protocols, these sensor nodes form a wide area of connectivity that extends the reach of cyberspace out into the physical world. Data collected by each sensor node is transferred wirelessly to the sink either directly or through multi-hop communication. WSNs have unlimited applicability. They find application in areas such as environmental monitoring, industrial monitoring, health and wellness monitoring, seismic and structural monitoring, inventory location monitoring, surveillance, power monitoring, factory and process automation, object tracking, precision agriculture, disaster management, and equipment diagnostics [1–6]. These monitoring applications involve the collection of large volumes of raw data over time. Thus, collecting high-fidelity data for these monitoring applications considering the limitations of WSNs presents a key challenge.WSNs operate under tight energy budgets and have other limitations that include limited radio bandwidth, limited memory, limited computational capability, limited packet size and high packet loss rates. Data compression is one tool that can be used to effectively manage these limited resources of the nodes to deliver high-fidelity high data return to the sink node over low rate and unreliable radio links. Saving a byte of data through data compression has been shown to worth spending between four thousand (using Chipcon CC2420 transceiver) to two million (using MaxStream XTend transceiver) cycles of computation [7]. The amount of energy required for transmission over time can be greatly minimized if we can reduce the volume of data to be transmitted. The reduction in data size will further lead to considerable savings in power. Therefore, compressing data before transmission is one of the major strategies for energy-efficient WSNs.In this paper, we present a lightweight block-based lossless adaptive compression scheme called fast and efficient lossless adaptive compression scheme (FELACS) based on Golomb–Rice codes for WSNs. Since sensor nodes have relatively low computational power, tight energy budgets and limited hardware resources, our focus in the design of FELACS is that, it must have very low complexity. FELACS compresses each block of source data independently and thus provide significant robustness to packet losses that may occur due to congestion, interference and multipath effects. Naturally, Golomb–Rice codes are fast to implement and requires no coding table. As such, they have been used in many application areas [8]. For each application, a different Golomb–Rice parameter estimation technique is normally proposed to suit the particular application. Therefore, in this paper, we devised a simple, fast and efficient Golomb–Rice parameter estimation method that makes the implementation of Golomb–Rice codes very suitable for WSNs.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we review related work. In Section 3, we discuss the original Rice coding algorithm. In addition, we introduce our proposed FELACS algorithm. Next, we discuss Lossless Entropy Compression (LEC) algorithm. In Section 4, we present a detailed performance evaluation of our proposed scheme in comparison to other schemes including state-of-the-art Rice algorithm and other lossless schemes proposed specifically for WSNs. Finally, in Section 5, we present our conclusions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
