@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A lightweight message authentication scheme for Smart Grid communications in power sector

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Designed an authentication scheme for IoT based smart grid communication.Analyzed the scheme using automated tool ProVerif.The proposed scheme is more lightweight and secure than existing schemes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Authentication,Smart meter security,Lightweight cryptography,IoT,Smart Grid,ProVerif,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The Internet of Things (IoT) has plenty of applications including Smart Grid (SG). IoT enables smooth and efficient utilization of SG. It is assumed as the prevalent illustration of IoT at the moment. IP-based communication technologies are used for setting SG communication network, but they are challenged by huge volume of delay sensitive data and control information between consumers and utility providers. It is also challenged by numerous security attacks due to resource constraints in smart meters. Sundry schemes proposed for addressing these problems are inappropriate due to high communication, computation overhead and latency. In this paper, we propose a hybrid Diffie–Hellman based lightweight authentication scheme using AES and RSA for session key generation. To ensure message integrity, the advantages of hash based message authentication code are exploited. The scheme provides mutual authentication, thwarting replay and man-in-the-middle attacks and achieves message integrity, while reducing overall communication and computation overheads.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Internet of things (IoT) refers to the emerging concept of computing in which abundant physical objects are connected to the Internet to form a network. This network enables connected objects to access, interpret, exchange and monitor the information of each other. It has brought a revolution in communication technologies by empowering advanced applications such as Smart Grid (SG). Although, IoT has the ability to provide management of energy at home level, but it also has the potential to facilitate the complete advanced electric power grid known as SG. SG is comprised of millions of interconnected and interacting devices that can be considered as the objects present in IoT. Therefore, due to similar nature of both IoT and SG, IoT can easily facilitate the implementation of SG and integrates its feature of collecting and sharing energy related information in SG. This integration will allow SG to carry out its routine tasks in sustainable, efficient, reliable and cost effective manner.SG is the replacement for conventional power grid because it brings more reliability and efficiency through smart, intelligent and interactive features. SG not only offers distributed control to power suppliers but also satisfies the current and future needs of the consumers [1]. In recent years, SG is seizing the attention from researchers and also from engineers in electric power generation and communication areas [2]. SG is also referred as the future grid. It is an enhancement of the conventional electrical power grid, by integrating digital computation and communication technologies for providing secure, efficient and reliable delivery of electricity and exchange of information between power generators, utility companies and consumers of the electric power [3]. Some important functionalities provided by SG are as under;1.Self healing: SG has the ability to identify, analyze and respond to particular faults swiftly through intelligent and appropriate action in order to recuperate from that fault [4,5].Motivate and include the consumers: The SG provides interactive options and information, enabling consumers to select an appropriate available tariff and control their power usage accordingly. In this way, the consumers can make better and cost effective plan for themselves.Resist attack: SG can resists against both physical and cyber-attacks.Increase in power quality: These days consumer’s major demand is constant voltage and therefore SG have the ability to maintain constant voltage which can ultimately increase the power quality and reduces the commercial productivity loss, because sudden fluctuations in voltage can be harmful for electric appliances [4].Accommodate all sources of generations and storage options: Conventional power grid doesn’t have the ability to integrate renewable energy sources such as green power, wind power and solar power etc. SG on the contrary has the ability to adapt and integrate these renewable resources [4].Enables electrical markets: SG supports distributed power sources, which attracts new electric power suppliers and service providers towards the power market, also ensures cost effective power supply to consumer.Optimizing assets and operate efficiently: SG automatically assists the equipment conditions, manages its configuration and reduces the maintenance cost as compared to conventional electrical grid.SG is therefore, an electrical power infrastructure with smart capabilities by allowing power providers, power distributors and power consumers to maintain operating requirements and capabilities in near-real-time [2]. Moreover, SG provides the power to consumers in a stable and reliable way on contrary to conventional power grid [2,6]. The SG sanctions two-way communications among consumers and providers of electrical power, this instinctive feature enable consumers to efficaciously prompt their power requisites to utility providers by which they play an active role and efficiently customize their consumption level [2]. This ability enables the consumers to minimize their energy consumptions by communicating back and forth with the electricity providers. Whereas the conventional grid broadcasts the electricity in one-way fashion and the consumers cannot actively participate, and neither can they customize their consumption level. The demand response capability for the load management can efficiently reduce the load in an emergency situation or in high price situation, so the consumers can reduce their consumption level in these situations accordingly [7]. It was estimated that, the demand response in non-emergency situation can reduce the price from 5% to 15% in peak load.In SG, a number of sensing devices, smart meters and control-systems lies in the path between providers and consumers of electric power for facilitating the two-way communications [2]. The sensing devices are capable of malfunction detection and the operations that exhibit deviations with respect to normal ranges. It requires a felicitous response from control center, while these responses are converted to control messages and sent to SG segments [2]. For this purpose, the SG communication framework and its functionality must be characterized in order to sanction active consumers participation and facilitate resiliency to sundry security threats. In SG the consumers have smart meters, by which they are capable of identifying their consumption of power in most efficient way as compared to conventional energy meters [2,6].The smart meters customarily accumulate the electrical consumption information of smart home, which is then amassed by utility company (i.e. for monitoring and billing purposes). Consumers can also access their smart meter for checking their consumption level and adjust the power utilization accordingly (i.e. less utilization of electricity during peak hours for preserving mazuma) [2,6]. For this purpose smart meter sends messages to the utility provider periodically for adjusting their power utilization and participate actively for their power utilization adjustment within SG dynamically. The utility providers can additionally send some special offers by sending messages to smart meters, by which the consumers can preserve mazuma and adjust their utilization accordingly. During peak electrical hours if all the appliances are switched on and the SG are peregrinating to an emergency situation then the utility provider send messages to all consumers by utilizing smart meters to notify about the emergency event and to adjust consumption level accordingly, by which the consumers thwart the situation by shutting down some appliances and participate to the stable environment actively [8]. Whereas the conventional power grid did not have such functionality. The smart meters can efficiently communicate with their appliances and accumulate the energy requisites from all appliances i.e. smart appliances [6].The SG communication infrastructure consists of homes, buildings and immensely colossal neighborhoods. In order to facilitate SG communication, Internet Protocol (IP) based communications network technologies are the suitable cull for establishing IP-based SG communications. The smart meters and smart appliances (i.e. heater, dishwasher, washing machine, air conditioner, tube light, television etc.) must have a unique IP addresses for supporting SG communication and standards of IETF (Internet Engineering Task Force) for remote management of smart meters located at different places in the hierarchy [2,6].The electric utilities itself can turn off loads remotely in peak hours demands, and they can manage integration to their distribution systems of power generation, like solar and wind for load balancing [8]. The remote management sanctions the power providers to efficiently amass metering data from smart meters for monitoring and billing purposes and they additionally send some control messages which contains some special offers and error events.In the current decade SG got attentions from researchers in both distribution and communication sectors, for this purpose different communication models are presented in the literature [7,9–12]. The communication model which is adopted here is presented in [2,6] with a minor enhancement, by superseding wimax technology through optical fiber for long distance communication between control centers and buildings feeders shown in Fig. 1.The authors in [2,6] proposed the communication model for SG, in which they dissever transmission and distribution system of the power from communication. The Distribution Network (DN) distributes electric power from power plants to consumers by the following two primary systems; (1) Transmission Substations (TSs) at power plant, (2) one or many Distribution Substations (DSs) [2,6,9]. The TSs distributes the electrical power from power generation plants through higher voltage transmission lines (230KV’s) to DSs, resides at different regions. They then transform this high voltage power to a medium voltage power and distribute it to feeders reside at buildings, the feeders at buildings then transform medium voltage to a lower voltage, which is then utilized by smart home appliances [2]. The hand-off between TS to DS of high voltage and the conversion process of this high voltage to medium voltage is done in DS. So in short the TS distributes the electric power from power plant to DS whereas the DS distributes the medium level voltage electric power to feeders, which convert it to lower caliber voltage and is then consumed by consumer’s appliances.Three hierarchical networks for distribution are composed at lower level, denominated as Neighborhood Area Network (NAN), Building Area Network (BAN), and Home Area Network (HAN). Each DS only covers one neighborhood area, and one NAN contains a number of BANs, and single BAN have multiple HANs [2,6] as shown in Fig. 1, n-DSs covering n neighborhoods, so each DS have one NAN and each NAN have k-BANs and each BAN can have m-HANs. The smart meters shown in Fig. 1 are responsible for sanctioning the two-way communication among consumers and providers of electricity, the smart meters comprises of two interfaces, one is utilized for power reading and another is utilized like gateway (GW) for communication purposes [2,6]. The smart meters located at different places in the hierarchy shown in Fig. 1 are designated as NAN-GW, BAN-GW and HAN-GW, through these smart meters/GWs consumer can check their current consumption level of the electrical power and adjust their consumption by shutting or running some appliances [2,6].The utilization of IP-based communication network in SG causes the astronomically immense volume of delay sensitive data and control information, such networks are susceptible to man-in-the-middle, denial of service, eaves dropping and replay attacks [2]. As SG networking coalesces different components of electrical power system to collaborate and interact with one another, which requires interaction between these different technologies to work efficaciously by introducing different security risks [1]. The higher degree of interconnection between different components of SG introduces incipient security vulnerabilities [13]. Electric Power Research Institute (ERPI) analyzes the main issue of SG development concerning cyber security, and states in their report that, cyber security becomes a critical component for SG due to sundry cyber attacks and incidents which disconnect the SG network. Cyber security not only addresses deliberate attacks (i.e. from disgruntled employee, industrial espionage, and additionally from terrorists) but withal a compromise to information infrastructure caused by user errors, failure of equipment and natural disasters. The attackers exploit these vulnerabilities and get access to control software facilely and alter the load conditions by destabilizing the grid in an capricious way. Availability, confidentiality and integrity were the only security objectives of the conventional power grid [14].All wireless networks are inherently insecure [15,16]. Same is the case with SG as the two way communication among different components is IP-based by which the attackers can facilely exploit SG by gaining access to SG environment [1,2]. In SG the consumers of smart homes are equipped with smart meters, which amass the consumer’s consumption information and these smart meters send this information to utility provider on conventional interval for monitoring and billing purposes. So the security of the smart meters are consequential. An efficient and secure authentication mechanism can guarantee the security of such smart devices. If no such authentication mechanism is opted in a SG network then the attacker can facilely modify the critical information like power utilization, leading towards erroneous billing and mendacious power usage approximation. From US power system, $6 billion of worth of power is purloined as per current estimate [17]. So the SG communication framework must consider an efficient authentication mechanism against which the attackers fail to compromise the secrecy or privacy of the information which is exchanged among consumers and utility providers of the electric power [2].The SG infrastructure is of resource constrained nature, so in order to address the security concerns of smart meters, the message authentication protocols must be lightweight. The subsisting authentication schemes could not work with resource constrained environments [18–20], such traditional schemes lead to scalability issues i.e. multiple requests are not processed at the same time and increment the communication latency and engender delay in providing service to all consumers.The rest of the paper is organized as follows, related work is elaborated in Section 2, the system model, threat model and design goals are discussed in Section 3. Section 4 introduces the notations used in proposed scheme followed by the proposed scheme itself. Security analysis is discussed in Section 5. Likewise, the ProVerif validation of proposed scheme is solicited in Section 6. Section 7 analyzes and compares the proposed scheme with existing schemes. Finally, Section 8 presents the conclusion of the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
