@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Wavelet fusion for encrypting images with a few details

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper introduces a new scheme for encrypting images with few details based on wavelet fusion..The fusion is a pre-processing step to change the homogeneity of flat areas in the images having a few details. RC6 or chaotic Baker map encryption are then performed on the fused image.Encryption with chaotic Baker map is just a permutation algorithm that cannot perform well on flat areas of the images, because the permutation yields approximately the same intensities. So, circular shifts on pixels are performed on the fused image prior to chaotic encryption to remove flat areas or reduce the degree of homogeneity.The robustness of the suggested image ciphering schemes is tested in the presence of noise before decryption. Simulation results demonstrated that the suggested image ciphering schemes provide a secure and effective way for encrypting images with few details.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Image encryption,Chaotic Baker map,DWT,Image fusion,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper introduces a new scheme for encrypting images with a few details based on wavelet fusion. In this scheme, the image with a few details to be encrypted is fused with another image that is rich in details utilizing the Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) prior to encryption. The fusion is a pre-processing step to change the homogeneity of flat areas in the images having a few details. RC6 or chaotic Baker map encryption are then performed on the fused image. Encryption with chaotic Baker map is just a permutation algorithm that cannot perform well on flat areas of the images, because the permutation yields approximately the same intensities. So, circular shifts on pixels are performed on the fused image prior to chaotic encryption to remove flat areas or reduce the degree of homogeneity. Chaotic encryption is then performed in the wavelet domain to increase the degree of diffusion. Several metrics are used in this paper for performance evaluation of the suggested ciphering schemes like visual inspection, histogram test, encryption quality analysis, and diffusion analysis. The robustness of the suggested image ciphering schemes is tested in the presence of noise before decryption. Simulation results demonstrated that the suggested image ciphering schemes provide a secure and effective way for encrypting images with few details.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Now, the security becomes a significant problem in telecommunication and image protection. Ciphering is considered as an efficient method to realize security. Image ciphering is employed in video conferencing, mobile multimedia systems, military communications, telecommunications, and telemedicine [1,2]. Image ciphering schemes are divided into confusion-based schemes and diffusion-based schemes. Encryption for the purpose of transmission over wireless channels is preferred to be implemented with confusion-based schemes, because diffusion-based schemes are sensitive to the accumulation of errors [3]. So, chaos-based algorithms have shown their superiority for image encryption [4].Encryption of images with few details is a challenging task for most encryption algorithms. Block cipher algorithms like the RC6 algorithm fail in hiding the details of these images, because the pixel values incorporated into the encryption of a certain area of the image are very close. Also, spatial domain chaotic ciphering has a disadvantage of keeping an identical histogram to that of the plainimage. A solution to such problem is based on performing some type of pre-processing on the image prior to encryption to remove homogeneity of flat areas. This pre-processing step can be a fusion with another image that is rich in details.Image fusion can be considered as a process that merges different images together to construct a single image [6–9]. In this paper, the target is totally different from that of traditional fusion algorithms, which aim at integrating information from different realizations of the same scene. Fusion is performed here with a totally different image from the image to be encrypted to create as much randomness as possible in the obtained image. This process is expected to increase encryption efficiency.The remaining paper sections are arranged with the following order. Section 2 presents image fusion with the wavelet transform. Section 3 introduces the suggested image ciphering schemes. Section 4 presents results and analysis. Noise effect on the decryption process is explored in Section 5. In Section 6, conclusions are given.The DWT represents a compromise between the spatial and frequency domain representations. The DWT processes the signal at various frequency bands with various resolutions through decomposing the signal into a low frequency component (approximation) and high frequency components (details). The DWT employs scaling and wavelet functions. The 2-D DWT is employed through performing a 1-D DWT on rows and columns of the 2-D data. Fig. 1 shows the process of applying the 2-D DWT to an image with a bank of filters, where L and H represent low-pass and high-pass filters, respectively, and ↓2 denotes the down sampling by two. The finite impulse response filter coefficients of the low-pass and high-pass filters in both decomposition (L, H) and reconstruction (L⌣,H⌣) should fulfill the biorthogonal conditions of dealiasing and exact reconstruction in Z-domain as follows:(1)H(−z−1)H⌣(Z)+L(−z−1)L⌣(Z)=0(2)H(z−1)H⌣(Z)+L(z−1)L⌣(Z)=1The low-pass and high-pass filters are not identical in biorthogonal wavelet filters. However, the low-pass filter is symmetric; the high-pass filter may be symmetric or anti-symmetric. The filters coefficients are integers or real numbers. The biorthogonal wavelet filters become orthogonal, whenH=H⌣, andL=L⌣, in which case H is a conjugate mirror filter. The orthogonal filters coefficients are real valued. The filters are of the same length and are not symmetric.The image fusion process is performed between the original image and an auxiliary image of rich details. The wavelet fusion is widely used for image fusion [8], in which wavelet coefficients of transformed images are merged in the DWT using defined fusion rule, and then the result is subjected to inverse DWT to obtain the final fused image. Wavelet fusion can be represented by taking the DWT W of the two images I1(n1, n2) and I2(n1, n2) to be fused according to a given fusion rule ϕ[10–12]. Then, apply the inverse DWTW−1, and the fused image I(n1, n2) is obtained with the following equation:(3)I(n1,n2)=W−1(ϕ(W(I1(n1,n2)),W(I2(n1,n2)))).This process is depicted in Fig. 2.The averaging rule is adopted in this paper for the fusion of the image to be encrypted and an auxiliary image. It performs an averaging of values from the two wavelet-transformed images at each position. The selection of the averaging fusion rule aims at making the decryption process possible if the auxiliary image is known at the receiver. The steps of wavelet-based image fusion scheme are:1.The forward DWT is performed for the image with few details and the auxiliary image to obtain the approximation and detail coefficients to be fused.Coefficient combination according to a certain fusion rule (averaging) is performed to get the fused coefficients.Inverse DWT of the fused coefficients is employed to get the fused image.Fig. 3 shows a medical image with few details and its histogram. It is clear that the histogram is approximately binary-valued. So, it is difficult to encrypt this image with traditional encryption algorithms. This figure also shows the result of the fusion of this image with Lena image and how the resulting image histogram has changed in a manner, which makes encryption easier. Figs. 4–8 show similar examples for 512 × 512 gray-scale Medical, Logo, Chessboard, Fingerprint, Nike, and Tux images with a few details, respectively. Fusion has also a great effect on the resulting image histogram.Two schemes for encrypting images with few details are suggested. The first scheme includes two steps as shown in Fig. 9(a). Firstly, the image fusion is performed on the original and auxiliary images. After that, encryption is performed with the RC6 algorithm. The second one includes three steps illustrated in Fig. 9(b). Firstly, the image fusion is performed. After that, encryption is performed in two steps; circular shifts of pixels and chaotic Baker map randomization.After the pre-processing image fusion step, the fused image is subjected to pixel-level shifts. This is achieved using a secret key provided by a Pseudo-Noise (PN) sequence generator. The permutation process is performed by applying the secret key to both rows and columns of the plain image. If the secret key bit is 1, the corresponding row is circularly shifted to the right by a number of shifts equal to the row number minus one (e.g. row number 4 is shifted 3 times). If the secret key bit is 0, the corresponding row stays unchanged as depicted in Table 1. The permutation process is performed on the columns of the resulting image in a similar way using the same secret key as illustrated in Table 2.The Baker map randomization is applied on the image resulting from fusion and circular shifts, but in the wavelet domain to enhance the diffusion level of the encryption process [13,14]. The Baker map randomization for an N × N square matrix is performed through the following steps:1.The matrix is split to k vertical rectangles of height N and width ni, where n1 + n2 + …nk= N.The vertical rectangles are expanded horizontally.After that, the rectangles are accumulated in a way that makes the left one at the bottom and the right one at the top.The discretized chaotic Baker map should allocate every pixel to another location using a confusion way in which every pixel of the square matrix takes its new location according to this map. Let B(n1, … ,nk), denote the discretized chaotic Baker map, such that the vector, [n1, … ,nk], represents the secret key S, N is the number of pixels in one row, the secret key is selected in a way that every integer nidivides N, and Ni= n1 + …+ ni. The pixel at the location (r, s) withNi≤r<Ni+niand 0 ≤ s < N is assigned to [14]:(4)B(n1,…,nk)(r,s)=[Nni(r−Ni)+smod(Nni),niN(s−smod(Nni))+Ni]Fig. 10 illustrates a randomization example of an 8 × 8 pixels image. The secret key is selected as (2, 4, 2), which means that N = 8, n1 = 2, n2 = 4, and n3 = 2 [14,15].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Wavelet fusion has been used as an efficient pre-processing tool for encrypting images with few details. Simulation results have ensured that wavelet fusion of the image at hand with another image that is rich in detail helps destroying the similarity between regions in the image with few details. Several metrics have been used for performance evaluation of the proposed encryption schemes. The robustness of the proposed schemes to the presence of noise in the decryption process has also been investigated. We can come to a conclusion that the proposed encryption scheme that uses wavelet fusion, circular shifts, and Baker map has succeeded in hiding the information in the images to be encrypted, but at the cost of a slight reduction in the visual quality of the decrypted image in the presence of noise. So, this proposed scheme can work properly in noisy environments. On the other hand, the proposed scheme that uses wavelet fusion and RC6 can successfully hide the information in the images to be encrypted, but at the cost of a considerable reduction in the visual quality of the decrypted image in the presence of noise. So, this scheme is more suitable for noise-free environments.