@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A cross-layer mobility support protocol for wireless sensor networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The L3 handover and the L2 handover can be performed simultaneously.A sensor node can directly achieve the L2 handover without scanning all channels.A sensor node neither needs a care-of address nor participates in the L3 handover.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
6LoWPAN,Wireless sensor network,Cross-layer,Mobility,Handover,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper proposes a cross-layer mobility support scheme for the IPv6 over low-power wireless personal area network (6LoWPAN) wireless sensor network (WSN). This scheme combines the handover in the network layer (L3) with the handover in the link layer (L2) so that the L3 handover and the L2 one can be performed simultaneously. During the L3 handover process, a sensor node neither needs a care-of address nor participates in the handover process. During the L2 handover process, a node uses the channel information to directly achieve the L2 handover without scanning all channels. Finally, this paper analyzes and evaluates the performance of this protocol, and the data results show that this protocol improves the mobility handover performance.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The IPv6 over low-power wireless personal area network (6LoWPAN) is made up of low-power nodes with limited resources, and one typical example is 6LoWPAN wireless sensor network (WSN) where sensor nodes sense some physical parameters. 6LoWPAN WSN has mobility, so it can obtain more extensive application space only if it provides mobility support.The fact that a sensor node works as both a router and a host results in differences between the IPv6 network architecture and the 6LoWPAN WSN one, so current mobility standards [1,2] cannot efficiently work in 6LoWPAN WSN. This poses considerable obstacles to the 6LoWPAN applications. At present, some mobility handover solutions for 6LoWPAN WSN [3–12] are proposed, and they improve the mobility handover performance to various extents. However, these solutions only focus on either the L2 handover or L3 handover, and they do not effectively combine these two kinds of handovers to improve the total handover performance. Moreover, in these handover solutions the L2 handover and the L3 handover are two independent processes and are performed in serial. That is, the L3 handover is started after the L2 handover is complete, so the total handover delay is the sum of the L2 handover latency and the L3 one. As a result, the handover performance is degraded to some extent.In order to improve the handover performance, this paper proposes a cross-layer mobility support protocol for 6LoWPAN WSN. Compared with these previous works, this protocol has the following contributions:(1)This protocol proposes the 6LoWPAN WSN architecture. Based on this architecture, a distributed IPv6 addressing algorithm is presented. Through this algorithm, a node can acquire a unique address from its neighbor without duplicated address detection (DAD), and a routing backbone can be established. Via this routing backbone the routing can be achieved without route establishment.Based on this architecture, a cross-layer mobility handover algorithm is proposed. This algorithm combines the L3 handover with the L2 handover so that the L3 handover and the L2 one can be performed simultaneously. As a result, the handover delay and packet loss are reduced.In the L3 handover a node neither needs a care-of address (CoA) nor participates in the handover process, and in the L2 handover a node uses the channel information to directly achieve the L2 handover without scanning all channels, so the handover latency, cost and packet loss are lowered.The following sections discuss this protocol in detail. In Section 2, the related work on the 6LoWPAN mobility support is discussed, and in Section 3 the 6LoWPAN architecture is presented. In Sections 4 and 5 the addressing algorithm and the handover algorithm are presented, respectively. In Section 6, the performance of this protocol is analyzed and evaluated, and in Section 7 the paper concludes with a summary.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
