@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An end-to-end secure key management protocol for e-health applications

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We introduce an energy-aware key management protocol for e-health applications.The protocol guarantees the end-to-end principle.Constrained nodes offload asymmetric cryptographic operations to third parties.We conduct a formal validation regarding the security properties of our protocol.Analysis results highlight energy gains on constrained nodes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
E-health,Internet of Things (IoT),Confidentiality,Security,Privacy,Key management,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Key distribution is required to secure e-health applications in the context of Internet of Things (IoT). However, resources constraints in IoT make these applications unable to run existing key management protocols. In this paper, we propose a new lightweight key management protocol. This protocol is based on collaboration to establish a secure end-to-end communication channel between a highly resource constrained node and a remote entity. The secure channel allows the constrained node to transmit captured data while ensuring confidentiality and authentication. To achieve this goal, we propose offloading highly consuming cryptographic primitives to third parties. As a result, the constrained node obtains assistance from powerful entities. To assess our protocol, we conduct a formal validation regarding security properties. In addition, we evaluate both communication and computational costs to highlight energy savings. The results show that our protocol provides a considerable gain in energy while its security properties are ensured.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Internet of Things (IoT) is one of the main communication development in the last decade. Through this concept, it is possible to connect everyday sensors and devices to each other and to the Internet. According to [1], the main concept behind IoT is the pervasive presence around us of various wireless technologies such as Radio Frequency IDentification (RFID) tags, sensors, actuators or mobile phones in which computing and communication systems are seamlessly embedded. Based on unique addressing schemes, these objects interact with each other and cooperate to reach common goals.Technology advances along with popular demand will foster the widespread deployment of IoTs services. It would radically transform our corporations, communities, and personal spheres. From the perspective of a private user, IoTs introduction will play a leading role in several services. E-health is one of the most interesting applications. In fact, it will provide medical monitoring to millions of elderly and disabled patients while preserving their autonomy and comfort anywhere. Using sensors planted in or around a body, physiological data are gathered and transmitted to qualified medical staff that can intervene in case of an emergency.E-health applications are unlikely to fulfil a widespread diffusion until they provide strong security foundations. Making sure that only authorized entities can access and modify data is particularly relevant in e-health applications. Indeed, in these applications data are very sensitive, and any unwanted modification could lead to dramatic events. Securing communications in e-health systems necessarily passes through key management protocols. They are in charge of delivering security credentials to the involved entities. However, classical solutions are hindered due to the scarcity of resources available, either energy power or computation capabilities.In this paper, we propose a new lightweight key management protocol. This protocol is based on collaboration to establish a secured communication channel between a highly resource constrained node and a remote entity (i.e. server). The secured channel allows the constrained node to transmit captured data while ensuring confidentiality and authentication. Our protocol offloads highly consuming cryptographic primitives to third parties which are not necessarily trusted. Consequently, constrained nodes obtain assistance from more powerful entities in order to securely establish a shared secret with any remote entity.To assess our protocol, both in terms of security properties and energy savings, we proceed with a theoretical analysis that is formally validated through an implementation in Avispa tool [2]. In addition, using energy models that consider both communication and computational costs, we estimate energy savings at the constrained nodes side. The obtained results show a considerable gain of energy cost according to the number of third parties while security properties are kept safe.The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, e-health applications in the context of IoT are briefly introduced along with the main security threats that might hinder their deployment. Thereafter, we provide in Section 3 an overview on the state of the art of the proposed security approaches. In Section 4, we present in detail our novel cooperative key management protocol. Both security and quantitative analysis of our protocol are provided in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper and gives future directions.Internet of Things deployment opens doors to a huge number of applications that can deeply improve our daily life. Among them, e-health applications are gaining more and more attention [1]. An e-health system is a radio-frequency-based wireless networking technology that provides ubiquitous networking functionalities. It is based on the interconnection of tiny nodes enhanced with sensing and/or actuating capabilities planted in, on, or around a human body. E-health applications are context-aware, personal, dynamic, and anticipative. As IoT meets all these characteristics, it provides a suited environment for their efficient deployment. In fact, an extensive research on using IoT paradigm in e-health has recently been reported [3]. Population ageing and the increase of survival chances from disabling illnesses will lead to an increased demand from todays population, which requires a continuous health care [4].E-health applications could spare a patient from long stays in hospitals, which is especially sought in emerging countries that lack medical infrastructures and well-trained personnel. Additionally, the continuous monitoring anticipates emergency situations allowing rapid and effective intervention of health teams. Moreover, early stage diagnostics could also be achieved remotely [5]. In sum, e-health applications in the context of IoT constitute a cost effective and unobtrusive solution without interrupting the patient’s everyday activities. Nevertheless, their deployment could be hindered if privacy challenges are not addressed efficiently.As health data are highly sensitive, studies in [6,7] have underlined that e-health applications might be more vulnerable to attacks compared to other IoT applications. In fact, health related data are private in nature; any breach in the confidentiality of personal captured data would seriously repulse patients from adopting e-health solutions. For instance, many people would not like their health personal information, such as an early stage of pregnancy or details of certain medical conditions, to be disclosed. In fact, eavesdropped communications could be used for several illegal purposes. Moreover, any modification in the captured data could lead to disastrous consequences, as it could engender wrong medical prescription or delay an emergency intervention.Classical countermeasures are not suited to the constrained environment of IoT due to several factors such as power and computation scarcity, weak reliability of wireless links, and scalability. Thus, a considerable effort has been undertaken by the research community to provide viable solutions to secure IoT applications. The next section provides an overview on the state of the art of the proposed security approaches, and positions our contribution regarding the literature.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
