@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Ocular artifact suppression from EEG using ensemble empirical mode decomposition with principal component analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel methodology for ocular artifact suppression in EEG data using EEMD with PCA.The proposed method eliminates the ocular artifacts from the measured EEG without using reference electrooculogram channel.The proposed method exhibits effective suppression of ocular artifact with low distortion compared to wavelet approach.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Artifacts,Electroencephalogram,Ensemble empirical mode decomposition,Principal component analysis,Variance,Skewness,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Signals associated with eye blinks (230–350 micro-volts) are orders of magnitude larger than electric potentials (7–20 micro-volts) generated on the scalp because of cortical activity. These and other such non-cortical biological artifacts spread across the scalp and contaminate the Electroencephalogram (EEG). We present here a novel approach for efficient detection and effective suppression of these artifacts using single channel EEG data by combining Ensemble Empirical Mode Decomposition (EEMD) along with Principal Component Analysis (PCA). We present a methodology for ocular artifact suppression, by performing EEMD on the contaminated EEG data segment to get the intrinsic mode functions (IMFs) and subsequent elimination of artifacts by automatic selection of particular principal components, which capture ocular artifact features after using PCA on IMFs.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Electroencephalogram (EEG) is a non-invasive measurement of neuronal electrical activity which gives an insight into the functioning of the brain. EEG signals are measured from the scalp either with electrodes in the standard 10–20 arrangement or an extended 10–20 system (64 electrodes), following a standard devised by the International Federation of Societies of EEG [1]. EEG signals are often contaminated by potentials of non-cerebral origin such as those associated with eye-blink; these signals are called Electrooculogram (EOG) signals. These artifact signals pose a serious problem as brain signals are relatively smaller [2]. For example, eye blinks result in potential differences over the scalp which are often large enough to make the interpretation of the EEG difficult. Generally portions of the EEG time series, which are contaminated by EOG and other artifacts, are rejected in long duration recordings but cannot be rejected in shorter recordings as it will lead to a substantial loss of data. Several different techniques like regression techniques [3], Independent Component Analysis (ICA) [4–6] and wavelet [7] based approach have been suggested to eliminate the relatively common biological artifacts. Regression is a relatively simple way to remove ocular artifacts by projecting the measured EOG signal on the EEG channels. However, this method might produce unexpected artifacts in the data due to bidirectional contamination [8]. ICA has been used in the artifact rejection problem [9–11] but it requires careful selection of the number of independent components which have to be eliminated [12,13]. Some studies have also proposed the hybrid methodology of combining ICA with the regression or with the wavelet based approach [14,15] but since such methodologies are based on multi-channel data, they are not suitable for the ocular artifact suppression using single channel EEG data. On the other hand, wavelet is a relatively simpler technique due to its optimal resolution both in the time and in the frequency domains for the elimination of artifacts. However the wavelet based techniques rely on predefined basis functions for the decomposition of the recorded signal. More recently, techniques based on the empirical mode decomposition (EMD) have been developed, especially for the analysis of non-linear and non-stationary signals [16–19]. Such a decomposition is based on the idea of locally extracting fine scale fluctuations in a signal and iterating the procedure on the (locally lower scale) residual. EMD is an adaptive and unsupervised method since the basis functions are derived from the data itself. EMD decomposes the data into a set of intrinsic mode functions (IMFs) through a sifting process and a linear combination of IMFs yields the original signal. Comparative studies [20] have shown that the performance of EMD is often superior to that of the wavelet based approach in reliably extracting biomedical signals. Recently, some studies [21,22] have used EMD for ocular artifact removal, but their methods required calculation of a metric such as energy or entropy of the IMFs obtained by performing EMD on slightly larger time window (3 s) of contaminated EEG data; besides, these works did not offer a systematic methodology for ocular artifact detection or a comparison of performance of the proposed artifact elimination techniques with the conventionally used wavelet approach for single channel data. While EMD has a distinct advantage (of using basis functions adapted to the data) over wavelet and other signal denoising techniques, it has the disadvantage of mode mixing. The mode mixing (existence of different time scales in a single IMF or the same time scale in different IMFs) arises due to intermittency. To circumvent this, the ensemble empirical mode decomposition (EEMD) approach was proposed. In the EEMD, a finite amplitude of normally distributed white noise is added to the signal in each trial before EMD is performed and the ensemble average of IMFs is taken. The noise is reduced when sufficient number of trials are averaged, since the noise in each trial is uncorrelated and thus the ensemble mean may be taken to represent the true signal. The aim of this paper is to introduce a new ocular artifact suppression methodology based on a single channel EEG data by automatically retaining only those principal components which extract the features corresponding to the ocular artifacts after applying PCA on the IMFs.The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 highlights a brief introduction to EEMD and PCA; Section 3 introduces the experimental protocol and provides an overview of the existing approaches for artifact detection and elimination; Section 4 presents the proposed approach for ocular artifact suppression based on single channel EEG data. Finally, Section 5, provides the concluding remarks with potential directions for future work.EMD is an algorithm used for the analysis of multi-component signals that breaks them down into a number of amplitude and frequency modulated (AM/FM) zero-mean signals, termed intrinsic mode functions (IMFs). The following criteria have to be satisfied for a set of functions to be designated as IMFs:(i) The number of extrema and the number of zero crossings must be equal or can differ at most by one.(ii) The mean value of the envelope defined by local maxima and local minima, at any location, must be zero (i.e., envelopes should be symmetric with respect to zero).Unlike wavelet based techniques, EMD has the distinct advantage that it does not rely on a set of predefined basis functions and derives the basis functions, known as Intrinsic Mode Functions (IMF), adaptively from the data itself [23]. This method is, however, prone to mode mixing, especially when the noise is present intermittently. To overcome this issue, a suitable amplitude of white noise is added in each trial in the EEMD analysis to prevent mode mixing; the noise tends to cancel when ensemble averaged since no correlation exists between the noise introduced at different trials. It has been reported that the optimum amplitude of the noise to be added is in the range 0.1 - 0.4 times the standard deviation of the signal [24]. For all the studies discussed here, we fix the maximum number of trials for the ensemble average to be 200 and added noise is about 0.4 times standard deviation of the signal (this is found to be sufficient in most cases).PCA has been widely used in many applications for feature extraction and dimensional reduction for multichannel data. The principal component analysis transforms the original variables into new principal components (PCs), which are orthogonal, so that the data decomposed in terms of these components are uncorrelated with each other; therefore, PCA expresses as much as possible of the total variation in the data using only a few principal components and each successively derived PC expresses progressively decreasing amounts of the variation.In this work, this artifact suppression has been implemented using an open source software Python [25–27].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We have presented a new approach for the identification and elimination of EOG artifacts by using the PCA with the EEMD from the EEG recordings, where the basis functions are derived using data itself. Comparison of the as recorded EEG with the cleaned EEG reveals an effective suppression of artifacts corresponding to eye blink without using an auxiliary reference eye-blink electrode. The experimental results show that the proposed method can be used for automatic detection and elimination of EOG artifacts after proper selection of threshold. Unlike PCA or ICA, the present method can be used for single channel EEG data, whereas PCA or ICA can be used only if the number of EEG channels is sufficiently large. The proposed method is capable of removing EOG artifacts while maintaining the non-contaminated EEG signal relatively undisturbed. It may be possible to extend these studies in future by investigating the feasibility of the proposed method for the elimination of the EOG artifacts in Magnetoencephalogram (MEG) studies, where separate sensors are not available to measure EOG artifacts.