@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A reliable data transmission scheme based on compressed sensing and network coding for multi-hop-relay wireless sensor networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A scheme of reliable data transmissions for the WSNs is presented.The encoding–decoding method is proposed and its effectiveness is proved.Performances of the proposed and other existing schemes are also analyzed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Compressed sensing,Multipath routing,Network coding,Wireless sensor networks,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The joint multipath routing and Network Coding (NC) method has been shown to improve the reliability and energy efficiency of multi-hop-relay wireless sensor networks (WSNs). However, NC is a kind of “all-or-nothing” code: the destination node cannot decode any information unless it successfully receives as many NC coded packets as the raw ones. Observed that WSNs often measure physical signals which show a high degree of correlation, in this paper, we propose a more deliberated scheme combined with Compressed Sensing (CS). Depending on the proposed measurement and recovery method, we prove that the original data can be recovered progressively while preserving the advantage of NC-based scheme. Detailed mathematical analysis of the performance of our proposed scheme along with other existing schemes is given. The experimental results also show the efficiency and robustness of the proposed scheme.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Harsh environment, failure of certain nodes, and unreliable wireless communication may cause long periods of poor connectivity, which poses challenge in providing reliable transmission in wireless sensor networks (WSNs). The existing transmission schemes to improve the reliability of WSNs include the traditional forward error correction (FEC), the automatic repeat request (ARQ), and some other technologies under development, such as multipath routing [1] and network coding (NC) [2].Among these technologies, the multipath routing, which takes advantage of the wireless channel’s broadcast property, has attracted more and more researchers’ attention. This scheme establishes multiple paths between the source and the destination/sink node through a procedure of routing discovery. It utilizes such path redundancy to enhance the network packet delivery ratio. In order to further improve the efficiency and reliability, the NC-based multipath routing schemes [3–7] have been proposed recently. Compared to the traditional store-and-forward process, the main idea of using NC is to re-encode several incoming packets into one or multiple outgoing packets at the intermediate (relay) nodes [8]. We illustrate the benefits of using NC through a simple example [3], as shown in Fig. 1.In Fig. 1, the source node wants to forward three original data blocks A, B and C to the sink node through the traditional method and the NC scheme respectively. In NC scheme, these data blocks will be encoded into X1, X2, and X3 at the source node; then, each coded block will be packed into a data packet with its coding coefficients and broadcasted to the next hop. Because of the harsh network conditions, these packets may not be received correctly by those intermediate nodes (in Fig. 1, a crossed out packet represents its loss during propagation). Next, the intermediate nodes re-encode and relay these successfully received packets until those packets reach the sink node (destination). In this example, the sink node successfully receives 3 packets A/A/C by using the multipath method and Y11/Y21/Y32 by using the NC-based method, respectively. Obviously, due to a redundant A, the sink node only gets two unique packets A and C in the traditional multipath method. While, by utilizing the Gauss-Jordan elimination algorithm, the sink node can recover (decode) all original/raw data blocks in NC scheme if Y11/Y21/Y32 are linearly independent.Nevertheless, the NC scheme still has a large space to improve. First of all, for most practical NC methods (e.g., Random Linear Network Coding (RLNC) [10]), each packet should be re-encoded at each hop until it is routed to the sink node. As each intermediate node’s local coding coefficients are independently generated, the global coding coefficients of the origin packets may be linearly correlated. Therefore, the original packets may not be successfully recovered at the sink node. Secondly, more importantly, NC scheme has a property called “all-or-nothing” [11]. As mentioned above, all N data blocks are encoded and propagated in the network, thus in order to achieve data recovery in NC scheme, efforts should be made to solve an N-dimensional linear equations. In order to successfully recover the original data, the sink node has to receive no less than N coded packets before recovery. In other words, even though the sink node receivesN−1packets, it cannot recover any information of original data. Because of the transmission requirement of observation datasets, images or videos, the real world applications of WSNs cannot tolerate such a severe constraint on their performance [11].Motivated by the fact that the data forwarded in WSNs often shows a high degree of correlation (redundancy) [11–14], this paper proposes a scheme which combines NC and compressed sensing (CS)[15] to overcome the shortages of single NC scheme, while preserving its advantages. Both simulation and practical experiments of the influence of different network parameters on proposed scheme have been conducted, and reconstructions of both synthetic and real original data under different network delivery parameters are tested. The main contributions of this study can be summarized as follows:•A complete design of joint application of NC and CS technologies to improve the reliability of data transmissions in WSNs is proposed. Through our proposed scheme, the destination node is able to employ the CS reconstruction algorithms to recover all original data blocks once it has received a certain number of NC coded packets (less than the number required by the existing NC-schemes).A CS measurement method is proposed, and we theoretically prove that if this method is adopted at the source node, the destination node can extract the measurement coefficients and results from its received packets which have went through NC operating in network, thus the original data can be successfully reconstructed through CS theory.The performances (successful delivery ratio, successful recovery probability and normalized energy consumption) of the proposed scheme along with several other existing schemes (end-to-end/hop-by-hop ARQ/FEC, multipath routing and NC-based scheme) are specifically analyzed.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we introduce the related works of this study. In Section 3, the architecture of the proposed scheme is presented. In Section 4, the performances of our scheme along with several other existing schemes is analytically studied. In Section 5, we experiment on the performances of the proposed and existing schemes under different network conditions. Finally, we conclude the paper with some discussions in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
To avoid the “all-or-nothing” drawback of the existing NC based multipath routing scheme, a joint NC and CS scheme is proposed in this paper. This proposed scheme is established based on the fact that data observed in WSNs often shows a degree of redundancy. In this scheme, an appropriate CS measurement method is proposed for the source node coding procedure, and its validity has also been proved. Mathematical analysis has been used to study the performance of the proposed scheme, along with several other typical reliable packet forwarding schemes. Both simulation and practical experiment results show that, under different evaluation metrics, the proposed method outperforms these existing methods. In the future, we plan to extend our proposed scheme to a kind of adaptive networking transmission method. In such scheme, the sink node can adaptively reconstruct the data without the prior knowledge of the data sparsity. Certainly, some mathematical foundations (such as the adaptive stopping rule of the data construction) should be studied first.