@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#


@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
HightlightsA lossy hyperspectral image compression scheme based on intra-band prediction and inter-band fractal is proposed.Intra-band prediction exploiting spatial correlation is applied to I-bands.Inter-band fractal encoding with a local search algorithm is applied to P-bands.SVM classification accuracy for the reconstructed image is slightly higher than that for the original one.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Hyperspectral image,Lossy compression,Fractal encoding,Prediction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstractImage, graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Hyperspectral image is a three-dimensional data cube, which has one dimensionality in spectrum and two dimensionalities in space. Generally, hyperspectral image contains hundreds of bands, resulting in an extreme huge data volume, which is not convenient for transmission, analysis and storage. Therefore, to find a highly efficient compression method for hyperspectral image has become an urgent issue. On the other hand, the coding complexity is also an important factor when designing the encoder. Hyperspectral image compression methods are classified as lossly compression and lossless compression. Lossless compression [1] methods can preserve the whole information of the original hyperspectral image but the compression ratio (CR) is very low, usually below 3:1, which cannot satisfy many practical applications. Actually, we do not need the whole information in some studies so that lossy compression methods with high CR and acceptable information loss have practical significance. What is more, it indicates that a higher CR might cause positive impact on the classification results for specific compression techniques [2,3].Fractal encoding is a relatively novel idea for lossy image compression by utilizing the local self-similarity. It has advantages such as high CR, resolution independence and fast decoding. Therefore, it is considered as a promising compression method. The basic theory is to use a contractive transformation instead of the original image, and the fixed point of the transformation is close to the image. As the introduction of partitioned iterated function system (PIFS) by Jacquin, in which every mapping operates on a subset of the image rather than the entire image, fractal image compression became a practical reality, and the standard algorithm for fractal block coding is formed [4]. The image is firstly segmented into non-overlapping range blocks and overlapping domain blocks, the sizes of which are larger than the range blocks. The encoding of each range block consists of searching for the best affine mapping in the domain block pool. Thus the combined mappings make up a transformation on the image as a whole [5]. Such a system for the encoding of monochrome digital images without any entropy coding of the parameters of the fractal code can achieve a bit rate below 1bit/pixel, demonstrating that fractal encoding has a very high compression ratio. But the drawback exists in that the block matching procedure is very time-consuming. Therefore, many efforts in reducing the matching complexity have been done to speed it up. Among them, an effective approach is to do less searching by excluding many of the domain blocks because many of them are never used [6,7]. Some hybrid approaches to enhance fractal image rate-distortion performance are also introduced by combining it with predictive coding, transform coding or vector quantization [8–10].Our objective is to design a lossy compression scheme for hyperspectral image with improved compression efficiency and low complexity. In a hyperspectral image cube, the pixel values of each band are the reflectance values of ground objects located in the same region for each band. As different bands contain the same ground targets, they have the same spatial topological structure. Therefore, adjacent bands are usually highly similar. We guess that extending the original fractal coding method in a two-dimensional digital image to different bands of hyperspectral image might produce high compression efficiency. And to our best knowledge, there are nearly no publications for hyperspectral image compression based on the fractal theory. We put forward an applicable lossy hyperspectral image compression scheme based on hybrid intra-band prediction and inter-band fractal encoding. Firstly, the hyperspectral image is partitioned into several groups of bands (GOBs), and intra-band prediction or inter-band fractal encoding is chosen for different bands. Nextly, the fractal parameters are signed Exp-Golomb entropy encoded. Finally, error compensation mechanism is used, i.e. the prediction error and fractal residual are transformed, quantized, reordered and entropy encoded. Experimental results suggest that the proposed scheme obtains higher compression efficiency compared with the existing well-known lossy compression methods and higher classification accuracy for the reconstructed image than the original uncompressed image.This paper is structured as follows. Section 2 is an overview of the related work. The proposed lossy compression scheme for hyperspectral image is introduced in Section 3. Experimental results are shown in Section 4. Section 5 concludes the paper and presents the future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
