@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
3D face recognition based on pose and expression invariant alignment

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A 3D face registration and recognition approach is proposed.Pose correction is evaluated through various correction parameters.Face range images are divided into different regions and features are extracted.Ensemble classifier is used to fuse results using features from different regions.Results show mark improvement in registration accuracy and recognition rates.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
3D face recognition,3D registration,Intrinsic coordinate system,Fusion,Ensemble classifier,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper we present a novel pose and expression invariant approach for 3D face registration based on intrinsic coordinate system characterized by nose tip, horizontal nose plane and vertical symmetry plane of the face. It is observed that distance of nose tip from 3D scanner is reduced after pose correction which is presented as a quantifying heuristic for proposed registration scheme. In addition, motivated by the fact that a single classifier cannot be generally efficient against all face regions, a two tier ensemble classifier based 3D face recognition approach is presented which employs Principal Component Analysis (PCA) for feature extraction and Mahalanobis Cosine (MahCos) matching score for classification of facial regions with weighted Borda Count (WBC) based combination and a re-ranking stage. The performance of proposed approach is corroborated by extensive experiments performed on two databases: GavabDB and FRGC v2.0, confirming effectiveness of fusion strategies to improve performance.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Biometric data tends to classify human beings through their distinctive physiological and behavioral characteristics. Among well-known biometric modalities like iris, voice, fingerprint, palm print and gait, human face is considered an effective biometric for a wide range of vital applications in numerous and diverse domains. Biometric data acquisition process has always been thought as an affront to privacy of a subject and requires subject’s cordial cooperation whereas facial biometric data is noninvasive and socially well accepted. Although face recognition using 2D intensity images has been studied intensively in the last decades and the majority of implemented face recognition systems are based on 2D images [1], it is still a very challenging task to recognize people using 2D images under diverse circumstances of pose, expression and illumination variations. With the emergence of reliable and inexpensive 3D scanners and the use of 3D facial structure information, the researchers generally conclude that some of the nuisance factors related to 2D images can be overcome by using 3D scans due to the reason that 3D data can more easily be pose corrected and it is not affected by illumination changes [2]. However, to handle facial expression variations, we still require evolution of algorithms, irrespective of using 2D or 3D data, because expressive faces complicate the face recognition by creating higher intra-class variance than inter-class variance. The main algorithms which have been evolved for 2D face recognition are based on holistic and local features of a facial image. In holistic techniques, face recognition is performed using the entire face. Three leading algorithms in this category include PCA, Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) and Independent Component Analysis (ICA) [3]. The major local feature based approaches of 2D face recognition are Local Binary Pattern (LBP) [4], Scale Invariant Feature Transform (SIFT) [3] and Gabor Wavelets [5]. The appearance based paradigm has also been explored to find strength of 3D face recognition and the most popular, appearance based 3D methods are PCA, LDA and ICA [1]. Local feature based 3D matching exploits properties of local descriptive points, curves and regions. The study [1,6] reported point based methods that exploited meshSIFT algorithm to detect facial key points. Another study [7] explored the curvelet transform for detecting salient points on the face scans to build multi-scale local surfaces. The curve based method [8] proposed a Riemannian framework for analyzing facial shapes from radial curves emanating from the nose tip whereas the study [9] is a representative work of region based methods suitable for occlusion handling. The most crucial phase of any 3D face recognition algorithm is registration of facial surfaces and the final accuracy of the results greatly depends on the quality of the alignment module. In this work, we aim to present (i) an efficient face registration method based on intrinsic coordinate system and (ii) a face recognition method based on ensemble classifier that incorporates rank based fusion.The first contribution of our study is a novel 3D registration algorithm. The proposed algorithm does not register two face scans to each other using the conventional registration process, rather transforms each 3D scan to an intrinsic coordinate system. This reference coordinate system is based on the nose tip, vertical symmetry plane and horizontal nose plane of the face. A novel method is presented for finding vertical symmetry plane and horizontal nose plane. Angles are measured between intrinsic and world coordinate systems which are then used to align the face surface. A novel method with mathematical validation is presented for quantitative analysis of our proposed registration method which is the second contribution of this study. The third contribution is a region based two tier, ensemble classification method where face is divided into regions like other approaches [10,11]. PCA based classifier using MahCos distance metric is implemented for classification of each region where PCA is used to extract compact feature vectors. PCA is a subspace method which provides dimensionality reduction while relying on a set of basis vectors which correspond to maximum variance direction of the image data [12]. It is observed that combining results of multiple overlapping regions using an ensemble classifier produces excellent recognition results. For performance evaluation of proposed face registration and recognition method, GavabDB 3D database [13] of 61 subjects and FRGC v2.0 3D database [14] comprising of 4007 images from 466 subjects with pose and expression variations are used which are the most commonly used databases for 3D face recognition.This study is organized as follows. Section 2 presents an overview of related work. Proposed methodology for 3D face registration and recognition is presented in Section 3. Section 4 is dedicated for experiments and results and a description of the used 3D face databases. Conclusion and future work is presented in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
