@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Bayesian inference and model comparison for metallic fatigue data

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Several models are calibrated to the 75S-T6 data set by means of the maximum likelihood method.Classical measures of fit based on information criteria are used to compare and rank models.Bayesian approach is considered to analyze some models under two different a priori scenarios.Bayes factor and predictive information criteria are used to compare Bayesian models.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Metallic fatigue data,Fatigue life prediction,Random fatigue-limit models,Maximum likelihood methods,Bayesian computational techniques for model calibration/ranking,Predictive accuracy for Bayesian models,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this work, we present a statistical treatment of stress-life (S-N) data drawn from a collection of records of fatigue experiments that were performed on 75S-T6 aluminum alloys. Our main objective is to predict the fatigue life of materials by providing a systematic approach to model calibration, model selection and model ranking with reference to S-N data. To this purpose, we consider fatigue-limit models and random fatigue-limit models that are specially designed to allow the treatment of the run-outs (right-censored data). We first fit the models to the data by maximum likelihood methods and estimate the quantiles of the life distribution of the alloy specimen. To assess the robustness of the estimation of the quantile functions, we obtain bootstrap confidence bands by stratified resampling with respect to the cycle ratio. We then compare and rank the models by classical measures of fit based on information criteria. We also consider a Bayesian approach that provides, under the prior distribution of the model parameters selected by the user, their simulation-based posterior distributions. We implement and apply Bayesian model comparison methods, such as Bayes factor ranking and predictive information criteria based on cross-validation techniques under various a priori scenarios.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Mechanical and structural components subjected to cyclic loading are susceptible to cumulative damage and eventual failure through an irreversible process called metal fatigue. Prediction of such fatigue through the expected service life of mechanical parts and assemblies is an important objective of numerical simulations used in mechanical and structural engineering practice. Based on such predictions, inspection intervals can be established. The frequency of these inspection intervals bears on the safety and costs of operation  [1–3].The fatigue characteristics of materials are established through fatigue tests performed on coupons, also called dogbone specimens, made of round bars or flat plates. The coupons are designed such that the stress is highest in the gauge section and that it remains substantially constant when the coupon is loaded in the axial direction. In bending and torsion tests, the stress varies linearly over the cross section and is constant in the axial direction, for any fixed point in the cross section.The number of cycles to failure, the peak stress and the cycle ratio are recorded for each experiment. The cycle ratio is defined as the minimum stress to maximum stress ratio. When an experiment is stopped before the specimen fails, then the test record is marked as a run-out. In some experiments, the specimen may buckle or fail outside of the gauge section. Such experiments are disregarded. State-of-the-art reviews on mechanical fatigue are presented in  [1] and  [3]. Here, we focus on high-cycle (stress-life) fatigue.The set of data pairs(Si,Ni), whereSiis the stress andNiis the corresponding number of cycles at failure in theith test, exhibits substantial statistical dispersion. Interpretation and generalization of test data are essential for making risk-informed design decisions. The goal is to find a probability distribution for the fatigue life given data and underlying assumptions. There are many possible phenomenological models which will lead to different results. These results can be derived by different statistical frameworks, among them the frequentist and the Bayesian approaches. Furthermore, there are several ways to judge the results obtained by the use of different models. Various statistical models such as lognormal, extreme value, Weibull and Birnbaum–Saunders distributions have been used for this purpose.We consider different types of models that contain fatigue limit parameters. Although such models have been widely used (see, for example,  [4–7]), there is an ongoing debate concerning the existence of the fatigue limit  [8,9]. Some authors use the terms “endurance limit” or “fatigue strength” instead of “fatigue limit”  [1,6]. We distinguish between the fatigue limit, which is a physical notion, and the fatigue limit parameter, which is an unknown parameter, expressed in the same scale as the equivalent stress and calibrated for different models. Usually, data support curve fitting up to a certain number of cycles to failure only. Extrapolation beyond that number substantially increases uncertainty. For example, aluminum does not have a fatigue limit, since it will always fail if tested to a sufficient number of cycles. Therefore, the fatigue limit (fatigue strength) of aluminum is reported as the stress level at which the material can survive after a large number of cycles. For the purposes of this paper, the number of cycles can be fixed at 2×107, since the available data do not contain substantially larger cycle values.We employ a classical (likelihood-based) approach to fit and compare the proposed models using the 75S-T6 aluminum sheet specimen data set described in Section  2. Ultimately, we provide an analog Bayesian approach to fit and compare the models. The classical approach provides a point estimation (Maximum Likelihood estimate) for the model parameterθthat lies in the 90% confidence interval if it were repeatedly used with random data from the model for fixedθ. In the Bayesian formulation, no repetition is required and the interval estimation is based on the posterior distribution. Although Ryan used a Bayesian approach to find an optimal design for the random fatigue-limit model  [7], we are, to our knowledge, the first to use Bayesian methods to analyze and compare fatigue models.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section  2 introduces the main characteristics of the fatigue tests conducted at the Battelle Memorial Institute on 85 75S-T6 aluminum sheet specimens by means of a Krouse direct repeated-stress testing machine. The data set with the fatigue test results is available as a csv file in the supplemental material to this paper (see Appendix A). This data set contains run-outs. Section  3 presents classical statistical models of fatigue test results. In Section  3.1, we first consider a classical statistical fitting technique, called logarithmic fit, for illustration purposes only, that does not take into account the presence of run-outs. Subsequently, we introduce fatigue-limit models and random fatigue-limit models, which are both specially designed to fit data in the presence of run-outs. We fit two fatigue-limit models, whose mean value function is same as in the logarithmic fit, with constant and non-constant variance functions, by constructing the corresponding likelihood functions and estimating all the unknown parameters that define the S-N curves by means of the maximum likelihood method. The fatigue limit parameter assessment under both models can be done by computing numerically tailored functions from their joint likelihoods, usually called profile likelihoods  [10]. Later, we extend these models by assuming that the fatigue limit parameter is a random variable. To clarify the fitting procedure that provides estimates for S-N curves and predictions of fatigue life, we consider two random fatigue-limit models and their extensions, where a non-constant variance function is used. The assessment of the fatigue limit parameter is then summarized by comparing the estimated probability density functions of the four fitted models. Section  3.2 includes the computation of bootstrap confidence bands for the S-N curves and bootstrap confidence intervals for the maximum likelihood estimates. Section  3.3 is dedicated to comparison of the models by some widely used information criteria. Section  4 focuses on the Bayesian analysis of some of the models. In Section  4.1, three of the models analyzed using the likelihood approach are embedded in a Bayesian framework that we characterize based on informative priors and on non-informative priors. We use Bayesian computational techniques to estimate the posterior probability density function of each individual parameter of the six fitted models as well as the bivariate posterior probability functions of all the combinations of two parameters out of the total number of parameters for any of the six fitted models. Section  4.2 presents the Bayesian model comparison approach, which includes the Bayes factor and predictive information criteria. The Bayes factor is approximated by means of the Laplace method and the Laplace–Metropolis method. The Bayes factor is used to evaluate the fit of Bayesian models while the predictive information criteria are used to compare models based on their predictive accuracy.Data are available from 85 fatigue experiments that applied constant amplitude cyclic loading to unnotched sheet specimens of 75S-T6 aluminum alloys  [11, table 3, pp. 22–24]. The following data are recorded for each specimen:•the maximum stress,Smax, measured in ksi units.the cycle ratio,R, defined as the minimum to maximum stress ratio.the fatigue life,N, defined as the number of load cycles at which fatigue failure occurred.a binary variable (0/1) to denote whether or not the test had been stopped prior to the occurrence of failure (run-out).There are many linear and nonlinear models (S-N curves) that have been used to predict fatigue life,N, in terms of the stress,S. A good list of these models can be found in  [12]. In this section, we consider relevant nonlinear regression models used with the 75S-T6 data set. For the sake of completeness, we first show how the fitting procedure works for a model that does not take into account the run-out feature of some observations. This so-called “equivalent stress equation model” was used in  [4]. Secondly, we introduce some fatigue-limit models that are tailored to work well in the presence of run-out observations, similar to  [5] and  [6], and we calibrate each of these models by using the maximum likelihood method.In all the proposed models, the quantities of interest are the prediction of fatigue life, given the test stress and the cycle ratio, and the estimation of the fatigue limit parameter. The fatigue life predictions are summarized by means of the quantile functions. We plot the median (S-N curve), the 0.95 quantile and the 0.05 quantile.Prior to the fitting of any statistical model, the fatigue data obtained for particular cycle ratios need to be generalized to arbitrary cycle ratios. For this purpose, the equivalent stress,Seq, is then defined asSeq(q)=Smax(1−R)q, whereqis a fitting parameter. This definition is also used in  [4] and  [13].We first consider the logarithmic fit as defined in  [14] and  [4]; that is,(1)μ(Seq(lg))=A1+A2log10(Seq(lg)−A3),using the objective function proposed in [14],(2)estd=(∑i=1n(log10(ni)−μ(Seq(lg)))2n−p)1/2,wherenis the number of data points andpis the number of fitting parameters (namelyA1,A2,A3andq).The resulting estimated mean value function is given byμ(Seq(lg))=10.07−3.54log10(Seq(lg)−25.41),whereSeq(lg)=Smax(1−R)0.5147and the value of the objective function isestd=0.5195.RemarkRun-outs will introduce a bias error in the estimate when this approach is used. The resulting estimated mean value function, without the run-outs, is given byμ(Seq(lg))=7.71−2.17log10(Seq(lg)−31.53),whereSeq(lg)=Smax(1−R)0.4633and the value of the objective function isestd=0.3673. Clearly, removing the run-outs increases the value of the fatigue limit. Fig. 1shows the estimated quantile functions for the logarithmic fit, with the estimated fatigue limit parameter equal to 31.53 ksi. We point out that the estimated fatigue limit is equal to31.53/(20.4633)=22.87ksi, since the fatigue limit is the value of the maximum stress when the cycle ratio,R, is equal to−1(the “fully reversed” condition).LetA3be the fatigue limit parameter. At each equivalent stress withSeq>A3, the fatigue life,N, is modeled by means of a lognormal distribution. This implies thatlog10(N)is modeled with a normal distribution with meanμ(Seq)and standard deviationσ(Seq). We generalize the logarithmic fit by assuming that•μ(Seq)=A1+A2log10(Seq−A3),ifSeq>A3σ(Seq)=τ.This model is characterized by five parameters:θ=(A1,A2,A3,q,τ), whose maximum likelihood (ML) estimate, obtained by calibrating the model with the data, isμ(Seq)=7.38−2.01log10(Seq−35.04),whereSeq=Smax(1−R)0.5628andτ=0.5274. The maximum likelihood estimates are summarized in Table 1. The corresponding fit is shown in Fig. 2(blue circles = observed failures; red circles = run-outs). The difference between Model Ia and the logarithmic fit shows the importance of including the run-outs especially in the estimation of the fatigue limit. Run-outs that correspond to equivalent stress levels greater than the fatigue limit parameter are called significant run-outs. Only significant run-outs contribute to estimating the parameters. In this case, eight of the 12 run-outs were significant.We extend the model proposed in Section  3.1.1 by allowing a non-constant standard deviation as in  [5]:•μ(Seq)=A1+A2log10(Seq−A3),ifSeq>A3σ(Seq)=10(B1+B2log10(Seq)),ifSeq>A3.In this model, there are six parameters:θ=(A1,A2,A3,q,B1,B2), and their ML estimates areμ(Seq)=6.72−1.57log10(Seq−36.21),σ(Seq)=10(4.55−2.89log10(Seq)),whereSeq=Smax(1−R)0.5510. The maximum likelihood estimates are summarized in Table 2. The corresponding fit is shown in Fig. 3(blue circles = observed failures; red circles = run-outs). Fig. 3 shows that the uncertainty in predicting fatigue life decreases with high values of the equivalent stress when compared to Model Ia. However, the uncertainty increases for values of the equivalent stress that are close to the estimated fatigue limit parameter. In Model Ib, there are seven significant run-outs because the fatigue limit parameter has increased to 36.21 ksi. WhenA3<Seq<100, the estimated standard deviation ranges between 1.11 and0.059, supporting the assumption of a non-constant standard deviation.RemarkProfile LikelihoodsTo assess the plausibility of a range of values of the fatigue limit parameter,A3, we construct the profile likelihood  [5, p. 294]:(3)R(A3)=maxθ0[L(θ0,A3)L(θˆ)],whereθ0denotes all parameters except for the fatigue limit parameter,A3, andθˆis the ML estimate ofθ. Fig. 4shows the profile likelihood functions forA3corresponding to the models in Sections  3.1.1 and 3.1.2. As in  [5], approximate100(1−α)%confidence intervals forA3based on the calibrated profile likelihoods are given by:{A3:−2log(R(A3))≤χ1;1−α2}, whereχ1;1−α2is the100(1−α)percentile of a chi-square distribution with 1 degree of freedom. The approximate95%confidence intervals forA3are(32.45,36.28)and(34.36,36.88)for Models Ia and Ib, respectively. We can see that each model suggests a different range for the fatigue limit parameter,A3. We therefore need to systematically choose which model is better to assess the value ofA3.We now extend the model proposed in Section  3.1.1 to allow a random fatigue limit parameter as in  [6]:•μ(Seq)=A1+A2log10(Seq−A3),ifSeq>A3.σ(Seq)=τ.log10(A3)∼N(μf,σf).Here, we assume thatlog10(N)givenA3<Seqis modeled with a normal distribution with meanμ(Seq)and standard deviationσ(Seq). In this case, the probability density function (pdf) oflog10(N)is obtained by marginalizingA3:flog10(N)(u;θ)=∫0Seqh(u;μ(Seq),σ(Seq))ℓA3(w;μf,σf)dw,whereθ=(A1,A2,μf,σf,q,τ),h(u;μ(Seq),σ(Seq))is the conditional density oflog10(N)givenA3, andℓA3(w;μf,σf)is the marginal density ofA3. Similarly, the marginal cumulative distribution function (cdf) oflog10(N)is given byFlog10(N)(u;θ)=∫0SeqΦ(u−μ(Seq)σ(Seq))ℓA3(w;μf,σf)dw,whereΦis the conditional cumulative distribution function oflog10(N)givenA3. The functionsflog10(N)andFlog10(N)no longer have closed forms and must be numerically evaluated. Global adaptive quadrature is used to approximate the integrations (see  [15]).Assuming independent observations, the likelihood function ofθ=(A1,A2,μf,σf,q,τ)is therefore given by(4)L(θ;{log10(n1),…,log10(nm)})=∏i=1m[flog10(N)(log10(ni);θ)]δi[1−Flog10(N)(log10(ni);θ)]1−δi,whereδi={1ifniis a failure0ifniis a run-out .We can also consider a random fatigue-limit model with the smallest extreme value (sev) distribution as in  [6]:•μ(Seq)=A1+A2log10(Seq−A3),ifSeq>A3.σ(Seq)=τ.The density oflog10(A3)isϕ(t;μf,σf).The conditional density oflog10(N)givenA3<Seqisϕ(t;μ(Seq),σ(Seq)),Table 3shows the maximum likelihood estimates and the maximum likelihood values obtained for Model IIa and Model IIb. The estimated parameters for both models are similar except for the parameters,σfandτ, which have smaller values with Model IIb. As a consequence, Model IIb has a smaller maximum likelihood value. Since Models IIa and IIb have the same number of parameters, we can conclude that Model IIb is better than Model IIa. It is thus sufficient to present the corresponding fit of Model IIb (Fig. 5).The random fatigue-limit model proposed in Section  3.1.3 is extended by allowing non-constant standard deviation:•σ(Seq)=10(B1+B2log10(Seq)).The random fatigue-limit model proposed in Section  3.1.4 is extended by allowing non-constant standard deviation:•σ(Seq)=10(B1+B2log10(Seq)).Table 4shows the maximum likelihood estimates and the maximum likelihood values obtained for Models IIc and IId. Again, the random fatigue-limit model with the sev distribution (Model IId) performs slightly better than the random fatigue-limit model with the lognormal distribution (Model IIc). The corresponding fit of Model IId in Fig. 6is very similar to the one obtained by Model IIb in Fig. 5.Figs. 7 and 8show the probability density function forA3corresponding to Models IIa, IIb, IIc and IId.In the next subsections, our goal is to compare the relative performances of the proposed models that include an adequate formulation in terms of run-outs. As an initial step, we explore the consistency of the fitted models by looking at the variability in the confidence bands of the quantile functions of fatigue life.We obtain bootstrap confidence bands for the model fittings Ia, Ib, IIb and IId, as illustrated in Figs. 2, 3, 5 and 6, respectively. Stratified bootstrap algorithm 1 is implemented with censored data. First, the data set is stratified on the basis of the cycle ratio,R. Then, we sample independently from each stratum where each sample containsSmax,R,Nand the binary variableδ(see  [17]). By repetition, we generateM=200bootstrap data sets. For each data set, we obtain the maximum likelihood estimate and compute the corresponding quantiles.Fig. 9shows the median functions (blue curves) and the bootstrapped 95% confidence bands (black curves) for Models Ia, Ib, IIb and IId. Fig. 10shows the 0.05 quantiles (blue curves) and the bootstrapped 95% confidence bands (black curves). Table 5provides the bootstrap confidence intervals for the maximum likelihood estimates for these models. Clearly, the random fatigue-limit models (Model IIb and Model IId) provide the narrowest confidence intervals forA1,A2andq.Using a classical approach, we compute some popular information criteria, such as Akaike information criterion (AIC)  [18], Bayesian information criterion (BIC)  [19,20] and AIC with correction  [21], which are based on the maximized log-likelihood values. Such measures take into account both the goodness of fit and the complexity of the models in terms of the number of parameters.Table 6contains the maximum log-likelihood values that correspond to the models introduced in Sections  3.1.1–3.1.6 together with the classical information criteria computations. These classical evaluations of model uncertainty indicate that, despite its complexity, Model IIb is preferable.We consider now a Bayesian approach to study Models Ia, Ib and IIb under two different scenarios. For each scenario, we compute the maximum posterior estimate (analytically) using the Laplace method and provide Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) posterior samples. The random walk Metropolis–Hastings algorithm 2 is used to generate MCMC samples. We use a normal proposal distribution to perturb the current simulated vector,θc, and generate a new perturbed vector,θp∼N(θc,diag(δ)), whereδis a vector of parameters that controls the acceptance rate of the algorithm. After several attempts, we choseδsuch that we could obtain a reasonable acceptance rate (see  [22, Chapter 6]).For both scenarios, the algorithm is initialized as follows:•Model Ia:θ0=(7.4,−2,35,0.56,0.5)andδ=(0.1,0.1,0.1,0.01,0.05).Model Ib:θ0=(6.7,−1.6,36.2,0.55,4.6,−2.9)andδ=(0.1,0.1,0.1,0.01,0.1,0.1).Model IIb:θ0=(6.5,−1.5,1.6,0.04,0.49,0.085)andδ=(0.1,0.1,0.005,0.001,0.01,0.01).Each chain was run for1,010,000times, with a 10,000 iterations burn-in period and every 50th draw of the chain kept. The MCMC posterior samples were summarized by the Laplace–Metropolis estimator (see  [23]), the empirical mean and standard deviation and the estimated marginal densities. The marginal densities were obtained by kernel density estimation (KDE) with a normal kernel function. The bandwidth was chosen to be optimal for normal densities.In attempting to provide an objective Bayesian analysis, we considered two different scenarios. For both scenarios, we chose data-dependent proper priors  [24]. In the first scenario, normal priors centered around the maximum likelihood estimates with arbitrary variance were considered for all the parameters except the standard deviations that were assigned inverse-gamma priors. The second scenario adopted less informative uniform priors for all the parameters. The uniform priors were chosen by spreading the range of the likelihood function then tuning these priors until we obtained proper untruncated posterior distributions.In scenario 1, we considered the following informative priors that were induced from the maximum likelihood estimates as explained previously.•Model Ia:A1∼N(7.4,2),A2∼N(−2,2),A3∼N(35,2),q∼N(0.56,0.5),τ∼IG(0.5,0.25).Model Ib:A1∼N(6.7,2),A2∼N(−1.6,2),A3∼N(36.2,2),q∼N(0.55,0.5),B1∼N(4.6,2),B2∼N(−2.9,2).Model IIb:A1∼N(6.5,2),A2∼N(−1.5,2),μf∼N(1.6,0.1),σf∼IG(2,0.1),q∼N(0.49,0.5),τ∼IG(1,0.1).Maximum posterior estimates shown in Table 7are similar to the maximum likelihood estimates obtained for Model Ia (Table 1). Fig. 11and empirical standard deviations given in Table 8show that the fatigue limit parameter,A3, is the most uncertain parameter whereasqis the least uncertain parameter. Fig. 11 also shows that the data are informative for all the parameters because there is a contraction between the prior densities and the posterior densities. Correlation coefficients presented in Table 9and Fig. 12show thatA1andA2are approximately linear dependent. We can therefore reduce the number of parameters in Model Ia by one parameter. These parameters are also highly correlated with the fatigue limit parameter,A3. On the other hand, there is a weak linear relationship betweenqand the parametersA1,A2andA3. Moreover, the standard deviation,τ, has no notable correlation with any parameter.Numerical results—Model IbMaximum posterior estimates given in Table 10are similar to the maximum likelihood estimates obtained for Model Ib (Table 2). Similarly to Model Ia, Fig. 13and Table 11show that the fatigue limit parameter,A3, is the most uncertain parameter whereasqis the least uncertain parameter. However, the uncertainties have been reduced forA1,A2andA3when compared with Model Ia. Fig. 13 shows again that the data are informative for all the parameters as previously explained. The marginal posterior of the fatigue limit parameter,A3is left-skewed similar to the profile likelihood estimate. Correlation coefficients shown in Table 12and Fig. 14show thatA1andB1are almost perfectly correlated withA2andB2, respectively. Thus, we can consider a fatigue limit model with non-constant variance with only four parameters, which is the same number of parameters in the logarithmic fit. The fatigue limit parameter in Model Ib has a moderate linear relationship withA1,A2andqwhereas the fatigue limit parameter in Model Ia has a strong linear relationship withA1andA2and a weak linear relationship withq.Numerical results—Model IIbMaximum posterior estimates presented in Table 13are similar to the maximum likelihood estimates obtained for Model IIb (Table 3). Fig. 15and Table 14show that the location and scale parameters,μfandσf, are the least uncertain parameters. Moreover, the uncertainties have been reduced forA1,A2andqwhen compared with Model Ia and Model Ib. Fig. 15 shows that the data are very informative for all the parameters because there is a strong contraction between the prior densities and the posterior densities. Similarly to Model Ia, Table 15and Fig. 16show thatA1andA2are approximately linear dependent, and therefore we can reduce the number of parameters for Model IIb by one parameter. The location parameter,μf, is strongly correlated withA1andA2whereasσfis moderately correlated withA1,A2andμf. There is a weak negative correlation betweenτandσfand a weak positive correlation betweenτandq.Now, we provide the same results but for prescribed uninformative priors as follows:•Model Ia:A1∼U(5,13),A2∼U(−5,0),A3∼U(24,40),q∼U(0.1,0.9),τ∼U(0.1,1.5).Model Ib:A1∼U(4,10),A2∼U(−4,0),A3∼U(30,40),q∼U(0.1,0.9),B1∼U(2,7),B2∼U(−5,−1).Model IIb:A1∼U(4,10),A2∼U(−4,0),μf∼U(1.4,1.8),σf∼U(0,0.1),q∼U(0.1,0.9),τ∼U(0,0.25).Maximum posterior estimates presented in Table 16are similar to the maximum posterior estimates obtained for Model Ia and reported in Table 7. Table 17shows that the MCMC posterior samples obtained for Model Ia with uniform priors have more variability than the posterior samples obtained for Model Ia under Scenario 1. However, Fig. 17shows that the data are informative for all the parameters. The marginal posterior of the fatigue limit parameter is again left-skewed but with larger variance. Correlation coefficients given in Table 18and Fig. 18show thatA1andA2are again linearly dependent and the number of parameters for Model Ia can be reduced by one parameter. In general, the correlations among the parameters of Model Ia under Scenario 2 have increased when compared with those under Scenario 1 (Table 9).Numerical results—Model IbMaximum posterior estimates presented in Table 19are similar to the maximum posterior estimates obtained for Model Ib and given in Table 10. Similar to Scenario 1, Fig. 19and Table 20show that the fatigue limit parameter,A3, is again the most uncertain parameter whereasqis the least uncertain parameter. However, the MCMC posterior samples obtained with uniform priors have more variability than do the posterior samples in Scenario 1 (Table 11). The marginal posterior of the fatigue limit parameter is again left-skewed but with larger variance. Correlation coefficients in Table 21and Fig. 20show thatA1andB1are almost perfectly correlated withA2andB2, respectively. The correlations among theA1,A2,A3andqparameters under Scenario 2 have increased when compared with those under Scenario 1 (Table 12).Numerical results—Model IIbMaximum posterior estimates given in Table 22are similar to the maximum posterior estimates obtained for Model IIb under Scenario 1 and presented in Table 13. Similar to Scenario 1, Fig. 21and Table 23show that the location and scale parameters,μfandσf, are the least uncertain parameters. The MCMC posterior samples obtained with uniform priors have slightly greater variability than do the posterior samples in Scenario 1 (Table 14). Fig. 21 shows that the data are very informative for all the parameters because there is a strong contraction between the prior densities and the posterior densities. Table 24and Fig. 22show thatA1andA2can be considered linear dependent, and therefore we can reduce the number of parameters for Model IIb by one parameter. In general, the correlations among the parameters of Model IIb under Scenario 2 are greater than those correlations under Scenario 1 (Table 15).We now analyze more closely comparisons among Models Ia, Ib and IIb.We adopt a traditional Bayesian approach by estimating the Bayes factor of Model A against that of Model B, which is defined asFB,A:=∫LB(θB;y)ρB(θB)dθB∫LA(θA;y)ρA(θA)dθA=pB(y)pA(y),whereρA(θA)andρB(θB)are the prior densities, andpA(y)andpA(y)are the marginal likelihoods  [25, Chapter 2].Common methods to estimate Bayes factors  [26,23] are applied to compare the fitted models and to rank their plausibility. Fast preliminary estimates of the log marginal likelihoods were obtained through the application of the Laplace approximation. Then, the log marginal likelihoods were computed using the Laplace–Metropolis estimator, which is based on the MCMC posterior samples together with the Laplace approximation.In both cases, the approximation of the log marginal likelihoodlog(p(y))is given byP2log(2π)+12log(|H∗|)+log(ρ(θ∗))+log(L(θ∗|y)),wherePis the dimension of the vectorθ,θ∗is the maximum posterior estimate andH∗is the inverse Hessian of the negative log posterior.In the Laplace estimator,θ∗andH∗are numerically approximated by means of the Broyden–Fletcher–Goldfarb–Shanno (BFGS) algorithm. The Laplace–Metropolis estimator uses the MCMC posterior samples to find the maximum posterior estimate,θ∗, and approximate,H∗, by the empirical covariance matrix.In this section, we compare models by measuring their prediction accuracy. We estimate the prediction accuracy using deviance and Watanabe–Akaike information criteria as well as cross-validation.•Log pointwise predictive density (lppd)The general method to estimate the prediction accuracy of a certain model is through the log predictive density,logρ(y|θ)=logL(θ;y), whereyis a new observation. An overestimate of the log predictive density can be obtained by using the observed data,{yi}i=1n. It is an overestimate because the observed data were used first to inferθ. In our Bayesian approach,θis summarized by the MCMC posterior samples,{θm}m=1S, and therefore the log pointwise predictive density estimate is given by(5)lppd=∑i=1nlog(1S∑m=1Sρ(yi|θm)),whereSshould be “large enough”  [27,28].Deviance information criterion (DIC)DIC can be considered as a Bayesian generalization of the AIC by replacing the maximum likelihood estimate by the posterior mean and computing the effective number of parameters,pDIC, as follows:pDIC=2(logL(θ̄)−1S∑m=1SlogL(θm)),whereθ̄is the posterior mean  [27]. Then, the deviance information criterion is given byDIC=−2(logL(θ̄)−pDIC).Watanabe–Akaike information criterion (WAIC)WAIC or widely applicable information criterion is a stable Bayesian predictive measure that approximates the leave-one-out cross-validation (see  [27–29]) and is defined bypWAIC=2∑i=1n(log(1S∑m=1Sρ(yi|θm))−1S∑m=1Slogρ(yi|θm)),WAIC=−2(lppd−pWAIC).K-fold cross-validationCross-validation is the most popular yet computationally expensive method to estimate a model’s predictive accuracy. We consider theK-fold cross-validation where the data are randomly partitioned into K disjoint subsets,{yk}k=1K. Then, we define{y(−k)}={y1,…,yk−1,yk+1,…,yK}to be a training set. For each training set, we compute the corresponding posterior distribution,p(θ|y(−k)). Then, the log predictive density foryi∈ykis computed using the training set{y(−k)}, that is:lpdi=log(1S∑m=1Sρ(yi|θk,m)),i∈k,where{θk,m}m=1Sare the MCMC samples of the posteriorp(θ|y(−k)). Finally, we sum to obtain the expected log predictive density (elpd):elpd=∑i=1nlpdi.TheK-fold cross-validation (withK=5or 10) is usually used instead of the leave-one-out cross-validation, which is the most computationally exhaustive type of cross-validation (see  [30, Chapter 5] and  [28]).In the next Subsection, we present the main numerical results from applying the techniques described in Sections  4.2.1 and 4.2.2 for Models Ia, Ib and IIb under the two predefined scenarios.Table 25shows that Model IIb under Scenario 1 is preferable by the log marginal likelihood and the predictive information criteria. The Laplace method appears to underestimate the log marginal likelihood for Model IIb. This is expected because of the complex likelihood function of Model IIb and because the Gaussian approximation does not always provide a good estimation. Table 25 also shows consistency with the classical information criterion presented in Table 6.Table 26shows that Model IIb under Scenario 2 is preferable by the log marginal likelihood and the predictive information criteria. In general, the estimated values in Table 26 are slightly higher in magnitude than are the results in Table 25. This is reasonable because Bayesian models with proper informative priors should be preferable.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We calibrated models of various complexity that were designed to account for right-censored data by means of the maximum likelihood method. We used a data set described in Section  2 for this purpose. The robustness of the estimation of the quantile functions has been assessed by computing bootstrap confidence intervals for samples stratified with respect to the cycle ratio.We then considerably enlarged the scope of our study by considering a Bayesian approach. Any prior distribution, which is suitable to describe the available knowledge on the physical parameters, can be easily incorporated into our Bayesian computational framework that provides a simulation-based posterior distribution.To decide which model could be considered more reliable for deployment, first we computed classical measures of fit based on information criteria. Then, the Bayesian approach for model comparison was applied to determine which model would be preferred under different a priori scenarios. This approach included very different techniques ranging from those based on the estimation of the marginal likelihood to those based on predictive information criteria, whose implementation requires the use of cross-validation techniques.The classical approach and the Bayesian approach for model comparison have provided evidence in favor of Model IIb given the 75S-T6 data set described in Section  2. Model IIb assumes that both fatigue life and the fatigue limit parameter follow a Weibull distribution and the expected value of the fatigue limit parameter,A3, is 39.88 ksi.An integrated set of computational tools has been developed for model calibration, cross-validation, consistency and model comparison, allowing the user to rank alternative statistical models based on objective criteria.