@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Video Compressed Sensing framework for Wireless Multimedia Sensor Networks using a combination of multiple matrices

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Implemented DWT–DCT hybrid based video compressive sensing framework.Proposed and implemented two memory efficient measurement matrices for WMSN.Proposed matrices yields similar (or better) PSNR compared to Gaussian matrix.Storage and energy complexity is less for proposed matrices compared to Gaussian matrix.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
WMSN,VCS,DWT–DCT,Combination matrix,Hybrid matrix,Orthogonal matching pursuit,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Wireless multimedia sensor networks (WMSNs) have been used for sensitive applications such as video surveillance and monitoring applications. In a WMSN, storage and transmission become complicated phenomena that can be simplified by the use of compressed sensing, which asserts that sparse signals can be reconstructed from very few measurements. In this paper, memory-efficient measurement matrices are proposed for a discrete wavelet transform (DWT)–discrete cosine transform (DCT) hybrid approach based video compressed sensing (VCS). The performance of the framework is evaluated in terms of PSNR, storage complexity, transmission energy and delay. The results show that the proposed matrices yield similar or better PSNR and consume less memory for generating the matrix when compared with a Gaussian matrix. The DWT–DCT based VCS yields better quality and compression when compared with DCT and DWT approaches. The transmission energy is 50% less and the average delay is 52% less when compared to raw frame transmission.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A WMSN consists of simple and low-cost sensor nodes that are used for a variety of applications, such as environmental monitoring, healthcare monitoring and surveillance applications. In the case of surveillance applications, sensor nodes with multimedia capability are deployed in the area of interest to detect anomalies. These sensor nodes will capture and transmit the surveillance video wirelessly to the network operator. Transmission of multimedia data that range from several megabytes to a few gigabytes is a challenging task because it imposes requirements for large amounts of storage and high bandwidth for transmission. These challenges can be overcome by using an emerging technique called compressed sensing (CS), which asserts that the original signal can be reconstructed from a small number of measurements [1]. CS can be applied to sparse signals or compressible signals. The original signal is made sparse using a transform basis, and a measurement matrix is applied to the sparse signal to obtain the measurements. These measurements are transmitted for reconstruction at the receiver side. There are many reconstruction algorithms, such as basis pursuit, greedy algorithms and iterative algorithms, for reconstructing the original signal from the measurement vector.The objective of this paper is to implement VCS based on a DWT–DCT hybrid approach and to propose efficient measurement matrices for VCS. This VCS framework is based on a block-based approach; CS is applied to all of the blocks to obtain the measurements. The performance of the system with the proposed measurement matrices is evaluated by analysing the PSNR, percentage of reduction in samples, storage, energy complexity, transmission energy and end-to-end delay.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a brief survey of related works. Section 3 provides a brief description of the CS technique, and Section 4 provides details about VCS based on the DCT, DWT and DWT–DCT hybrid approach. This section also explains in detail the proposed measurement matrices and orthogonal matching pursuit (OMP) algorithm, whereas Section 5 discusses the simulation and experimental results in detail; finally, Section 6 gives the conclusions and proposed future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A VCS framework based on the DWT–DCT hybrid approach is implemented using the proposed Combination matrix and Hybrid matrix. The performance of the measurement matrix is evaluated in terms of PSNR, storage and energy complexity. Transmission energy and delay are analysed experimentally with the help of TelosB nodes. From the results, it is concluded that the proposed matrices are memory and energy efficient while maintaining an acceptable range of PSNR. The DWT–DCT hybrid approach yields better PSNR for fewer measurements when compared with standalone DCT and DWT approaches. The experimental results show that on average, the transmission energy is 50% less and the end-to-end delay is 52% less when compared with raw frame transmission.Conventional wireless sensor nodes do not have adequate memory, power and bandwidth for multimedia applications. The future work is to develop customized hardware that can incorporate the VCS technique. The transmission energy can be further reduced by encoding the measurements before transmission. The customized hardware should have a camera module to capture the scene, a processor with high processing speed and adequate memory to process the video using the CS technique. To capture and process only the scene of interest or to detect anomalies, the camera module must be associated with a PIR sensor, which triggers the camera only upon interruption. This highly efficient hardware could then be used for video surveillance applications in WMSN.