@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Design and evaluation of a cloud-based Mobile Health Information Recommendation system on wireless sensor networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The development of a Mobile Health Information Recommendation system which integrates Cloud Computing, and Context-aware technology, and applies Collaborative Filtering technique for information recommendation.Through the collaborative recommender, users can effectively obtain consistent health information, and reduce energy and time consumption.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Health information technology (HIT),Mobile web service,Collaborative recommender,Wireless sensor network,Cloud-computing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Recent technological trends such as cloud computing, wireless communication, and wireless sensor networks provide a strong infrastructure and offer a true enabler for health information technology services over the Internet. This system is based on the cloud computing environment, integrating mobile communication technology, context-aware technology, and wireless sensor networks to build a mobile web for a personalized health information service, which includes two health information recommendation service functions: a collaborative recommender and a physiological indicator-based recommender. We further propose a hybrid predictive model, which combines the Grey Theory and Markov chain to predict the moving object’s path. This will decrease the cost which arises from tracking errors and prolong the network’s lifetime. From the experiment results of usability, it has been discovered that subjects have positive responses towards usability measurement dimensions of the system: satisfaction, expectation-confirmation, perceived trust, perceived usefulness, and perceived value.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Recent technological trends such as cloud computing, wireless communication, and wireless sensor networks provide a strong infrastructure and offer a true enabler for health information technology (HIT) services over the Internet. With the increasing popularity of mobile devices and development of wireless communication network technologies, more and more studies integrate mobile devices and context-aware technology for developing healthcare service platforms to support personalized health management to enhance the effectiveness of preventive medicine [1]. In addition, there have been more and more studies on applications of mobile communication technology, context-aware technology, and wireless sensor networks to Healthcare service [2]. Despite its great potential, more research is still needed as to how to effectively integrate these IT technologies and apply them to healthcare service.In light of the advancement of HIT and communication technologies, many organizations have provided much on-line medical information available for general public. Specifically, more and more people use the information for personal health care management or patient-oriented decision making [1]. Through the on-line social media, people connect with others who have the same disease or condition, and track and share their own experiences. Many studies have shown that such effects influence the patient-physician relationship, as patients tend to become empowered as active participants in the health care decision-making process [3], especially those living with one or more chronic illness [4]. However, the information relevant to the patient’s concern is usually scattered across many different web sites. It is, therefore, difficult for patients to find reliable healthcare information with the number of site and information source choices increasing and the overwhelmingly large volume of data to review. Furthermore, from the research on mobile health conducted by the Pew Research Center since 2010, it is found that integrating mobile devices in health information landscape nowadays is a trend, especially in groups of young people [5]. Through a wide variety of smart mobile devices (iPhone, Android, Blackberry, iPad, etc.) users can download or browse large quantities of health information anytime, anywhere, and thus the intention of people to use the Mobile web to assist self-health management has increased.With this in mind, this study proposes a framework which integrates Cloud Computing, Wireless Communication, and Wireless Sensor Networks technology, and applies a Collaborative Filtering (CF) technique to develop a Mobile Health Information Recommendation service to help users to obtain their preferred health information more efficiently. Bobadilla et al. [6] argue that the recommendation system has proved to be a useful tool to process Internet information overload phenomenon, and can effectively reduce problems caused by an excessive amount of information. The study enhances the effectiveness of receiving health information by the user and develops two health information recommendation service functions: physiological indicators-based recommender and collaborative recommender.After a brief introduction in Section 2 on the background to this paper, our system framework and functions for the development of Mobile Health Information Recommendation service is introduced in Section 3. In Section 4, the approach used by the proposed scheme of Grid Wireless Sensor Networks is described, then its performance efficiency is evaluated. The implementation of the collaborative recommender and the physiological indicators-based recommender are discussed in Section 5. The usability of the system is evaluated in Section 6. Discussion and conclusions follow in Sections 7 and 8.In recent years, mobile health information systems have been integrated with ubiquitous wireless communication technology to capture physiological signals and symptom information. These data are collected by mobile sensors and transmitted to a remote server for analysis. Then the results of analysis are sent to the user as the feedback for treatment or a health care reminder. Deng et al. argues that mobile health service is to provide health care, prevention, diagnosis, treatment, and monitoring services through a mobile device [7].Some researchers argue that the purpose of a mobile health service system is to provide medical and health care services to professionals so that their work can be better supported. As for the average consumers, mobile health information services allow them to obtain useful health information and guidance to achieve better health self-management [7]. Through the use of mobile health information services, healthcare administrators can enhance their management system, thereby reducing operating costs. The rising number of chronic diseases nowadays has become an increasingly heavy burden for health care organizations. The remote home health monitoring will help reduce health care costs [8] of constantly monitoring the health status of patients with chronic illness. In particular, via mobile health information services, it is possible to provide remote health monitoring with low cost and improved efficiency [8]. In addition, mobile health applications have become increasingly widespread, such as developing the health system to providing diabetes health education information, as well as encouraging users to talk to physicians through the mobile information system [9].Nowadays, the health information landscape tends to integrate mobile device applications [5]. Through a variety of smart mobile devices, users can download or read a large quantity of health information to assist health self-management. Therefore, this study integrates mobile devices, context-aware technology, and collaborative recommendation algorithms to develop a health care system. The major application of this system is as a daily health care information recommendation service. The target subjects are young people. It is hoped to assist users of this system to pay more attention to preventive health care and health self-management.The present system is based on the cloud computing environment, integrating mobile communication technology, context-aware technology, and wireless sensor networks to build a cross-platform for the Mobile Web for Personalized Health Information service. The health information database of this study is from one online electronic health information resource in Taiwan and is used as testing data. Since the database must store a large amount of health information and perform real-time dynamic recommendation calculations, the system is set up in the cloud VMware Workstation in order to ensure computing performance of the system. By doing so, multiple users may share a virtual machine and the effectiveness of searching for online health information will be improved. The database adopted MySQL, and uses HTML5, CSS, JavaScript, PHP, and jQuery as the main programming languages.The Mobile Web for Personalized Health Information service established by the study obtains the effect of a cross-platform through Mobile Health Information Recommendation service application (APP) by PhoneGap packing. It can be used in tablets or cellphones whether the operating system is iOS, Android, Windows Phone or some other. The functions of the personalized health information service of the study include the collaborative recommender and the physiological indicator-based recommender. It is expected that this will provide users with health information service under different conditions. First, the collaborative recommender is mainly based on preferences and needs of users to apply the FRSA (Fusion of Rough-set and Average-category-rating) algorithm to calculate and recommend health information to the user. On the other hand, the physiological indicator-based recommender is mainly based on the user’s physiological indicators to recommend health information. This feature is combined with other physiological indicator measuring devices such as blood pressure monitors, weight meters, pulse and blood oxygen meters, heart rate monitors, etc. to transmit physiological data signals to the cloud database records via wireless sensor networks. The system would then recommend health information matching their physiological needs to users based on pre-established rules of reasoning.In order to understand performance of the system and responses of users, this study further conducted experimental tests of usability on the prototype system. It was found that the subjects have positive responses towards the recommendation service of this system as detailed in 6.2 Usability Analysis. However, the experimental test procedures reveal that sensors for physiological indicator measuring devices draw heavily on power during signal transmission. Insufficient power would affect the validity of the recommended outcome. In order to improve the efficiency of signal transmission from sensors of physiological indicator measuring devices to physiological indicator-based recommender and to reduce sensor node power costs, we further propose a hybrid predictive model, which combines the Grey Theory and Markov chain to predict a moving object’s path. The system determines the sleeping and waking schedules for each sensor node. This will decrease the cost which arises from tracking errors and prolong the network’s lifetime. The simulation analysis results are discussed in 4.2. The detailed description of the structure of the system environment is shown in Fig. 1.In this study, the proposed recommendation system has five components: a cloud computing based database; the hybrid predictive model of PEGASIS; a web based user interface; a health information query module; a collaborative recommender; and a physiological indicator-based recommender. The functions of each component are described below.(1)Cloud computing-based database – The system uses virtualizes and cloud of VMware to build a cloud server. It stores a large volume of health knowledge provided by a Taiwan health and medical information portal, recommendation system user profile, rough-set-based prediction [10] generated matrix table and a physiological indicator database. The user profile and rough-set-based prediction generated matrix table mainly support the computing process of collaborative recommender. The data for physiological indicator database is mainly received from a multi-interface biomedical modular platform [11] and physiological measurement devices by mobile devices. The multi-interface biomedical modular platform sends physiological data to Mobile Health Information Recommendation System via smart phones equipped with WiFi wireless or 3G communication. The platform also connects physiological measurement modules with embedded Android devices or smart phones using communication interfaces e.g. serial cables, Bluetooth communication, or ZigBee wireless communication [11,12]. An interface-independent uplink and downlink packet communication protocol is established to monitor vital signs, such as pulse and blood oxygen, blood pressure, respiration, and body temperature. Related physiological data is stored in the physiological indicator database to support the health recommendation computing process of physiological indicator based recommender. The cloud database runs on a cloud-computing platform with many benefits (please see [13] for detail discussion).The hybrid predictive model of PEGASIS – In order to enhance the performance efficiency of a prediction model, we improved Fuemmeler’s scheme. We used the Grey Theory to predict the target tracking path in each grid. Then the Markov chain was used to calculate the probability of targets appearing in each grid. To increase the accuracy of tracking the target path, we then calculated the position of the targets that appeared in each sensor node. Our scheme can predict a more accurate position of the targets that appear in each sensor node. Hence, the number of active nodes and the energy consumption of the scheme will be decreased noticeably so that the network life will be prolonged. The detailed flow is described in Section 4.Web-based user interface – Patients use the interface to search useful health information. Through an internet-based visual interface, users can receive the results of health recommendations from the collaborative recommender and the physiological indicator-based recommender more easily. It was developed using HTML5, CSS, JavaScript, jQuery and PhoneGap techniques so that users are able to use the system to query the health information anytime, anywhere, and via any device (e.g. desktop computer, laptop computer, iPad, Smartphone, etc.).Classified Health information query module – The health information query feature is presented as a way of subject classification; users can select a subject classification menu according to their needs and search and browse the health information that they are interested in. Users can query health information by clicking on classified items, such as drugs and health products, diseases and conditions, first aid, health diet, children and teens’ health, women’s/men’s health, and seniors’ health.Collaborative recommender – The health information recommendation feature is based mainly on users’ profile and usage records. Health information that conforms to user preference is automatically recommended through association rules and the FRSA (Fusion of Rough-set and Average-category-rating) algorithm. The feature helps users to filter extensive health information and effectively obtain the health information that meets their interest. It applies the FRSA algorithm proposed by Su et al. [10] to calculate and recommend health information matching the user’s preferences. Through this service function, users can not only access content of consistent information, but also dramatically reduce information searching time. The detailed flow is described in Section 5.1.Physiological indicator-based recommender – The physiological indicator-based recommender is based mainly on physiological indicators of the user to recommend health information. The module uses the physiological indicator data base provided by multi-interface biomedical modular platform (e.g. blood pressure monitors, pulse and blood oxygen meters, etc.) [11], and physiological measurement devices (e.g. weight meters, pulse and heart rate monitors, etc.) to recommend health information. Physiological indicators collected by the physiological indicator database can support the physiological indicator-based recommender to run the recommendation computing process so health information conforming to users’ physiological needs is recommended to users. The detailed flow is described in Section 5.2.Web service management web site – This feature is network-based system operation interface. It is the basic feature of back-end management of the system, including basic functions such as maintenance of user’s basic information, user registration management, and system management.In [14], Fuemmeler et al. proposed a scheme which is based on a Markov chain. It assigns sleep time to each sensor node according to probability. The probability is computed by the Markov chain: the now event position is related with the past event position. The next time event position can be predicted by the Markov chain. The authors assume the target will finally leave this network. There are, in total, (n+1) states. A probability transition matrix p is used to compute the probability of the target position.(1)p=Z000…01-ZT1whereZis an×nmatrix.This will generate a large amount of calculation and the size of each grid becomes too large. As a result, it causes a higher tracking error rate. To enhance the performance efficiency of the prediction model, the Fuemmeler’s scheme was improved. The Grey theory was used to predict the target’s tracking path in each grid. Thus, the Markov chain was used to first calculate the probability of targets appearing in each grid. To increasing the accuracy of target tracking path, the position of targets appearing in each sensor node was then calculated. Because the scheme could predict the more accurate position of targets appearing in each sensor node, the number of active nodes and the energy consumption of this scheme will be decreased tellingly so that the network life will be prolonged.A hybrid predictive model is proposed which combines Grey theory and Markov chain to predict an object’s moving path. The system determines the sleep and wakeup schedules for each sensor node. This will decrease the cost which arises from the tracking error and prolongs the network lifetime. The flowchart diagram of the hybrid predictive model of PEGASIS architecture is shown in Fig. 2.The proposed scheme could be divided into three phases: grid chaining phase of PEGASIS architecture; predict the object moving path phase; and determine state of the sensor nodes.(1)Grid chaining phase of PEGASIS architecture:By using grid computing in the sensing field, the sensing field could be divided into several grids.First of all, the whole sensing field is divided intoN×Ngrids by grid-chaining [15].In grid-chaining phase, there are four steps to determine the grids.(A)Setup grid step:The quantity of grid will be set up first, for example, the setup of the quantity of.N×Ngrids.Grid deployment step:Each network node will be evenly distributed. If the node number cannot be evenly distributed to all grids, the grid closer to the base station will have one more node.Intra-grid chaining step:Form chain to the nodes within the grid. A Gredy algorithm is used to form a chain for nodes within the grid, and this is called grid chain.Inter-Grid chaining step:Form chain between grids which is called the area chain. This follows the rule from left to right (odd row) or from right to left (even row), hence the chain will be made from first grid to last grid.Predict the object moving path phase:After the grid-chaining construct, it is assumed that each grid can connect with its neighbor grids. This ensures that each neighbor grid can transmit a message to each other. Then, we move the observation model of the target probability of appearing in the grid into the Markov chain probabilities transition matrix. The probability of target appearance in each grid is obtained.(2)pk+1=pkPThe equation above denotes that the target state in the next time is obtained by the product of the now state and probabilities transition matrix. ThePn(grid)is the probability of target appearing in each grid, where n is the number of the grid. After thePn(grid)calculation, the Grey theory will be performed to predict the target tracking target position. In [16,17], the Grey prediction procedure has described. The Grey theory is used to predict in the grid which is the maximum probability of target appearing in each grid. In other words, the Grey theory is used to predict the target tracking position in the grid whosePn(grid)is maximum. It is assumed that each sensor node can know own position by using global positioning system (GPS). Therefore, it is assumed that the target position can be located when the target appears.In the Grey scheme,X0is defined as a set of target original position, andX1is the accumulated generation operation (AGO) set calculated byX0set, andX2is the average set obtained byX2set.X0=(x0,0,x0,1,…,x0,N-1)is a non-negative set of the target position.x0,N-1is the target position att=N-1. GM(1,1) uses theX0=(x0,0,x0,1,…,x0,N-1)to obtain a AGO, that is,(3)x1,i=∑j=0ix0,j,i=0,1,…,N-1.Therefore, we acquire the AGO setX1=(x1,0,x1,1,…,x1,N-1).BecauseX1is a non-decreasing sequence set, we predict theX1by the exponential curve fitting approach. The fit exponential functionx̂1(t)be described as(4)dx̂1(t)dt+αx̂1(t)=βHence, the question will become to find out theαandβ.(5)x̂1(t)=x0,0-βαe-αt+βαThe equation above is the best fitting curve for the sequenceX1.Due toX1is a discrete data sequence,dx̂1(t)/dtis replaced byx0,i=x1,i-x1,i-1andx̂1(t)by(x1,i-1+x1,i)/2. Therefore, (4) becomes(6)X0+αX2=βwhereX2=(x2,1,x2,2,…,x2,N-1,)is made by averaging the consecutive elements ofX1as(7)x2,i=x1,i-1+x1.i2,i=1,2,…,N-1Eq. (6) is the Grey differential equation.In order to determine theα,β(6) is expressed as(8)B·v¯=x¯whereB=-x2,11-x2,21⋮-x2,N-11,v¯=αβx¯=x0,1x0,2⋮x0,N-1Then, the least root mean square error solutionv¯is obtained by using the Pseudo-inverse method [15].(9)v¯=(BTB)-1BTx¯Reducing Eq. (9), produces(10)α=ΔΓ-(N-1)Φ(N-4)Θ-Δ2and(11)β=ΓΘ-ΔΦ(N-4)Θ-Δ2whereΔ=∑k=1N-1x2,k,Γ=∑k=1N-1x0,k,Φ=∑k=1N-1x2,k·x0,kandΘ=∑k=1N-1x2,k2.By substituting the α and β into (7), the predicted valuex1,Ncan be obtained as(12)x̂1,N=x0,0-βαe-αN+βαThis produces the predicted value ofx0,Nby(13)x̂0,N=x̂1,N-x̂1,N-1After the prediction of probability of target appearing in each grid, the predicting range is reduced by using Grey theory. This can find the more accurate position of the target path.(3)Determine state of the sensor nodesAfter the prediction of the Grey system theory, the position of target in the grid with the maximum probability of target appearance is obtained. When the process of prediction for all target paths is complete, each sensor node’s sensing ranger is checked for whether or not it covers the target path. If the sensor node’s sensing range covers the target path, it should be an active node. If a sensor node’s sensing range is not covered by any target path, it could be a sleep node and does not perform a sensing task. We denote thatb(covered)is a Boolean function. When the value ofb(covered)is 1, the sensor node has covered the target path, which can be active nodes. On the other hand, when the value ofb(covered)is 0, the sensor node has not covered any target path, so should go into sleep mode.Only the sensor node which covers the predicted path needs to go into the active mode. Fuemmeler’s scheme is based on the grid as a unit in sleep mode, so the proposed scheme can reduce the number of active nodes, thereby reducing the energy consumption of wireless sensor networks so that the overall wireless sensor network lifetime will be prolonged.Finally, the proposed scheme determines the sensor nodes which cover the target path to be active nodes, and the sensor nodes which do not cover the target path to be sleep nodes. As a result, the energy consumption of the proposed scheme will be decreased.The performance efficiency of the Fuemmeler et al. proposed scheme [14] and the proposed scheme is evaluated in this section. There are three simulation situations in this section. First, the simulation is made in the context of a sensor field of 100m×100m, a sensing radius ofr=15mand the number of sensor nodes is 200. As can be seen from simulation results, the novel scheme demonstrates the least amount of total energy consumption each round compared with Fuemmeler’s scheme. The proposed scheme ensures a small number of sensor nodes are active. The tracking error rate is described by(14)1-n(track)totalpathwhere n(track) is the total number of the target paths are covered and thetotalpathis the total number of the target paths. The proposed scheme could reduce the tacking error rate further than Fuemmeler’s scheme.As illustrated in Fig. 3, the proposed scheme could obtain a lower number of active nodes than Fuemmeler’s scheme in each round. Because the system needs all sensor nodes to detect the target, the predicted range is reduced by using the Grey theory so that the number of active nodes will be decreased. At the fiftieth round, the number of active nodes in our proposed scheme is 79 and in Fuemmeler’s scheme is 128.As shown in Fig. 4, the energy consumption of proposed scheme is less than Fuemmeler’s scheme in each round. Since the sleep nodes do not perform any tasks they consume no energy. At, fiftieth round, total energy consumption of our proposed scheme and Fuemmeler’s scheme are 39.5 (J)and 64 (J)respectively.In our proposed scheme, the Grey theory is used to predict the position of the target path after the calculation of the probability of target appears in each grid. Hence, a more accurate position than Fuemmeler’s scheme can be obtained. In Fig. 5, at the fiftieth round, the tracking errors of our proposed scheme and Fuemmeler’s scheme are 0% and 5%.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
According to the structure proposed in this study, the research further establishes functions with context-awareness, recommendation calculus, as well as personalized services. This study makes five contributions to the area of research.(1)The Mobile Health Information Recommendation service based on cloud computing can solve the problem of massive computing and data access of the system.The proposed scheme of Grid Wireless Sensor Networks can help in reducing the energy consumption of scheme and prolongs network life.Through the collaborative recommender service, users can more effectively obtain consistent health information, and reduce the energy and time consumption for data search.The physiological indicator-based recommender combines with context-aware technology to strengthen the health information referral service. With the aid of this feature, users can obtain individual physiological indicators and corresponding health information in a timely manner.Finally, the usability responses of subjects towards this system and system computing structure via usability tests help in understanding the user satisfaction, expectation-confirmation, perceived usefulness, perceived value, and perceived trust of user in regard to the system.However, there are some limitations to this study and they deserve further exploration in the future. Since the present study is still in the prototype development stage, experimental tests were conducted in a laboratory. In the future, various practical applications for different situations such as home care or remote medical care can be included. As for system structure, the cloud environment established by the research is a private cloud environment. If health organizations introduce a related method and structure in the future, the IT security issue of cloud environment also requires further exploration. Finally, due to constraints of time, the study cannot observe the behaviors of users of the system for a long period, or whether the system can help users establish good health management practices. These research topics are worth further exploration in the future.