@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Interacting multiple model for improving the precision of vehicle-mounted global position system

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Clothoid model which shows longitudinal and lateral constant speed motion and the Adaptive Current Statistics model which shows the accelerating of the vehicle.Enhancing the positioning accuracy by the ACS model and clothoid model.IMM is better to improve the position accuracy within the limited cost.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Adaptive Current Statistics,Clothoid,Global position system,Interacting multiple model,Low-cost,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstractImage, graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The high-precision, real-time positioning of a vehicle is the key technology to vehicle networking research, such as vehicle–road coordination control and intelligent transportation systems. Considering the cost effectiveness and competitive pressure in the automobile consumption market, most vehicle-mounted GPS adopt a single-frequency pseudo-range receiver, instead of the costly differential GPS, which can achieve centimeter-level positional accuracy. The single-frequency pseudo-range receiver has relatively poor dodging and disclosure and limited precision (i.e., from 1 m to 10 m); thus, achieving lane-level positioning is difficult. The GPS can neither effectively guide a vehicle in the overall navigation process nor provide detailed information on the road and environment for driving control.With the reduction in the cost of the GPS receiver hardware and with the aim of improving the positioning precision of low-cost GPS, researchers have attempted to adopt the multi-information fusion technology of multi-sensors. These attempts have solved some questions, such as compensating for the occluded GPS satellite signal by inertial measurement unit (IMU) and GPS, and improving the precision of dead reckoning by odometer and gyroscope [1–4]. The Kalman filter (KF) [5,6] is widely adopted in earlier studies, but the linearization of a complex nonlinear model can lead to additional deviation, and many parameters are difficult to observe. If a simple single model is adopted, then the dynamic and complex driving states of a vehicle cannot be described accurately. With the development of the multi-sensor data fusion technique, the most exciting area of current research now focuses on the IMM, which can effectively resolve the problem of low-level robustness in a single model.The core of an IMM algorithm is the process of setting up different sub-filters according to different simple models. The state values of these sub-models are then combined by adjusting the model probabilities. Through this method, the complex driving process is covered by these simple models [7,8]. To reach the required level of precision, an appropriate motion model must be selected. At present, researchers mostly adopt the constant velocity (CV) and constant turn (CT) models. The literature [8] presents an IMM algorithm based on simple models, which increases the positional accuracy of low-cost GPS by 20%. However, if a vehicle is in a state of acceleration or deceleration as a result of the operation of the driver, then these models can express neither the longitudinal nor longitudinal velocity change rate in the following period. Therefore, the desired tracking effect cannot be achieved using these simple models. Considering the above problems, the lateral and longitudinal dynamic characteristics, and extreme accelerating ability, this study establishes the clothoid model and ACS [9] model. Using these two models, the IMM algorithm realizes an accurate forecast of the driving state of a vehicle and its attainable area in the next period of time.The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Section 2 gives a detailed description of the IMM algorithm, including the four steps in the recursive process. Section 3 introduces the clothoid model and ACS model of the IMM algorithm, and the method of modeling. Section 4 shows the contrastive experiments and results of different models and different types of the GPS device. And finally, the conclusions are drawn in Section 5.The IMM algorithm is based on the general pseudo-Bayesian and Markov chain. The IMM fully accounts for the different states of motion and is proven to be, at present, the most cost-efficient algorithm in the state estimation of mix systems.The IMM is described in Fig. 1. The input of this system is a low-cost GPS and an IMU. The filter and fusion of the state is computed by the IMM. The ACS and clothoid models describe the complex rigid body kinematics of vehicle motion. The output is the high-precision position and velocity of the vehicle.An IMM estimator uses several filters at the same time, rather than a single KF. Therefore, the final output of an IMM estimator is statistically calculated based on the weights of the sub-filters, which are computed according to prevailing navigation circumstances. By adopting the clothoid and ACS models, the trajectory of the vehicle is deduced through the IMM algorithm.As Fig. 1 describes, there are four steps in the recursive process of the IMM algorithm:(1)Interaction of models: in this step, the weight of each model is recalculated based on a Markov transfer matrix and the state vector of the previous step, and the covariance matrix is then updated.The KF can predict the state vector, associated error covariance, measurement estimate, and innovation covariance.The probability update of the models is conducted.The fusion of the model: the state value estimate and covariance matrix of the fusion result are achieved, and one recursion calculation of the IMM algorithm is completed.Considering vehicle kinematics and dynamic characteristics, as well as braking capacity in extreme accelerating situations, this study develops the clothoid model, which shows longitudinal and lateral constant speed motion, and the ACS model, which shows vehicle acceleration.The clothoid model is a curve whose curvature changes linearly with its curve length (i.e., the curvature of a circular curve is equal to the reciprocal of the radius). In this study, the clothoid model describes longitudinal and lateral constant speed motion.The clothoid model is given by(1)y(x)=y0+tan(ɛ)x+C02x2+C16x3where y0  is the lateral distance to the left wheel, x is the longitudinal distance, C0 is the road curvature, C1 is the change rate of road curvature, and ɛ is yaw angle.The trajectory of the vehicle is described in Fig. 2.The state vector of the clothoid model is given by(2)X=[C0C1xɛ]The state vector X is updated with the following formulas:(3)C0k=C0k−1+VΔTC1k−1(4)C1k=C1k−1(5)xk=xk−1+VΔT(6)ɛk=ɛk−1+Δɛ+VΔTC0k−1+(VΔT)2C1k−1Here, ΔT is the interval between two frames of the input video, and Δɛ is the change angle during ΔT.The above-mentioned models, CV and CT, actually describe the simple motion state, such as constant speed or stable steering. When a vehicle is running at variable speeds, such as under heavy acceleration, the result of path tracking lags behind the real path. The key to further improving the tracking performance of the algorithm is how to describe the state of variable speed. Therefore, this study sets up the ACS model aimed at the transient motion process of a vehicle.The ACS model is a non-zero mean and time-related model, which is an improvement in the current statistics (CS) model. In the CS model, when the target is maneuvering at a certain acceleration, the acceleration value of the next moment is within a certain scope, which is determined by the characteristics of the target. The probability density conforms to a modified Rayleigh distribution.Given limitations of acceleration ability, acceleration variance can be self-adaptively adjusted at intervals, which are limited by the maximum acceleration ability of the vehicle's kinematic characteristic.The acceleration of the vehicle is given by(7){x¨=a¯+a(t)a(t)=−αa(t)+ω(t)The discretization equation is given by(8)Xk+1=ϕkXk+Uka¯+Wk(9)Xk=[xkx˙kx¨k](10)ϕk=[1T1α2(−1+αT+e−αT)011α(1−e−αT)00e−αT](11)Uk=[1α(−T+αT22+1−e−αTα)T−1−e−αTα1−e−αT]Wkis the discrete time white noise, and the variance is given by(12)Qk=2ασa2The zero-mean colored noise is a(t), the acceleration variance isσa2, the reciprocal of the time constant is α, and the mean of acceleration isa¯.According to the variance characteristic of a Rayleigh distribution, if the further prediction value of accelerationx¨k+1|kis set as the current acceleration meana¯, then the acceleration mean in the CS model can be adaptively adjusted, and the ACS is set.The acceleration variance is given by(13)σa2={4−ππ(amax−ak+1|k)2ak+1|k>04−ππ(a−max+ak+1|k)2ak+1|k<0The maximum positive and negative accelerations of the vehicle are amaxanda−max, respectively. According to the characteristics and test of the vehicle, amaxanda−maxare respectively set as 5 and −5 m/s2. In the ACS model, the acceleration variance can be adaptively adjusted according to amaxanda−max.The test vehicle is equipped with a high-accuracy differential GPS and a low-cost GPS from the State Key Laboratory of Automotive Simulation and Control in Jilin University. Data collection on the high-cost and low-cost GPS equipment is simultaneously conducted. To better verify the robustness of the ACS and clothoid models through IMM, comparative experiments are conducted on two model groups: the traditional CV and CT models, and the new clothoid and ACS models.The parameters of the low-accuracy and high-accuracy GPS units are given in Table 1.The CAN bus and Spatial NAV100 provide the data, including velocity, acceleration, heading, and raw rate. The code of the IMM–KF algorithm and real-time data collection is based on LabVIEW language tools. RT3000 has a position accuracy of 0.02 m, which can be considered as the real course of the vehicle. It is therefore set as a reference course in the contrast test.The position effect is shown in Figs. 3and 4. The lines in the figures represent the courses of the IMM algorithm with clothoid and ACS models, the low-cost GPS, the high-accuracy differential GPS, and the IMM algorithm with CV and CT models. Their respective acronyms are: IMM, GPS, RTK and CVCT. As shown in Figs. 3 and 4, given the low accuracy of the single-frequency GPS, a larger deviation exists, and the course is off the road. The IMM is also shown to improve accuracy by fusing the status data of the vehicle.Fig. 4 shows only the lateral positional accuracy, whereas Fig. 5shows better longitudinal accuracy of position. By comparing the ACS and clothoid models to the CV and CT models, the longitudinal accuracy improves by around 20%, when the vehicle is running at variable velocity.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
