@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
On-line motor condition monitoring system for abnormality detection

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A set of economical handheld online real-time data-acquisition devices for motor abnormal detection based on vibrational and electrical detection methods was developed.The errors of analysis results from electrical and vibration signal were less than 10% comparing our proposed device with commercial industrial computer.This is a low cost, small size and simple use motor condition monitoring system.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Electrical signal analysis,Vibration signal analysis,Motor condition monitoring system,Fast Fourier transform,Infinite impulse response filter,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstractImage, graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
As an induction motor is extensively used, in addition to seeking high efficiency and energy conservation, how to enhance stability and safety becomes a key point. If the operational status can be monitored by effective equipment and repaired before the motor shows initial failure symptoms and serious damage [1,2], the system reliability can be enhanced, and maintenance costs after damage can be reduced. Since factory productivity will not be interrupted, this increases the economic benefit of the system.In recent years, foreign and domestic experts and scholars studied detection methods for induction motor fault feature signals [3] and obtained many theoretical results and practical applications. According to experimental results, each detection method has certain identification characteristics [4]. If only one detection method is used, the cause of a failure often cannot be correctly diagnosed, and there may even be misrecognition. In order to increase the fault recognition rate to remedy the deficiencies of each detection method, this study uses vibration signal detection [5] and electrical signal detection [6] of the stator for measurement and analysis in order to implement complementary effects.The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 the system framework and signal processing of electrical and mechanical sensors are presented. In Section 3 the hardware circuit and graphic user interface of the motor condition monitor are introduced. Subsequently, in Section 4 the experimental results and validation are presented. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper.A motor operating state monitoring system is constructed in this study, which uses a voltage sensor and current sensor to measure the three-phase voltage and current signal. The triaxial accelerometer measures the vibratory magnitude in x, y, and z directions, the self-made signal acquisition device transmits analog signals to the measuring system for real-time analysis processing and display, and then, the measuring system actively shows the spectrograms of various phases. Thus, the user can see the spectral distribution of the motor on a touch screen and further analyze and monitor motor health conditions. Fig. 1shows the framework of this system.Before the motor condition is measured, the signal passes through an analog low pass filter (LPF) for anti-aliasing filtering. Then, the signal is sent to the microcontroller for A/D conversion and digital filtering, and the signal is filtered again to guarantee the integrity of the signal. Finally, the Fast Discrete Fourier Transform is implemented for a clean signal, and the result is displayed on the touch screen, so that the user knows the current motor operating conditions. The process is shown in Fig. 2.The output of the Infinite Impulse Response (IIR) filter is related to the previous output and input signals. Thus, the past output can influence the current output value, called a recursive filter. A unit impulse input's output response is an infinite sequence; thus, it is also known as an IIR filter [7–9]. The architecture is shown in Fig. 3.An IIR filter can be expressed as the following nth-order difference equation:(1)y[n]=∑i=0Mbix[n−i]+∑k=1Naky[n−k]Both sides of the aforesaid equation take z transformation, which is shifted to obtain the system transfer function expressed as(2)H(z)=Y(z)X(z)=∑i=0MbiZ−i1−∑k=1NakZ−kIf the difference equation of (1) is expanded, it is observed that the system output y[n] equals the linear combination of the current input x[n], the input delay signal x[n-i], and the output delay signal y[n-k] of the system, where the input delay signal is the previous input, and the output delay signal is the previous output. This study uses Matlab software to simulate the signature waveform of a digital filter, and the digital filter parameters are set according to the present system's required sampling frequency, shown in Fig. 4.In the calculation of the Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT), high efficiency can be calculated by many continuous small DFTs. The symmetry and periodicity of the twiddle factorWNkn=e−j(2π/N)knare used to reduce the computational process. This study introduces the common Decimation In-Time (DIT) Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) algorithm for dividing a long sequence x[n] into many short subsequences. Thus, it is also known as a time division algorithm.A triaxial accelerometer, made by PCB Piezotronics, is used to measure the vibratory magnitude of the motor, and the model number is 629A31. A miniature transformer is used as a voltage sensor, with optional withstand voltages of AC 110 V and AC 220 V, a wattage output of 4 W, and an output voltage of AC 6 V. The current sensor is made by Chauvin Arnoux, Model E3N, and the measurement range has two optional gears. The pictures are shown in Fig. 5.The original signal, which contains equipment and circuit noises, is measured by sensors. The amplitude of the original signal is greater than the receptacle range of the microcontroller. Therefore, the signal cannot be sent directly to the microcontroller for analysis, as it must be processed. The signal processing circuits of the accelerometer, voltage sensor, and current sensor are introduced, as follows.Due to the specification requirements of the triaxial accelerometer, a DC 24 V is supplied to the electronic circuit and a constant current diode is applied to provide fixed 4 mA current to the accelerometer. The accelerometer signal output passes through the voltage follower to remove the loading effect and enters the magnification circuit for the user to choose the appropriate magnification. A level increasing circuit is used to increase the voltage level. Finally, the 2-level filter filters the signal. The circuit architecture is shown in Fig. 6.As the single-phase voltage of a motor is AC 220 V, the extracted electrical signals cannot be sent directly to the microcontroller. Therefore, a miniature transformer selects the AC 220 V joint option, which is reduced to AC 6 V. This self-made voltage step-down circuit is used for the secondary buck, and the signal is processed by appropriate level upgrading and an inverse circuit. The circuit architecture is shown in Fig. 7.The current clamp meter has two optional magnifications. The first option is a peak at 100 mA∼10 A and the second option is a peak at 1 A∼100 A. The common ground for the two options is the relative maximum current output peak at DC 1 V, and the acceptable maximum voltage of the microcontroller is DC 3.3 V. Based on these characteristics, it is unnecessary to amplify or reduce the current signal of the current clamp meter, provided the measurement signal passes through the level increasing circuit, which converts the AC signal into a DC signal to be sent to the microcontroller for A/D conversion. The circuit architecture is shown in Fig. 8.In this experiment the signals measured by an industrial computer are compared with the signals measured by the self-made measuring system, and the errors are recorded in order to validate the accuracy of this experiment. Finally, the measured data are transferred to the computer, which uses Matlab software, for another analysis to validate the accuracy of measuring system FFT, as shown in Fig. 9.Five three-phase induction motors are prepared for this study. Specifications include the number of poles at 4 P, a rated output of 2 HP, a rated efficiency of 79.4%, a line frequency of 60 Hz, and a rated speed of 1720 rpm. Four types of faults are made based on the motors of the same specifications, including the turn-to-turn fault of a stator coil, rotor bar breaking, bearing outer race breakage, and eccentric misalignment. The turn-to-turn fault of the stator coil is made by destroying the insulation of the Phase A coil of the stator and the coils making contact with each other in order to short circuit the coil. As the turn-to-turn fault is very dangerous, for the consideration of safety, only one coil is short circuited for testing. As the rotor bar's breaking fault has the same fault feature at different breakage positions, there will be other characteristic frequencies unless other fault types are initiated. This experiment uses basic bar breaking, where two rotor bars are broken by manual drilling. The hole depth is about 3 cm, and the hole size is about 0.7 cm. In terms of the bearing fault, a common fault is outer race damage. Thus, the bearing's outer race, in this experiment, is a molten 1 cm hole by manual electric heating. In the experiment on misalignment eccentricity fault, the relative shift of the motor and loading equipment is made by tilting the test platform, and the inclination is measured by a level meter in order to create a misalignment fault. It inclines 0.05 cm to the Y-axis, as shown in Fig. 10.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
