@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Automatic modulation format/bit-rate classification and signal-to-noise ratio estimation using asynchronous delay-tap sampling

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A technique for joint modulation format and bit-rate classification is proposed.The proposed technique can simultaneously enable non-data-aided SNR estimation.The technique uses asynchronous delay-tap plots with artificial neural networks.The signal classification accuracy is 99.12% and mean SNR estimation error is 0.88 dB.Due to its simplicity, it is attractive for future cognitive wireless networks.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Automatic modulation classification,Automatic modulation format and bit-rate classification,SNR estimation,Asynchronous delay-tap sampling,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstractImage, graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The incredible advances in digital signal processing (DSP) technologies over the last decade along with the advent of fast and economical analog-to-digital converters (ADCs) have developed a strong interest in cognitive radio for both commercial and military applications. The cognitive radio terminals in future wireless networks are envisioned to be adaptive in nature whereby various transmission parameters such as modulation format, bit-rate, signal power etc., can be varied dynamically depending upon the channel conditions and quality-of-service (QoS) requirements [1–5]. Therefore, the digital receivers in future cognitive wireless networks are expected to be fully capable of blind estimation of these critical parameters.Automatic modulation classification (AMC) has been an active research area for the past several decades and a number of techniques have been proposed in the literature [6,7]. These include AMC techniques based on iterative expectation-maximization algorithm [8], machine learning method using genetic programming in combination with K-nearest neighbor (KNN) [9], two-stage optimization using greedy convexhull learning algorithm and alternative convexhull shrinkage algorithm [10], maximum likelihood approach using probability density function of signal phase [11], higher-order statistical moments and cumulants [12,13], combination of higher-order statistics and instantaneous properties of digitally modulated signals [14] etc. The existing AMC techniques exploit various characteristics of modulation schemes for the purpose of their recognition for e.g., (i) instantaneous variations in the amplitude, frequency and phase of the carrier, (ii) statistical features such as higher-order moments and cumulants, cyclostationarity etc., (iii) spectral features obtained through Fourier and wavelet transforms, (iv) geometrical features of the constellation diagrams and (v) variance of the zero-crossing interval of the carrier. The current AMC techniques suffer from two main drawbacks. (1) These techniques entail high implementation and computational complexity since they often require coherent detection, high-speed synchronous sampling, and intricate preprocessing steps for the extraction of abovementioned parameters. (2) To the best of authors' knowledge, all these techniques focus merely on modulation format classification and cannot jointly identify the bit-rates of signals, which are also expected to vary dynamically in future wireless networks.Apart from the need of joint modulation format and bit-rate classification, a priori knowledge of various channel parameters is also crucial in wireless networks since this vital information can be exploited for achieving the optimal performance through various adaptive schemes [1]. In particular, accurate estimation of signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is indispensable in wireless networks since the performance of many algorithms strongly depends on precise knowledge of SNR. The real-time information about SNR can enable several useful functionalities such as adaptive modulation and coding, dynamic power allocation, soft decoding etc. Over the last few years, a plethora of SNR estimation techniques has been proposed [15]. These include techniques based on higher-order moments [16], fourth-order cross-moments [17], correlation and cyclostationarity properties [18,19], training symbols [20], rank discrimination test [21] etc. The above-mentioned techniques can be categorized as data-aided (DA) and non-data-aided (NDA) techniques. The former approach relies on periodic transmission of pilot symbols known to the receiver while the latter one estimates SNR directly from the information-bearing received signal. Since the use of pilot symbols results in wastage of channel bandwidth and transmission power, NDA SNR estimation techniques are considered more suitable for wireless networks [15].In this paper, we propose a simple technique which effectively exploits modulation format, bit-rate, and SNR dependent patterns present in asynchronous delay-tap plots (ADTPs) obtained from the received signals. In contrast to existing AMC techniques which target only modulation format classification, the proposed technique can jointly classify modulation format and bit-rate of the received signal from a known set of modulation formats and bit-rates. In addition, it can blindly estimate the SNR of a received data-bearing signal. The proposed technique requires simple envelope detection and low-speed asynchronous sampling (without necessitating timing/clock information) and thus offers reduced implementation complexity as compared to existing AMC and SNR estimation techniques. Furthermore, due to the fact that the proposed technique can simultaneously estimate modulation format, bit-rate and SNR of the received signal, it is also computationally more efficient than the existing techniques which require separate algorithms for the estimation of these three parameters. Numerical simulations performed for three modulation formats at two different bit-rates i.e., 250/500 Mbps non-return-to-zero (NRZ) 2 amplitude-shift keying (2ASK), 250/500 Mbps return-to-zero (RZ) quadrature phase-shift keying (QPSK) and 1/2 Gbps NRZ 16 quadrature amplitude modulation (16QAM) signals validate successful classification of all modulation formats/bit-rates for SNR as low as 0 dB. Similarly, accurate estimation of SNR in the range of 0−30 dB is shown for various signal types.The rest of paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the concept of asynchronous delay-tap sampling (ADTS) technique while in Section 3, the system model used in numerical simulations is described. Section 4 provides information about principal component analysis (PCA) method. In Section 5, the results for joint modulation format/bit-rate classification and blind SNR estimation are presented and discussed. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper.The concept of ADTS is illustrated in Fig. 1. In ADTS, the signal envelope is sampled in pairs (pi, qi) with a known constant delay Δt (called tap-delay) between the two samples [22–24]. It is important to note that the sampling process is completely asynchronous in nature whereby, the sampling period Tsampling is not related to the symbol period Tsymbol and can be many orders of magnitude longer. This implies that there is absolutely no need for timing/clock information in ADTS. Moreover, the sampling can be performed at very low sampling rates. Both of these properties are extremely desirable since they can significantly reduce the implementation complexity and cost. Binning the sample pairs (pi, qi) into a two-dimensional (2D) histogram produces a scatter plot called an ADTP, which provides information richness similar to conventional eye diagrams with the benefit that unlike eye diagrams, the generation of ADTPs does not necessitate timing information. The patterns reflected by ADTPs depend on various factors such as (i) shape of the signal waveform (and hence, modulation format), (ii) slopes of the signal pulse (and thus, data rate) and (iii) noise as well as other impairments introduced into the signal. Fig. 2shows distinct ADTP patterns corresponding to different modulation formats, bit-rates and SNRs. It is essentially this relation between ADTP patterns and various modulation formats, bit-rates and SNRs which the proposed technique exploits using ANN-based pattern recognition for the joint estimation of these parameters. In order to reduce the complexity of subsequent pattern recognition system, we preprocess ADTPs using PCA for the extraction of most significant and distinctive features [25,26]. These unique features are then utilized for the training of two ANN-based classifiers used for the recognition of modulation format/bit-rate and estimation of SNR of the received signal.To investigate the applicability of proposed technique, we have conducted numerical simulations and the system model used is shown in Fig. 3. Three modulation formats i.e., one from each of the three families of amplitude, phase, and multilevel-QAM modulation schemes, are selected for evaluation purposes. For each chosen modulation format type, we have considered two different data rates so as to analyze the bit-rate classification ability of the technique. Furthermore, we have considered a combination of NRZ and RZ modulation formats in this work since both types are used in practical communication systems. Hence, the set of selected signals constitutes 250/500 Mbps NRZ-2ASK, 250/500 Mbps RZ-QPSK and 1/2 Gbps NRZ-16QAM signals. The Gaussian pulse-shaping filters are used for transmitted signal pulses while the channel effects are limited to the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) only. The noise power is altered so as to vary the SNR of received signal from 0 to 30 dB in steps of 0.5 dB (i.e., 61 SNR values considered for each signal type). The total received power (i.e., sum of signal and noise powers) is −10 dBm. The envelope of received passband signal is sampled by employing ADTS to obtain 100,000 sample pairs (pi, qi), which are then used to synthesize an ADTP with 30 × 30 bins. We generated a large data set of 366 ADTPs corresponding to three modulation formats, two bit-rates, and 61 SNR values. Two separate subsets namely training and testing data sets are then obtained by randomly selecting 70% (i.e., 256) and 30% (i.e., 110) ADTPs, respectively, from the overall data set. The ADTPs in both data sets are processed using PCA and the extracted feature vectors are then exploited by ANN-based classifiers for joint modulation format/bit-rate classification and NDA SNR estimation.Principal component analysis, also called Karhunen–Loève transform (KLT), is a classical technique for features extraction and data compression. It has myriad applications in the areas of image processing, pattern recognition, and computer vision. The central idea of PCA is to reduce the large dimensionality of a given data space to a relatively smaller dimensionality of feature space. This reduction is attained by transforming to a new (and more concise) set of uncorrelated variables called principal components (PCs). Thus, PCA results in an economical and more compact representation of data [25,26]. In this work, we apply standard PCA on ADTPs in the training and testing data sets in order to determine the most useful features. For this purpose, first each ADTP in the training data set is represented as a one-dimensional vector φiof length 900 by concatenating all the columns and then a matrix Φ = [φ1φ2…..φ256] of size 900 × 256 is generated, where each ADTP in the training data set forms one column of the matrix Φ. The mean image vector Γ of matrix Φ is given as(1)Γ=1256∑i=1256φiNext, we obtained zero-mean image matrix Ψ = [ψ1ψ2…..ψ256], where ψi= φi− Γ. The covariance matrix C of Ψ is given as(2)C=1256∑i=1256ψiψiT=ΨΨTMatrix C can have up to 900 eigenvectors (also called PCs) and corresponding eigenvalues which can be determined using(3)Cμi=λiμifori=1,2,…900where μiand λiare the ith eigenvector and eigenvalue of C, respectively. The eigenvalues of a few PCs are plotted in descending order in Fig. 4(a) which clearly shows that the eigenvalues swiftly converge to zero. We ranked the computed eigenvectors according to their eigenvalues and selected only K eigenvectors amongst them such that the parameter Ω, which is ratio of the sum of eigenvalues of chosen eigenvectors and the sum of all the eigenvalues of C, satisfies the following criterion:(4)Ω=∑i=1Kλi/∑i=1900λi>Pwhere P is often chosen to be above 0.9 [26]. The value of parameter Ω is shown in Fig. 4(b) as a function of number of PCs selected K. It is evident from the figure that Ω > 0.9 for K = 6. This implies that we can retain only six PCs (pertaining to the six largest eigenvalues) and discard the rest without losing significant information. Note that in contrast to original 900-dimensional image space, the chosen eigenvectors span only a K-dimensional subspace. Any vector ψ corresponding to an ADTP in the training or testing data set can thus be approximated as a weighed-sum of the chosen eigenvectors in this K-dimensional subspace i.e.(5)ψ≈∑k=1Kwkμk⇒wk=μkTψfork=1,2,…KA vector x = [w1w2…wK]Tcontaining the weights wkis known as the feature vector of a given ADTP. Using the K selected eigenvectors, we determined feature vectors x (each of length 6) for all the ADTPs in the training and testing data sets. In addition, for each ADTP, we obtained a 6 × 1 binary vector y1 (where, the location of only one non-zero element in y1 signifies actual modulation format and bit-rate of the signal) and the actual SNR value y2.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
