@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Broadcasting strategies for cognitive radio networks: Taxonomy, issues, and open challenges

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We give an overview of various broadcasting strategies proposed so far for cognitive radio networks (CRNs).We identify required key characteristics of broadcasting strategies in CRNs.We propose a comprehensive and detailed classification of broadcasting strategies in CRNs.We provide a detailed study of broadcast storm problem in CRNs.We discuss the possible scenarios for the generation of broadcast storm problem and its related challenges in CRNs.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Broadcasting,Cognitive radio network,Broadcast storm problem,Common control channel,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Broadcasting is the simplest form of communication in which nodes disseminate the same information simultaneously to all of their neighbors. Broadcasting has been widely used in many types of networks including wireless networks, wireless sensor networks, and mobile ad-hoc networks. Likewise these networks, broadcasting is also used in cognitive radio networks (CRNs) to accomplish various tasks such as spectrum sensing, spectrum sharing, spectrum management, and spectrum mobility. This article investigates and provides a comprehensive overview of various broadcasting strategies that have been proposed so far for cognitive radio networks. Moreover, it provides a detailed study of broadcast storm problem in CRNs. Finally, it discusses issues, challenges and future research directions for broadcasting strategies in CRNs.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The concept of dynamic spectrum access by introducing the idea of cognitive radio has gained popularity among researchers as it opportunistically accesses the licensed frequency band without causing interference to the licensed users’ communication. Efficient use of under-utilized spectrum is the basic motivation behind cognitive radio networks. Federal Communications Commission (FCC) governs the overall spectrum usage in USA and also regulates the assignment of specific band of frequencies to a particular user. Spectrum purchased in accordance with FCC regulations is used by primary users (PU) or licensed users [1]. While the users which do not have a license and opportunistically access the vacant spectrum in the absence of primary user activity are named as cognitive radiousers or secondary users (CR users or SU users).Cognitive radio technology is different from other communication technologies. In CRNs, cognitive radio nodes actively gather information about the surroundings such as available transmission frequency and power needed. In this manner, CR node selects the best possible channel and also reconfigures operational characteristics of cognitive devices to dynamically adapt themselves with changing environment. These features allow the CR user to dynamically access the available channels and vacate them as soon as PR user becomes active, causing little or no interference with the primary radio nodes.Broadcasting is the fundamental part of wireless networks including cognitive radio networks as it is the basic means of communication between cognitive radio nodes. The benefits of broadcasting in wireless networks include efficient and simple spreading of information e.g. control data in the network without the need for complex routing protocols. Data dissemination can be done via broadcasting in wireless ad hoc networks where complexity is not preferred.In CRNs, the CR users have a pool of multiple channels from which they select the best channel for communication but all CR users may not have the same set of available frequencies [2]. Moreover, in case of PU activity, CR user must interrupt its communication and vacate the channel, search for a new channel and initiate broadcast from the beginning. Additionally, simple flooding of information via direct broadcasting (causing each node to re-broadcast the received information; famously called as broadcast storm problem) can result in clogging of entire network in extreme cases. Therefore, broadcasting in CRNs has new and complex challenges which have not been encountered in traditional wireless networks due to the dynamic nature of cognitive networks.As it can be seen in Fig. 1, the channels for broadcasting are identical for all the nodes surrounding the source node i.e. node A in case of conventional wireless networks whereas each CR node in CRNs has a set of channels or frequencies on which it can communicate which may not be available to all CR nodes in the network [3]. Therefore, data dissemination via broadcasting is especially challenging in CRNs. Additionally, collision and contention issues in case of multiple simultaneous broadcasts have not been as deeply analyzed in CRNs as compared to conventional wireless networks.The main contributions of this survey are listed below:•We investigate and give an overview of various broadcasting strategies that have been proposed so far for cognitive radio networks.We identify required key characteristics of broadcasting strategies in cognitive radio networks.We provide a detailed study of broadcast storm problem in CRNs and its related challenges in CRNs.This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the broadcasting basics and broadcasting strategies in wireless networks in general while Section 3 is designated to the discussion of broadcasting in cognitive radio networks. Then, in Section 4, we discuss broadcast storm problem in cognitive radio networks. Sections 5 describes the issues, challenges, and future research directions of broadcasting in CRNs. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper.Wireless networks include a vast variety of networks, each of which is different from the other in one or another way e.g. cellular networks are centralized networks while MANETs are ad hoc based infrastructure-less networks. Similarly, WLANs are static networks while VANETs are mobile vehicular networks where communication among vehicles is dynamic and ever-changing.The basic principle of broadcasting in all wireless networks is same, i.e., a node transmits a message to all other nodes in its immediate neighborhood and the paramount objective is to spread the transmitted information throughout the network (cf., Fig. 2). Based on the type of network, broadcast message is conventionally flooded throughout the network which causes contention and collision issues. Therefore, direct broadcasting via flooding can lead to network failure and jamming which necessitates the evolution of novel and adaptive broadcasting protocols.Broadcasting in wireless networks in its most basic form is referred to as flooding. Flooding is the network-wide transmission of information along with each node re-transmitting the received information to its immediate neighbors and ensuring that the data is successfully disseminated throughout the network. Broadcasting in wireless networks(WNs) is subject to many conditions which can be characterized in the following ways:•Efficient message delivery: While broadcasting in wireless networks, the parameters that are primarily optimized are the throughput and latency. Therefore, the time it takes a piece of information to be transferred from a single node to all of its neighbors should be calibrated carefully so as to ensure efficient message delivery.Efficient usage of the available spectrum resources: During broadcast, all resources should be utilized optimally especially the spectrum reserved for control information. For example, in cellular networks in order to conserve spectrum usage frequency reuse and sectoring is done.Minimum time consumption: It should ensure that the message delivery takes less time.Less overhead generation: The overall network overhead should be less than the total efficiency of the network.Broadcasting is a simple and fast method of data dissemination in a network where proper architecture has not been realized and network is in its natal stages. Broadcasting in ad-hoc context is utilized for discovering immediate neighbors whenever a new node is initialized in a network and also for disclosure of novel routes to specific destination motes in case of node failure or emergence of new nodes in the network (cf., Fig. 3). Broadcasting is also a feasible solution for distribution of control information throughout the network. For example, in MANETs, frequent requests for route updation and address conflict resolution are broadcast into the network, and in WSNs, broadcasting is used to synchronize neighbors according to their sleep and wake up time periods so that whenever a node wakes up to transmit data, corresponding destination is ready for reception.As discussed in Section 2, broadcasting is conventionally done through flooding technique in ad-hoc wireless networks, i.e., whenever a node wants to broadcast a message, it is wirelessly transmitted to immediate neighbors. The neighbors on receiving packet/broadcast message, re-transmit it once to all neighbors within their range. It is evident that such unchecked broadcasting can result in several issues. Such a scenario is called broadcast storm problem (BSP). Discussed below are some of the problems that arise due to broadcast storm problem.•Contention: Since wireless channel is shared among multiple nodes, therefore, whenever flooding is initiated, multiple nodes in close vicinity might decide to re-transmit the message simultaneously so that they have to contend for channel access among themselves [4]. For example, in Fig. 2, 3rd set of re-transmissions represents the contention between nodes B and C.Collision: The network architectures in WNs under discussion are MANET, VANET and WSNs in which there is lack of back-off mechanism, RTS/CTS confirmation and collision detection. Thus, during flooding collisions can occur more often and can result in information loss. It is clear from Fig. 2 that collision will occur between nodes D and B at 2nd set of re-transmissions and no information will be received by node E.Redundant re-broadcasts: In case of BSP, there are many packets that are transmitted again and again as a result of flooding. These redundant re-broadcasts increase the overall network overhead and can result in network isolation or breakdown in extreme cases. In Fig. 2, redundant broadcasts are generated as soon as the 2nd set of re-transmissions is initiated.The idea of cognitive radio networks was introduced by J. Mitola in 1999. Cognitive radio networks were introduced due to (a) limited spectrum availability for wireless communication, (b) fixed assignment of spectrum, only licensed users occupy spectrum as-and-when needed, and (c) inefficient use of spectrum. In CRNs, cognitive nodes are programmed to (1) make use of vacant frequency bands in unlicensed spectrum and also (2) exploit licensed bands in case of absence of licensed user nodes. In spite of its advantages, cognitive radio networks are still subject to certain constraints. The first constraint is that the CR node should not interfere with PR node communication. Moreover, whenever a PR node becomes active and decides to occupy a specific channel, then, the CR node communicating on the said channel should immediately vacate it (cf. Fig. 4). Since multiple channels are available to CR nodes for communication, therefore, in order for successful delivery of message to occur between any two CR nodes, both nodes need to be tuned on the same channel.The management of unoccupied channels can be done in two ways: (1) infrastructure based, in which a spectrum broker is responsible for spectrum sensing, assignment and management, and (2) infrastructure-less, in which CR nodes themselves are responsible for spectrum sensing, assignment and management. The former is not preferred over the latter because of its requirement of a dedicated control channel and it also exposes the network to different threats like Denial of Service (DoS) attack. In this paper, we concentrate on infrastructure-less architecture.In infrastructure-less architecture, CR nodes are responsible for spectrum sensing, spectrum sharing, spectrum management, and spectrum mobility. Therefore, for certain essential networking tasks like neighbor discovery, route discovery, channel assignment etc., CR nodes need broadcasting to share control information among CR nodes. The control information may also contain bandwidth requirements, primary user presence and location [5]. Being cognitive in nature, besides the aforementioned tasks, CR nodes need to share the spectrum sensing information and local measurements with all of its neighbors. Besides this, whenever a CR user switches to a channel, it has to rebroadcast in order to facilitate routing in cognitive radio networks [6]. Broadcasting is also important for network setup problem [7] in which CR nodes for the first time contacts with other nodes.Broadcasting is vital but extremely challenging in cognitive radio networks due to heterogeneous spectrum availability. This is due to the fact that channels are spread over a widely separated frequency band (the term frequency band and channel will be used interchangeable in the rest of the paper). Broadcasting protocols for CRNs are provided in chronological order in Table 1, while their comparison and summary are given in Table 2. For instance, during spectrum sensing a cognitive radio node may sense widely separated consecutive non-overlapping channels having frequency bands ranging between 300 and 3000 MHz, where there may co-exist different licensed based primary networks like GSM, UMTS, and TV. In addition, cognitive radio nodes may encounter frequency band from unlicensed band like ISM based-networks, for instance bluetooth, hiperlan, IEEE 802.11, etc., over these frequency bands. Whether licensed or unlicensed, these frequency bands may have different channel transmission characteristics, propagation delays, bandwidths and other constraints. Besides this, allowed transmission power varies for different frequency bands, as mentioned by FCC regulations. In this fashion, instead of transmission on single spectrum band, if CR nodes exploit the availability of multiple widely separated spectrum bands and use them for transmission. Then, as a result, lower power is required to be used in each spectrum and less interference with PR nodes is achieved. Therefore, cognitive networks have the potential to utilize spectrum that is otherwise wasted by licensed users.Moreover, the traffic pattern and channels’ occupancy of primary radio nodes over this widely spread spectrum band vary with technology to technology. Thus, it is essential to correctly select channels allowing reliable communication among CR nodes as well as channels that increase the number of CR receivers. Selecting a reliable channel having low PR occupancy, helps the operation of broadcasting. Therefore, we have coupled broadcasting with channel selection. For a certain broadcast message to be successfully delivered, channel selection is the basic step in cognitive radio networks.The key characteristics of any broadcasting strategy in cognitive radio networks must include:•Efficient message delivery: It means that all the nodes receive the message.Efficient usage of the available spectrum resources: It means that CRNs do not consider a single static control channel because it is not able to use the spectrum resources efficiently.Consider primary users’ constraints: Do not create interference to primary nodes and select reliable channels.Less time consumption: It should ensure that the message delivery takes less time.Less overhead generation: The network overhead should be less.Less channel switching time: As it has many constraints, whenever CR node switches between different channels a delay is added which affects the overall performance efficiency of the network. Net channel switching time should be low.The returning probability of primary user over a channel should be low enough so that the CR nodes easily utilize that channel for long period of time.We classify the broadcasting strategies in the context of cognitive radio networks into five categories (cf. Fig. 5). The two major categories are based on number of channels used for broadcasting. Table 2 gives an overview of broadcasting protocols and their characteristic parameters for CRNs.In this approach, message is broadcasted to all the available channels. This approach ensures the reception of packets by all CR nodes, at the cost of:•Higher channel switching time.Higher delay in broadcasting.Higher energy consumption by CR nodes.Broadcast storm problem [4].In [12], complete broadcasting is done to find out the ergodic sum capacity of CR-MAC i.e. CR multiple access channel. This can result in network overhead as depicted in above points and should be implemented while keeping network back haul under consideration.In this approach, a control channel that operates on same frequency known to all CR nodes in a network is used to broadcast control information i.e. channel occupancy status, and spectrum management queries. This approach has the following disadvantages:•Higher channel contention and congestionExposure to different attacks like DoS attack.Channel resources are wasted unnecessarily and inefficient use of spectrum takes place.Decrease in throughput.A dedicated control channel may not be free to all CR nodes due to spectrum heterogeneity. One can use ISM band as a control channel but it has its own limitations.This approach guarantees that all the nodes will receive the packets at the cost of above constraints. The problem becomes complex in the scenario of infrastructure-less cognitive radio network architecture. Yang et al. [25] assume that a dedicated control channel is available by providing a radio interface to access points to exchange coordination information among CR nodes. Pérez-Romero et al. [26] have proposed a cognitive pilot channel.Common control channel is not almost feasible in the context of CRN. Kondareddy et al. and Akyildiz et al. [7,27] have mentioned several problems of CCC. (1) A dedicated control channel is wasteful to channel resources. (2) A common control channel would get saturated as the number of users increases. (3) An adversary can jam the channel by intentionally flooding over the dedicated channel, this is denial of service (DoS) attack. Thus, dedicating a common control channel for entire network is not a good idea as it might not work as the chosen channel may not be available to all the users due to heterogeneous spectrum availability and PR occupancy.Broadcasting over a set of channels has several advantages over complete broadcasting like:•Less channel contention and congestion.Lower delay in information dissemination.Less energy consumption.Less channel switching time.Less message overhead.The subset of channels should cover the neighbors of a node on all channels. At a glance, this approach seems fair but the selection of subset of channels plays a vital role in broadcasting. For instance, if a subset of channels, which is very frequency agile is selected, then it will not only make interference with the PR nodes but also increase the broadcasting traffic due to re-transmissions and channel switching time. Kondareddy and Agrawal [11] proposed selective broadcasting in which a set of channels is selected based upon neighbors coverage and redundancy and network overhead is minimized. Song and Xie [3] have proposed a distributed protocol BRACER for broadcast delay optimization in which a set of channels are selected for broadcast to reduce redundancy. In [17], broadcast scheduling and collision avoidance schemes have been discussed by broadcasting on a set of channels to reduce average broadcast delay.This approach is distributed approach of channel assignment and is well suited for ad hoccognitive radio networks. This approach restricts some nodes or a set of nodes, to communicate with their neighbors on a particular channel. In simple words, it creates small islands of nodes and use a channel or a set of channels for broadcasting. But this approach should guarantee that this minimal set of nodes cover all the nodes distributed over a range of channels on a particular island of nodes. The main complexity with this approach is how to connect different nodes’ islands and how to share information among them. Broadcasting over a set of channels will also lead to possibility of lower network performance because of not using certain communication links. Lazos et al. [28] have proposed a cluster-based common control channel that keeps into account the spectrum opportunity. Furthermore, Chen et al. [9], give another example of group based broadcasts in which clusters of CR nodes are set up in order to reduce redundant broadcasts and minimize network overhead.In this approach, CR nodes randomly select any channel and start broadcasting. But this will never ensure that all the neighbors will receive the information and secondly the channel switching time decreases enormously. In [15], a single hop scenario for spectrum sensing in cognitive radio networks has been presented in which channels are selected randomly to reduce computation complexity (cf. Table 2). Similarly, in [13], Gel’fand-Pinsker coding has been implemented on multi-hop CRNs to optimize achievable rate regions. Authors have investigated the limits of broadcast channels in CR relay nodes. Fahad et al. [14] propose an adaptive Local Healing Algorithm for broadcasting trees that have been broken due to hidden terminal or deafness problem. Channel assignment in [14] is done randomly for broadcasting in cognitive radio networks. But this approach will decrease the number of receivers as the number of channels increases [29]. Thus, selecting a reliable channel is highly important in broadcasting.In this type of broadcasting, certain metrics are first calculated and tested for broadcasting on a specific channel. The metrics or parameters for selection of channel for broadcasting can depend on the scenario i.e for control information exchange one might consider the security as a vital metric etc. In [2], a greedy-based polynomial-time heuristic algorithm has been proposed for ensuring fair spectrum sharing where maximization of node ID ratio has been considered as a metric for channel broadcasting. Whereas in [19], counter has been set to symbolize which node does the broadcasting and which does not i.e if counter value is zero then packet is discarded and not re-broadcasted. Song et al. [10] and Ji et al. [20] make use of broadcasting trees for initiating a broadcast message. In [18] , only those SUs are used for broadcasting that have the highest optimal power capacity in CRNs.When compared with conventional wireless networks, simple broadcasting through flooding in CRNs can be disastrous due to network challenges that are unique to CRNs. Channel diversity and spectrum management issues are open research issues as yet and no prior work has been done to link these issues to broadcast storm problem to the best of our knowledge.The characteristic traits of broadcast storm problem are same for all wireless networks whether it is a highly mobile network like VANET or a static network like wireless mesh network. The most simple way of data dissemination is through flooding technique in which each node re-broadcasts the received message exactly once on reception. There are many drawbacks of this kind of broadcasting. First of all, there will be a lot of redundant re-broadcasts due to the fact that omni-directional antennas are usually used and transmission coverage areas of many CR nodes residing in the same geographical region overlap. Moreover, if a CR node decides to broadcast on a particular channel then depending on the ratio of number of channels to the number of CR nodes, its neighbors might also decide to transmit on the same channel. This could result in contention issues and eventually lead to collisions at large scale. If there is no broadcast scheduling mechanism in the CR nodes, it could result in collisions and eventually lead to BSP. Following are some of the scenarios that can cause broadcast storm problem in cognitive radios:•BSP generation in neighbor discovery process: When a network is created or when new nodes emerge in a network, these nodes have no prior knowledge about network topology. So the first step in setting up communication in any network is neighbor discovery (ND) process. In CRNs, neighbor discovery is an open research issue that has been addressed by few researchers. In a neighbor discovery process for CRNs based on deterministic flooding based mechanism, all the nodes in a network are simultaneously initiate the ND process by flooding EMPTY messages on all channels available based on the distance threshold assigned to each node.It can be perceived clearly that the use of flooding to find neighbors in CRNs can result in broadcast storms. The first scenario that can take place is depending upon geographical position and channel reliability; multiple nodes may choose a single channel at the same instant for flooding EMPTY messages for ND. This will result in contention as well as collision issues. As there will be no acknowledgment of EMPTY messages in case of collision, the nodes will again transmit ND packets. Even if we limit this effect by using distance or regional leader metric, there will be serious contention as well as collision issues resulting in broadcast storm problem.For example, if a CRN as depicted in Fig. 6is considered for ND process then CR user labeled as 1 will receive EMPTY messages from users 2, 4, 5 and 6 simultaneously resulting in massive collision and information loss. While 8, 7 and 3 will receive EMPTY packets successfully and re-transmit them once in the second round. Whereas 2, 4, 5, 6 and 1 will re-transmit ND information as acknowledgment for it was not received in last round. This process will continue and jam the network. In this scenario, channel 5 was chosen by all CR users simultaneously due to its reliability and durability. BSP will increase as the number of neighbors increases and network becomes more congested.BSP generation in control information exchange: Hamdaoui and Shin [30] present the concept of dedicated control channel for exchange of control information like neighbor coordination and spectrum awareness etc. Exchanging control information through flooding on a CCC as mentioned in [30] is quite similar to flooding in traditional WNs as all CR node broadcast control information on the same channel at approximately the same time in case of neighbor discovery queries or spectrum awareness. Therefore, BSP can occur on dedicated CCC if the number of users exceeds a certain level and network is overloaded.Chen et al. [9] have addressed this problem and proposed a group-based control channel design in which clusters of CR nodes are created. Within a cluster a CCC is designated for all CR nodes to exchange control information inside the cluster. In this case also, BSP can occur if the number of CR nodes is high within each cluster and CCC is heavily loaded. This can be envisaged through Fig. 6 where nodes 1, 4, 5, 6 and 7 form a cluster while the CCC is selected as channel 5. Flooding control information on ch-5 initiated by node 1 can result in BSP within a cluster.BSP due to channel diversity: Let us consider a scenario where CR user 1 needs to communicate with node 2, 5 needs to communicate with user 3 and user 6 needs to communicate with user 7 in Fig. 6. As users 1, 6 and 5 have overlapping coverage areas if they select the same channel for broadcasting through flooding then there will be collision and nodes will have to re-transmit information which will again result in contention, redundancy and collision scenarios. Therefore, channel diversity and spectrum scheduling are key factors in reducing BSP at local level in a CR network.BSP due to PU activity: Due to lack of synchronization in channel switching among CR nodes in CRNs, deafness problem is created which eventually leads to BSP. Deafness problem has been explained in Section 5.5, now we will discuss how it can result in BSP generation. Let us consider Fig. 6, where node 2 needed to relay information to node 6. Therefore, node 2 broadcasts message to node 1 to relay it to node 6. As node 6 lies within coverage area of primary user marked red, when PU marked red becomes active, node 6 has to switch channel. Node 1 is unaware of this channel switching therefore it keeps re-transmitting the message under the assumption that packet has been lost. If deafness problem takes place at more than 2 nodes in CRN it could lead to broadcast storm problem in a small scale network.This section is dedicated to discussion of cognitive radio based research challenges and complexities in broadcasting that are added due to the dynamic and unpredictable nature of cognitive radio networks.In order to maintain synchronous communication in cognitive radio networks, control information has to be exchanged periodically among nodes. This is a challenging task due to the intrinsic properties of cognitive radio networks such as the heterogeneity of channels that are available to CR nodes i.e. number of channels available for communication for CR nodes varies according to their location and time. Level of complexity in broadcasting is increased when PR user channel occupancy and traffic pattern is taken into account. The channel occupancy pattern of PR nodes is of crucial importance because it tells about how heavily a channel is occupied by PR user; if a channel is frequently occupied then it is less likely to be used by CR node. As PR activity is uncertain, the availability of channels for CR nodes is also uncertain. Additionally, PR nodes have different channel occupancy patterns in different locations and utilize various technologies. Thus, it is difficult to predict the time varying channel occupancy pattern. As a result, this adds another level of complexity to cognitive radio networks.Different channels in CRNs have different penetration power and transmission ranges based upon the frequency they have. A low frequency signal can travel farther and has better penetration power when compared with higher frequency signal. Therefore, different channels will have different broadcast coverage area at different time depending upon their geographical location and thus different set of neighbors. Consequently, whenever a CR node switches from one channel to another, its transmit power as well as neighbors changes which further complicates the broadcasting process.The second challenge is that CR nodes may encounter a huge set of available channel set spread over wide frequency range. CR nodes have to disseminate information to all of its neighboring nodes in order to facilitate different networking tasks as mentioned earlier. In order to accomplish this, CR nodes have to access, compete, and select a channel or a set of channels and it is referred to as control channel. But this information should be transmitted with minimum delay, having less message overhead, and less channel switching time.If CR nodes select a single channel then this channel should ensure that by broadcasting over this channel, CR nodes are able to disseminate the message to all of its neighbors. Otherwise, CR nodes select a set of channels so that the message reaches to all of its neighbors.Selecting channels without considering its occupancy and use them for broadcasting may lead to interference with PR nodes and also come up with many re-transmissions of broadcast messages. This results in large overhead and traffic generation. For instance, consider a highly opportunistic network (where available channel set to CR nodes changes very fastly), in which a CR node randomly selects a channel for broadcasting without considering the PR occupancy and transmit the control information. There is a very high probability that a PR node starts communication over that channel, and results in (1) interference with PR nodes and (2) all the neighbor nodes may not receive the broadcasted packet being on different channels.Broadcasting over a single channel may cause a situation that all the nodes may not receive the message being on different channels due to the fact that the probability that a channel is common to all nodes is very small. Therefore, there is a need to broadcast the control information over more than one channel to ensure that every neighbor receives a copy. In the literature, most proposals assume that the set of available channels is static i.e. the channels available to use is fixed at the time of network initialization. Since, cognitive radio may allow the spectrum available to change dynamically, the set of channels may change dynamically also. Besides this, existing proposals often assume that the available channels are homogeneous i.e. different channels have similar range and support similar data rates. The homogeneity assumption is nullified when different channels may be located on widely separated slices of frequency spectrum with different bandwidths, and different propagation characteristics.Several techniques of broadcasting in multi-channel multi-hop wireless networks have been proposed [4]. But these techniques are not feasible for cognitive radio networks. For instance, the aforementioned proposed techniques of broadcasting consider multiple channels but they are static. Alternatively, in cognitive radio networks, channels are highly dynamic due to primary nodes activity. In addition, broadcasting in cognitive radio networks is expected to be done more frequently due to higher spatio-temporal availability of channels and mobility of PR and CR nodes.The authors of [11] proposed selective broadcasting in which a set of pre-selected channels are used to transmit control information. Basically, they are selecting the channel based on its degree. In simple words, they select those channels for broadcasting which has higher degree i.e. higher number of neighbor nodes. Let us suppose if this set of higher degree channels (contains higher number of nodes) has higher frequency agility, then there would be higher chances that CR nodes loose these channels. This implies that the set of channels used for broadcasting should not be dependent only on degree, instead it should also be dependent on the occupancy and traffic pattern. Selecting the channels which have higher number of CR nodes does not keep into account the dynamic behavior of cognitive radio networks. So, with higher frequency agility which is an intrinsic property of dynamic spectrum access networks, the selective and complete broadcast is not always feasible.CRNs have highly dynamic spectrum access properties due to which conventional MAC layer protocols do not work well in cognitive environments. Following are some of the challenges faced in cognitive radio at MAC layer.Neighbor discovery process is initiated whenever a new CR node emerges in the network. It allows the CR node to become aware of its immediate neighbors also called as relay nodes in the case when destination node is not one of the neighbors. In cognitive radio context, whenever CR node switches to a new channel it needs to listen for PU activity on that particular channel as well as check whether other CR nodes have already occupied that channel. As mentioned earlier, each node can choose any channel from set of available channels as long as it does not interfere with PU activity. Therefore, in order to communicate with neighbors, the CR node needs to be tuned onto the channel that is same as that of its neighbor. Since CR node does not have any knowledge about its neighbor at the beginning of neighbor discovery procedure, therefore it needs to scan each channel to see which one is occupied by relevant relay node which can result in enormous delay as well as waste of energy. Therefore, broadcast by flooding cannot be done in CRNs as it would only cause network jamming and interfere with PU activity. Intelligent adaptive protocols are needed to address this problem.Deafness is quite similar in one aspect to hidden terminal problem in WNs. It can be seen in Fig. 7that there are three primary users and multiple CR nodes within PU coverage area. In order to understand deafness problem, let us consider that CR node S1 needs to communicate with CR node D1 in a multi-hop fashion. A sends S1’s packet to B on a frequency coded as blue. In the meantime, PU user in blue frequency area becomes active and causes B to switch channel as B lies within its coverage area. But A is unaware of channel switch done by B therefore, it keeps re-transmitting the packet under the assumption that it is lost due to interference. Therefore, broadcasting protocols should be equipped to handle this sort of scenario.Considering Fig. 7, let us assume that A needs to communicate with D2 while at the same time C needs to communicate with B. As both A and C have overlapping coverage area, if both of them switch onto the same channel for communication then there is bound to be collision, resulting in information loss. Therefore in order to avoid these kinds of contention and ultimately collision issues, there should be dynamic distributed scheduling at MAC layer for broadcasting.Conventionally, whenever a new node emerges in a network, it broadcasts its presence to immediate neighbors and in turn takes into account neighbor knowledge through neighbor discovery process while tuned on a single fixed frequency. This is not possible in CRNs due dynamic spectrum access and versatility of channels. Following are some of the challenges faced for broadcasting in CRNs in the context of network layer.One of the major issues in CRNs is the dearth of cooperative decision making between route and spectrum selection. In CRNs choosing a closest neighbor may not be optimal routing decision as it could result in more hop counts in long run. For example if S1 needs to send a packet to D2 in Fig. 7 then by considering only parameters like distance, location metrics we choose node D as our next hop (cf. Fig. 8) but it is clear that it only increases number of hops while same operation could have been performed considering the fact that D2 is within TX range of S1. Therefore, in CRNs route selection should be correlated with spectrum selection to reduce broadcasting delay.In conventional WNs, optimal route is usually selected on the basis of SNR percentage but in CRNs each hop may not be done on the same frequency. As mentioned earlier, high frequencies can carry data to short distances i.e TX range is low while they can carry more data as compared to low frequency signals. Therefore, channel diversity also affects the interference levels according to physical location, operating frequency and interface hardware.Since, the spectrum is large providing higher number of available channels to CR nodes and having heterogeneity. So, this heterogeneity brings different channel characteristics like transmission power, bandwidth, transmission delay, error rate, interference temperature, interference with PRs, number of CR on the channel, PR traffic etc. Therefore, broadcasting control information over all channels, in order to reach all neighbors is costly and incurred with large delay. Transmitting over every channel makes CR nodes switching to every channel, thus consumes energy and increase channel switching time. Besides this, if the number of available channels is larger than the number of available radios, then sending a packet on every channel will be quite expensive. Higher channel switching between data channels and common control channel (CCC) is required in the context of CR nodes that are equipped with single radio. Channel switching may result in with scheduling overhead and synchronization requirements. A good channel selection strategy should reduce frequent channel switching. Furthermore, channel switching degrades channel capacity. As CR nodes have to constantly check for PU activity and switch channel whenever PU is active, there is a switching delay added in result of broadcasting in CRNs. This switching delay is increased in case of multi-hop networks and needs to be incorporated into present broadcasting protocols.Broadcasting over all channels or multiple channels make CR nodes to switch to multiple channels, which leads to channel switching. Channel switching causes non-negligible delay for the transmission and consumes energy. Thus, channel switching can be minimized by using a reliable group of channels or a single channel for a long period of time. This can be achieved by selecting those channels which have lower PR activity. Another problem that channel switching brings is the updating of routing table that which node is available of which frequency band. In addition, higher channel switching also brings packet loses.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
