@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Mobility and QoS aware anycast routing in Mobile ad hoc Networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Anycast routing is important in terms of resources, robustness and efficiency.The proposed model is based on node stability, congestion and link/route expiry time.Performs better in terms of control overheads, PDR and end-to-end delay.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Mobile ad hoc Network,Congestion,Anycast,Stability,Routing,QoS,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Anycast is an important way of communication for Mobile Ad hoc Networks (MANETs) in terms of resources, robustness and efficiency for replicated service applications. Most of the anycast routing protocols select unstable and congested intermediate nodes, thereby causing frequent path failures and packet losses. We propose a mobility and quality of service aware anycast routing scheme in MANETs (MQAR) that employs three models: (1) node movement stability, (2) channel congestion, and (3) link/route expiry time. These models coupled with Dynamic Source Routing (DSR) protocol are used in the route discovery process to select nearest k-servers. A server among k-servers is selected based on less congestion, route expiry time, number of hops, and better stability. The simulation results indicate that proposed MQAR demonstrates, reduction in control overheads, path delays and improved packet delivery ratio compared to existing methods such as flooding, DSR and load balanced service discovery.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Mobile Ad hoc Networks (MANETs) consists of a set of wireless mobile nodes communicating to each other without any centralized control or fixed network infrastructure and can be deployed quickly [1,2]. The potential applications include emergency disaster relief, battlefield situations, mine site operations, and wireless classrooms or meeting rooms in which participants wish to share information or to acquire data.Anycast is an important way of communication for replicated service applications in terms of resources, robustness and efficiency, when mobility and link disconnections are frequent. Anycast allows a source node to transmit packets to a single destination node out of set of several destination nodes. The idea behind anycast is that a client wants to send packets to any one of the nearest possible servers offering a particular service or application. The set of destination nodes is identified by anycast address [3]. As compared to unicast and multicast, anycast is a new type of communication defined in IPv6 that provides a service mainly in client server environment [4].Constructing and maintaining anycast communication should be simple so as to keep minimum control overheads. It is a common practice in most of the anycast routing protocols, where in packets are sent along the shortest path [5]. This is because, fewer nodes involved in transmission may save the power, network bandwidth and collisions during the message transmission.One of the most important issue in MANETs is to find an efficient and reliable anycast route. The current research on MANETs mainly focuses on ad-hoc routing protocols with minimum hop count, energy efficiency, low server load, and low congestion, as the route selection criterion. Although there are many proposed routing protocols for MANETs, most of them consider the shortest-path with minimum hop count as the route selection criterion. Even though hop metric is easy to implement and reliable in dynamic environments, the queuing delay and the contention delay at the intermediate nodes are not taken into account for route selection. Thus, a minimum hop path may sometimes incur a higher end-to-end delay than some alternate paths. Moreover, routing protocols based on minimum number of hops some times cannot fairly distribute the routing load among mobile hosts. An unbalanced distribution of traffic may lead to higher packet dropping rate and faster battery power depletion on certain mobile nodes.The objective of this paper is to design and analyze a stability and QoS based anycast routing scheme in MANET to improve the performance and enhance the service availability through the method of evenly distributed traffic load. The scheme uses Dynamic Source Routing (DSR) [6] as basic route finding protocol along with stability and QoS models. Our contributions as compared to existing works are as follows. (1) Designing a mathematical model for selecting stable nodes (with respect to position) based on node’s own stability, i.e., self stability, and neighbor nodes stability. (2) Designing a mathematical model for selecting noncongested nodes based on channel load and node buffer occupancy. (3) Designing a mathematical model for finding link expiry time between pair of nodes. (4) Design of route discovery process, which includes request phase to find routes to anycast servers through forwarding intermediate nodes which satisfy stability, congestion criteria and also meet the route expiry deadline; and reply phase to update routing cache and confirm the routes found in request phase, and (5) designing route maintenance procedure to handle node and link failures.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents an overview of existing MANET anycast routing protocols, Section 3 discusses the proposed work. Simulation and result analysis are presented in Section 4, and conclusions are given in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Node’s movement stability, channel load, node congestion level and route expiry time are the important QoS metrics among several QoS parameters for providing an efficient, low overhead QoS support for anycast routing in MANETs. we proposed mobility and QoS based anycast routing in MANETs. The proposed work is simulated for various MANET network environments to validate its performance. From the simulations, we observed that the proposed scheme performs better than traditional flooding, DSR and DIASD scheme in terms of control overhead, packet delivery ratio and end-to-end delay.In our future work, we would like to work on anycast routing protocols to check the efficiency under high throughput applications, e.g. multimedia applications by employing negotiation parameters in route request packet in finding nearest server through non congestion paths.