@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Enhancing secure routing in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks using a Dynamic Bayesian Signalling Game model

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Collaboration between mobile nodes is significant in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks.Dynamic Bayesian Signalling Game model is proposed to enhance secure routing and motivate effective cooperation among nodes.A novel scheme of payoff formulation is developed to motivate the misbehaving nodes.We used a belief updating system to update a node’s belief in terms of action chosen, message sent, and strategy chosen.The proposed scheme could significantly minimize the misbehaving activities of malicious nodes and thereby enhance secure routing.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Belief updating system,Dynamic Bayesian Signalling Game,Mobile Ad Hoc Networks,Secure routing,Vulnerabilities,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Collaboration between mobile nodes is significant in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (MANETs). The great challenges of MANETs are their vulnerabilities to various security attacks. Because of the lack of centralized administration, secure routing is challenging in MANETs. Effective secure routing is quite essential to protect nodes from anonymous behaviours. Game theory is currently employed as a tool to analyse, formulate and solve selfishness issues in MANETs. This work uses a Dynamic Bayesian Signalling Game to analyse strategy profiles for regular and malicious nodes. We calculate the Payoff to nodes for motivating the particular nodes involved in misbehaviour. Regular nodes monitor continuously to evaluate their neighbours by using the belief evaluation and belief updating system of the Bayes rule. Simulation results show that the proposed scheme could significantly minimize the misbehaving activities of malicious nodes and thereby enhance secure routing.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The characteristics of MANETs pose great challenges with respect to security design because of their dynamic network topologies, lack of centralized control and self organizing character. Collaboration between MANET nodes is the most problematic issue for forwarding packets among nodes. Each node can forward data packets for other nodes. This makes it difficult to design secure routing. Secure routing plays a vital role in forwarding packets in critical applications. Node mobility creates more opportunities for various security attacks in any network; because of node mobility, cooperation between nodes is more challenging in MANETs. Therefore it is essential to develop an effective secure routing protocol to protect the nodes from anonymous behaviours. In general, malicious nodes do not want to forward a neighbour’s packets in networks that degrade the network performance. Existing schemes are not suitable for enhancing MANET security because of routing overhead and vulnerabilities. To minimize the activities of malicious nodes, they should be monitored continuously and not allowed to participate in routing. Game theory approaches ([1]) provide effective solutions to security problems in MANETs; they prevent conflict in cooperation among the mobile nodes. They apply to a variety of disciplines including computer networks, economics, behavioural biology and political science as well. A Dynamic Bayesian Signalling Game allows a player with a number of possible actions to have a clear strategy for making an effective decision. In each message set, the sender with a strategy must have a belief as to which node should receive it to ensure secure MANET routing.Various methods have been described for preventing nodes from attacks. Daojing et al. [2] proposed a Secure and Distributed Reprogramming Protocol (SDRP). It used an identity based cryptography mechanism to enhance security for reprogramming in wireless sensor networks. It did not provide confidentiality against message interception. Feng Li et al. [3] proposed a Game Theoretic Based Analysis (GTBA) of cooperation between regular (normal) and malicious nodes in MANETs. In this approach, selfish nodes are motivated by building a reputation system. GTBA does not take multiple attacks into consideration. Ze Li and Haiying Shen [4] used game theoretic approaches to analyse cooperation incentives for nodes provided by reputation systems and price-based systems. They addressed the issues of enforcing cooperation among selfish nodes and discriminating malicious nodes from regular nodes. This scheme does not sufficiently address security problems such as compromised cooperative nodes.We propose a protocol, enhancing secure routing for Mobile Ad Hoc Networks, that uses a Dynamic Bayesian Signalling Game model (SRPDBG); its goal is to analyse the strategy profile for regular and malicious nodes. Differently from the above methods, this work reveals the best actions of individual strategy for each node. The contributions of this work are summarized as follows:•First, we formulate a two player Dynamic Bayesian Signalling Game for the sender and receiver.To find the best outcome of the strategic interaction between sender and receiver, three Nash Equilibrium strategies are analysed: Pure Strategy with Nash Equilibrium, Mixed Strategy with Nash Equilibrium and PBE with Bayesian Nash Equilibrium.We then calculate the payoff for nodes for motivating the particular nodes that are misbehaving.A belief update of each node is determined based on the Bayes rule in terms of action chosen, message sent and strategy chosen based on the probability of the node’s type.We design an algorithm for finding belief-strategy pairs for the PBE strategy and the best response strategy for players.Through extensive simulation results, we evaluate the performance of the proposed SRPDBG. The results show that the SRPDBG outperforms other strategies in analysing the malicious node’s behaviour and also in evaluating the strategies of regular and malicious nodes.The remainder of the paper contains eight sections. Section 2 summarizes related work and highlights the differences between it and our work. Section 3 describes our Dynamic Bayesian Signalling Game in MANETs in terms of payoff formulation and analysis of three Nash Equilibrium Strategies: the Pure Strategy with Nash Equilibrium, the Mixed Strategy with Nash Equilibrium and the PBE with Bayesian Nash Equilibrium and payoff calculation. Section 4 presents the Belief update mechanism based on the Bayes rule. Section 5 describes our algorithm for finding the Belief strategy pairs for the PBE strategy and finds the best response strategy for players. Section 6 presents our simulation results and a relevant performance analysis. Finally, Sections 7 and 8 presents our conclusions and discusses future direction.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
