@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An efficient network on-chip architecture based on isolating local and non-local communications

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose two-layer network on chip to separate local and non-local traffics.For each locality rate, we obtain the best division ratio for the bitwidth of channels.We define locality based on the number of hops between source and destination nodes.For each traffic, locality is defined to include 50 percent of all communication.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Network-on-Chips,Interconnect architecture,Communication locality,MultiProcessor Systems on Chips,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, a locality aware NoC communication architecture is proposed. The architecture may reduce the energy consumption and latency in MultiProcessor Systems on Chips (MPSoCs). It consists of two network layers which one layer is dedicated to the packets transmitted to near destinations and the other layer is used for the packets transmitted to far destinations. The actual physical channel width connecting the cores is divided between the two layers. The locality is defined based on the number of hops between the nodes. The relative significances of the two types of communications determine the optimum ratio for the channel width division. To assess the efficiency of the proposed method, we compare its communication latency with that of conventional one for different channel widths, communication traffic profiles, and mesh sizes.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Technological advances in the integrated circuit fabrication have provided an opportunity to implement embedded systems on a single chip. It has led to the advent of MPSoC architectures which are advantageous to single processors in terms of performance and energy consumption. These architectures have been used in a wide range of applications including home and mobile multimedia, biomedical, automotive and networking [1,2].In the state of the art integrated circuits, logic gates perform the operations faster, whereas RC delay of (semi-) global interconnects becomes longer. Therefore, in realizing high performance and energy-efficient Chip Multiprocessor (CMP) systems, an efficient underlying on-chip interconnect architecture is crucial. To improve data communication parameters such as delay and energy consumption, Network-on-Chip (NoC) architecture has emerged as a substitution for the traditional shared buses. NoC benefits from simultaneous transmission of packets between the cores. This architecture which routes packets instead of wires [3,2,4], provides higher degree of scalability and reusability compared to the shared bus.For these chips, tasks are mapped onto cores. Modern task mapping algorithms (viz. Nearest Neighbor (NN) and Best Neighbor (BN)) increase communication locality in today MPSoCs to reduce the communication costs. In NN [5], the first task is mapped on the first Intellectual Property (IP) block as an initiator. Then, the next task from the task graph is mapped to the nearest available block. BN determines the next block according to the nearest neighbor paradigm and Path Load (PL) algorithm [5,6]. PL is a congestion-aware algorithm to reduce the occupancy of channels used by the tasks which are mapped. The technique introduced in [7] divides the entire NoC into virtual clusters. The blocks of each cluster are dedicated to the tasks of one application which again results in the locality of communication.In this paper, to improve the parameters of the communication architecture of NoCs, distinguishing between local and non-local communications, we make the following contributions:•First, we introduce low-latency yet energy-efficient two-layer on-chip interconnect architecture which separate local and non-local communications using two different layers. In order to avoid adding a separate physical channel between the cores, the channel width is divided between the two network layers.Second, in this work, the effect of varying the number of hops is studied to define the local communication on the communication parameters for different traffic profiles.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the motivation behind proposing locality-aware network on chip and Section 3 reviews the related works on the areas of locality-aware communication and link optimization of NoCs. The structures of the generic and proposed router architectures are explained in Section 4. The simulation setup and results are discussed in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
