@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Adaptive energy detector for spectrum sensing in cognitive radio networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Noise uncertainty in energy detection is counteracted by adapting detection threshold.Multiple receiver architecture is exploited for maximum likelihood estimation.Threshold adaptation allows maintaining a constant and low false-alarm rate.The probability of detection is improved in the low SNR regime without increasing sensing time.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Spectrum sensing,Energy detection,Noise variance estimation,Noise uncertainty,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstractImage, graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The recent advances in spectrum accessing policies result in a more flexible and efficient use of the radio spectrum [1,2]. This in turn could open the possibility for the deployment of improved and emergent wireless and mobile applications, ranging from smart grid, public safety, and broadband cellular to medical applications [3]. The dynamic spectrum access (DSA) enabled by the cognitive radio (CR) technology would provide the technological solution for opportunistically accessing to the currently underutilized frequency bands [4]. In the DSA, a CR senses the licensed spectrum to find unoccupied frequency bands suitable for secondary use, and exploits the discovered spectrum in an interference-free manner such that the efficiency on the spectrum use is maximized. The key components of CR are the capability of sensing the radio spectrum to opportunely declare if a licensed band is vacant or if it is occupied by its incumbent. This would ascertain that the CR operation will not interfere with the licensees’ transmissions, and that the spectrum reuse opportunities present in time and space will be efficiently exploited [5].Spectrum sensing is defined as the stage of observation and analysis of the signals contained in the spectrum to gain radio awareness. To the date, there have been proposed a number of spectrum sensing techniques, each of them capable of offering a degree of accuracy and complexity when detecting the presence of primary signals, i.e., the signals transmitted by the incumbents of the licensed bands. Pros and cons of the spectrum sensing techniques are discussed in many studies, for example [6,7]. The constrained time dedicated for spectrum sensing, multipath fading and time dispersion of the wireless channel, the highly dynamic radio environment and the limited information regarding the signals transmitted in the spectrum are, to name a few, the major concerns in the design of reliable spectrum sensing algorithms [8].Energy detection (ED) is an appealing signal detection technique for spectrum sensing due to its low computational complexity and generic implementation, i.e., it does not require knowing the structure of the primary signal to make decisions regarding its presence. In the traditional approach for ED the energy is estimated and then compared against a detection threshold. The detection threshold is commonly set according to the expected noise floor. A fundamental issue with this approach stems from the fact that the noise in communications systems is the aggregation of random sources of power, including thermal noise, interference due to nearby unintended emissions or weak signals from transmitters located far away. Therefore, it is likely that the noise power changes randomly from a detection interval to another, particularly if the cognitive user changes continuously its radio environment, originating the so-called noise uncertainty problem. If the ED's detection threshold is not adjusted accordingly to the fluctuations in the noise power, then it is likely that its performance is reduced dramatically, giving place to a limit on the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), known as SNR-wall, below of which signal detection becomes unreliable, or even impossible, regardless of the time the signal is observed [9].Given that the decreased performance of the ED in the presence of noise uncertainty is due to the lack of correctness in the detection threshold, then a feasible approach is to adapt the detection threshold to the random fluctuations in the noise power [9]. This approach allows counteracting the negative effects of the noise uncertainty because the detection threshold changes as the noise power does. In this sense, in order to add robustness to the appealing ED technique, in this paper we propose an adaptive energy detector (AED) that includes a noise power estimation (NPE) stage with the aim of adapting the detection threshold to the noise power present at the time of spectrum sensing.If we assume that spectrum sensing is carried out with the cooperation of multiple receivers, then it is possible to exploit the fact that when the signal received is composed by only noise samples the maximum likelihood (ML) estimate of the noise power can be derived by averaging the eigenvalues of the covariance matrix [10]. Furthermore, even if a primary signal is present in the received signal, it is possible to estimate the noise power to some exempt of accuracy, by averaging all but the largest of the eigenvalues. We consider this strategy for NPE and adapting the decision threshold to the noise power present at each sensing event. In this sense, the major contributions of this paper are the identification of a suitable strategy for NPE that works using the samples received for spectrum sensing even when the samples contain traces of a primary signal, and the integration of such a strategy in the formulation of the ED for addressing the noise uncertainty problem.The rest of this paper is structured as follows: in Section 2, a summary of the most significant related works is presented. The system model along with the formulation of the spectrum sensing problem is presented inSection 3. The theoretical formulation of ED is described in Section 4, here its performance metrics are derived and a brief discussion of the noise uncertainty is presented, also the formulation of the proposed adaptive energy detector is presented in this section. The results of the performance evaluation of the proposed detector are described and discussed in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 presents the concluding remarks of our research work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
