@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An SDMA-based MAC protocol for wireless ad hoc networks with smart antennas

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An SDMA-based MAC protocol (S-MAC) for wireless ad hoc networks is proposed.Exploiting the creation of spatial channels to enhance network capacity.Providing collision-free access to the communication medium based on the location of a node.Improving the performance of throughput and spatial channel reuse.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
IEEE 802.11,Medium access control,Wireless ad hoc networks,SDMA,Smart antennas,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A wireless ad hoc network consists of a set of wireless devices. The wireless devices are capable of communicating with each other without the assistance of base stations. Space Division Multiple Access (SDMA) is a new technology designed to optimize the performance of current and future mobile communication systems. In this paper, an SDMA-based MAC protocol (S-MAC) for wireless ad hoc networks with smart antennas is proposed. The proposed protocol exploits the SDMA system to allow reception of more than one packet from spatially separated transmitters. Using SDMA technology provides collision-free access to the communication medium based on the location of a node. The proposed protocol solves the hidden terminal problem, the exposed terminal problem, and the deafness problem. Simulation results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed S-MAC in improving throughput and increasing spatial channel reuse.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A wireless ad hoc network is a network of self-organizing wireless devices able to directly communicate with one another [1–3]. Each node in a wireless ad hoc network functions both as a host and as a router. Two nodes can communicate directly if they are within transmission range of each other.The design of IEEE 802.11 assumes an omni-directional antenna at the physical layer. Existing antenna systems are equipped with omni-directional antennas in wireless ad hoc networks. Therefore, the mobile nodes share a single wireless channel. Using omni-directional antennas leads to lower spatial channel utilization because only one pair of communicating nodes can transmit data at the same time.New ideas about increasing network throughput by using smart antennas, which allow the nodes to transmit packets in different spatial channels, have been proposed. Smart antennas [4–6] can enhance network throughput more efficiently than omni-directional antennas in wireless ad hoc networks [7–10]. Smart antennas offer some advantages that enhance spatial reuse of the wireless channel and extension of the transmission range. To use the advantages of smart antennas in wireless ad hoc networks requires an efficient MAC protocol. In this paper, a new MAC scheme designed to improve network throughput performance and spatial channel utilization is proposed.In recent studies, several MAC protocols have been proposed that suitably adapt IEEE 802.11 for directional antennas. However, directional transmissions in wireless ad hoc networks result in serious location information problems [11,12]. The transmitter must know the location of a receiver to turn the beam in a suitable direction before transmitting Request-to-Send (RTS) frames. The transmitter creates the appropriate beam patterns, depending on the location of a receiver. Some studies assume that the location of a node may be obtained using a Global Positioning System (GPS) [3,7,13,14]. Other studies assume the transmission of data through the routing layer in order to acquire information about the location of a receiver, or the location of a receiver. In [15], RTS frames are transmitted omni-directionally in order to find the location of a receiver. Korakis et al. [11] proposed a MAC protocol for full exploitation of directional antennas that scans the entire area around a transmitter in order to find the location of a receiver or a transmitter. Although this scheme attempts to extend the communication range, circular transmission increases delay time and incurs a large control overhead. Ko et al. proposed a MAC protocol that utilizes the directional transmission capability of a directional antenna to improve bandwidth efficiency, called Directional MAC (D-MAC) [7]. Lal et al. proposed a MAC protocol that exploits the creation of spatial channels designed to enhance the throughput for ad hoc networks [9]. This scheme uses Space Division Multiple Access (SDMA) technology with smart antennas.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, related work is presented. Section 3 describes the proposed SDMA-based MAC protocol in detail. In Section 4, the performance of the proposed protocol is compared with other MAC protocols through simulation. Conclusions are provided in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper proposed an SDMA-based MAC protocol, called S-MAC, for wireless ad hoc networks using smart antennas. The proposed S-MAC exploits the creation of spatial channels to effectively enhance network capacity. This protocol utilizes the broadcasting of RTS to find the location of a receiver, and employs a directional beam to increase spatial reuse of the wireless channel and extend the transmission range. This protocol does not assume any knowledge of the location of neighboring nodes. S-MAC exploits beam information by transmitting CTS and BDTS frames to find the beam being used by the communicating nodes. Each node uses a beam table to determine the direction of the busy beam and to prevent collision and congestion in the network. Simulation results showed that the performance of the proposed S-MAC substantially improves throughput and spatial channel reuse.