@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Automated screening of MRI brain scanning using grey level statistics

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Automated algorithm for detecting normality or abnormality in MRI brain scans.A new Modified Grey level Co-occurrence Matrix (MGLCM) method is presented to extract second order statistical texture features for discriminating brain abnormality.MGLCM generates efficient texture feature that is used for measuring the symmetry of MRI brain scan than the tradition GLCM.An accuracy of 97.8% was achieved using MGLCM with 9 orientations and 1 distance.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Magnetic resonance imaging,Modified grey level Co-occurrence matrix,Principle component analysis,Multi-layer perceptron neural network,Support vector machine,Linear discriminant analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstractImage, graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Research on medical image processing has expanded over the last decade attracting researchers from fields that include mathematics, computer sciences, engineering, biology and medicine. Indeed, the medical image processing field has become very important and plays a significant role in clinical practice applications as biomedical imaging helps in the diagnosis patients’ pathologies. Brain tumours and stroke lesions in particular, are crucial cases in medical imaging as their accurate detection and segmentation have a significant influence on clinical diagnosis. They also help in predicting prognosis and treatment in addition to being beneficial for the general modelling of the brain's pathologies and its anatomical construction [1]. The detailed information collected from these images can also be used to index large databases of archived images of brain tumors for various studies and training purposes. Historical data can then help clinicians and radiologists to diagnose and treat new patients by determining the effectiveness of various medicine and procedures on previous patients with similar tumor volume, tumor area or other characteristics [2].In current clinical routine, clinicians spend an increasing part of their time diagnosing and interpreting medical images. They need to have a high level of experience to carry out manual and accurate dilineation and classification of these images if they are to be used in the final diagnosis. However, due to the large number of slices which are produced by medical scanners, the manual detecion of tumors is considered to be very cumbersome, a time consuming task and prone to human errors. They are evaluated either based on qualitative criteria by observing hyperintense tissue appearance or by depending on primitive quantitative measures such as the largest diameter visible from axial viewing [3,4].The Iraqi Ministry of Health reported that the average annual number of registered cancerous brain tumor cases has increased significantly since 1990 due to decades of wars, sanctions and occupation [5]. This study was conducted in collaboration with the MRI Unit of the Al-Kadhimiya Teaching Hospital in Iraq which faced many problems in diagnosing and issuing diagnostic reports for the large number of inpatient and outpatient cases. Indeed, the average number of patients received daily by the MRI unit is over 110 for a six working days week totalling about 2640 patients scanned monthly. Therefore, developing an automated system for brain tumor detection is beneficial and desirable to reduce both human errors and workload in the MRI units in Iraq.Typical medical imaging techniques include ultrasonography, computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Among these technologies, MRI is an excellent medical imaging technique for studying the brain and it is widely used because of its ability to differentiate soft tissues with a significant spatial resolution that can reach a 1×1×1mm voxel size. It is also more sensitive to local changes in tissue water since these changes reflect the physiologic alternation that can be detected and visualized by MRI. Furthermore, it is a non-invasive technology and is different from other technologies because of its ability to generate multiple images of the same tissue with different contrast visualization and different image acquisition protocols. These multiple MRI images provide additional useful anatomical information to help the clinicians study the brain pathology more precisely. Indeed, quantitative analysis of MRI brain scans to acquire knowledge about the human brain structure has increased dramatically in recent years because of a variety of diseases that can alter the brain structure. By analyzing these alternations, it is possible to understand clearly these diseases and potentially diagnose them quickly and accurately [1,3].The main objective of this study is to develop and evaluate an automated screening algorithm of MRI brain scanning images to discriminate normal and pathological patients without any clinician's interception; hence reducing clinicians’ examination and interpretation time. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows, in Section 2, we review some related work and introduce the contribution of this research. In Section 3, material and methods are described. In Sections 4 and 5 we demonstrate how the features are extracted and classified respectively. The experimental results are discussed in Section 6. Finally, the conclusions are drawn in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
