@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Lifetime maximization through dynamic ring-based routing scheme for correlated data collecting in WSNs

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A solution to correlation data aggregation in WSNs is addressed in this paper.Data aggregation is processed along the ring to mitigate hotspots problem.The proposed scheme is proved to improve network lifetime by 200% or more.Our scheme is more practicality which allows low complexity implementation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#


@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This work provides a novel dynamic ring-based routing scheme for correlation data aggregation named Ring-Based Correlation Data Routing (RBCDR) scheme. In this scheme, first, nodal data is routed to rings which have abundant energy in minimum hops, and then all data aggregation is processed along the ring, after that, the aggregated data is routed to the sink with shortest route. Compared with current research, RBCDR scheme has higher network lifetime. RBCDR scheme processes data aggregation in non-hotspots regions which have abundant energy and then routes all aggregated data to the sink, achieving less data sent to the sink and thus decreasing the energy consumption in hotspots near the sink, therefore, it significantly improves the network lifetime. Through theoretical analysis and simulation results, our scheme is proved to improve network lifetime by 200–340%, compared with sink-centered baseline version data aggregation scheme.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The main function of Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) is to sense the physical phenomenon in monitoring environment [1]. Data sensed by multiple nodes may be highly correlated [1,2]. For instance, when monitoring ambient temperature, temperature sensed by neighboring nodes may be spatially and temporally correlated, thus, there is no need to send all sensed data to the sink [3]. Meanwhile, in many applications, sink only needs average (maximum or minimum) temperature. In such an application scenario, multi node data can be gathered into one data packet, thereby greatly reducing the energy consumption of the nodes and avoiding network congestion, so as to improve the network performance. Thus, correlated data aggregation research has important implications. Extensive research work has been devoted to provide energy-efficient routing algorithms for correlated data gathering [4–6].The main goal of correlated data aggregation route is to decrease network transmitting data amount by correlated data aggregation, and thus to decrease nodal energy consumption, improve network lifetime and avoid network congestion, achieve overall performance improvement [1,2]. Several routing techniques to handle the correlated data aggregation problem have been proposed [2–4]. The main goal in [4] is to decrease total amount of transmitting data to decrease network energy consumption, however, subsequent studies found that only reducing the total energy consumption does not necessarily improve the life of the network. In most studies, the network lifetime is defined as the first death of nodes in the network [5], if the energy consumption is not balanced, some nodes may die early, resulting in low network lifetime. Therefore, subsequent correlated data aggregation research not only considers the data correlation, but also energy consumption balancing [6,7]. In recent research, correlated data aggregation route is always studied with energy consumption, network lifetime and other performance metrics such as data reliability and delay, to improve overall performance [3,8].There are a lot of strategies about data aggregation routing, but it is worth noting that although data aggregation can reduce data amount to the sink and thus decrease energy consumption, to the best of our knowledge. Currently, the proposed data aggregation route schemes have failed to make full use of the data aggregation characteristics to improve network lifetime greatly. Meanwhile, the practicability and scalability of current proposed schemes still need further study.In this paper, we propose a novel dynamic ring-based routing scheme for correlation data aggregation named Ring-Based Correlation Data Routing (RBCDR) scheme, which is simple and practical. RBCDR scheme can improve network lifetime greatly, and the main innovations are:(1)RBCDR scheme is an energy efficient route scheme which can improve network lifetime greatly.Our previous research on energy hole phenomenon in WSNs [9] has found that, even data load is decreased through correlated data aggregation, there is still energy hole in the network, which seriously affects network lifetime. In this paper, RBCDR scheme changes the traditional sink centered data aggregation method, data route is not directly to the sink, instead, it is routed to selected ring region with abundant energy, after the ring region receives the entire network data, data is route along the ring to one node, finally, the entire network aggregated data is sent to the sink. In this way, RBCDR scheme processes data aggregation in regions with abundant energy and only sends the aggregated data to the sink, which minimizes the energy consumption in sink hotspots, and thus it can greatly improve network lifetime. According to our theoretical analysis and simulation results, RBCDR scheme can improve the network lifetime by more than 2 times and the larger network, the better performance.In addition, RBCDR scheme has good energy efficiency. This paper carefully analyzes the energy consumption situation in the network, through dynamically selecting regions with abundant energy as ring routes, the network energy consumption is balanced, and the energy efficiency is improved by more than 5 times.(2)RBCDR scheme does not require new data aggregation schemes, current mature algorithms can be adopted, which is really functional.The first stage of RBCDR scheme is processed in ring regions with high remaining energy, since nodes in these regions have higher remaining energy. In the second stage of RBCDR scheme, the total data aggregation is processed in rings with abundant energy. Therefore, in RBCDR scheme, data aggregation is processed by nodes with high remaining energy, so, in data aggregation route, there is no need to construct ingenious data aggregation tree to aggregate data to minimize energy consumption, we can adopt simplest route schemes (e.g. the shortest route combined with data aggregation scheme), although the simple route schemes do not have good data aggregation and more energy consumption is consumed, since the energy consumption is in non-hotspots, there is no effect on network lifetime.(3)We provide extensive theoretical analysis and simulations to confirm the good performance of our scheme. Theoretical analysis and simulation results confirm the effectiveness of the proposed strategy. In the comparison simulations, for a medium-scale sensor network, our scheme improves network lifetime by more than 2 times, moreover, with larger network and higher data correlation, the network lifetime can be improved by more times. Meanwhile, our scheme improves energy efficiency by 2 times.The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, the related works are reviewed. The system model is described in Section 3. In Section 4, the details of dynamic ring-based correlation data aggregation scheme are presented. Performance analysis is provided in Section 5. Section 6 is the comparison and analysis of simulation results. We conclude in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
