@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Botnet detection via mining of traffic flow characteristics

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new traffic flow behavior analysis method has been proposed to detect botnets irrespective of their control structures.Benchmark datasets collected from various sources, such as ISOT Botnet dataset from University of Victoria, Conficker dataset from CAIDA, dataset from CVUT University, dataset from Dalhousie University and dataset from Centro University.It can successfully detect the various types of botnets with a high detection rate and a low false positive rate.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Botnet detection,Network flows,Small packets,Packet ratio,Bot response packet ratio,Novelty detection,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Botnet is one of the most serious threats to cyber security as it provides a distributed platform for several illegal activities. Regardless of the availability of numerous methods proposed to detect botnets, still it is a challenging issue as botmasters are continuously improving bots to make them stealthier and evade detection. Most of the existing detection techniques cannot detect modern botnets in an early stage, or they are specific to command and control protocol and structures. In this paper, we propose a novel approach to detect botnets irrespective of their structures, based on network traffic flow behavior analysis and machine learning techniques. The experimental evaluation of the proposed method with real-world benchmark datasets shows the efficiency of the method. Also, the system is able to identify the new botnets with high detection accuracy and low false positive rate.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A botnet is a collection of compromised hosts or zombies that are remotely controlled by an intruder called botmaster via a Command and Control (C&C) channel. Due to the massive size of botnets, they pose a severe threat to cyber security. According to [1], the extent to which the botnets smash up is becoming more critical day by day. Botnets are used for different attacks such as sending Spam, launching distributed denial of service (DDoS) attack, identity theft, and click fraud, etc. Some of the largest spam botnets are sending out literally billions of messages per day. Cybercriminals use a variety of bots to conduct DDoS attacks on Internet servers and botnets are raising threats in the cyber space with millions of infected computers.Botnet has made an endeavor to control zombies remotely and instruct them by commands from botmaster through C&C channel which is a crucial component of a botnet. Different botnets can organize their C&C channel in diverse ways [2]. Botnets can be centralized, decentralized or hybrid according to their C&C channels and communication protocols like HTTP, P2P, IRC, IM, etc. IRC-based centralized C&C structure is the most commonly used botnet structure [3]. In this, all the bots in a botnet are connected to a single C&C channel to obtain the commands from the botmaster. The IRC-based centralized botnet structures are easy to create, manage and they react to commands faster. However, it is also easier to combat centralized botnets, since the entire zombie network is neutralized if the C&C channel is blocked. Virut.n, Rbot, and Eldorado are some popular IRC botnets. Recently, botmasters have started using HTTP to manage their web-based centralized botnets. HTTP is a prominent communication protocol as it comprises of majority of the internet traffic [4]. These web-based C&C bots try to blend into normal HTTP traffic, which consequently makes them more difficult to identify, since HTTP is a network communication protocol in many applications. Zeus, Spyeye, and BlackEnergy are some popular botnets using HTTP as the communication protocol. These botnets are estimated to include millions of compromised computers around the world and mainly used to steal critical information including login credentials, sensitive financial data etc. Nowadays, botmasters have started to build botnets with more resilient C&C structures using peer-to-peer (P2P) protocols [5]. Bots belonging to P2P botnet form an overlay network in which any of the bots can be used by the botmaster to distribute commands to the other bots. In P2P botnet, commands are transferred from bot to bot, each bot has a list of several neighbors and any command received by a bot from one of its neighbors will be sent to the others, further distributing it across the zombie network. Storm, Waledac, ZeroAccess, Citadel, Kelihos, and Conficker are some popular P2P botnets. It offers higher resiliency, since even if a significant portion of P2P botnet is taken down, the remaining bots may still be able to communicate with each other and with botmaster.In both centralized and decentralized botnet structures, a bot in the network will generate a burst of small packets when actively searching for susceptible hosts. The bot communication may exhibit a more uniform pattern when the bot queries for updates or instructions continuously, resulting in many uniform sized, small TCP/UDP packets. These traffic flows, especially the periodicity of the patterns are of great interest for botnet detection, since the passive traffic monitoring would like to recognize the suspicious patterns and disrupt the botnet before the actual attacks take place. Based on this bot behavior we have analyzed network traffic flow statistical features in a controlled environment. The traffic flow statistical features such as the size and number of packets are used to detect bot in both centralized and decentralized structures using three different classification techniques such as Boosted decision tree, Naive Bayesian and Support vector machine. The detection of botnets using behavioral analysis of network traffic flows has several advantages. The flow based approach requires only a fraction of the total amount of traffic data to be analyzed. The mining based method operated on the flow level network traffic has shown promising results towards botnet detection. It can detect even unknown botnets that are using encrypted communication with high accuracy. Another advantage is that the proposed approach for detecting bots will be less expensive compared to other approaches that implement deep-payload-analysis.The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 summarizes and discusses related work on botnet detection and Section 3 discusses our proposed detection system. The data collection and analysis is described in Section 4 followed by the experimental results and performance evaluation in Section 5. Finally section 6 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
