@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Smart wireless sensor networks for online faults diagnosis in induction machine

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new method has been proposed for online faults diagnosis in induction motors based on smart WSN combined with motor current signature analysis using FFT.The proposed method is novel as it is important to install low cost sensors and detection mechanisms along with induction machines to achieve short detection time and an automated way of reporting the fault.The system can distinguish a faulty motor from a healthy motor with a probability of 99% with less than 5% of false alarm.Simulation results presented show the efficiency of the proposed method to detect faults in induction machine.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
WSN,Induction motor,Fault diagnosis,Smart sensor,MCSA,Online monitoring,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Online induction machine faults diagnosis is a concern to guarantee the overall production process efficiency. Nowadays, the industry demands the integration of smart wireless sensors networks (WSN) to improve the fault detection in order to reduce cost, maintenance and power consumption. Induction motors can develop one or more faults at the same time that can produce sever damages. The origin of most recurrent faults in rotary machines is in the components: stator, rotor, bearing and others. This work presents a novel methodology for the online faults diagnosis in induction motors. This technique uses the smart WSN to obtain the machine condition based on the motor stator current analysis. The implementation of the proposed smart sensor methodology allows the system to perform online fault detection in a fully automated way. Simulation results presented show the efficiency of the proposed method to detect simple and multiple faults in induction machine. It provides detailed analysis to address challenges in designing and deploying WSNs in industrial environments, and its reliability.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The fast advancement in WSNs is due to not only the innovations in the communications and computer-engineering fields, but also the development of new transducers, since as data-capture devices they play a key role in online monitoring systems. Taking into account the features of WSN motes (e.g., consumption, price, and size), special attention should be paid to the research and the achievement of new generation transducers, provided that they are compatible with these features and can therefore be included within the nodes of a WSN [1,2]. The development of wireless sensor networks is the result of the deployment of large number of these smart sensors. The collaborative operation of WSN brings significant advantages including flexibility, high fidelity, self-organization, aggregated intelligence via parallel processing, low cost, low consumption and rapid deployment. These features make WSN a promising platform for online and remote implementation of fault diagnosis system. Instead of proposing a new fault detection method for a specific motor failure, the main focus of this work is to perform a system overview for a global automated current motor analysis especially where the nonintrusive nature of electrical signal based machine. This enables us to implement the online induction machine fault detection in a smart WSN architecture. In the proposed smart WSN scheme, every smart sensor attached to the induction motor determines the condition of the motor if it is healthy or faulty and sends the fault nature if it exists. The smart sensor takes this decision based on the electrical data measured from the induction motor, and then the fault detection scheme is applied at the same smart sensor. Only the detected fault nature is sent to the local supervisory center via WSN and to the remote user via IP networks. In this approach the data communication burden is reduced because the WSN transmits only the motor condition to monitor efficiency and health condition in an online and nonintrusive manner. In other alternative approach, the electrical data are collected and transmitted through WSN and processed in the diagnosis center using alternative algorithms for fault detection. This method needs high bandwidth especially for great number of sensors and high capacity (for the diagnosis center) to process all gathered data. In case that, in some applications, other sensors data such as temperature and vibration are readily unavailable, it presents also many complexities for real time applications. Due to the limitation of WSN technology such as long latency, relaxed data throughput, limited reliability, and the system scalability are the objectives of applying the smart WSN scheme to perform online faults diagnosis for industrial machine [3,4].Induction motors are key elements in every industrial process; their robustness, low cost, easy maintenance and versatility make them popular in many applications from home appliance to sophisticated industrial equipments. In industry, the most popular induction motor is the squirrel-cage motor that they can keep working under certain fault conditions without giving any sign of failure until it is too late when production costs have excessively risen or the machine have suffered irreversible damage. Thus, when induction motor start developing incipient faults it is important to detect the fault early because it is easier to repair and benefiting the industry in cost and maintenance time. Online continuous monitoring of rotary machine can diagnose electrical and mechanical faults opportunely avoiding expensive reparations and unscheduled shutting downs of production line preventing incoming losses. The approach presented in this paper minimizes the time interval between the fault occurrence and its diagnosis, and to provide a system overview where the non-invasive enables its application in a WSN architecture. To attain this short detection time, the proposed fault detection method should be implemented at the smart sensor level. The paper discusses the development of sensors for identifying mechanical faults in induction motors is organized as; Section 2 describes the wireless sensor networks implemented in this architecture. Section 3 presents the fault diagnosis method based on WSN. Section 4 describes the architecture design of the proposed online fault detection method and Section 5 presents the experimental validation of this architecture. Finally the work is concluded in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
