@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Image denoising in hybrid wavelet and quincunx diamond filter bank domain based on Gaussian scale mixture model

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a new denoising algorithm using wavelet and quincunx diamond filter bank.The subband coefficients are modeled with Gaussian scale mixture model.Bayes least means square is used to obtain the denoised coefficients.The new method does spatial averaging without smoothing the edges.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Denoising algorithms,Half-band filter,Wavelet filter bank,Quincunx diamond filter bank,Gaussian scale mixture model,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The main challenge in image denoising is, how to preserve the information such as edges and textures to get satisfactory visual quality when improving the signal to noise ratio. In this paper, we propose a hybrid filter bank for denoising based on wavelet filter bank and quincunx diamond filter bank. The noisy image is decomposed into different subbands of frequency and orientation using DMeyer wavelet. The quincunx diamond filter bank is designed from finite impulse response (FIR) filters using Kaiser window, which is applied on the detail subband of wavelet filter bank. The directional subband coefficients are modeled with Gaussian scale mixture model (GSM). The Bayes least squares estimator is used to obtain the denoised detail coefficients from the noisy image decomposition. Experimental results show that the new method performs spatial averaging without smoothing edges, and thereby enhances the visual quality and peak signal-to-noise-ratio.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Edge-preserving image denoising has become a very intensive research topic. In the past three decades, a variety of denoising methods has been developed in the image processing and computer vision communities. Although seemingly very different, they all share the same property of keeping meaningful edges. The main goal of the image denoising algorithm is to preserve global contrast, edges and texture details of the image without blurring while smoothing the image.The transform domain denoising methods have shown remarkable success over the last decade. Image denoising using wavelet techniques [1–5] is very effective because of its ability to capture the energy of the signal with few transform coefficients. But it suffers from several fundamental shortcomings including lack of shift, orientation invariance and poor directional selectivity. Although wavelet transform is optimal for a large class of one-dimensional signals, it represents only point-singularities. It is less efficient for line and curve-singularities (edges), which represent the directional information in two-dimensional domain. So, ordinary wavelet transform is not optimal for denoising two-dimensional signals such as natural images.To overcome this weakness of wavelets in high dimensions, researchers have recently considered multiscale and directional representations to capture the intrinsic geometrical structures such as smooth contours in natural images, and they have proposed a series of effective image denoising algorithms. Steerable wavelet [6], complex wavelet [7,8], curvelet [9,10] and ridgelet [11] are developed to represent functions sparsely that contain singular curves and surfaces in multi-dimensional space. However the high redundancy limits the application of these transforms in denoising applications.The directional filter bank (DFB) [12] proposed by Bamberger and Smith, preserves sharp edges and geometrical structures with nonredundant representation which is suitable for denoising application. However DC energy leakage into the subbands affects the directional information. Do and Vetterli developed the contourlet transform (CT) [13,14], which is constructed by combining the Laplacian pyramid (LP) to remove the low frequency component and the directional filter bank (DFB). The contourlet transform is widely used in image denoising due to its properties like multiresolution, localization, directionality and anisotropy. However, contourlet transform lacks the shift invariance and produces false Gibbs distortion due to the sampling process. The nonsubsampled contourlet transform (NSCT) [15,16] is proposed by switching off the upsamplers and downsamplers in contourlet domain, which is fully shift-invariant, multiscale and multidirection expansion. The denoising performance of NSCT is poor due to the overcomplete representation of images. Several multiscale and multidirectional transforms proposed in [17–24] are fully shift invariant and introduce many artifacts in the denoising results. Its computation cost is much higher than that of the separable wavelet transform due to the necessity of many 2D filter bank for good orientation selectivity.To alleviate these problems, we propose a hybrid wavelet quincunx diamond filter bank (HWQDFB), which is built upon wavelet filter bank (WFB) and quincunx diamond filter bank (QDFB). HWQDFB is a translation invariant, directional and multiresolution expansion that has similar frequency partition as other transforms. Initially the noisy image is decomposed into different subbands of frequency and orientation using HWQDFB. This transform can capture the edges and contours more effectively compared to wavelet transform. Gaussian scale mixture model is utilized to model the directional coefficients of the transform, to recover the noise-free image using Baye’s least squares estimator from the observation. The sharp frequency selectivity and high stopband attenuation with linear phase characteristics of Kaiser window eliminates the filter design problems in QDFB. The proposed hybrid structure reduces the computational complexity and provides an efficient directional representation based on the geometric structure of an image. This proposed method with various thresholding strategies are compared with other techniques.The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 explains the overview of proposed filter bank. Section 3 describes the design of two channel quincunx diamond filter bank. Section 4 covers the Gaussian scale mixture model of HWQDFB coefficients. Several experimental results are presented and discussed in Section 5. Finally, some concluding remarks are given in Section 6.The overview of the proposed hybrid filter bank is shown in Fig. 1. The structure consists of two parts, a wavelet filter bank with DMeyer wavelet that ensures the multiscale property and a quincunx diamond filter bank (QDFB) for directionality. QDFB is designed with Kaiser Window having high stop-band attenuation and sharp cutoff frequency. Its basis functions have elongated supports rather than square supports as with 2D wavelets, which make it more efficient in describing curvature details along smooth contours. The structure increases the directionality with better edge preservation.The discrete wavelet transform (DWT) [25–27] is implemented with the separable 1D filtering along rows and columns followed by downsampling. Such separable systems are much easier to implement and reduces the computational complexity. The wavelet transform maps the function onto a scale-space plane. The analyzing function of the wavelet transform is chosen to produce large number of wavelet coefficients close to zero. The total number of non-negligible wavelet coefficients depends on the regularity of the image, the number of vanishing moment of ψ and the size of its support [25]. A wavelet function ψ has p vanishing moment if(1)∫-∞∞tkψ(t)dt=0for0≤k≤pψ is orthogonal to any polynomial of degree p−1. If the image is regular and ψ has enough vanishing moments, then the wavelet coefficients are small at fine scales 2j. Therefore, the selection of wavelet filter depends on the tradeoff between the number of vanishing moment and the support size.Wavelet filter bank (WFB) decomposes the image into low-low (LL), low-high (LH), high-low (HL) and high-high (HH) subbands. Since most of the energy is in the top left (LL) subband, the approximation coefficients obtained in the first level can be utilized for the next level of decomposition. The approximation coefficient Wϕ(j0,m,n) of an image x(n1,n2) at scale j0 is given by(2)Wϕ(j0,m,n)=1MN∑n1=0M-1∑n2=0N-1x(n1,n2)ϕj,m,n(n1,n2)The detail coefficientsWψi(j,m,n)along horizontal (H), vertical (V) and diagonal (D) directions are(3)Wψi(j,m,n)=1MN∑n1=0M-1∑n2=0N-1x(n1,n2)ψj,m,ni(n1,n2)where i=[H,V,D] and j=1. φj,m,n(n1,n2) andψj,m,mi(n1,n2)are the set of orthonormal basis functions generated by dilation and translation of scaling function φ and a mother wavelet ψ.To increase the directionality of WFB, quincunx diamond filter bank is used in conjunction with WFB. The decimation matrix used in the quincunx filter bank isQ1=111-1.Let H0,G0 be the quincunx lowpass filter pairs and H1, G1 be the highpass filter pairs. Quincunx lowpass filter retains most of the signal energy than the separable lowpass filter. This nonseparable filter provides a better match to the original spectrum of the image and also the human visual system. The Quincunx lowpass filter conserves horizontal and vertical frequencies, but it cuts off the diagonals to half of their original range. The diamond filter is a 2D half-band filter with symmetric frequency response about the point(ω1,ω2,H)=π2,π2,0.5and is used as prefilters for quincunx sampled data. The filter bank does not affect the low frequency component; hence the global contrast of the image is maintained. HWQDFB is localized not only in position and scale but also in orientation. This localization provides surprising properties to this transform and makes it useful for image denoising application.Our goal is to design the Quadrature Mirror Filter (QMF) imposing the Bezout identity (i.e., perfect reconstruction) and with other properties such as sharp frequency response, easy implementation and linear-phase. In this paper, we focus on the finite impulse response (FIR) case due to easy implementation and perfect reconstruction. The filters satisfy the Bezout identity as follows:(4)H0(z)G0(z)+H1(z)G1(z)=IThe linear phase filters preserve the shape of the signal within the passband and minimizes the effect of aliasing in each subband. The 1D linear phase half-band FIR filter is designed using Kaiser window [28–30] due to its high stopband attenuation, absence of ripples in the passband and narrow controllable transition width. FIR filter implementation reduces the computation cost because the 50% of the filter coefficients are zero. An effective and simple way to design 2D filters from 1D FIR filter is the mapping approach [31–34] equivalent to the generalized McClellan transformation [32]. The 1D FIR filter is designed with Kaiser Window based on prolate spheroidal functions. The window function ωk(n) is given by(5)ωk(n)=I0α1-2πN-12I0(α)whereI0(α)=1+∑K=1α1K!(α2)K2, α is the adjustable parameter. I0(α) is the modified Bessel function of first kind of order zero. The main lobe width and peak side lobe level are adjusted by varying the parameter ∝.A multistage half-band filter is efficient to obtain sharp cutoff frequency. The transfer function of linear phase FIR half-band filter with impulse response h(n) is given by(6)H0(z)=∑n=0N-1h(n)z-n;N-1is evenThe FIR filter used here is a type 1 filter satisfyingh(n)=h(n-1-N). The impulse response of the half-band filter h(n) is obtained by designing an all pass filter g(n) with cutoff frequency slightly below π as given by(7)h(n)=g(n2),n=0,2,4,……0,whennis oddn≠N-120.5,n=N-12The frequency response of the filter is half-band symmetrical. The 2D diamond lowpass filters are obtained by the mapping method proposed by McClellan [32] with a frequency responseH0D(ω)=12H0ω1+ω22H0ω1-ω22as shown in Fig. 2. The frequency response of 2D highpass filter is given by(8)H1D(ω1,ω2)=e(jω1+π)H0De(jω1+π),e(jω2+π)The polyphase implementation reduces the computational complexity of the filter. The characteristics of 1D filter such as high stopband attenuation, good passband and low transition width are transferred to 2D Diamond filters.Modeling the statistics of natural images is a challenging task, because of high dimensionality of the signal and the complexity of statistical structure. Statistical image models have been developed by transforming the image from the pixel domain to transform domain. The GSM model [4,5,35] represents the local variance fluctuations in neighborhoods of coefficients at different spatial locations, scales and orientations. This spatial inhomogeneity of the local variance represents the sparseness of the responses and amplitude coupling among neighbors.Consider an image decomposed into oriented subbands at multiple scales by HWQDFB. The subband coefficients are statistically modeled as GSM model in which the parameters are governed by a hidden random field. GSM is the product of a Gaussian random vector and an independent hidden random scalar multiplier. Based on this assumption, a Bayes least squares estimate of the coefficients is derived. Let a random vector x be expressed as the product of zero mean Gaussian vector u and an independent positive scalar hidden random variablez.(9)x=zuThus x is an infinite mixture of Gaussian vectors, whose density is determined by the covariance matrix Cuof vector u and the mixing density pz(z). If x is the vector of subband coefficients of the original image and w is the vector of noise coefficients, then a vector of noisy subband coefficient is given by(10)y=zu+wThe denoised detail coefficients are obtained from the noisy image by Bayes least squares estimation based on GSM. The average of least squares estimate of x when conditioned on z weighted by posteriori densitypzyis(11)E{xc/y}=∫0∞pzyExc/y,zdzLet Cwbe the covariance matrix of zero mean Gaussian noise vector w and Cube the signal covariance. Assume that Cwis constant for all neighborhoods within a subband. Cy/zis the covariance matrix of observed vector y conditioned on z and is given by(12)Cy/z=Cu+CwThe neighborhood noise covariance Cwis computed at each subband by applying the hybrid representation to a deterministic function with the same sample autocorrelation as the noise. The elements of Cware computed by averaging the products of pairs of coefficients over all the neighborhoods of the subband.Let S be the symmetric square root of positive definite matrix Cw. i.e., Cw=SST. Let V=QTS−1y and {Q,Λ} be the eigenvector/eigen value expansion of the matrix S−1CuS−T. The local wiener estimate of a particular conditionally Gaussian observation y using a given hidden scale factor z is given by(13)Exc/y,n=∑n=1Nzmcnλnvnzλn+1where mcnrepresents an element (cth row, nth column) of the matrix M, where M=SQ,λnis the diagonal element of Eigen vector Λ, vnis an element of v and xcis the reference coefficient. By Bayes rule and noninformative Jeffrey’s prior [35], the conditional density p(y/z) is(14)p(y/z)=exp-12∑n=1Nvn2zλn+1(2π)NCw∏n=1N(zλn+1)

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
