@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Performance of Relay-Aided Multi-Carrier-CDMA using preprocessing based on quantized feedback

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The achievable BER when a DMS is supported by a cluster of relays (PCIRs and VQ-CIRs).The attainable BER when a DMS is assisted by one relay (PCIRs and VQ-CIRs).The achievable BER when one relay assists all the K DMSs (PCIRs and VQ-CIRs).

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
MC-CDMA,Transmitter preprocessing,Relay diversity,Multi-user interference,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, we investigate the achievable bit-error-rate performance (BER) of a transmitter preprocessing (TP)-aided cooperative downlink (DL) multi-carrier code division multiple access system by employing three cooperation strategies. In a multi-user cooperative DL communication, multi-user interference at the relays, which prevents the achievement of relay diversity, is suppressed with the aid of the TP operated at the base station (BS). In addition, inter-relay interference at the destination mobile station is mitigated by the TP employed at the relays. Furthermore, the channel impulse responses (CIRs) required for formulating the TP at the BS is based on the quantized CIRs feedback in contrast to the perfect CIRs (PCIRs) assumption at the relays. Our study shows that the resultant BER performance of the quantized CIRs feedback-based TP at the BS, coupled with the PCIR-based TP at the relays, remains close to that attained with the PCIRs knowledge at the BS and relays.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In a cellular system, spatial diversity is attractive because it offers spectral efficiency without calling for additional bandwidth and transmission time. Spatial diversity is usually achieved by the deployment of multiple transmit antennas and/or multiple receive antennas. Although deploying multiple antennas at the base station (BS) is feasible, employing multiple antennas at the mobile stations (MSs), which are pocket-sized, is usually impractical, owing to size and cost constrictions. Furthermore, in the context of downlink (DL) communication, employing multiple antennas at the BS can result in transmit diversity, but it does not inherently make use of the non-linear relationship that exists between the propagation pathloss and propagation distance [1]. In contrast, in relay-aided cooperative communication, an intermediate relay between the BS and MS splits a longer path into two shorter paths. Hence, the overall pathloss can be reduced by taking advantage of the non-linear relation between the propagation pathloss and propagation distance. Additionally, exploiting this non-linear relationship can yield transmit power gains, which, in turn, allow us to reduce the overall transmission power [1].The principal initiative behind cooperative communications dates back to the revolutionary work on the information theoretic features of the relay channel [2]. Inspired by this contribution, different cooperation strategies and protocols have been proposed over the years. Furthermore, according to the operations carried out at the relays, the relaying protocols can be classified into three types [3,4] namely, amplify-and-forward (AF), decode-and-forward (DF) and compress-and-forward (CF). Among the aforesaid protocols, the AF and DF protocols were developed in [5]. These two protocols have become the most popular because of their simplicity and instinctive designs. In the AF protocol, which is analogous to the analog-repeater-based approach [6], the relay simply amplifies and forwards the BS’s ‘overheard’ signal to the desired destination. Although this approach is simple, it potentially increases the system’s overall noise level because both the signal and the noise are amplified. Conversely, in the DF protocol, the relay decodes the signal received from the BS and forwards a re-encoded signal to the destination. Here, when the relay forwards the erroneously recovered signal, the problem of error propagation may arise, which, in turn, may exacerbate the detection at the destination mobile station (DMS), leading to degradation in the overall system performance in terms of the achievable error rate or capacity.Recently, in [5,7], it has been shown that the fixed DF system, when dispensed with any of the error-aware mechanisms at the relays, does not provide diversity gain compared to its conventional direct-transmission-based counterpart. As a result, the selective DF scheme [5,7] was developed with the aid of error detection codes and/or intelligent relay selection schemes. Here, the relay will forward the signal only if it correctly decodes the signal. In addition, when the signal is channel encoded, the DF scheme is also referred to as coded cooperation [8–10]. Furthermore, the CF based cooperative scheme has also received increasing research attention [11,12] where the relay forwards a compressed or quantized version of the signal received from the source. Cooperative relay-aided communications can be established with the assistance of fixed relays or with the aid of the MSs that are in the close proximity of a DMS acting as relays [1,13]. When the latter case is invoked, these relays forward the DMS’s information they receive from the BS, thereby creating a virtual multiple transmit antenna system. Such virtual multiple antenna aided systems, called virtual antenna array (VAA), have been shown to provide improved performance in terms of achievable capacity or error performance [14].In the recent past, the multi-carrier code division multiple access system (MC-CDMA), which is based on the combination of orthogonal frequency division multiplexing and CDMA, has been proposed as a contending access scheme for the next generation wireless standards because it has the advantages of high bandwidth efficiency, frequency diversity, etc. [15]. However, the performance of a MC-CDMA system suffers if the interference grows, that is, if the number of users to be supported is high, multi-user interference (MUI) will be dominant, thereby leading to poor error performance. Furthermore, if a MC-CDMA DL system that supports multiple users is aided by relays to achieve relay diversity, then the multi-user signals will interfere with each other, generating MUI at the relays as well as MUI and inter-relay interference (IRI) at the DMSs. This MUI at the relays should be suppressed to achieve the diversity gain [16,17]. The classical approach to address the different types of interferences is to employ any of the well-known multi-user detection (MUD) techniques, especially, to call upon a non-linear MUD because it provides better error performance than its linear counterpart [18–22]. However, the complexity introduced by such a detection approach in the context of signal detection is excessive and deters its implementation, even at the BS, where a high complexity algorithm is allowed [18–21]. In view of the advantages of bypassing the potentially excessive-complexity non-linear MUD approaches and, moreover, the linear MUD techniques that lead to poor error performance [22], transmitter preprocessing (TP) techniques can be invoked.Of late, such transmitter preprocessing techniques, which are capable of suppressing the MUI, have allured much attention and research in wireless communications and have been widely studied, as seen, for instance, in [14,16–21]. TP essentially carries out the necessary signal processing at the BS, thereby eliminating the requirement of complex detection algorithms at the MSs [16–21]. Moreover, such preprocessing techniques result in power efficient MSs [16–21,23–27]. Furthermore, in [16,17], it has been shown that the employment of TP at the BS can result in MUI free transmission from the relays. The TP in the afore-mentioned contributions is constructed based on the spreading matrix of all of the DL users, and the results have been documented only for one cooperation strategy. At the DMSs, classical maximal-ratio-combining has been employed to combine the signals forwarded by the relays. In [20], we have demonstrated the achievable BER performance of the relay-aided MC-CDMA system with preprocessing. Here, we have made the usual supposition of the availability of perfect channel impulse responses (PCIRs) at the transmitter for TP formulation, which is legitimate in the context of time division duplex (TDD) type wireless systems because the uplink (UL) and DL channels are reciprocal [27]. In contrast, in frequency division duplex (FDD) type wireless systems, UL and DL channels are not reciprocal and, hence, the CIRs required for TP formulation have to be estimated at the receiver and conveyed to the transmitter. For that reason, TP construction becomes more challenging in FDD systems than its TDD counterpart [25–27]. In [25,26], we demonstrated the performance of the space division multiple access system and relay-aided CDMA, respectively, by employing the FDD scheme. Additionally, in [21], we reported the performance of a TP-aided DL-MC-CDMA system in terms of the achievable BER when the DMSs are aided by a cluster of relays for a FDD type system. Here, we have assumed that there is sufficient number of relay stations to assist a DMS. However, there may be scenarios where there is a limited number of relays or only one relay to support the DMSs. In this case, the relays have to forward the multi-user signals and, consequently, in addition to the IRI, MUI will also be the dominating channel impairment at the DMSs. Furthermore, in these scenarios, relay diversity cannot be taken advantage of, although the non-linear relationship between the propagation pathloss and propagation distance can alone be utilized. Therefore, it would be interesting, now more than ever, to study the BER performance of the considered system in a multi-user environment, when only the non-linear pathloss behavior of the propagation channels is exploited. Furthermore, to the best of the authors’ knowledge, the achievable BER performance in the milieu, wherein the relays need to forward the multi-user signals, has not been reported.Therefore, against this background, in this correspondence, we investigate the performance of a relay-aided cooperative DL-MC-CDMA system with the aid of three cooperation strategies by employing both TP based on PCIRs and vector-quantized CIRs at the BS and PCIRs based TP at the relays to mitigate the MUI and IRI at the relays and the DMSs, respectively. In particular, the three cooperation strategies can be stated as follows:(1)A cluster of relays forward a DMS’s signal, which they receive from the BS after appropriate processing;Each of the relays, after TP, forwards the desired signal to their corresponding DMS, andA single relay forwards the multi-user signals to all of the DMSs after TP.In all of the above mentioned cooperation strategies, we assume that the BS preprocesses the DL multi-user signal using a TP approach, which constructs a subspace that is orthogonal to the interfering subspace to suppress the DL-MUI at the relays. In addition, transmit minimum-mean-square-error (T-MMSE) [16] based TP is employed at each of the relays to suppress the IRI. Furthermore, the CIRs required for TP formulation at the BS are estimated at the relays and are conveyed via ideal feedback channels to the BS. Our study and results demonstrate that the cooperative DL-MC-CDMA system, aided by TP, efficiently suppresses the MUI and IRI, thereby contributing to the achievement of relay diversity, which in turn leads to a noticeable improvement in the achievable bit-error-rate (BER). Additionally, it is discerned that the BER performance of the quantized CIRs feedback based TP is close to that attained with the PCIRs knowledge, thereby assisting in achieving the relay diversity.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the system model and assumptions. Section 3 addresses the multi-user TP approach employed in this contribution. Section 4 addresses the vector quantization. Section 5 elucidates our simulation results and, eventually, in Section 6, we provide our conclusions.Let us assume that the considered DL-MC-CDMA system supports K users arbitrarily distributed in a single cell. The schematics of the frequency domain (F-domain) spread MC-CDMA system employing TP at the BS and relays for different cooperation strategies are shown in Fig. 1. Here, we assume that each of the K DL users is supported by a single MS, which acts as a relay, or by a cluster of L MSs acting as relays, depending upon the cooperation strategy invoked. In this treatise, we also assume that the relay stations (RSs) are capable of carrying out additional signal processing, i.e., preprocessing on the signals received from the BS in addition to detection and forwarding. The B channels connecting the BS to the RSs are assumed to undergo Rayleigh fading, and the R channels connecting the RSs to the MSs experience Nakagami-m fading. In addition, to implement the preprocessing, we assume that the distance between the BS and any of the DMSs is too large such that the contribution of the direct link to the received signal at the DMSs is negligible. Additionally, for cooperation strategy 1, because each of the DMSs is supported by L relays, the number of relays needed to support the K DMSs equals to KL. Furthermore, throughout this treatise, we assume that the transmission is based on a time division approach. To be specific, a symbol duration is divided into two time slots. During the first time slot, the BS processes the K users symbols and broadcasts them synchronously to the KL relays, and in the second time slot, the KL relays forward the symbols they receive from the BS to their corresponding DMSs after appropriate processing. Additionally, we define the group of MSs that act as relays and aid in forwarding the corresponding DMS’s signals as a cluster. In this contribution, we assume for simplicity that the clusters are sufficiently spaced apart so that each of the clusters is free from inter-cluster interference. However, this approach can be readily extended to scenarios where inter-cluster interference is also a pressing issue, in addition to the MUI and IRI. Table 1lists some of the key symbols and variables used throughout this contribution.LetNcdenote the length of the spreading code assigned to each of the K DL users. It is assumed thatNc⩾KL, i.e., the total number of relay stations supporting all of the K DL users should be lower than or equal to the length of the F-domain spreading codes for cooperation strategy 1. Conversely, for cooperation strategy 2, because each of the L relays supports only one DL user, it is assumed thatNc⩾L. Furthermore, letddenote the KLb-length symbol vector transmitted to the KL RSs, with b representing the number of symbols corresponding to the kth user. In this context, the symbol vectordcan be expressed as(1)d=d1T,d2T,…,dKTTwithdk=d¯1T,d¯2T,…,d¯LTT,k=1,2,…Kandd¯1=d¯2=⋯=d¯L, whered¯l=dl1,dl2,…,dlbT. In addition, let the F-domain spreading code corresponding to the lth MS acting as a RS be expressed as(2)cl=1Nc[cl0,cl1,…,cl(Nc-1)]T,l=1,2,…,KLFurthermore, theNcb×bF-domain spread matrix corresponding to the lth RS that forwards the kth DMS’s symbols is given by(3)Cl=diagcl,cl,cl,…,cl=Ib⊗cl,l=1,2,….,KLNow, concentrating on the lth relay corresponding to the kth DMS,Clof (3) is invoked to effect the F-domain spreading. In this context, the F-domain spread signal can be expressed as(4)xl=Cldl,l=1,2,…,KLWhen combining the K DL users, the F-domain spread signal can be expressed as(5)∑l=1KLxl=xAfter TP, multi-carrier modulation is carried out, and the transmitted MC-CDMA signal overNcbsubcarriers can be expressed as(6)s=FPx=FPCdwherePandscorrespond to theNcb×Ncbcomponent preprocessing matrix andNcb-length transmitted vector, respectively. Therefore, theNcblength transmitted vectorsis given by(7)s=s1,s2,…,sNcbTAdditionally, in (6),C=C1,C2,…,CKLis aNcb×KLbcomponent spreading matrix that corresponds to the KL relays. Furthermore, in (6), theNcb×NcbmatrixF, considered to operate the multi-carrier modulation, is given by(8)F=diagexpj2πf1t,expj2πf2t,…,expj2πfNcbtIn a typical CDMA based system, spreading and preprocessing can be carried out jointly to assist the TP [21,22]. Therefore, (6) can be expressed ass=FP‾d. Here,P‾is aNcb×KLbmatrix that jointly implements the preprocessing and spreading, i.e.,P‾=PC.In this contribution, we assume that each of the subcarriers experiences flat fading. Then, the CIR vector connecting the BS and the lth relay supporting the kth user can be expressed as(9)hkl=h1l,h2l,…,hNcblIn the case of a frequency-selective channel,hulcan be modeled as [22](10)hul(t)=∑l=1Lhulδ(t-τl)whereu=1,2,…,NcbandLdenotes the number of paths. Now, whensis transmitted, the received signal at the lth relay corresponding to the kth user can be expressed as(11)ylk=hkls+nwherenrepresents the zero-mean complex Gaussian noise. Here, we assume that the subcarriers are designed to be perfectly orthogonal to each other. Hence [22],(12)fuv=1Ts∫0Tsexpj2πfutexp-j2πfvtdt=1,ifu=v0,ifu≠vIn this context,ylukcan be expressed as(13)yluk=1Ts∫0Tsylkexp-j2πfutdtwhereu=1,2,…,NcbUpon substitutingylkfrom (11) into (13), we have(14)yluk=h̃ulP‾d+nu,k=1,2,…,K,l=1,2,…,KLwhereh̃ul,u=1,2,…,Ncbis devised by making all of the entries of (9) zero, excludinghul. Then, after multi-carrier demodulation, the observation vector at the lth relay can be expressed as(15)ylk=yl1k,yl2k,…,ylNcbkT,k=1,2,…,K;l=1,2,…,KLNow, let us define(16)Hlk=diagh1l,h2l,…,hNcblandn¯lk=nl1k,nl2k,…,nlNcbkTTherefore, the observation vector at the lth relay in the context of the kth user is given by(17)ylk=HlkP‾d+n¯lk,k=1,2,…,K;l=1,2,…,KLHere,n¯lkis the zero-mean complex Gaussian noise vector with a covariance matrixEn¯lkn¯lkH=2σ2INcb. In particular, by invoking (17), the decision variable for b symbols indlcorresponding to the kth user at the lth relay is given by(18)rl=ClTylk=ClTHlkP‾d+ñl,k=1,2,…,K;l=1,2,…,KLwhereñl=ClTn¯lkdenotes the zero-mean complex Gaussian vector with a covariance matrixEñlñlH=2σ2Ib. To carry out the multi-user transmitter preprocessing (MUTP), the decision variables of all of the KL relays corresponding to the K users are grouped into a single KLb-length vectorrgiven by(19)r=r1T,r2T,…,rKLTTwhererl=r1,r2,…,rbT. Hence, in the context of KL relays, the decision variable vector can also be expressed as(20)r=C‾THP¯d+n¨whered=d1T,d2T,…,dKTTdenotes a KLb-length symbol vector of all of the KL relays,C‾=diagC1,C2,…,CKLis aKLNcb×KLbspreading matrix employed by the BS,H=H11T,H22T…,HKLKTTis aKLNcb×Ncbcomponent small scale fading matrix,P‾is aNcb×KLbcomponent preprocessing matrix that includes the power normalization coefficients, which will be addressed in the forthcoming discourse, andn¨=ñ1T,ñ2T,…,ñKLTTwithñl=ñ1,ñ2,…,ñbTis a KLb-length noise vector having zero-mean and a covariance matrixEn¨n¨H=2σ2IKLb.Now, let us consider the operation at the relays. In this work, we consider a decode and forward protocol.Fig. 1a shows cooperation strategy 1. The preprocessing conceived at the BS is capable of completely removing the MUI at the relays, i.e., if the preprocessing matrix is so designed to satisfyC‾THP‾=γ, whereγis aKLb×KLbdiagonal matrix hosting the power control coefficients, then the decision variable vector of (20) can correspondingly be given asr=γd+n¨. Accordingly, it can be stated that the symbols arriving at the relays are MUI free. In addition, in this cooperation strategy, we assume that each of the DMSs is aided byLrelays. This cooperation strategy can be invoked in a scenario where there is a sufficient number of MSs in the vicinity of the desired DMS to aid it. Furthermore, this cooperation strategy not only exploits the non-linear relationship between the propagation distance and pathloss to yield transmit power gains, it also provides diversity gain, which assists in improving the BER performance of the system. Because a cluster of L relays forward the kth user’s symbols, letd¯̂k=d¯̂k1T,d¯̂k2T,…,d¯̂kLTT,k=1,2,…,Kdefine the Lb-length vector, withd¯̂k1=d¯̂k2=…=d¯̂kL, whered¯̂kl=d̂k1l,d̂k2l,…,d̂kblT, that will be transmitted by the L relays to the kth DMS. Here, we assume that each relay employs a unique spreading sequence to spread the kth user’s symbols. Because each relay is only aware of its own channel vector, which connects it with its corresponding DMS, preprocessing is carried out on a per-relay basis. Therefore, after spreading and preprocessing, multi-carrier modulation is carried out and the transmitted MC-CDMA signal overNcbsubcarriers from the lth relay to the kth MS can be expressed as(21)s¯=F‾klP¨kld¯̂klwhereP¨kl=PklCklands¯correspond to theNcb×bcomponent preprocessing matrix andNcb-length transmitted vector, respectively. In this context, the received vector at the kth MS can be expressed as(22)y¯k=h¯klF‾klP¨kld¯̂kl+nk,l=1,2,…,L;k=1,2,…,KAfter multi-carrier demodulation, the observation vector at the kth DMS due to the contribution of its lth relay can be expressed as(23)y¯k=H‾klP¨kld¯̂kl+n¯k,l=1,2,…,L;k=1,2,…,KwhereH‾kl=diaghk1l,hk2l,…,hkNcbl.Finally, the observation vector in the context of the kth MS as a result of transmission from the L relays can be written as(24)y¯k=∑l=1LH‾klP¨kld¯̂kl+n¯k,k=1,2,…,KNow, by invoking the relay-specific spreading code at the DMS, the decision variables of the kth user’s transmitted symbols by the lth relay are formed by performing the correlation operation, which can be expressed as(25)r¯kl=CklTy¯k,l=1,2,…,L;k=1,2,…,KExplicitly, the decision variable of the kth DMS’s symbols due to the contribution from the L relays can be expressed as(26)r¯k=∑l=1LCklTy¯k,k=1,2,…,KFrom the above expression, it is apparent that this cooperation strategy results in the Lth order diversity.Fig. 1b and c illustrate cooperation strategy 2. In this cooperation strategy, we initially assume that the relays are spaced close enough to each other so that IRI at the DMSs is dominant, as shown in Fig. 1b. Additionally, we assume that each of the L relays supports one user. Hence, the total number of relays required to support K users is L, i.e.,L=K. This cooperation strategy is useful in a scenario where there are only a limited number of MSs in the vicinity of the desired DMSs to aid them. Furthermore, this cooperation strategy takes advantage of only the non-linear relationship between the propagation distance and propagation pathloss that contributes to the transmit power gains. Akin to cooperation strategy 1, assuming that the preprocessing matrix completely eliminates the DL-MUI, after despreading and detection, the symbols transmitted by the lth relay to the kth user’s MS can be expressed as(27)d¯̂kl=d̂k1l,d̂k2l,…,d̂kblT,l=1,2,…,L;k=1,2,…,KAfter spreading (27) with the aid of a user-specific spreading code, preprocessing is carried out. The spread and preprocessed symbols are then multi-carrier modulated and transmitted to the kth user’s MS. Then, the received signal at the kth MS from the lth relay can be readily expressed as(28)y¯kl=hklF‾klP¨kld¯̂kl+nkl=1,2,…,L;k=1,2,…,Kwherehklis the channel vector connecting the lth relay corresponding to the kth user and the kth user’s MS,F‾kldenotes the multi-carrier modulation matrix employed by the lth relay to carry out multi-carrier modulation on the kth user’s signal andP¨klrepresents the preprocessing matrix. As there are L relays supporting K users, the kth MS will experience IRI. Consequently, the observation vector at the kth MS can be expressed as(29)y¯k=hklF‾klP¨kld¯̂kl+∑i,j=1;i,j≠lLhkjF‾ijP¨ijd¯̂ji︸IRI+nkl=1,2,…,L;k=1,2,…,KAssuming that the subcarriers employed by the lth relay are designed to be perfectly orthogonal with each other, after multi-carrier demodulation, the received signal on the uth subcarrier corresponding to the kth user from the lth relay can be expressed as(30)y¯kul=h̃kulP¨kld¯̂kl+nkul=1,2,…,L;k=1,2,…,K;u=1,2,…,NcbExplicitly, with the aid of (30), the observation vector at the kth MS due to the lth relay overNcbsubcarriers can be given by(31)y¯k=H‾klP¨kld¯̂kl+n¯kl=1,2,…,L;k=1,2,…,KwhereH‾kl=diaghk1l,hk2l,…,hkNcblandn¯k=n¯k1,n¯k2,…,n¯kNcbT.Subsequent to the multi-carrier demodulation, the kth DMS carries out the single-user detection. To be specific, the kth DMS forms the decision variables for the b symbols ind¯̂klby carrying out the despreading operation with the aid of the spreading sequence employed by the lth relay corresponding to the kth user’s DMS. In this context, the decision variables can be expressed as(32)r¯k=CklTy¯kl=1,2,…,L;k=1,2,…,KConsequently, after hard detection, the symbols in the context of K users can be collected into a single vector of length Kb, given by(33)d¯̂=d¯̂1T,d¯̂2T,…,d¯̂KTTFig. 1d demonstrates cooperation strategy 3. As alluded to earlier, in this cooperation strategy, one relay supports all of the K users randomly distributed in a single cell DL system. This cooperation strategy can be called upon when there is only one relay to support a group of DMSs. Here too, taking advantage of the non-linear relationship between the propagation distance and propagation pathloss can reduce the overall BS transmit power. Because the DL preprocessing matrix completely eliminates the DL-MUI at the relay, the Kb-length symbol vectord¯̂of all of the K DL users at the relay after despreading can be readily expressed as(34)d¯̂=d¯̂1T,d¯̂2T,…,d¯̂KTTThe components ofd¯̂in (34) are then respread with the user-specific spreading code to form the F-domain spreading signal for the K DL users. When combining in the context of K users, the F-domain spread signal can be readily expressed as(35)∑k=1KCkd¯̂k=x¯After TP, multi-carrier modulation is carried out and the transmitted MC-CDMA signal overNcbsubcarriers can be expressed as(36)s¯=F‾PCd¯̂=F¯P¯d¯̂whereP‾ands¯correspond to theNcb×Kbcomponent preprocessing matrix and theNcb-length transmitted symbol vector, respectively. Assuming that the subcarriers experience independent fading, the received signal at the kth MS can be expressed as(37)y¯k=hks¯+n¯k,k=1,2,…,Kwherehk=h1,h2,…,hNcbrepresents the channel vector connecting the relay and the kth MS andn¯kdenotes the zero-mean complex Gaussian noise. When the subcarrier signals are designed to be orthogonal with each other, the received signaly¯kuafter multi-carrier demodulation can be expressed as(38)y¯ku=h̃kuP‾d¯̂+n¯kuwhereh̃ku,u=1,2,…,Ncbis devised by making all of the elements ofhkzero, excepthu. Therefore, after multi-carrier demodulation, the observation vector at the kth user’s MS can be expressed as(39)y¯k=y¯k1,y¯k2,…,y¯kNcbT,k=1,2,…,KDefiningH‾k=diag{hk1,hk2,…,hkNcb}andn¯k=n¯k1,n¯k2,…,n¯kNcbT, the observation vector at the kth MS can also be expressed in matrix form as(40)y¯k=H‾kP‾d¯̂+n¯k,k=1,2,…,KIn the above expression,n¯kis the zero-mean complex Gaussian noise vector with a covariance matrixEn¯kn¯kH=2σ2INcb. The decision variables for the kth user is formed by the correlation operation on (40), which can be expressed as(41)r¯k=CkTy¯k=CkTH‾kP‾d¯̂+ñk,k=1,2,…,Kwhereñk=CkTn¯kdenotes the zero-mean complex Gaussian vector with a covariance matrixEñkñkH=2σ2Ib. Furthermore, in order to carry out MUTP, the decision variables of all of the K users are assembled into a single Kb-length vectorr¯given by(42)r¯=r¯1T,r¯2T,…,r¯KTTThe decision variable of (42) can also be expressed as(43)r¯=C∼TH¯P¯d¯̂+n⃛whereC∼=diagC1,C2,…,CKis aKNcb×Kbcomponent spreading matrix,H‾=H‾1T,H‾2T,…,H‾KTTis aKNcb×Ncbcomponent small scale fading matrix,P‾is aNcb×Kbcomponent preprocessing matrix that includes the power normalization coefficients andn⃛=ñ1T,ñ2T,…,ñKTTis the zero-mean complex Gaussian noise vector with a covariance matrixEn⃛n⃛H=2σ2IKb.In this section, we present the MUTP employed in our work, which is based on the orthogonal subspace approach [23,24]. Because the orthogonal subspace approach results in a zero forcing (ZF) solution [23,24], the ZF-MUTP is derived by satisfying the following conditions∀l∈{1,2,…,KL}(44)ClTHlP‾l=γlandCjTHjP‾l=0for anyj≠lThe preprocessing matrixP‾lcorresponding to the lth relay is aNcb×bmatrix designed to lie in the subspace determined byClTHl, which is orthogonal to theKL-1brank subspace constituted by allCjTHj,forj=1,2,…,KL;j≠l. In other words, the preprocessing matrix is derived with the aid of theNcb×KL-1bCIR matrix associated with the interfering relays. Now, let us defineH¨las the CIR matrix by invoking all of the relays, except the desired relay of the kth DMS. In this context,H¨lcan be expressed as(45)H¨l=H1HC1,…,Hl-1HCl-1,Hl+1HCl+1,…,HKLHCKL,l=1,2,…,KLNow, we form aNcb×bdimensional matrixWl, which can be expressed as [23,24](46)Wl=INcb-H¨lH¨lHH¨l-1H¨lHHlHCl,l=1,2,…,KLHere,Wlis orthogonal toH¨lbecause [24,27](47)H¨lHWl=0andWlHH¨l=0However,(48)ClTHlWl=ClTHlINcb-H¨lH¨lHH¨l-1H¨lHHlHCl≠0,l=1,2,…,KLTherefore, it may be concluded that the power ofHlHClis being projected on the subspace determined byWl. Hence, the preprocessing matrixP‾lcan be defined as [23,24,27](49)P‾l=Wlγl=INcb-H¨lH¨lHH¨l-1H¨lHHlHClγl,l=1,2,…,KLunder the constraintTraceP‾lP‾lH=b. Furthermore, the power normalization coefficientγlin (49) can be expressed as(50)γl=bTraceHlHClClTHlINcb-H¨lH¨lHH¨l-1H¨lH2l=1,2,…,KLFinally, the overall preprocessing matrixP‾, realized based onP‾l, that results in the ZF solution can be formulated as(51)P‾=[P‾1,P‾2,…,P‾KL]whereP‾l,l=1,2,…,KLis defined according to (49). The above addressed preprocessing approach is suitable for implementation at the BS because the BS has the knowledge of all of the CIR vectors connecting it with the KL relays. Furthermore, in cooperation strategy 3, because the relay is aware of all of the CIR vectors connecting it with the K DMSs, the aforesaid preprocessing can also be invoked at the relay to perfectly eliminate the effects of MUI at the DMSs. In contrast, in cooperation strategies 1 and 2, the relays are only aware of the channel vector that connects them with the corresponding DMS. Hence, a simple T-MMSE approach can be invoked to implement the TP at the relays. Correspondingly, the preprocessing matrixP¨klis given by [16](52)P¨kl=HklHCklCklTHkl+σ2INcb-1HklHCkl︸P¨∼klγ¨lwhereγ¨l=bTraceP¨∼klP¨∼klHIn the context of K DL users, for cooperation strategy 2, the preprocessing matrix defined in (49) inverts K number of matrices of dimensionK-1b×K-1b, each of which is for one DL user. Hence, it can be shown that the complexity in computing the preprocessing matrix of (49) is of the order ofOKK-13b3=OK3b3×K-13K2[22]. Further, for the cooperation strategy 1, the complexity can be shown to be of the order ofO(KL(KL-1)3b3). In contrast, the preprocessing matrix defined in (52) needs to compute the inverse of the matrix of dimensionKb×Kb. Therefore, the complexity is typically proportional toOK3b3. Furthermore, cooperation strategy 3 employs the preprocessing based on (49) at the relay that forwards the multi-user signal. Correspondingly, the complexity is of the order ofOK3b3×K-13K2. Therefore, exploiting this preprocessing approach does not provide the implementation advantage, especially at the relay. Furthermore, the achievable BER is also poor compared to the other two strategies.The preprocessing matrices of (49) and (52) require the knowledge of CIRs at the BS and relays, respectively. In a TDD type wireless system, channel reciprocity can be exploited to determine the CIRs knowledge in order to devise the preprocessing matrix. However, in this work, we have assumed FDD type wireless systems, specifically in the context of B channels, and, hence, the CIRs have to be estimated and fed back through feedback channels to the BS from the relays. This is because the frequency separation between the UL and DL channels is typically larger than the coherence bandwidth of the channel. Consequently, the channel reciprocity cannot be exploited to estimate the DL channel from the UL channel in a FDD type system. Therefore, we estimate the CIRs of the B channels at the relays by invoking the pilot assisted channel estimation technique and exploit vector quantization (VQ) [25–28] to quantize the estimated CIRs. The quantized CIRs are then fed back to the BS via dedicated low-rate feedback channels that can exhibit robustness against fading and noise. The vector quantization can be explained as follows.Let us consider a real and continuous valued source vectorχ¯n, which is to be quantized. Here, we refer the source to be either the amplitudes or phases of the CIRs. Let the source vector be defined as a zero-mean stationary ergodic process. Furthermore, let this continuous valued source vector belong to the N-dimensional hyperspace that comprises the DL-CIRs magnitudes or phases, i.e., letχ¯n∈R¯N. The VQ encoder then maps this continuous valued source to a finite precision representationQ¯n∈Q¯M¯, whereQ¯M¯=0,1,2,…,M¯-1denotes theM¯VQ centroids. In other words,Q¯n=ℵ¯χ¯n. Therefore, the VQ encoder’s mapping function can be represented asℵ¯:R¯N→Q¯M¯. Now, let theM¯partitions of the CIR hyperspace be denoted byR¯i=0M¯-1. Each of these partitions has a VQ encoded centroidcb¯ii=0M¯-1such thatcb¯i≅Eχ¯n|Q¯n=i=Eχ¯n|χ¯n∈R¯i. The VQ encoder now associates each of the unquantized sources with the ith cell or region asχ¯i∈R¯i⇒Q¯n=i, where i denotes the index of the VQ encoded centroidcb¯ii=0M¯-1. Thus, the VQ codebook comprisesM¯VQ encoded centroids or codewordscb¯ii=0M¯-1. The codebook is updated with the aid of Lloyd’s algorithm [28], as described below.Let us consider a sufficiently large number of data samples, e.g.,V¯, be generated such thatZ¯=χ¯1,χ¯2,…,χV¯¯. Initially, letting j=1, the initial codebookCB¯j=cb¯0j,cb¯1j,cb¯2j,…,cb¯M¯-1jcan be formulated by randomly choosingM¯values from the data setZ¯. The codebook is updated according to the steps given in Table 2. In the table,d¯(·,·)denotes the Euclidean distance between the arguments.In this contribution, we employ two vectors to vector quantize the phases and amplitudes separately. This is because the phases and amplitudes follow different distributions. To be specific, the former is uniformly distributed, while the latter is Rayleigh distributed [27]. Now, letχ¯ndenote the vector that corresponds to either the phases or magnitudes. Consequently, at the BS, the observation vector whenχ¯nis transmitted through a feedback channel can be expressed as [25](53)r(f)=h(f)χ¯n+n(f)whereh(f)represents the feedback channel gain, which is assumed to be Rayleigh distributed. Furthermore,n(f)in (53) denotes the Gaussian distributed noise vector with zero-mean and a variance 2σ2. Based on the observations of (53),χ¯̂n, the estimate ofχ¯n, that corresponds to either the phases or amplitudes of CIR vectors connecting the BS and RSs is given by [26](54)χ¯̂n=w↔optr(f)wherew↔opt=h(f)Hh(f)h(f)H+σ2-1.In this section, we present the simulation results to demonstrate the BER performance of the relay-aided DL-MC-CDMA system that employs TP based on [23,24,27], which is realized with the aid of PCIRs and vector quantized CIRs at the BS coupled with PCIR-based TP at the RSs. In the context of quantized CIRs, the amplitudes and phases are quantized into 1024 legitimate codewords. The B and R channels are assumed to undergo frequency-selective Rayleigh fading withL=20time domain (T-domain) resolvable paths and Nakagami-m fading, respectively. Specifically, if the fast fading gains of the R channels can be expressed ashkl=αklejθkl,l=1,…,L;k=1,…,K, then the phases{θkl}obey independent uniform distribution in{0,2π}, and{αkl}follow Nakagami-m distribution with the probability density function given by(55)fαkl(y)=2mlmly2ml-1Γ(ml)Ωlexp-mlΩly2,l=0,1,…,L;k=1,2,…,KwhereΓ(·)is the gamma function,mlrepresents the fading parameter of the R channel andΩl=Eαkl2. In our simulations, we exploit the generalized Nakagami-m distribution of (55) to model the different fast fading conditions. That is, in our considered DL system, the B and R channels may experience different fading. To be specific, the distance between a relay and its DMS may be shorter than the distance between the BS and the relays. In this case, the R channels may experience less severe fading than the B channels. Hence, to characterize the less severe fading conditions, we model the channel with Nakagami-m fading with a relatively high value of m. For instance, we may assume that the B channels experience Rayleigh fading that corresponds to Nakagami-m fading with m=1, while the R channels undergo Nakagami-m fading associated withm>1, i.e., in our simulations, we assume m = 2 for Nakagami-m fading. We also assume that the signals transmitted over the DL channels experience pathloss (Lp), which can be expressed as a function of the Transmitter–Receiver distance, i.e.,LpdB(d)=LdBd0+10ηlogd/d0. Here,LdBd0refers to the pathloss measured at a reference distanced0andηdenotes the pathloss exponent. The typical value ofηused in our simulations is 4. Furthermore, it is assumed that the transmission power remains constant before and after TP, i.e.,EP‾d2⩽KLbat the BS andEP¨kld¯̂kl2⩽bat the relays for maintaining constant transmission power before and after preprocessing. The spreading length used in our simulation isNc=64and the number of subcarriers isNcb=256, implying that b=4bits. Hence, each data bit of the users is transmitted overNc=64subcarriers, entailing the highest possible diversity order achievable to be 64. A carrier frequency offset of 222.22Hz, with a subcarrier spacing of 15KHz in accordance with 3GPP standard, is also considered in our simulations. Additionally, we assume that each of the DMSs is supported byL=1,2,6relays.Figs. 2 and 3demonstrate the performance of the considered relay-aided MC-CDMA system in terms of the attainable BER forK=5andK=10, respectively, when the preprocessing is realized based on PCIRs and vector quantized CIRs. From the plots, it is observed that the BER performance significantly improves when the number of relays assisting a DMS increases, especially in the higher SNR regime. However, it is inferred that there is no useful diversity gain in the lower SNR regime. Hence, increasing the number of relays does not assist in achieving the diversity gain in the lower SNR regime, which is witnessed by the exhibition of poor BER performance. Furthermore, it is observed that the m-sequences result in better achievable BER than the random sequences because random sequences suffer more from noise amplification than the m-sequences. Additionally, this performance degradation in terms of the achievable BER when exploiting random sequences is mainly because random sequences exhibit worse cross-correlation properties than the deterministic m-sequences [29–31]. Furthermore, it can be inferred from the results that there exists no error floor for both the m-sequences and random sequences, advocating that the TP is capable of completely suppressing the MUI at the relays and IRI at the DMSs.In Figs. 4 and 5, we elucidate the BER performance of the considered system for two scenarios: (i) dominant MUI and IRI at the RSs and DMSs, respectively, and (ii) dominant MUI and weak IRI at the RSs and DMSs, respectively, forK=5andK=25. Here, we assume that each of the K DL users is supported by one relay and, hence, the total number of relays employed by the considered system is equal to the total number of users supported, i.e.,L=K. From the figures, it is observed that the performance of the system slightly deteriorates when the relays are spaced close enough to each other. This performance deterioration is due to the IRI being dominant in addition to the MUI. However, from Fig. 5, it can be discerned that the performance of the system improves in the context of weak IRI at the DMSs. Furthermore, in both the scenarios, TP is capable of completely eliminating the MUI and IRI operated at the BS and RSs, respectively.In Fig. 6, we show the average BER vs average SNR per bit performance of the relay-aided DL-MC-CDMA system using TP based on PCIRs and vector quantized CIRs feedback at the BS and PCIRs based TP at the RSs when supporting K=5 and 25 DL users. Here, we have considered that a single relay supports all of the K DL users. From the plot, we can observe that, although TP efficiently suppresses the MUI at the relay, the performance of the system in terms of the achievable BER degrades when the number of users to be supported by the DL system increases.In Fig. 7, we illustrate the performance comparison of the three cooperation strategies considered in this contribution. From the results of Fig. 7, we may make the following observations: first, the achievable BER in the case of cooperation strategy 1 (L=2) is better when compared to the other two cooperation strategies. This is because cooperation strategy 1 offers diversity gain in addition to exploiting the non-linear relationship that exists between the propagation distance and propagation pathloss. Additionally, this performance gain is derived mainly because the symbols that are forwarded to the DMSs are MUI free. Second, the attainable BER performance slightly degrades when cooperation strategy 2 is called upon. The reason is that, in the second strategy, only one relay supports each of the DMSs. Hence, this strategy does not offer diversity gain but exploits the non-linear relationship to reduce the distant dependent pathloss. In addition, exploiting the non-linear pathloss behavior yields transmit power gains. Furthermore, the second strategy results in better BER performance when compared to the third strategy because the relays forward only the corresponding DMS’s signals and not the multi-user signals. Third, cooperation strategy 3 results in poor BER performance when compared to the other two strategies. This is because, in this approach, though the signals that arrive at the relay are MUI free, the relay has to forward the multi-user signals to all of the K DL users. In this context, MUI is dominant at each of the K DL users, which leads to BER performance degradation. Nevertheless, similar to the other two strategies, the non-linear relationship is also exploited here, to mitigate the effects of propagation pathloss, which, in turn, translates to transmit power gains. In Fig. 8, we elucidate the impact of codebook size on the BER performance of the considered system. Here, N represents the number of bits employed to quantize the amplitudes and phases of the CIRs. From the figure, it can be seen that the performance corresponding to N=4, 6 and 8 is 6, 3 and 1dB, respectively, worse than that corresponding to N=10 at a BER of 10−3, implying the imperfect removal of MUI. Additionally, from our study and the simulation results of Figs. 2–7, it can be observed that the resultant BER performance of the TP based on the quantized CIRs acquired via feedback channels remains close to that obtained with the PCIRs assumption.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we have investigated the performance of a relay-aided DL-MC-CDMA system with TP based on PCIRs and vector quantized CIRs knowledge for three cooperation strategies. Our study shows that TP operated at the BS and RSs is capable of efficiently suppressing the MUI and IRI at the relays and DMSs, respectively. Hence, low-complexity signal processing is sufficient at each of the relays and DMSs in the context of signal detection. Additionally, because the TP completely eliminates the MUI at the relays, the signals that are forwarded to the DMSs are MUI free. Furthermore, our study elucidates that relay diversity can be achieved after the MUI is mitigated by the TP operated at the BS. Additionally, from our study, it is inferred that the TP based on the quantized CIRs feedback at the BS along with the PCIR-based TP at the relays resulted in almost the same BER performance as that obtained with the PCIRs. Hence, we advocate that the feedback of VQ-CIRs to the BS to formulate the preprocessing that is capable of mitigating the MUI can be considered an efficient approach, particularly in the context of FDD type wireless systems. Our future direction of research will focus on communication scenarios experiencing inter-cluster interference.