@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Sleep-awake energy efficient distributed clustering algorithm for wireless sensor networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new energy efficient routing algorithm has been proposed for cluster based wireless sensor networks.SEED achieves O(1) message exchange complexity per sensor node and time complexity for cluster formation is O(N) for WSN having N sensor nodes.We introduce sub-clustering in SEED to decrease the redundant data transmissions towards the base station.The proposed model utilizes sleep-awake awareness to save the available power.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Heterogenous network,Clustering,Sleep-awake,Sub-cluster,Life time,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Hierarchical clustering technique is an effectual topology control methodology in Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs). This technique is used to increase the life time of the network by reducing the number of transmissions towards the base station. We propose and validate a new routing protocol termed as Sleep-awake Energy Efficient Distributed (SEED) clustering algorithm. We divide the network sensing field into three energy regions because in SEED cluster heads are communicating directly with the base station. The cluster heads of the high energy region are communicating with the base station through a longer distance and paying extra energy cost as compared to the cluster heads of the low energy region. Same application base sensor nodes form sub-clusters to decrease the number of transmissions towards the base station. In every round, one node from these sub-clusters nodes awake and transmit the data and the rest of them sleep to save available resources. We select six criteria to check the performance of our algorithm. The simulation results show that SEED achieves longer network life time and high throughput as compared to the existing clustering protocols.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) can present the distinctive benefits and flexibility with respect to low-power and economical fast deployment for many applications [1]. A WSN can be homogeneous [2] or heterogeneous [3,4]. A homogeneous WSN consists of sensors with similar technical characteristics i.e., initial energy and data rate. Whereas, a heterogeneous WSN consists of sensor nodes having different initial energy and data rate. The nodes in WSNs are usually battery-operated sensor nodes with limited energy resources and replacing the batteries of these sensor nodes is not an option. However, we can use good energy management schemes to save energy of individual nodes as discussed in [5,6]. Designing energy efficient routing protocol is important for prolonging the life time of the network.There are three types of routing protocols namely, direct communication [7], minimum transmission energy [8], and clustering protocols [9–11]. In direct communication, sensor nodes directly communicate with the base station. However, as the size of the network increases, more energy is required for communication, causing the sensor nodes to die very quickly. In case of minimum transmission energy, when the node senses data to transmit, it may find the shortest possible route consisting of several hops to the base station. Optimal routes help to save the energy of the network [12]. However, the nodes closer to the base station forward more packets as compared to the distant nodes. In this way, the power of the sensor nodes closer to the base station will be drained very quickly.Many energy efficient schemes are defined in [13–17], among these schemes cluster based routing is found to be a more energy efficient and scalable way to organize sensor nodes. The whole sensing field is divided into small clusters. In every cluster, a cluster head (CH) is selected on the basis of different parameters, such as energy or distance from the base station. A cluster head is responsible for transmitting any gathered information sensed by the nodes in its cluster. The cluster head may aggregate and diffuse [11] the data before transmitting it to the base station. However, this additional responsibility results in a higher rate of energy drainage for the cluster heads. However, selecting the optimal number of cluster heads is a good way to increase the life time of WSNs [18]. Low Energy Adaptive Clustering Hierarchy (LEACH) is the most popular clustering mechanism [1]. LEACH addresses the problem of energy by probabilistically rotating the role of cluster head among all the nodes. Each node has equal probability to become a cluster head. In this way, low energy sensor nodes are selected as cluster heads and this may degrade the performance of LEACH. Stable Election Protocol [4] introduces a two-level heterogeneous network, which contains two types of nodes i.e., normal nodes and advance nodes. These nodes have different initial energy levels. Rotating epoch of SEP is directly interrelated with the initial energy of sensor nodes. However, SEP performs weakly in multi-level heterogeneous networks.Our contribution: Following the thoughts of clustering which reduces the number of transmissions to prolong the life time of the network. We proposed a routing protocol to reduce redundant transmission towards the base station in application base heterogeneous WSN. Same application base nodes form sub-clusters and in these sub-clusters only one sensor node transmits data and the remaining sensor nodes remain in sleep mode to save energy. The rotating epoch and election probability is correlated with the remaining energy. Only high energy sensor nodes belonging to a region have greater probability to become cluster heads. In this work, the cluster head also avoids the same data coming from different nodes to move towards the base station. In this way, the redundant data is avoided which reduces the consumption of energy. All the nodes are not constantly monitoring the sensing field; only one awake node from a sub-cluster monitors the field in allocated time slots. The remainder of the nodes is in sleep mode to save the resources. The main contributions of the proposed model are summarized as•We divide the network sensing field into three energy regions for even energy distribution.In SEED, the data transmission phase is a longer phase. So, one node can communicate with the base station twice in a round in the data transmission phase.We introduce sub-clustering in SEED to decrease redundant data transmission towards the base station.The propose model utilizes sleep-awake awareness to save the available power.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: We review the previous approaches for WSN clustering in Section 2. In Section 3, we discuss the heterogenous network nodes deployment strategy of SEED algorithm and we describe our proposed routing protocol with the concept of sub-clustering among the sensor nodes with the same applications to reduce the redundant data flow towards the base station. Simulation results for network stability, network throughput, packet drop rate, and cluster head selection are discussed in Section 4. Finally, the conclusion is drawn in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
