@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Randomized fault-tolerant virtual backbone tree to improve the lifetime of wireless sensor networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Need of energy efficient backbone routing for WSNs.FTVBT (virtual backbone tree construction algorithm) proposed to minimize energy consumption.Identifies hotspots, distributes dependents across tree nodes and the distribution is also bounded.Randomized FTVBT elects tree nodes based on a weight function and increases network lifetime.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Backbone construction,Energy consumption,Network lifetime,Routing,Virtual backbone,Wireless sensor network,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Backbone nodes are effective for routing in wireless networks because they reduce the energy consumption in sensor nodes. Packet delivery only occurs through the backbone nodes, which depletes the energy in the backbone drastically. Several backbone construction algorithms, including energy-aware virtual backbone tree, virtual backbone tree algorithm for minimal energy consumption and multihop cluster-based stable backbone tree, fail to form a complete backbone when converting important nodes, such as a cut vertex tree node to a non-backbone node. Thus we propose a fault-tolerant virtual backbone tree (FTVBT) algorithm that addresses all of these conflicts and we give theoretical derivations of the bounds for the probability that a sensor node can connect with the backbone. Furthermore, randomized FTVBT improves FTVBT by redistributing non-tree nodes randomly among all the eligible tree nodes based on their fitness values, thereby decreasing the rapid depletion of energy in a particular node and increasing the network lifetime. We performed simulations in NS2 and analyzed the experimental results.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
At present, wireless sensor networks (WSN) are major research topics in the areas of computer science and telecommunications. Wireless sensors are deployed in a region that needs to be monitored. Large numbers of sensors are deployed randomly, which are low power, low cost, memory/computationally-constrained devices that form a network. These devices transmit the sensing data back to a sink. Some emerging applications of WSNs include environmental monitoring, industrial control, healthcare, military uses, area surveillance and natural habitat monitoring. The sensor nodes consume energy during events such as sensing, computation and communication. From a traditional perspective, the energy consumption by WSNs is dominated by communication rather than by sensing and computation. In most cases, the computational energy cost is insignificant compared with the communication cost [1,2]. The sensing cost can also be assumed to be negligible in some networks.Numerous solutions have been proposed for network life management based on deployment optimization (coverage, connectivity), topology control, energy efficient routing, clustering, data aggregation, mobile sinks/relay nodes and backbone approaches [3–7]. In this study, we propose a multihop routing protocol that performs better than single hop routing. In single hop routing, the energy consumption can be reduced in only a few nodes. Thus, single hop transmission is not suitable in situations where the sink node is not reachable. In these situations, multihop routing protocols are preferred but they require adequate resources to transmit data to the sink, which increases the communication overheads and costs. Addressing these issues by routing through a backbone can reduce the communication overheads and the overall energy consumption of WSNs.In this study, we attempt to increase the lifetime of sensor networks by constructing a virtual backbone tree. Several virtual backbone algorithms have been proposed previously such as energy-aware virtual backbone tree (EVBT), multihop cluster-based stable backbone tree and a virtual backbone tree algorithm for minimal energy consumption (ViTAMin). Constructing the backbone involves selecting tree nodes and each sensor node (non-tree node) is associated with at least one tree node. The tree nodes are selected based on their energy, upstream distance from the parent tree node and the angle between the node and its parent. Mobile sink nodes are considered in the present study. We propose a novel backbone construction and reconstruction algorithm and we explain how the N-of-N lifetime is maintained. Even if only one sensor node exists in a region, the backbone will be maintained by virtual backbones and the mobile sink.Section 2 provides a brief overview of related research and the challenges involved in the formation of a backbone. An overview of the proposed fault-tolerant virtual backbone tree (FTVBT) is provided in Section 3, which also includes the algorithms for backbone construction, reconstruction, the randomized fault-tolerant backbone formation approach, and a discussion of the network lifetime. The simulation results and an evaluation of FTVBT are presented in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 gives our conclusion and some directions for future research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
