@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The design of particle swarm optimization guidance using a line-of-sight evaluation method

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The proposed is an improved PSO guidance law, which is called IPSOG, for a missile.The principle of IPSOG is based on PSO algorithm and parallel navigation.Both Pbest and Gbest that are evaluated by LOS rate should close to zero in IPSOG.Compared the IPSOG with the PSOG, the IPSOG has better guidance performance.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Particle swarm optimization,PSO,Line-of-sight,LOS,Guidance law,Missile,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstractImage, graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Missiles have already become a weapon of air superiority in air combat, and the core part that guides a missile to its target is the guidance law. Therefore, many guidance laws have been examined, including proportional navigation guidance (PNG) [1], augmented PNG (APNG) [2], and optimal guidance [3].In recent years, artificial intelligence (AI) algorithms have been applied in many fields, and the study of intelligent guidance laws has become more popular. For example, Mishra et al. [4] designed two kinds of fuzzy-logic-based homing guidance schemes, and showed them to be better than PNG or APNG. Gonsalves et al. [5] developed a neural network guidance law based on the notion of a neighboring optimal adaptive critic. Younas et al. [6] proposed the near optimum navigation constant for PNG by using a modified genetic algorithm. The particle swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm is one kind of AI algorithm, and is utilized to optimize parameters or gains in intelligent guidance law, such as Sang et al. [7] and Fang et al. [8]. In 2013, Kung et al. [9] proposed the particle swarm optimization guidance (PSOG) to solve the missile guidance problem. The PSOG that utilized the PSO algorithm to search for the optimal lateral acceleration made its debut in the research of missile guidance. Although the PSOG technique had been verified, the follow-up studies found that the miss distance (MD) tended to large. The relative distance was regarded as the objective function in the PSOG. Thus, the lateral acceleration might easily saturate at the final stage.In this paper, we propose the improved PSO guidance (IPSOG) to improve the guidance performance. The IPSOG uses the line-of-sight (LOS) rate as the objective function. The fitness function is then evaluated according to the defined objective function. The seven elemental maneuvers [10] of evasion scenarios are utilized to verify the guidance performance.This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 gives a review of mathematical models and the PSO algorithm; Section 3 describes the details of the IPSOG; Section 4 shows simulation results; finally Section 5 presents concluding remarks.Point-mass models are used for a missile and a target. The equations are employed as follows:Fig. 1shows the aerodynamic vectors of a target. The equations of a target dynamic [10] are as follows:(1)x˙t=Vtcosγtcosψt(2)y˙t=Vtcosγtsinψt(3)z˙t=Vtsinγt(4)V˙t=g(nx−sinγt)(5)γ˙t=gVt(nzcosϕ−cosγt)(6)ψ˙t=gnzsinϕVtcosγtwhere xt, yt, ztare x-, y-, z-coordinates, respectively; Vtis the velocity; γtis the flight path angle; ψtis the azimuth angle; g is the gravity acceleration; nx, nz, and ϕ are three control variables which can be transformed into the thrust force, pitch force, and rolling angle, respectively.Due to the inertia factor, the dynamic delay model for three control variables (nx, nz, and ϕ) are as follows:(7)nx=nxcom1+τts(8)nz=nzcom1+τts(9)ϕ=ωn2s2+2ωnξs+ωn2×ϕcomwhere nxcom, nzcom, and ϕcomare the control commands; τtis a time constant; ωnis a natural frequency; and ξ is a damping ratio.Fig. 2shows the aerodynamic vectors of a missile. The equations of a missile dynamic [11] are as follows:(10)x˙m=Vmcosγmcosψm(11)y˙m=Vmcosγmsinψm(12)z˙m=Vmsinγm(13)V˙m=Tm−Dmmm−gsinγm(14)γ˙m=ap−gcosγmVm(15)ψ˙m=ayVmcosγm(16)a˙p=apcom−apτm(17)a˙y=aycom−ayτm(18)Dm=k1Vm2+k2ap2+ay2Vm2where xm, ym, zmare x-, y-, z-coordinates, respectively; Vmis the velocity; γmis the flight path angle; ψmis the azimuth angle; Tmis the thrust; Dmis the drag; mmis the mass; τmis a time constant; k1 and k2 are the drag coefficients; apcomand aycomare the lateral acceleration of y- and z-axis, respectively.The PSO algorithm that was developed by Kennedy et al. [12] has been widely used to solve the optimization problem. The advantages are as follows: it is simple, there are few parameters, it is easy to implement and it is capable of jumping local optima.The concept of PSO algorithm is based on mimicking the social foraging behavior of a bird swarm. In a typical implementation, it initializes with a swarm of random particles' positions, and searches the optimal solution by updating generations. In iterations, two fitness functions are used to evaluate each particle. The first fitness function outputs the local best fitness values that each particle has achieved so far, and is called Pbest. Other outputs the global best fitness value that any particle in the swarm has achieved so far, and is called Gbest. After fitness function, the swarm uses Eqs. (19)-(20) to update each particle's velocity and position.(19)Vi,j=wVi,j+c1rand1(Pbesti,j−Xi,j)+c2rand2(Gbesti−Xi,j)(20)Xi,j=Xi,j+Vi,jwhere Vi, jis the velocity of a particle; Pbesti, jis a local best position which represents the best experience of individual particle; Gbestiis a global best position which represents the best experience of particle swarm; w is an inertial weight which represents the confidence of the previous velocity; c1 and c2 are two positive constants which represent the confidence for the experience of individual particle and particle swarm; Both rand1 and rand2 are two random values between [0, 1] that avoid falling into the local optimal solution; Xi, jis the position of a particle; the subscript i is a number of generation, and the subscript j is a number of particles.In traditional, classical and modern guidance laws utilized formulas to calculate the lateral acceleration at each time-step when pursuing a target, such as PNG, APNG, optimal guidance and unified optimal proportional guidance law [13]. However, limiting factors, for example if the maneuvering of a target is uncertain and nonlinear, are difficult to solve by formulas.In modern times, AI algorithms have been demonstrated to have the capability to solve uncertain, nonlinear and multi-objective problems in many fields. Especially, the advantages of PSO algorithms are that they are simple, few in parameters, easy to implement and capable of jumping local optima. Therefore, the algorithm is suitable for optimizing the lateral acceleration at each time-step, and the implementation, which is called the PSOG, has been completed and verified. Unfortunately, the PSOG could not satisfy the guidance performance when pursuing a maneuvering target. Therefore, we propose the IPSOG to improve the guidance performance. The IPSOG uses LOS rate as the objective function to provide the optimal lateral acceleration. The inputs of the IPSOG are the states of missile and target, and the outputs are the lateral acceleration. In accordance with the symbol definitions of the PSO algorithm described in the previous section, the block diagram of the IPSOG is shown in Fig. 3and the steps are employed as followsStep 1. Preset w, c1, c2, the maximum generation number imax, global best fitness value GbestJ1, and swarm size n. According to n, preset V1, jand the local best fitness value PbestJ1, j.Step 2. Let particle Xi, jbe a set of the lateral acceleration of the y- and z-axis. Thus, Xi, jis similar to Eq. (21). The X1, jis initialized within random distributions, and is distributed in four-quadrants. The boundary is limited within the acceleration extremum amax.(21)Xi,j=[thelateralaccelerationofthey−axizthelateralaccelerationofthez−axiz]Step 3. Let apcomand aycombe equal to Xi, j, respectively. apcomand aycomare then substituted into Eqs. (10)–(18), and the missile's dynamic is solved by the Runge–Kutta numerical method.Step 4. We already let both missile and target be represented as two point-mass. The LOS can be defined as a virtual straight line between them, and the LOS rate can be defined as the rotation of the angular rate between LOS and horizontal reference line. In the IPSOG, we let the LOS rate be the objective function. Eqs. (22) and (23) of the three-dimensional LOS rate refer to Yang [14], and the objective value Ji, jfor each particle is calculated by Eq. (24).(22)θ˙i,j=xi,jy˙i,j−x˙i,jyi,jxi,j2+yi,j2(23)ϕ˙i,j=z˙i,j(xi,j2+yi,j2+zi,j2)−zi,j(xi,jx˙i,j+yi,jy˙i,j+zi,jz˙i,j)xi,j2+yi,j2(xi,j2+yi,j2+zi,j2)(24)Ji,j=θ˙i,j2+ϕ˙i,j2where x, y, and z are the relative distances of x-, y-, and z-axis between missile and target, respectively;θ˙andϕ˙are the horizontal and vertical LOS rate, respectively.Step 5. The variation of the LOS rate would be varying with the dynamic of the missile and target in the missile guidance problem. Based on the parallel navigation, the lateral acceleration would be better when the LOS is parallel to each other at all times. In other words, the LOS rate equals to zero at each time-step. Thus, the designs of fitness functions in the IPSOG are based on the above, and Eqs. (25) and (26) are the fitness functions.(25)Pbesti,j=Xi,j(min(Ji,j))&PbestJi,j=min(Ji,j),ifPbestJi,j>min(Ji,j)(26)Gbesti=Pbesti,j(min(PbestJi,j))&GbestJi=min(PbestJi,j),ifGbestJi>min(PbestJi,j)where PbestJi, jis a local best fitness value; Pbesti, jis a local best set of the lateral acceleration; GbestJiis a global best fitness value; Gbestiare a global best set of the lateral acceleration.Step 6. Update Vi, jaccording to Eq. (19).Step 7. Update Xi, jaccording to Eq. (20).Step 8. Calculate the standard deviations of Xi, j. If any standard deviation is greater than the tolerance, set i equals i plus one, Xi, jequalsXi−1,j, Vi, jequalsVi−1,j, Pbesti, jequalsPbesti−1,j, PbestJi, jequalsPbestJi−1,j, GbestiequalsGbesti−1, and GbestJiequalsGbestJi−1. The step then returns to Step 3. If all standard deviation are smaller than the convergent tolerance or i equals imax, the output equals Gbesti.This section discusses the details of evasion scenarios, initial conditions, parameter setting, and simulation results.The seven elemental maneuvers [10] of evasion scenarios are utilized to verify the guidance performance as shown in Fig. 4, and the control commands are presented in Table 1.The initial conditions are shown in Table 2. Tm, mm, k1, and k2 refer to Kim et al. [15]. Both τmand τtare set as10−1. ωnand ξ are set as 10 and 0.7, respectively [10]. The amaxis set as ± 25g.The parameters of the IPSOG are set up as follows: n is set as 100; imaxis set as 700; w is set as 0.5; Both c1 and c2 are set as 1; The convergent tolerance is set as10−2; Both X1, jand V1, jare initialized randomly between amax. The effective kill radius is 11.5 m which refers to the R-27 family of missiles, and simulations would stop at minimal MD.The seven elemental maneuvers of evasion scenarios can be divided as linear and nonlinear, and the simulation results are as follows:Figs. 5–7are the linear scenarios, these are the maximum acceleration flight, continued stable flight, and maximum deceleration flight, respectively.In Tables 3–5, the MDs show that both the IPSOG and the PSOG can satisfy the requirement of the kill radius (<11.5 m). Though the MD of the IPSOG is greater than the PSOG in the scenario of the maximum deceleration flight, it only has a slight difference (0.902 m). Thus, the guidance performance of the IPSOG is relatively better than the PSOG in the MD. On the other hand, even though each time-to-go (Tgo) is the same, the mean of the lateral acceleration of the IPSOG are both smaller than the PSOG. Therefore, the trajectories of the PSOG are more curved than the IPSOG. In other words, the IPSOG is straighter than the PSOG as show in Figs. 5–7. Moreover, the lateral acceleration of the PSOG reaches the saturation (amax) at the final stage. On the contrary, the IPSOG keeps a small lateral acceleration. These mean that the PSOG may not be beneficial to pursue a linear maneuvering target, but the IPSOG has spare capacity to pursue a linear maneuvering target. Thus, the guidance performance of the IPSOG is better than the PSOG in the lateral acceleration. In other words, the IPSOG improves the disadvantage of the lateral acceleration. In addition, the trajectories of the IPSOG are similar to the parallel navigation.From the above-mentioned, the IPSOG reveals better guidance performance than the PSOG when pursuing a linear maneuvering target.Figs. 8–11are the nonlinear scenarios, these are the maximum g-force left turn flight, maximum g-force right turn flight, maximum g-force upward flight, and maximum g-force downward flight, respectively.In Tables 6–9, the MD of the IPSOG have made it obvious that the IPSOG is smaller than the PSOG, and only the IPSOG can satisfy the requirement of the kill radius (<11.5 m). These reveal that the IPSOG has higher accuracy than the PSOG. On the other hand, based on the guidance performance in the mean of the lateral acceleration or the final stage, the IPSOG is better than the PSOG. Therefore, the trajectories of the PSOG are more curved than the IPSOG as shown in Figs. 8–11. These mean that the IPSOG has more spare capacity to pursue a nonlinear maneuvering target. Thus, the guidance performance of the IPSOG is better than the PSOG in the lateral acceleration.From the above-mentioned, the IPSOG reveals better guidance performance than the PSOG when pursuing a nonlinear maneuvering target.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
