@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Q-aware: Quality of service based cloud resource provisioning

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Cloud workloads have been analyzed and clustered through workload patterns.QoS metrics of each workload have been identified.We have analyzed the effect of number of workloads and resources on execution time and cost.Proposed technique demonstrates the minimization of cost and time simultaneously while adhering to workload deadline.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cloud metrics,Workload patterns,Resource provisioning,Cloud computing,Cloud workloads,Quality of service,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Provisioning of appropriate resources to cloud workloads depends on the Quality of Service (QoS) requirements of cloud workloads. Based on application requirements of cloud users, discovery and allocation of best workload – resource pair is an optimization problem. Acceptable QoS cannot be provided to the cloud users until provisioning of resources is offered as a crucial ability. QoS parameters based resource provisioning technique is therefore required for efficient provisioning of resources. In this paper, QoS metric based resource provisioning technique has been proposed. The proposed technique caters to provisioned resource distribution and scheduling of resources. The main aim of this research work is to analyze the workloads, categorize them on the basis of common patterns and then provision the cloud workloads before actual scheduling. The experimental results demonstrate that QoS metric based resource provisioning technique is efficient in reducing execution time and execution cost of cloud workloads along with other QoS parameters.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Cloud Computing offers pay per use based services such as Infrastructure as a Service, Platform as a Service and Software as a Service through different Cloud providers [1]. Cloud provider provides the data and computing resources dynamically to the Cloud users based on their requirements over the internet. This is a challenging task to maintain the required Quality of Service (QoS) level of service to fulfill the expectations of Cloud consumers [2]. The complexity of management of resources in Clouds is increasing day by day, so an efficient technique is required for management of resources. To solve this problem, there should be a focus on provisioning before actual scheduling of resources. Resource provisioning is the practice of implementing policies and procedures that improve the efficiency of computing resources in such a way so as to reduce the execution time and cost while considering other QoS parameters like availability, network bandwidth, serviceability and customer confidence level. Further resource scheduling executes workloads to the provisioned heterogeneous resources based on scheduling decisions [3].Presently, provisioning of resources can be done in two ways: On-demand (providing resources quickly to urgent workloads) and long term reservation (reserving resources for later usage). In on-demand criteria, executing too many workloads on a single resource will cause problem of interference which leads to performance degradation and over provisioning. In long term reservation, many resources are in idle state which leads to under provisioning. Under provisioning and over provisioning of resources leads to wastage of time and resources that increases cost [4]. To handle this problem, there is a need of resource provisioning techniques for better management of resources to: (i) identify the Cloud workloads, (ii) analyze the Cloud workloads to find their QoS requirements, (iii) classification of Cloud workloads and (iv) provisioning of resources to the workloads without violation of Service Level Agreement (SLA). The scheduling of resources is generally done on best effort approach, which is not efficient in terms of cost and execution time [5]. For example: we cannot execute the second workload until the first workload completes which leads to the problem of starvation. To solve this problem, we need provisioning of resources before actual resource scheduling, in which second workload will be executed immediately after the completion of first workload. Thus, the waiting time of workload can be reduced to a large extent.The motivation of this research work stems from the challenges in managing and an efficient utilization of the resources. In real life situations, there are many constraints including (i) satisfying the QoS (ii) reducing the resource’s cost, (iii) minimizing the workload’s execution time by meeting the desired deadline described by cloud consumer and (iv) improves customer satisfaction. To provision the resources along with the QoS constraints is the main objective of this research work. This research paper proposes QoS metric based resource provisioning technique in which resources are provisioned by clustering of workloads after assigning weights to quality attributes of each workload. By using the proposed technique, real resource provisioning and resource scheduling can be predicted. Thus the queuing time, over and under-utilization of resource can be avoided or be assuaged.The paper is structured as follows: In Section 2, related work of cloud workloads and resource provisioning has been presented. Workload identification and analysis has been presented in Section 3. In Section 4, Resource provisioning technique has been proposed. Experimental setup and results has been presented in Section 5. In Section 6, conclusions and the future scope have been presented.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
