@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Artist-oriented 3D character posing from 2D strokes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Fast artist-oriented 2D stroke driven incremental refinement of 3D poses.Novel linear-time stroke-chain matching and feature extraction techniques.Modular joint rotation computation preserving joint depth and bone rigidity.Intuitive integration stroke-driven 3D pose design with Inverse Kinematics.Usability study with 22 subjects resulting in high SUS score.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Artist-oriented interface,Sketch-based system,3D character posing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstractfx1

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
3D character posing is a time-consuming process which requires not only artistic talent but also extensive technical ability. In order to achieve high artistic subtlety in the animated motions, current solutions involve separating these tasks between 2D artists and 3D animators. This separation causes an undesired loss in spontaneity and creativity. For this reason, research has recently been focused on developing more artist-oriented interfaces.In this paper we present a novel artist-oriented 3D character posing system. It combines the advent of touch-enabled pen tablets with recent developments in sketch-based interactions, and leads to a more natural 3D character posing interface. We propose a technique which has two main advantages: firstly, our method allows for wider range of people with artistic talent to begin posing characters with complex structures. Secondly, thanks to its intuitive interface, our system helps in reducing the time spent for character animation. The benefits of our approach become even more evident when working with complex characters that have large number of DOFs. Even with state of the art tools, these characters are especially time-consuming to pose since they require very complex rigs with numerous controllers. A 2D drawing-based interface does not only preserve the inherent artistic nature of a 2D artist׳s drawn strokes but also speeds up the process of character posing by allowing a more natural medium for animation.Intuitive: An artist-oriented interface should be intuitive and easy-to-use. The interactions need to closely resemble the 2D artist׳s natural workflow of using a stylus on a 2D surface. The method should not require extensive technical 3D animation knowledge, but instead employ techniques in line with a 2D artist׳s prior experience. Our interface allows 3D character posing through 2D strokes akin to a 2D artist׳s natural working methodology. The techniques used help 2D artists in bringing their 2D artistic talent into 3D character animation.Real-time: One frequently observed practice among artists when drawing involves repeatedly trying multiple strokes in succession until a satisfactory stroke is obtained. The artist usually does not know the final outcome, and hence makes many attempts in order to evaluate and determine the modifications needed to achieve the final stroke [1]. For the artist to use this dialectic approach, the method must fulfill two conditions: it has to be real-time, so that the artist can immediately evaluate the intermediate steps, and it has to be deterministic, so that the results are predictable and repeatable. The technique we present in this paper satisfies both of these requirements.Versatile: An artist-oriented interface should work with any character of any topology with any number of DOFs. The method should not rely on any prior data so that the artist may animate characters for which it is impossible to obtain motion capture data. Furthermore, the algorithm should work with any type of stroke. Our approach is versatile and generic and satisfies all these requirements. It does not impose any requirements on the input character or stroke.Locally refinable: The artist should have full control over the final results. As a consequence, the system should provide mechanisms to animate a character at different levels of granularity. The artist should be able to draw a pose at a coarse level but, at the same time, be able to set a single joint. Our method provides both coarse and fine control. The artist can set an entire chain from head to toe, a partial chain such as a leg or an arm, or a single joint using the same technique.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
