@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Understanding hydrological flow paths in conceptual catchment models using uncertainty and sensitivity analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Groundwater simulations and parameter sensitivities for 3 models were compared.Of 3 models calibrated to total flow, SMART captured groundwater contribution best.Internal flow partitioning varies greatly between models and parameter sets.Independent data on flow paths should inform calibration of conceptual models.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Conceptual catchment modeling,Hydrological processes,Groundwater,Sensitivity analysis,Parameter identification,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Increasing pressures on water quality due to intensification of agriculture have raised demands for environmental modeling to accurately simulate the movement of diffuse (nonpoint) nutrients in catchments. As hydrological flows drive the movement and attenuation of nutrients, individual hydrological processes in models should be adequately represented for water quality simulations to be meaningful. In particular, the relative contribution of groundwater and surface runoff to rivers is of interest, as increasing nitrate concentrations are linked to higher groundwater discharges. These requirements for hydrological modeling of groundwater contribution to rivers initiated this assessment of internal flow path partitioning in conceptual hydrological models.In this study, a variance based sensitivity analysis method was used to investigate parameter sensitivities and flow partitioning of three conceptual hydrological models simulating 31 Irish catchments. We compared two established conceptual hydrological models (NAM and SMARG) and a new model (SMART), produced especially for water quality modeling. In addition to the criteria that assess streamflow simulations, a ratio of average groundwater contribution to total streamflow was calculated for all simulations over the 16 year study period. As observations time-series of groundwater contributions to streamflow are not available at catchment scale, the groundwater ratios were evaluated against average annual indices of base flow and deep groundwater flow for each catchment. The exploration of sensitivities of internal flow path partitioning was a specific focus to assist in evaluating model performances. Results highlight that model structure has a strong impact on simulated groundwater flow paths. Sensitivity to the internal pathways in the models are not reflected in the performance criteria results. This demonstrates that simulated groundwater contribution should be constrained by independent data to ensure results within realistic bounds if such models are to be used in the broader environmental sustainability decision making context.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the natural environment, hydrological flows exist as a continuum throughout the surface landscape and subsurface formations. Hydrological models attempt to capture the dominant processes in a catchment to predict river flows. For practical reasons, this flow continuum is simplified into discrete flow paths to facilitate conceptual understanding, model development and data analysis. The number of flow paths identified can depend on the catchment characteristics and the ultimate objective of the investigation, with two to four flow paths typically representing responses of flow processes reaching a river (e.g. SMARG (Kachroo, 1992; Khan, 1986; Tan and O’Connor, 1996), HBV (Bergström, 1995), NAM (Nielsen and Hansen, 1973) and PRMS (Leavesley et al., 1983, 1996)).The merits of conceptual, parametrically parsimonious, hydrological models for investigating the dominant pathways and processes in catchments have been widely discussed (e.g. Refsgaard and Henriksen, 2004; Sivapalan, 2003). Model parameter identification is a fundamental challenge for hydrologists (Duan et al., 2006; Sivapalan, 2003). The presence of parameter interactions in conceptual rainfall–runoff (CRR) models can make a priori parameter prediction methods unreliable (Wagener and Wheater, 2006). Ideally, a model should be parametrically parsimonious while still capturing the dominant processes of the catchment with limited parameter interactions. Many hydrological models have been developed and used for decades for both research and operational hydrology. However, new model structures are still being developed to incorporate new conceptual understanding of specific catchment processes and places (Beven, 1999), and to facilitate the demands of new pressures on water resources, including nutrient enrichment (Futter et al., 2014).There is a growing body of literature investigating model structure uncertainty (Breuer et al., 2009; Clark et al., 2008; Gupta et al., 2012; Kavetski and Fenicia, 2011; Wagener et al., 2001). The focus is increasingly turning to the internal movement of water within these conceptual models to investigate if each of the simulated processes contributing to the total flows are realistic (e.g. Fenicia et al., 2011; Kokkonen and Jakeman, 2001). This hydrological partitioning is particularly important when coupling flow simulations with water quality, as the flow path can have a significant effect on solute transport and attenuation (Futter et al., 2014; Medici et al., 2012). Typically, particulate phosphorus is delivered via overland flow (Jordan et al., 2005). Nitrate is typically delivered to streams via subsurface pathways, with links between increasing nitrate concentrations and groundwater contributions (Tesoriero et al., 2009).Sensitivity analysis (SA) is “the principal evaluation tool for characterizing the most and least important sources of uncertainty in environmental models” (U.S.EPA, 2009). The central role of sensitivity analysis for testing and implementing environmental models is widely noted (Refsgaard et al., 2007; U.S.EPA, 2009). Sensitivity analysis of parameters of water quality models has been undertaken using one-at-a time sensitivity analysis (e.g. Morris, 1991) with Latin Hypercube Sampling, for example, for simulating dissolved oxygen with the ESWAT model (Vandenberghe et al., 2001) and nitrogen with the INCA-N model (Rankinen et al., 2013), or other Monte Carlo methods (e.g. McIntyre et al., 2005; Sánchez-Canales et al., 2015). More recently, variance based sensitivity methods have been employed for the parameters of SWAT (Nossent et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 2013).Variance based sensitivity analysis (e.g. Sobol, 2001) is recommended as a superior method for which the computational effort is not prohibitive (Saltelli and Annoni, 2010; Tang et al., 2007; U.S.EPA, 2009). For non-linear conceptual hydrological models such as those investigated in this study, variance based methods are ideal to investigate the parameter sensitivities and interactions in the global parameter space (e.g. O’Loughlin et al., 2013; van Werkhoven et al., 2008, 2009; Zhan et al., 2013).The aim of the study was to identify a suitable hydrological model that can represent the internal flow paths in Irish catchments. In this paper, a new model that was developed with a focus on sub-surface flow paths, SMART, is compared with two well-established conceptual models, NAM and SMARG. The parameters and internal flow paths the three models are compared using (i) an uncertainty analysis and (ii) a variance based sensitivity analysis method. The analysis is carried out on multiple metrics of the three models simulating a 16 year period in 31 Irish catchments.The majority of Ireland's area (70,000km2) has central, gently undulating lowlands of elevations generally less than 150m above sea level, with areas of higher elevations near coasts. Annual rainfall varies from in excess of 3000mm in the western mountains to less than 800mm along the east coast. Mean annual temperatures range between 9°C and 10°C.The 31 study catchments (Fig. 1,Table 1) were selected on the basis of having good quality meteorological and hydrometric data available for the 16 year study period beginning from 1 January 1990. The chosen catchments cover over 35% of the country and represent a variety of meteorological and geological conditions across Ireland, with catchment areas ranging from 151km2 to 2460km2.Meteorological data consisted of daily rainfall and potential evapotranspiration values obtained from the Irish meteorology office, Met Éireann. The catchment-area averaged rainfall was calculated using the Thiessen method, with each catchment using data from at least two precipitation stations and the largest catchment (Boyne) containing 13 stations. Annual average rainfall (AAR) ranges from 820mm in the Ryewater to 1897mm in the Flesk with an overall average of 1189mm. Potential evapotranspiration was obtained from ten stations distributed over the study area, with data from the nearest station selected for each catchment and assumed to be spatially uniform.Hydrometric data for each catchment consisted of daily mean flows originating from the Irish Office of Public Works (OPW) and the Irish Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Periods within the 16 years of the study with missing flow data at the catchment outlet were not included in the analysis. Of the 31 catchments, four have missing flow data for over 25% of the study period, with the majority having less than 10% missing values (Table 1).Groundwater is the part of the sub-surface water that is in the saturated zone, which typically flows through aquifers, although it can expand with increasing moisture conditions to include flow through the subsoils and soils. Two indices representing groundwater flow are used in this study to indicate proportion of groundwater contributing to streamflow in catchments:1.The groundwater recharge coefficient (ReCo) is calculated from the Geological Survey of Ireland (GSI) groundwater recharge map (Hunter Williams et al., 2013), and does not incorporate any streamflow time-series. ReCo represents the deep groundwater resource in a catchment. The main hydrogeological properties used to generate the map were soil drainage properties, subsoil permeability and subsoil thickness. For example, groundwater flow is predicted as low in areas overlain by thick, low permeability clay, and where low permeability aquifers are not able to accept percolating waters. ReCo is calculated as the predicted annual groundwater recharge (mm) as a percentage of the annual effective rainfall (mm).The Base Flow Index (BFI) is a measure of the proportion of streamflow that is drawn from natural storages in the catchment. It was calculated from streamflow time-series by the Office of Public Works (OPW) using the 5-day minima method (Institute of Hydrology, 1980). BFI is greater than the recharge coefficient as it can include flow through soils and subsoils.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
For coupled water quantity and water quality modeling, a hydrological model is required that can capture both the total flows and the groundwater contributions to streamflow. A comparison of results from Monte Carlo simulations of 31 study catchments for the NAM, SMARG and SMART models highlight that the relative contribution of groundwater depends on both the model structure and the catchment characteristics. Results showed that the new SMART model was superior to the two established models, NAM and SMARG, at representing both the total streamflow and the internal flow paths of the 31 Irish study catchments.The SMART model development was influenced by the favorable aspects of the SMARG and NAM structures to enhance model parameter identification while maintaining a structure that can properly identify overland, interflow, upper and lower groundwater flow as discrete flow paths contributing to streamflow. Results from Sobol's sensitivity method confirmed that the SMART model development reduced the number of poorly identifiable parameters, compared to the SMARG model.Internal flow partitioning varies greatly between models and, to varying degrees, between behavioral parameter sets for each model. This study illustrated this by comparing the simulated annual groundwater contributions to streamflow with additional independent information, in the form of groundwater flow indices. For studies interested coupling water quality and hydrological simulations, it is recommended that an appropriate model structure is selected and, where available, additional information on plausible groundwater flow contributions is incorporated into model calibration.