@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Color-aware surface registration

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Using color and geometric to ﬁnd correspondences in both rigid and non-rigid cases.Using color when determining the transformation/deformation in aligning surfaces.Proving our algorithm’s effectiveness when aligning richly textured surfaces.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Surface registration,Textures,Color aware,MeshHOG,Gabor filter,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstractUsing rigid and non-rigid registration to correct misalignments in geometry and texture. Two input textured surfaces (a) are captured by RGB-D cameras; the camera configuration provides initial alignment (b). Successive rigid (c) and non-rigid (d) steps improve it, giving a final surface with high-quality textures

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Reconstructing 3D objects from multiple scans taken from different viewpoints is a classical problem. A fundamental step in this task is surface registration, in which geometric data in local coordinate systems are aligned to a global coordinate system. Registration involves two intertwined problems: establishing correct correspondences between points on different surfaces, and finding a suitable spatial transformation or deformation that puts these surfaces into alignment. This is a computationally expensive task; most methods iteratively optimize correspondences and transformations alternately.Surface registration has made substantial progress, and existing methods perform quite well, even in challenging cases with little overlap, noise and outliers. However, many methods formulate registration as an optimization problem based on geometric errors, and only use geometric information for finding correspondences and transformations. Such methods work well with textureless surfaces (in this paper, texture refers to surface coloring, not shape detail). However, recently developed low-cost RGB-depth (RGB-D) acquisition devices such as the Microsoft Kinect permit efficient and cheap capture of textured surfaces, leading to many novel applications such as clothed 3D human body reconstruction. Often, the color information has greater detail than the geometric information, so registration based on geometry alone can lead to poor results in which the textures are not well aligned. Worse still, texture misalignments are typically much more noticeable to the eye than geometric misalignments.To overcome this problem, we present a novel color-aware registration algorithm that produces high-quality registration of textured surfaces. Our method can handle both rigid and non-rigid alignment: even if scans are supposed to be rigidly related, non-rigid alignment may be needed to correct for inaccurately determined camera intrinsic parameters, to allow for lens distortion, or to rectify small geometric changes (e.g. altered wrinkles in clothing when a human subject has moved slightly between successive scans).Our first contribution is to use color information as well as geometric information to robustly find correspondences, in both rigid and non-rigid cases. We filter out incorrect vertex correspondences by using a combination of color, texture and geometric measures, and further improve pruning by rejecting correspondences which are not mutually consistent. Our second contribution is to also take color into account when using optimization to find the transformation or deformation needed for surface alignment.We experimentally evaluate our color-aware registration algorithm using real scans, demonstrating the effectiveness of our algorithm when the subjects have richly textured clothing. We also compare our algorithm with other state-of-the-art methods using both real scans and a public dataset, showing the superiority of our method. While we have mainly tested the algorithm on our own data, we believe it to be generally useful, as identical problems are likely to arise in other RGB-D capture systems when capturing subjects with rich color textures.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We have proposed a novel algorithm to register 3D surfaces with detailed textures. It is distinctive in use of two color descriptors to improve the finding of corresponding vertex pairs. Color is also taken into account when computing the transformation (in the rigid case) or deformation needed to bring the surfaces into alignment (in the non-rigid case). In both cases, our experiments show that our method can accurately align surfaces with detailed textures, outperforming earlier approaches. The descriptors we currently use are based on either color texture or geometry. In the future, we hope to directly combine color and intrinsic geometry which could potentially provide a more effective joint descriptor for registration. Our current approach registers two scans. Applying our method sequentially to multiple scans may not produce ideal results as registration errors can accumulate. We wish in future to extend the method to multiple scans using ideas such as group registration.