@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Automatic reconstruction of parametric building models from indoor point clouds

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Reconstruction of high-level, parametric building models from indoor scans.Goes beyond mere surface reconstruction of previous reconstruction methods.Plausible configuration of walls determined by means of global optimization.Enables intuitive editing on level of building elements, e.g. moving whole walls.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Indoor scene reconstruction,Point cloud processing,Parametric models,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Digital 3D building models are increasingly used for diverse tasks in architecture and design such as construction planning, visualization, navigation, simulation, facility management, renovation, and retrofitting. Especially for legacy buildings, suitable models are usually not available from the initial planning. Point cloud measurements are often used as a starting point for generating 3D models in architectural software. But despite fast scanning devices and modern software, the generation of models from scratch still are largely manual and time-consuming tasks which make automatic reconstruction methods highly desirable.Reconstruction of indoor environments poses specific challenges due to complex room layouts, clutter and occlusions. Furthermore, planning and maintenance tasks often require models which give deeper insight into a building׳s structure on the level of building elements such as walls, and their relations like wall connectivity. This enables high-level editing for prototyping planned changes and simulations requiring information like room neighborhood or wall thickness. While previous reconstruction methods are able to faithfully recover partially observed surfaces from indoor point clouds and generate accurate boundary representations in the form of mesh models, a plausible decomposition into parametric, globally interrelated, volumetric building elements yet remained an open challenge. Existing approaches either represent walls, floors and ceilings as sets of unconnected planar structures detected in the point cloud [13,1,15,21,7] (Fig. 1(a)), or as collections of closed 3D boundaries of either the whole building [12], or separate rooms [4,19,18,8] (Fig. 1(b)). While the method in [20] reconstructs volumetric walls, their thickness is defined manually instead of being estimated from the input data.To overcome the limitations of previous approaches, we propose a novel reconstruction method in which the representation of buildings using parametric, interrelated, volumetric elements (Fig. 1(c)) is an integral component. Our approach automatically reconstructs walls between adjacent rooms from opposite wall surfaces observed in the input data while simultaneously taking into account globally plausible connectivity of all elements. Together with a faithful estimation of wall thickness, the result is a high-level editable model of volumetric wall elements. The reconstruction is formulated as an energy minimization problem which simultaneously optimizes costs for assigning rooms to areal regions of the building, and costs for separating adjacent rooms by volumetric wall elements. In contrast to previous approaches, this has the advantage that reasonable binary costs for the assignment of pairs of room labels to adjacent areal regions of the building – and thus the selection of suitable wall elements – is directly incorporated into the global optimization. To make our method robust against large-scale clutter outside the building, outliers are automatically filtered prior to reconstruction. Finally, doors and windows are detected, classified and assigned to the respective wall elements to further enrich the model. Our evaluation using various real-world indoor scans shows that our method rapidly provides models which can be used for e.g. planning of retrofitting, especially since our method requires little or no parameter adjustment.Applications: The distinguishing feature of our approach is that it directly captures important properties and relations of building elements. Since architectural Building Information Modeling (BIM) formats (e.g. Industry Foundation Classes, IFC) are based on similar relational paradigms, exporting our results to architectural software is straight forward. This enables a whole range of processing and analysis tasks in industry-standard software. We exemplify some applications for e.g. planning of retrofitting in Fig. 2which can directly be implemented using our results: since the incidence and adjacency relations of walls and rooms are inherently known, selecting e.g. all walls enclosing a room or manipulating whole walls while maintaining overall room topology is easily possible (Fig. 2(a)). This allows for quick, high-level prototyping of changes on the level of semantically meaningful construction element groups. The available information also enables more complex queries for e.g. the subset of wall elements that are simultaneously incident to two adjacent rooms (Fig. 2(b)). Together with directly available properties like wall thickness, openings, room and wall areas, this provides important information for performing acoustic or thermal simulations. The global connectivity information further allows us to perform pathfinding in the whole building story (Fig. 2(c)) for e.g. simulating and optimizing escape routes.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
