@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Dehydration of core/shell fruits

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A unified physically-based approach for modeling the deformation in a general dehydration process.A nonlinear finite element method to simulate the dehydration-induced morphological transformation.Simple parameters based on the geometry and material of the fruits to control the evolution of surface patterns.A looking-up table for efficient simulation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Dehydration,Buckling and wrinkling,Computer animation,Core/shell fruits,Morphological transformation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A core/shell fruit consists of a surface thin exocarp, a middle thick sarcocarp and a central hard stone. On the surface of some dehydrated core/shell fruits, such as jujubes, wolfberries, raisins, etc., rough and undulating patterns can be noticed comparing with their fresh states. The dehydration process is often related to a dramatic morphological transformation from an initial smooth and full configuration to a final rough one with many random, intricate and reticular undulations, as shown in Fig. 2 for the morphological evolution of a jujube at different dehydrated stages. To model such patterns in animations or movies seems to be a big challenge for an artist. On one hand, the artist can manually add the complicated details to a fruit model through classical texture mapping techniques (normal mapping or displacement mapping). However, it seems difficult, even for an experienced artist, to model the surface pattern evolution for an arbitrary realistic fruit using an empirical mathematical tool, since the buckles may merge together to a bigger one or divide into smaller ones during dehydration. On the other hand, the data driven methods rely on carefully captured images and measurements [1] and need to build up a mathematical model by studying the dehydration process of real fruits. However, the buckling morphology in each fruit may differ from each other because of the differences in their geometry and material. Also, it is an expensive and labor intensive work to collect morphological data via experiments.In animation production, physically-based methods have been proven to be very successful in simulating the phenomena, such as fire [2], fluid [3] and, even fruit senescence [4]. In the physical view, dehydration is related to many complex processes, such as water transport, evaporation and material remodeling, and the mechanism for inducing the final morphology roots from the local material instabilities. Comparing with traditional instability problems, which are mostly induced by mechanical loadings, the dehydration-induced buckling should be attributed to the internal volume shrinkage due to the water loss. So the volumetric growth theory developed in recent years, which aims to handle the deformation and stress for solids with a growing mass, could be adopted to model the phenomena. The related work will be briefly reviewed in the next section. Following the idea in the growth mechanics, a general continuum theory aiming to characterize morphogenesis of dehydrated core/shell fruits is elaborated and the corresponding FE model is also introduced with aim to simulate the dehydration-induced morphological transition for general core/shell fruits. The model offers the users several parameters to control the shape and material of the core/shell fruits, such as the material ratio, the exocarp thickness, the stone size and the overall shape parameters. The parameter effects on the final buckling patterns are also summarized from a broad range of surface deformations. An artist could adjust the above mentioned physical parameters to control the surface patterns of dehydrated fruits. Experiments on several kinds of fruits, such as jujubes, wolfberries, raisins and plums, demonstrate the visual accuracy of the simulation.Fig. 1 shows a preview of the results.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The morphological evolution of core/shell fruit in dehydration is a complex mechanical process. Due to the irregular distribution of surface buckles and their complicated evolution over time, dehydration induced morphologies are difficult to predict in an empirical way. This paper presents a unified numerical framework to simulate the morphological evolution of general core/shell dehydrated fruits based on a physically-based continuum model. The method is based on the multiplicative decomposition of the deformation into a dehydration-induced part and an elastic part, which allows to prescribe the dehydration deformation conveniently. The model is realized in the framework of the finite element method by an analogy between the deformation induced by dehydration and thermal expansion, which is proved to be efficient to generate rich buckling and wrinkling patterns and avoids a large amount of computation in the direct simulations. The effects of various parameters, such as the shear modulus ratio, the exocarp thickness, the stone size and the overall shape, on the final morphologies are investigated. The morphological evolutions for some realistic fruits such as jujubes, wolfberries, raisins and plums, are also given, which demonstrates the efficacy of the model. The method also works for other fruits and vegetables, such as potatoes, bananas, etc., only if their geometrical and material parameters are appropriately defined.In addition, other physical and/or chemical factors, such as light, humidity, pressure etc. could also be introduced in the model if their influence on the dehydration deformationϑis clarified. For example, a fruit will show faster dehydration speed and loss of more water (i.e., a smallerϑ) in the environment with strong light than that in the dark condition, which means thatϑis inversely proportional to the illumination intensity. Similarly, the effects of other factors onϑcould also be built according to the experience or experiment.