@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
SlidAR: A 3D positioning method for SLAM-based handheld augmented reality

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The correct in-situ 3D positioning of virtual objects with HAR is fundamental.We developed a 3D positioning method for SLAM-based handheld AR.We evaluated our method against a conventional device-centric method.Our method was significantly better in objective and subjective measurements.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Handheld augmented reality,3D manipulation,3D positioning,SLAM,User evaluation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
AR refers to a combination of real world and virtual computer-generated objects where virtual objects are registered in 3D and can be interacted with real time [1]. HAR means AR on handheld devices such as smartphones, tablet computers, and ultra-mobile computers. The fast technical advancement of handheld devices has increased the interest of HAR among researchers and developers [2]. A vast amount of AR applications already exist for various handheld devices [3].Currently, HAR provides the best means to introduce AR to the mass consumer market due to the widespread use of suitable handheld devices [4]. However, many of the existing HAR applications are not considered very practical due to insufficient functionality and they do not fully answer to the needs of the users [5,6]. Many design and technical challenges still remain and easy in-situ AR content creation is one of them.In order for HAR to become widely accepted, the users must be able to create AR contents by positioning virtual objects in the real environment [7,8]. Furthermore, the potential HAR users want to create AR contents in various indoor and outdoor environments [9]. The basic 3D manipulation [10] of virtual objects is fundamental in HAR content creation and 3D positioning is the first subtask of virtual object manipulation.HAR systems often utilize AR markers to track the environment, but the use of markers can be impractical or restricted in many use environments. Markerless tracking technologies, such as SLAM, track the environment without the need for adding any physical objects to the environment. In order to enable the 3D positioning of virtual objects, the markerless tracking based HAR system needs to reconstruct a 3D map of the environment. However, due to the insufficient processing capabilities of modern handheld devices and the vast amount of possible use environments, the correct 3D mapping of the environment might not always be possible. This can make the accurate 3D positioning of virtual objects very difficult.In this paper, we present a SLAM-based HAR 3D positioning method called SlidAR (Fig. 1) that uses 3D ray-casting and epipolar geometry. This method enables accurate 3D positioning of virtual objects to the real environment, which 3D structure is not correctly mapped by the HAR system. The initial position is determined by tapping to the representation of the real environment on the handheld device׳s display. A ray is cast from the device׳s camera to the tapped initial position. The object׳s position can then be adjusted along the epipolar line. SlidAR does not use virtual depth cues and it also enables the positioning of virtual objects in mid-air. We have also implemented another SLAM-based 3D positioning method called HoldAR, which is similar the device-centric method first introduced by Henrysson et al. [11]. In HoldAR, a virtual object can be freely positioned by fixing it׳s position to the handheld device and physically moving the device. Virtual depth cues are displayed on a ground plane.We conducted a user experiment to evaluate the efficiency of SlidAR against HoldAR. We asked the participants to position virtual objects to the real environment. The results showed that SlidAR was significantly faster and required significantly less device movement. The subjective feedback on SlidAR was also rated significantly higher. Although not significant, we observed that the positioning accuracy was also higher when using SlidAR.The main contribution of this paper is the SlidAR 3D positioning method for SLAM-based HAR systems. SlidAR does not require special hardware and it could be implemented to a vast variety of consumer handheld devices suitable for AR. Even though the method is developed for SLAM, it can be applied to marker-based HAR and it can be useful in any scenario where accurate 3D positioning of virtual objects is required. We proved the efficiency of SlidAR in a user experiment and we believe this is the first HAR 3D positioning experiment to have virtual objects being associated accurately to real world objects. The insights acquired from our experiment can be helpful in the design of future HAR systems and user experiments.The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Related work is discussed in Section 2. Section 3 describes the details of the two positioning methods we used in the experiment. Sections 4 and 5 explain the design of our experiment and the results, respectively. Finally, the results are discussed in Section 6 and future work in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We have developed SlidAR, a positioning method for SLAM-based HAR systems. SlidAR utilizes ray-casting and epipolar geometry. We have evaluated and proven it to be more efficient against a conventional device-centric positioning method that we call HoldAR. The results showed us that SlidAR was significantly faster, required significantly less device movement, and had significantly better subjective feedback compared to HoldAR method. SlidAR method also had higher positioning accuracy, although not significantly. The experiment confirmed the efficiency of SlidAR method.For the future work, we can improve the initial positioning phase of SlidAR by adding the possibility to freeze the AR view. The visualization of the epipolar line can be improved by making it׳s direction more easier to understand. We should also consider techniques that allow the object׳s position to be translated away from the epipolar line. The next step in evaluation of SlidAR method is to use practical application driven scenarios that could possibly reveal new findings. We should also evaluate what is the required level of positioning accuracy for different types of real world objects in order for users׳ to perceive the spatial connection between the real object and the virtual annotation correctly.