@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A GIS based spatially-explicit sensitivity and uncertainty analysis approach for multi-criteria decision analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Sensitivity and uncertainty analysis for GIS-Multicriteria Decision Making is underdeveloped in GIScience.Uncertainties associated with GIS-Multicriteria for landslide susceptibility mapping are systematically explored.We develop a novel spatially-explicit approach and combine it with Dempster–Shafer Theory.The results demonstrate that the accuracy of GIS-Multicriteria can be improved through this spatially-explicit approach.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
MCDA,Uncertainty and sensitivity analysis,Spatial Multiple Criteria Evaluation,Dempster–Shafer theory,Tabriz basin,Iran,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
GIS multicriteria decision analysis (MCDA) techniques are increasingly used in landslide susceptibility mapping for the prediction of future hazards, land use planning, as well as for hazard preparedness. However, the uncertainties associated with MCDA techniques are inevitable and model outcomes are open to multiple types of uncertainty. In this paper, we present a systematic approach to uncertainty and sensitivity analysis. We access the uncertainty of landslide susceptibility maps produced with GIS-MCDA techniques. A new spatially-explicit approach and Dempster–Shafer Theory (DST) are employed to assess the uncertainties associated with two MCDA techniques, namely Analytical Hierarchical Process (AHP) and Ordered Weighted Averaging (OWA) implemented in GIS. The methodology is composed of three different phases. First, weights are computed to express the relative importance of factors (criteria) for landslide susceptibility. Next, the uncertainty and sensitivity of landslide susceptibility is analyzed as a function of weights using Monte Carlo Simulation and Global Sensitivity Analysis. Finally, the results are validated using a landslide inventory database and by applying DST. The comparisons of the obtained landslide susceptibility maps of both MCDA techniques with known landslides show that the AHP outperforms OWA. However, the OWA-generated landslide susceptibility map shows lower uncertainty than the AHP-generated map. The results demonstrate that further improvement in the accuracy of GIS-based MCDA can be achieved by employing an integrated uncertainty–sensitivity analysis approach, in which the uncertainty of landslide susceptibility model is decomposed and attributed to model's criteria weights.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
GIS based multicriteria decision analysis (MCDA) is primarily concerned with combining the information from several criteria to form a single index of evaluation (Chen et al., 2010a). The GIS-MCDA methods provide a framework for handling different views and compositions of the elements of a complex decision problem, and for organizing them into a hierarchical structure, as well as studying the relationships among the components of the problem (Malczewski, 2006). MCDA procedures utilizing geographical data consider the user's preferences, manipulate the data, and combine preferences with the data according to specified decision rules (Malczewski, 2004; Rahman et al., 2012). MCDA involves techniques, which have received increased interest for their capabilities of solving spatial decision problems and supporting analysts in addressing complex problems involving conflicting criteria (Kordi and Brandt, 2012). The integration of MCDA techniques with GIS has considerably advanced the traditional data combination approaches for Landslide Susceptibility Mapping (LSM). In analyzing natural hazards with GIS-MCDA, the LSM is considered to be one of the important application in domains (Feizizadeh and Blaschke, 2013a). A number of direct and indirect models have been developed in order to assess landslide susceptibility, and these maps were produced by using deterministic and non-deterministic (probabilistic) models (Yilmaz, 2010). In creating a susceptibility map, the direct mapping method involves identifying regions susceptible to slope failure, by comparing detailed geological and geomorphological properties with those of landslide sites. The indirect mapping method integrates many factors and weighs the importance of different variables using subjective decision-making rules, based on the experience of the geoscientists involved (Lei and Jing-feng, 2006; Feizizadeh and Blaschke, 2013a). Among the proposed methods, GIS-MCDA provides a rich collection of techniques and procedures for structuring decision problems and designing, evaluating and prioritizing alternative decisions for LSM. Thus, GIS-MCDA methods are increasingly being used in LSM for the prediction of future hazards, decision making, as well as hazard mitigation plans (Feizizadeh and Blaschke, 2013a). However, due to the multiple approach nature of natural hazard modeling (e.g LSM) the problems related to natural hazards cannot usually be handled without considering inherent uncertainty (Nefeslioglu et al., 2013). Such uncertainties may have significant impacts on the results, which may sometimes lead to inaccurate outcomes and undesirable consequences (Feizizadeh and Blaschke, 2013b).GIS-MCDA based LSM methods are often applied without any indication of error or conﬁdence in the results (Feizizadeh and Blaschke, 2012; Feizizadeh et al., 2012; Feizizadeh and Blaschke, 2013a). The uncertainties associated with MCDA techniques applied to LSM are due to incomplete and inaccurate data on landslide contributing factors, rules governing how the input data are combined into landslide susceptibility values and parameters used in the combination rules (Ascough et al., 2008). In the context of GIS-MCDA uncertainty, there is a strong relationship between data uncertainty and parameter uncertainty, since model parameters are obtained directly from measured data, or indirectly by calibration (Ascough et al., 2008). Due to a potentially large number of parameters and the heterogeneity of data sources, the uncertainty of the results is difficult to quantify. Even small changes in data and parameter values may have a signiﬁcant impact on the distribution of landslide susceptibility values. Therefore, MCDA techniques in general, and in the domain of hazard mapping in particular, should be thoroughly evaluated to ensure their robustness under a wide range of possible conditions, where robustness is defined as a minimal response of model outcome to changing inputs (Ligmann-Zielinska and Jankowski, 2012).In an effort to address the uncertainty associated with data and parameters of GIS-MCDA we use a unified approach to uncertainty and sensitivity analysis, in which uncertainty analysis quantifies outcome variability, given model input uncertainties, followed by sensitivity analysis that subdivides this variability and apportions it to the uncertain inputs. Conceptually, uncertainty and sensitivity analysis represent two different, albeit complementary approaches to quantify the uncertainty of the model (Tenerelli and Carver, 2012). Uncertainty analysis: (a) helps to reduce uncertainties in how a MCDA method operates, and (b) parameterizes the stability of its outputs. This is typically achieved by introducing small changes to speciﬁc input parameters and evaluating the outcomes (Crosetto et al., 2000; Eastman, 2003). This process provides the possibility of measuring the level of conﬁdence in decision making and in the decision maker (Chen et al., 2011). Uncertainty analysis aims to identify and quantify confidence intervals for a model output by assessing the response to uncertainties in the model inputs (Crosetto et al., 2000). Meanwhile sensitivity analysis technically explores the relationships between the inputs and the output of a modeling application (Chen et al., 2010b). Sensitivity analysis is the study of how the variation in the output of a model (numerical or otherwise) can be apportioned, qualitatively or quantitatively, to different sources of variation, and how the model depends upon the information fed into it (Saltelli et al., 2000). Sensitivity and uncertainty analyses together contribute to understanding the influence of the assumptions and input parameters on the model of evaluation (Crosetto et al., 2000). They are crucial to the validation and calibration of MCDA (Chen et al., 2010b). Hereby, handling errors and uncertainty in GIS-MCDA plays a considerable role in decision-making when it is important to base decisions on probabilistic ranges rather than deterministic results (Tenerelli and Carver, 2012). In the context of applying GIS-MCDA to LSM we already compared different MCDA methods and their capabilities (see Feizizadeh et al., 2012, 2013; Feizizadeh and Blaschke, 2013a, 2013b). Building on this earlier work, in the remainder of this paper, we carry out a GIS-MCDA study for LSM with emphasis on the uncertainty and sensitivity analysis in order to improve the accuracies of the results by means of identifying and minimizing the uncertainties associated with the respective MCDA methods.The study area is the Tabriz basin which is a sub-basin of the Urmia Lake basin in Northwest Iran (Fig. 1). The study area encompasses 5378km2 and has about 2 million inhabitants. It is important for the East Azerbaijan province in terms of housing, industrial and agricultural activities. In the Tabriz basin the elevation increases from 1260m in the lowest part at the Urmia Lake, to 3680m above sea level in the Sahand Mountains (Feizizadeh and Blaschke, 2013a). Landslides are common in the Urmia lake basin and the complexity of the geological structure in the associated lithological units, comprised of several formations, causes volcanic hazards, earthquakes, and landslides (Feizizadeh and Blaschke, 2012). A landslide inventory database for the East Azerbaijan Province lists 132 known landslide events (Feizizadeh and Blaschke, 2013a). The geophysical setting makes the slopes of this area potentially vulnerable to mass movements such as rock fall, creeps, flows, topples and landslides (Feizizadeh and Blaschke, 2013a). In addition, the geotechnical setting and its impacts in the form of earthquakes as well as volcanic activities in the Sahand Mountains affect many human activities. Such hazards are sometimes limiting factors in respect to land use intensity in the Tabriz basin. As already indicated in the introduction section, in the remainder of this paper we focus on the sensitivity and uncertainty analysis for GIS-MCDA. For more detailed information regarding the physical properties and the geological setting of the study area the reader is referred to Feizizadeh and Blaschke (2011, 2013b, 2013a) and Feizizadeh et al. (2012).In order to develop a landslide susceptibility map of the area, we used nine factors (evaluation criteria) contributing to landslide vulnerability. They include topographic, geological, climatic, and socioeconomic characteristics, which were selected based on our previous studies in this area (see Feizizadeh et al., 2012, 2013; Feizizadeh and Blaschke, 2013a for criteria selection and justification). In the data preparation phase, topographic maps at the scale of 1:25,000 were used to extract road and drainage layers. The topographic maps were also used to generate a digital elevation model (DEM), as well as slope and aspect terrain derivatives. The lithology and fault maps were derived from geological maps at the scale of 1:100,000. A precipitation map was created through the interpolation of data gathered by meteorological stations in East Azerbaijan province over the time period of 30-years. A detailed land use/land cover map was derived from SPOT satellite images with 10m spatial resolution using image processing techniques. In addition, a landslide inventory database including 112 landslide events was used for the validation of the results. In the final data pre-processing step, all vector layers were converted into raster format layers with 5m spatial resolution.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
