@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Debye decomposition of time-lapse spectral induced polarisation data

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Time-lapse SIP data are analysed using a Debye decomposition scheme.Smoothness constraints are imposed on spectral and temporal variations.The chosen range of relaxation times must correspond to the frequency range of the data.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Debye decomposition,Spectral induced polarisation,Time-lapse inversion,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Spectral induced polarisation (SIP) measurements capture the low-frequency electrical properties of soils and rocks and provide a non-invasive means to access lithological, hydrogeological, and geochemical properties of the subsurface. The Debye decomposition (DD) approach is now increasingly being used to analyse SIP signatures in terms of relaxation time distributions due to its flexibility regarding the shape of the spectra. Imaging and time-lapse (monitoring) SIP measurements, capturing SIP variations in space and time, respectively, are now more and more conducted and lead to a drastic increase in the number of spectra considered, which prompts the need for robust and reliable DD tools to extract quantitative parameters from such data. We here present an implementation of the DD method for the analysis of a series of SIP data sets which are expected to only smoothly change in terms of spectral behaviour, such as encountered in many time-lapse applications where measurement geometry does not change. The routine is based on a non-linear least-squares inversion scheme with smoothness constraints on the spectral variation and in addition from one spectrum of the series to the next to deal with the inherent ill-posedness and non-uniqueness of the problem. By means of synthetic examples with typical SIP characteristics we elucidate the influence of the number and range of considered relaxation times on the inversion results. The source code of the presented routines is provided under an open source licence as a basis for further applications and developments.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Spectral induced polarisation (SIP) data consist of frequency dependent (typically 1mHz–10kHz) electrical impedances or admittances. These complex-valued data can either be represented in terms of real and imaginary parts, or as magnitude and phase values. Using the geometrical location of the electrodes, complex resistivities or complex conductivities can be inferred. These properties reflect electrical conduction and polarisation processes, for instance electrochemical polarisation at the interface between the pore fluid and minerals in soils and rocks or between different cells in living tissue, as of interest in geophysics and biophysics. SIP data are usually analysed and related to petro-, hydro-, or biogeophysical properties by means of empirical or mechanistic models (see, e.g., Slater, 2007; Kemna et al., 2012; Bücker and Hördt, 2013). While significant effort has been put into the development of mechanistic models over the last years (e.g., Revil and Florsch, 2010; Revil et al., 2012), most studies still address the formulation of parameter relationships using empirical models (e.g., Weller et al., 2013).Two types of empirical model approaches can be distinguished: the first type describes SIP data using one or a few polarisation peaks (i.e., local maxima) in the absolute phase spectrum (or imaginary conductivity spectrum) with corresponding, distinct relaxation times. This includes the Debye model (Debye, 1929; Böttcher and Bordewijk, 1978) and the class of Cole–Cole-type models (Cole and Cole, 1941; Pelton et al., 1978, see Dias, 2000 for an overview). In general these models are overdetermined, containing far fewer model parameters than data points available. This, however, limits the flexibility regarding different shapes of the spectra and imposes strong data influence on fitting quality and robustness (Morgan and Lesmes, 1994).The second approach describes the SIP response using a linear superposition of a large number of elementary Debye polarisation terms following a given distribution of relaxation times. The latter is commonly discretised in regular intervals. Thus, only the relative weights of the Debye contributions at discrete relaxation times are determined when fitting the observed polarisation response. This procedure of determining a relaxation time distribution (RTD) instead of a fixed number of relaxation times is referred to as Debye decomposition (DD). Contrary to the first type of models, the DD represents a strongly underdetermined inverse problem which requires some sort of regularisation to achieve a stable solution. A wide range of shapes of SIP spectra can be fitted using the DD approach, and more importantly, the approach does not require a certain number of polarisation peaks in the SIP data. However, representative (average or integral) parameters may be extracted from the RTD, also referred to as integrating parameters (Nordsiek and Weller, 2008) or characteristic integral parameters (Zisser et al., 2010b) in the literature.The concept of the superposition of multiple polarisation terms goes back to Schweidler (1907), with the first proposition of a continuous RTD by Wagner (1913). One of the first published discrete decomposition procedures inverted the imaginary part of the complex permittivity (Uhlmann and Hakim, 1971), while later studies used the real part to fit permittivity spectra (Morgan and Lesmes, 1994; Lesmes and Morgan, 2001). It is noted here that because of the so-called Kramers–Kronig relationships (e.g., Macdonald, 1952) it is theoretically sufficient to only fit the real or imaginary part of the permittivity spectrum to infer the complete complex permittivity response (because both real and imaginary parts are related as a consequence of causality). Different implementations of the DD for time-domain data have been published (Tong et al., 2004; Tarasov and Titov, 2007), and likewise formulations for frequency-domain resistance and resistivity instead of permittivity or conductivity have been presented (Nordsiek and Weller, 2008; Zisser et al., 2010b; Florsch et al., 2012; Keery et al., 2012). Keery et al. (2012) investigated uncertainties of the inferred DD parameters using a Markov-chain Monte Carlo method. Recently, Florsch et al. (2014) proposed a decomposition approach based on relaxation models other than the Debye model, such as the Cole–Cole model or Warburg model. In an accompanying work, Revil et al. (2014) promote the use of the Warburg model, arguing that the elementary response in a rock is less dispersive than a Debye response. Following the same reasoning, already Tarasov et al. (2003) used a decomposition based on a Cole–Cole model in accordance with the response of a theoretical model for the polarisation of a single pore (Titov et al., 2002).Based on numerous previous works on the linkage of SIP parameters with textural and hydraulic characteristics (for an overview see Kemna et al., 2012 and references therein), more recently also relationships of DD parameters to various petrophysical parameters have been established, such as to slag mass and grain size of slag–sand mixtures (Nordsiek and Weller, 2008), permeability of sandstones (e.g., Weller et al., 2010a), water saturation of sand–clay mixtures (Breede et al., 2012), specific surface area per unit pore volume of sandstones and sand–iron/clay mixtures (e.g., Weller et al., 2010b), and to changes in water salinity of sandstones (e.g., Weller et al., 2011). Attwa and Günther (2013) found correlations between DD relaxation time and hydraulic conductivity for samples taken from a Quaternary aquifer. One of the few published applications to field-imaging results investigated the relationship between DD-derived integral parameters and BTEX (benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, and xylenes) contamination (Flores Orozco et al., 2012).Despite the growing number of studies incorporating time-lapse SIP data (e.g., Breede et al., 2012; Flores Orozco et al., 2013) for monitoring purposes, we are not aware of any DD approaches incorporating time-lapse data sets in a single inversion problem, for instance to apply regularisation with respect to temporal changes. In this work we present an open source implementation of a DD for complex resistance/resistivity SIP time-lapse (monitoring) data which is capable of imposing smoothness constraints with respect to spectral variations as well as changes over time. The inversion methodology is developed in detail, and integral parameters commonly extracted from DD results are briefly reviewed. Important aspects of the DD routine are examined, such as the choice of sampling (discretisation) of the relaxation time axis and the influence of regularisation strategies on the DD result. The source code (in the Python programming language) and corresponding documentation is available under an open source licence.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The presented Debye decomposition procedure is a robust and versatile tool to describe and analyse time-lapse SIP data. The implementation of the procedure available under an open source licence facilitates further development and an easy adaptation to specific data types and fields of application. Time-regularisation strategies yield improved results for a better interpretation of monitoring measurements, especially when peak relaxation times are considered. The number of relaxation times per frequency decade should be larger than 20, and the range of relaxation times should be extended by at least one frequency decade beyond the limits given by the data frequencies. In addition, as with all regularised inversion problems, the choice of regularisation type and strength can significantly influence the results of the Debye decomposition. Future developments of the DD implementation will include the incorporation of specific polarisation terms, for example to represent higher-frequency electromagnetic coupling responses, as well as the inclusion of spatial regularisation for an improved analysis of SIP imaging results.The code described in this study is maintained and developed at https://github.com/m-weigand/Debye_Decomposition_Tools.