@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A flexible and extensible approach to automated CAD/CAM format classification

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Provides support for emerging applications in long-term data management.Compression-based classification enables specification-free format identification.Classification accuracy best when NCD distance and the first 16KB of files used.Classifier is highly effective at distinguishing among very similar formats.Computational time is comparable or better than approaches based on known signatures.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
CAD data management,Compression-based distance,Compression-based similarity,Digital preservation,Engineering digital libraries,Format classification,Nearest-neighbor classifier,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
There are hundreds of distinct 3D, CAD and engineering file formats. As engineering design and analysis has become increasingly digital, the proliferation of file formats has created many problems for data preservation, data exchange, and interoperability [1–3]. In some situations, physical file objects exist on legacy media and must be identified and interpreted for reuse [1]. In other cases, file objects may have varying representational expressiveness.We introduce the problem of automated file recognition and classification in emerging digital engineering environments. In emerging digital engineering environments, all design, manufacturing and production activities are “born digital.” The result is that massive quantities and varieties of data objects are created during the product lifecycle [1]. For historic, paper-based processes, the activity of record keeping and management would be the task for a team of human engineers and archivists. In the new digital processes, the overwhelming amount of information requires the development of tools to enable assimilation of massively more diverse and complex data.Managing these new processes and workflows requires automated tools to make the task of the engineer, archivist, or records manager tractable. Consider the scenario common in the aerospace industry: compliance. Records for aircraft must be retained for decades past the end of the production run [4]. Hence, for new aircraft (such as the 787 or A380), one can reasonably expect airplanes designed (and even manufactured!) in the past decade to be flying at the turn of the next century. Records for these artifacts are predominantly digital, with CAD models, configuration models, surrogate models, simulation objects, etc, proliferating and even unique to each and every aircraft. Making sense of this typhoon of data, organizing and harvesting it for its long-term use, requires new kinds of automated tools for sifting CAD data.This paper presents an approach to automated identification of engineering file formats. This work operates independent of any modeling tools and can identify families of related file objects as well as variations in versions. This problem is challenging as it cannot assume any a priori knowledge about the nature of the physical file object. Hence, the file object could be data from a legacy system, or a one-off format created for some ad hoc analysis. In these scenarios, one cannot assume there is even a software system capable of reading the object and rendering the digital model into a form that can be operated on. These are just some of the daunting requirements to support the emerging applications in areas of digital curation and long-term data management for engineering.This problem may appear, on its surface, to be trival. Why cannot we identify files based on file extension or other means? What makes this problem unique, and difficult, is the nature of use case for those engaged in curation of digital objects. For classes of engineering objects such as airframes or ships, the expected artifact lifecycle is measured in decades [4]. It is often the case today that engineering data objects on tape, or pre-digital media, are critical to understanding the performance and maintenance of existing structure. In this setting, those who must manage and curate engineering data are constantly faced with files of unknown origin or provenance, for which the task of understanding their contents is more of matter of forensics rather than simply reading the file into a browser or CAD system. Further complex is the case of contemporary processes today where file formats proliferate due to the analyses, measurements and simulations done on a particular artifact. In case studies by the authors, the number of files associated with the analysis of an individual part can number in the thousands [1]. Managing this overwhelming mass of new digital objects requires new tools for understanding the content and context of physical file objects. We believe this paper offers an initial tool for those working on engineering data.This paper is organized as follows. We begin, in Section 2, with a review of related work. Next, we detail our technical approach in Section 3 which is motivated by the information theory concept of Kolmogorov complexity and is an application of compression-based classification. In Section 4, we present comprehensive experiments using the Drexel University Design Repository. The Drexel Design Repository originated at NIST in 1993 and contains tens of thousands of CAD, CAM, and other related engineering data in hundreds of formats [5–7]. The Drexel Repository spans two decades and includes formats that date back to the 1980s (e.g., from the early CAD system Romulus) and multiple versions of formats (e.g., models from ACIS 1.1, multiple versions of Pro/E dating back to the early 1990s). Our experiments specifically use the 54 most frequently occurring filetypes from the Drexel Design Repository which amounts to over 40,000 files in our dataset. The formats primarily include 3D CAD model formats, CAM system formats, 3D simulation formats, formats used by 3D object similarity algorithms, various non-model formats associated with CAD/CAM systems, as well as 2D graphics formats, among others. We conclude in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The digital revolution has produced overwhelming quantities and varieties of “born digital” engineering data. As systems evolve over decades, their digital records are essential to tasks such as intelligent maintenance, disassembly and demanufacture, redesign and reuse, compliance investigations and failure studies. Today's digital engineering tools consume and produce a wide variety of models in the course of a given project: preliminary CAD models lead to detailed CAD models, which in turn are used to create surrogate models for simulation, generate tooling models, etc.In light of these emerging problems, this paper presented an approach to automated identification of engineering objects. As engineering activities become increasingly all digital, the proliferation of different physical file formats makes the sustainment and curation of engineering data very difficult. The tools and techniques presented in this paper work without any modeler or a priori knowledge about physical file structure and content. Using this approach, one can identify engineering data objects, their versions and provenance. This information is essential for those charged with engineering integration, data stewardship and records keeping—enabling them to automate the identification of file migration strategies, use of appropriate translators, and manage format diversity.