@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Data-aware 3D partitioning for generic shape retrieval

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a simple and effective partitioning algorithm for 3D meshes.The use of part descriptions enhances the use of global descriptors.We define a distance as an optimization problem, including both linear and quadratic constraints.Our experiments show that the partitioning algorithm has a great influence in the final effectiveness of retrieval tasks.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Mesh partitioning,Optimization matching,Shape retrieval,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Three-dimensional objects are a valuable resource in many fields such as engineering and medicine. They can represent the shape of a real object in a suitable way in order to be used by computers. The versatility of this representation has resulted in an increasing interest of the scientific community in several related topics. For instance: shape analysis, shape processing, modeling applications, and so on. In addition, it is currently possible to find massive and publicly available 3D data. For example the Google Sketchup collection, for which its use is becoming a common practice. For these reasons, the search for efficient and effective tools for this kind of data is imperative in order to support future applications.In particular, the content-based similarity search of 3D objects has received much attention in recent years. This can be performed without relying on additional information for searching, only using the provided shapes. Additionally, many fields (for example medicine [1,2], CAD/CAM [3], etc.) have benefited from the large amount of approaches proposed to overcome the problem of 3D matching. Nevertheless, the problem remains challenging and it is far from being completely solved. Moreover, part of the problem resides in the possibility of defining a suitable similarity measure between 3D models.In this paper, we consider the problem of generic shape retrieval. A common approach to facing this problem is to compute an intermediate representation (feature vectors or graphs, for instance) and subsequently defining the similarity of two objects as the similarity of their representations. In this direction, there are methods that exploit the visual similarity, the statistical properties of 3D measures, or the possibility of defining transform functions on the data, just to name a few. However, one of the most critical problems is the semantic gap. That is, the intermediate representation may not be able to capture all the needed information of a shape and therefore the effectiveness of searching may be seriously affected.A previous study by Bustos et al. [4] showed that some features could well represent certain classes of objects and furthermore, some features could be complimentary in representing a shape. This is because algorithms cover only a part of the possible spectrum of characteristics such as shape, silhouette, or intrinsic properties. Thus, a natural extension of classic approaches was the combination of features for improving the effectiveness of retrieval. Approaches in this direction have been previously presented by Bustos et al. [5], Vranic [6], and Papadakis et al. [7], all of them with promising results. However, the semantic gap is still latent in this approach as any possible combination of features could not represent important characteristics to discriminate between objects.A more recent approach is the combination of global and part-based information. The idea is to combine features extracted from an entire object with features extracted from parts of an object. Some techniques have been presented so far by Li and Johan [8], Bustos et al. [9], and Schreck et al. [10]. All these techniques share a common aspect: the part-based features come from a fixed partitioning of the objects. Although it was possible to improve the effectiveness with respect to using only global features, the fixed partitioning limits the possibility of having truly distinctive parts. This opens up a question on how to define a new kind of partitioning dependent on the shape information.We believe that the use of local features can enhance the use of global features in shape retrieval. That is, we are trying to mitigate the effect of the semantic gap. For instance, a common fact is having two objects with different appearance in the same class. Obviously, a global feature could differ in those objects. However, in a local sense, it is still possible to find correspondences between parts, so we can take advantage of this fact to improve the similarity measure (see Fig. 1). Therefore, the discriminative power of local features combined with global features could help to improve the effectiveness in the similarity search.In this paper, we propose a shape retrieval method using a data-aware partitioning algorithm. Our idea is to exploit the local characteristics of objects to determine discriminative parts. Thus, each object is represented by its global feature and a set of features extracted from parts. The partitioning method relies on finding robust local features (namely keypoints) on the object's surface and subsequently determining the parts where there is a high concentration of keypoints (for instance, a human shape commonly has many features located in hands, feet, and head). Beyond techniques which made use of the bag of features approach to aggregate local descriptors for retrieval, our method is the first attempt in combining global and local features found in a data-adaptive way for generic shape retrieval.Our main contribution is three-fold:•We propose a model partitioning algorithm based on local features. Regions on the surface with high concentration of local features will be selected as parts.We combine the global feature with features obtained from parts and define a combined distance to assess the similarity. The distance between global features is performed as usual. The distance between sets of parts is stated as an optimization problem. In addition, we propose a geometrical consistency criterion which can be formulated within the same optimization problem.We evaluate our approach using a well-known, established benchmark dataset and appropriate performance measures.Our approach is a generic, simple framework by which global and local descriptors can be combined in a data-adaptive way. The approach is able to provide on average, an improvement over the retrieval effectiveness of state of the art global descriptors. A careful, systematic analysis of the results is performed to assess in detail the magnitude of the improvement, relating it with global-only methods, and identifying classes of models for which the method is particularly effective. We test our approach using a state-of-the-art local interest point detector with desirable properties in combination with two robust view-based descriptors. Our approach is flexible in that it can accommodate further, possibly application-specific, object segmentation and description schemes, if needed.Our paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly presents the state of the art in generic shape retrieval. Section 3 describes our partitioning algorithm based on local features. Section 4 is devoted to the matching methods and the definition of our similarity measure. Section 5 describes our experiments and presents the discussion of our results. Finally, Section 6 draws the conclusions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we presented a shape retrieval method that combines global descriptors and part-based descriptors. We proposed a method for determining data-adaptive partition from meshes. Partitions were derived from agglomerations of distinctive keypoints on shapes. Finally, matching between partitions was stated as an integer program in order to compute correspondences.From our experiments, it is possible to say that partition matching contributes to improving the retrieval effectiveness. Our method was able to achieve significant improvements in classes with objects containing common distinctive parts. In contrast, there is a limitation when objects within a class do not share common distinctive parts. Therefore, the partition matching degrades the effectiveness of global descriptors instead of improving it. Nevertheless, we believe that our approach partially attenuated this limitation with its ability to determine characteristic partitions. In our opinion, our method offers new representational capabilities for 3D shapes which have proven to be effective in conjunction with global descriptors. In addition, we found a high correlation between the achieved effectiveness and the partitions provided by our method. Specifically, the number and size of the partitions play an important role for defining an effective similarity measure. This is because these two factors are well related to the quality of partitions (and their distinctiveness) and therefore, they influence the overall performance.In our opinion, the use of high-level local structures in 3D shape retrieval is a promising research direction. Moreover, the use of information in higher levels of abstraction (for instance, functionality) should benefit the definition of more effective similarity models.