@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The effects of screen size on rotating 3D contents using compound gestures on a mobile device

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The display size and the task-completion time are inversely related. Using a smaller display results in a shorter completion time.Tasks with obvious characteristics for the 3D objects require a shorter time to complete.Using familiar hand gestures leads to a shorter task-completion time.The Control–Display ratio is an important factor that affects the performance of the 3D rotation tasks.Adaptability and familiarity should be taken into consideration when introducing new hand gestures.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Touch gestures,Small touch screen,3D Immersive heritage,Control–Display ratio,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The development of mobile devices nowadays shows an increasing trend toward interacting with 3D digital content on a 2D touch screen. However, many issues regarding the appropriateness of the control mode require further exploration. The experimental design in this study designates displays of two sizes—five inches and seven inches—with three groups of hand gestures controlling the X-, Y-, and Z-axis, respectively. The three groups of gestures are compared in terms of how they interact with the 3D content. In the experiment, 30 adult research subjects twice completed a task that involved rotating three 3D immersive-heritage models. Their characteristics, completion time, subjective evaluation, and frequency of gesture change were measured and examined. The results from the experiment and the statistics from a two-way Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) indicate: (1) the display size and the task-completion time are inversely related. Under the effect of the Control–Display ratio, using a smaller display results in a shorter completion time while using a larger display results in a longer completion time; (2) tasks with obvious characteristics for the 3D objects require a shorter time to complete, but those with no obvious characteristics require more time; and (3) using familiar hand gestures leads to a shorter task-completion time, while using unfamiliar hand gestures leads to a longer completion time. The findings of this study show that the Control–Display ratio is an important factor that affects the operational performance of the 3D immersive-heritage model’s rotation tasks completed with hand gestures on small displays. In addition, adaptability and familiarity should be taken into consideration when introducing new hand gestures. Hence, the suggestions in this study constitute important guidelines for museums designing technology for the interaction between mobile devices and 3D immersive-heritage models.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Given the richness of information in today’s digital content, and the social educational responsibilities of museums and art galleries, the use of machines for reading and browsing is the best solution for insufficient manpower at the lowest cost. Due to the advancement and popularization of modern smartphones and other mobile devices, as well as multimedia technologies, research on the interaction of 3D objects in mobile communication has become a trend [1]. This is like creating an immersive interaction method on a virtual museum platform, which help the public understand and appreciate cultural heritage. Therefore, the interactive browsing content of museums can be expected to be closer to users [2]. As animation software matures, designers can produce a simulation of 3D objects with the relevant software. In such a case, interacting with artifacts without physical contact by using a mobile device is highly anticipated, and in-depth studies of 3D space display, gesture control, and natural interaction with 3D objects are of great importance [3].The motivation for this study is to replace the mouse and keyboard—with which we have been accustomed for a long time as input tools—with touch control, because touch-control technology is becoming increasingly advanced and popular. Manipulating text and graphics with this technology is easier and more intuitive. However, when manipulating 3D objects on a 2D display, the restriction of the small screen size may cause disruptions when using touch gestures, resulting in frustration and a deterioration of the operational performance.Thus, in consideration of the above-mentioned circumstances, this study aims to analyze the performance of manipulating 3D-simulated artifacts on 2D displays of different sizes with hand gestures in an experimental design. In addition, a quantitative method is adopted to analyze the statistics, and suggestions are made to help designers improve the rotational touch gestures for controlling 3D immersive heritage.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
It was assumed from the literature review that completing the tasks with a larger display would be easier than with a smaller display. In fact, the experimental results showed that the control performance with the 5-in. display was better than with a 7-in. display when 3D objects had obvious characteristics and as the level of difficulty of the tasks increased. An analysis of the Control–Display ratio is important because the Control–Display ratio for a 5-in. display is higher than that of the 7-in. display when rotating the same distance, and thus the completion time with a smaller display will be shorter than with a larger display under this condition. As a result, the operational performance of the 5-in. display was better than that of the 7-in. display (see Fig. 6). The Control–Display ratio in this paper was defined as the variance ratio calculated with the rotational distance of the hand gesture.The display size for mobile devices is increasing. In addition to a clearer view of text and figures, larger displays provide an easier way to complete rotation tasks. The higher gain value in larger displays makes such tasks easier than displays with a lower gain value.Furthermore, tasks containing larger objects with characteristics were easier to complete than those containing smaller objects without characteristics. The zooming-in and -out gestures might solve part of the problem. Coloring or marking objects without obvious characteristics to facilitate guidance may be one plausible solution, but this would require further research.The development of hand-gesture interaction in the future will be more diverse. Not only will it include tapping the display, it will apply the gyroscope. The goal for future development will be to customize hand gestures and motions, a feature that continues to call for our attention and research.