@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Visual discomfort of stereoscopic 3D videos: Influence of 3D motion

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Motion does not always induce more visual discomfort than static conditions.In-depth motion generally induces more visual discomfort than the planar motion.Relative disparity and velocity are main factors for visual discomfort.Disparity amplitude didn’t impact visual discomfort significantly.An objective visual discomfort model is proposed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Visual discomfort,3D motion,Stereoscopic video,Paired comparison,Objective model,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Visual discomfort is one of the most frequent complaints of the viewers while watching 3D images and videos. Large disparity and large amount of motion are two main causes of visual discomfort. To quantify this influence, three objectives are set in this paper. The first one is the comparative analysis on the influence of different types of motion, i.e., static stereoscopic image, planar motion and in-depth motion, on visual discomfort. The second one is the investigation on the influence factors for each motion type, for example, the disparity offset, the disparity amplitude and velocity. The third one is to propose an objective model for visual discomfort. Thirty-six synthetic stereoscopic video stimuli with different types of motion are used in this study. In the subjective test, an efficient paired comparison method called Adaptive Square Design (ASD) was used to reduce the number of comparisons for each observer and keep the results reliable. The experimental results showed that motion does not always induce more visual discomfort than static conditions. The in-depth motion generally induces more visual discomfort than the planar motion. The relative disparity between the foreground and the background, and the motion velocity are identified as main factors for visual discomfort. According to the subjective results, an objective model for comparing visual discomfort induced by different types of motion is proposed which shows high correlation with the subjective perception.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
As one of the three dimensions of Quality of Experience (QoE) in 3DTV [1], visual discomfort is getting more and more attention recently as viewers often complain about it while or after watching stereoscopic 3D images and videos. With the boom of stereoscopic 3D movies, visual discomfort becomes important and urgent as it is related to the safety and health issues of viewers.The concepts of visual discomfort and visual fatigue in 3DTV are often confused and interchangeably used. In [2,3], the authors provided distinct definitions for them. In this paper, we adopt the definition from [4], the details are shown as follows:•Visual discomfort is a physical and/or a psychological state assessed by the participants themselves, as a presently perceived degree of annoyance. As such, it may be related to experienced symptoms, perceived difficulties when performing a visual task, or any negative sensation associated with this task. Thus, visual discomfort can be measured by asking the viewer to report its level. Visual discomfort appears and disappears with any of these negative associations, and is supposed to have a steep rise time and a steep fall time contrary to visual fatigue. In other words, visual discomfort disappears rapidly when the visual task is interrupted, either by asking the observer to close his eyes or by terminating the visual stimulus. In this paper, we only focus on the visual discomfort.Visual fatigue is defined in this context as a syndrome. Its presence is assessed by the observation of zero, one or several symptoms (reported by the observer such as nausea) and zero, one or several clinical signs (measured objectively such as eye blinking rate). Usually it is supposed to have a longer rise time and a longer fall time than visual discomfort, it is not instantaneously diagnosed in conjunction with a certain 3D stimulus and remains a certain time after the 3D viewing has finished.In this paper, we focus on the visual discomfort issue.The vergence–accommodation conflict is one of the widely accepted causes of visual discomfort [5,6]. When viewing an object by means of a 3D screen, the eyes converge to the virtual object position but the accommodation has to be performed at the screen depth level, which is unnatural and will not happen in our daily life. The larger this discrepancy on vergence and accommodation, the more possibility that observers perceive visual discomfort.The comfortable viewing zone, which determines the threshold of the distance between the virtual object and the screen that would not induce visual discomfort, was thus investigated and defined in different ways. For example, ±0.2D of depth of field (DOF) [7–9], ±1arc degree of visual angle [10,11] or ±3% of the screen width for 3D television [3].The comfortable viewing zone is well investigated for stereoscopic still images. However, recent studies showed that fast motion can induce visual discomfort even if the object is within the comfortable viewing zone [9,11,12]. Thus, motion in stereoscopic videos, including planar motion and in-depth motion, is considered as an important factor of visual discomfort in 3D video sequences.In-depth motion is one of the significant factors that may cause visual discomfort. Studies already showed that visual discomfort increases with the in-depth motion velocity [3,9,11,13,14]. However, the influence from disparity amplitude (disparity range) and the disparity type (crossed or uncrossed) of in-depth motion on visual discomfort are still under study. In [11], the results showed that disparity amplitude of the moving object is not a main factor. However, in their recent study [3] it is shown that visual discomfort increases with the disparity amplitude. Furthermore, the results also showed that the in-depth motion with crossed disparity would induce significantly more visual discomfort than the uncrossed and mixed conditions. In [13], as they only analyzed the in-depth motion in the disparity range of ±1° with different velocities, there is no conclusion about the influence of crossed or uncrossed disparity amplitude on visual discomfort.The influence of the planar motion on visual discomfort was investigated as well [3,12,13,15]. These studies showed high consistency on the conclusion that visual discomfort increases with the motion velocity. The influences of the disparity on visual discomfort led to different conclusions in these studies. In [13], the results indicated that the disparity type, i.e., crossed and uncrossed disparity, did not affect the visual discomfort thresholds. However, in [3,12,15], the results showed that the crossed disparity will generate more visual discomfort than the uncrossed disparity. The possible explanation for this conflict might be the position of the background. In [13], the background was positioned at the screen plane. In [12,15], the background was placed at a fixed position of 46.28cm behind the screen (with disparity of −1.4°) and in [3], the position of the background was not depicted but in their previous study [11], the background was positioned at 134cm away from the camera (with disparity of −2.6°). The impact of the position of background on visual discomfort may therefore require further study.Most of the studies mentioned above investigated the influence of the in-depth motion and planar motion on visual discomfort separately. For quantifying the influence of static situations, planar and in-depth motion, it would be important to directly compare their impact on visual discomfort. Thus, this study focused on the influence of motion on visual discomfort of 3DTV, including the comparative analysis on the influence of different motion types on visual discomfort, the influence of disparity and velocity within a certain motion type and the proposal of an objective visual discomfort model based on the results. As observers may experience difficulties when using traditional 2D quality methods, e.g., Absolute Category Rating (ACR), to assess the visual discomfort induced by stereoscopic images [16], the pair comparison method was used in the subjective test as it would be easier for observers to select their preference in each pair, thus, the results are more reliable. To make the test feasible, the Adaptive Square Design (ASD) method was employed which reduces the number of comparisons significantly and generates reliable results.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the subjective experimental setup. Then follows the experimental results in Section 3. The proposed objective model is introduced in Section 4. Section 5 concludes the paper.When displaying 3D images on flat panel stereoscopic displays, the binocular angular disparity can be expressed by degree of visual angle [17], as shown in Fig. 1, the binocular angular disparitiesϕAandϕBfor points A and B can be calculated by Eqs. (1) and (2). For a point which is on the screen plane, the binocular angular disparity is 0° which means there is no disparity between the two retinal images. A positive value represents crossed disparity, such as the point A; a negative value represents uncrossed disparity, such as the point B.(1)ϕA=β-α(2)ϕB=γ-αMotion in 3DTV may be decomposed into planar motion (or lateral motion) and in-depth motion. Planar motion means that the object moves only in a plane parallel to the screen, i.e., the disparity does not change temporally. In-depth motion, which is also called motion in depth or z-motion, is defined as that the object moves towards or away from the observers. For planar motion, both eyes make the same conjunctive eye movements, called version[14]. For in-depth motion, the eyes make opposite, disjunctive eye movement, called vergence[18]. The eye movements for the planar motion and in-depth motion are shown in Fig. 2.The speed of the planar motion and in-depth motion can be expressed by the change of distance per second or the change of the visual angle (version or vergence) per second. The change of the visual angle is chosen in the study with the unit of “deg/s”.In this study we use disparity amplitude and disparity offset to define the motion in stereoscopic videos. The disparity amplitudedabetween points A and B can be expressed by Eq. (3) which represents the difference of angular disparity between the two points. The disparity offsetdobetween the two points A and B can be expressed by Eq. (4) which represents the center of the angular disparity between the two points.The static and planar motion stimuli can be expressed by the disparity offset and the velocity, where the disparity amplitude equals zero. The in-depth motion stimuli can be defined by the disparity amplitude, the disparity offset and the velocity.(3)da=ϕA-ϕB(4)do=12ϕA+ϕB

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study, we used paired comparison method to evaluate visual discomfort induced by motion of stereoscopic 3D videos. Different motion types, i.e., static condition, planar motion and in-depth motion conditions are compared. The results showed that motion does not always induce more visual discomfort when compared with static stereoscopic images, in particular, in the condition that the object is far from the background, static objects will introduce more visual discomfort than the moving conditions. Generally, in-depth motion stimuli would generate more visual discomfort than the planar motion stimuli, which might be opposite in the condition of very small disparity offsets.The velocity and the relative disparity are main factors of visual discomfort in stereoscopic 3D videos. The disparity amplitude did not impact visual discomfort significantly which is consistent with the conclusion of [11]. In addition, it is found that the frequency of the oscillation of the in-depth motion is not a significant factor of visual discomfort in 3DTV.The time course effect on visual discomfort measured by paired comparison method was studied in this paper. The results indicate that observer’s discriminability on visual discomfort did not change significantly with the growth of the time. Compared with the scale-based subjective assessment method, e.g., ACR, the paired comparison method is more reliable in assessing visual discomfort in 3DTV in this aspect.According to the regression analysis, an objective model which can be used to compare the visual discomfort of different types of motion was proposed. In the future work, this model will be extended and evaluated by the natural content video sequences.