@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Effect of PEDOT:PSS vs. MoO3 as the hole injection layer on performance of C545T-based green electroluminescent light-emitting diodes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We compared the effect of MoO3 and PEDOT:PSS as the hole injection layer (HIL) on the electroluminescence (EL) performance.We discussed the effect of different host materials.OLEDs with NPB as the host show higher power efficiency when MoO3 was used as the hole injection layer.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Organic light emissive diodes,Hole injection layer,Balance,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In order to understand the effect of hole injection on the performance of organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) with electron- and hole-type hosts used in the emissive layer, we fabricated OLEDs based on a green fluorescent 10-(2-benzothiazolyl)-2,3,6,7-tetrahydro-1,1,7,7-tetramethyl-1H,5H,11H-(1)benzopyropyrano(6,7-8-I,j)quinolizin-11-one (C545T) with poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) and MoO3 as the hole injection layer, respectively. Here, N,N′-di(naphthalene-1-yl)-N,N′-diphenyl-benzidine (NPB) and tris-(8-hydroxyquinoline) aluminum (Alq3) are, respectively, used as the host in the emissive layer for comparison. It is clearly found that different hole injection layers play different roles in the adjustment of the electron/hole injection and the transport balance, thus the different hosts are needed in the emissive layer for high electroluminescence efficiency OLEDs. This means that the selection of appropriate hole injection layers for OLEDs according to the different hosts in the emissive layer is especially important in the fabrication of high efficiency single emissive layer OLEDs.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) as a promising technology for lighting and display applications have been attracting great attention in the past several decades. With the development of materials and structural research, the efficiency and operational lifetime of OLEDs have been improved enormously [1–3]. The OLED device structures have been developed by introducing more functional layers than those done earlier [4–9]. These functional layers facilitate charge injection, transport and blocking in the devices, thus improving the balance of charge carrier injection and transport in the emitting layer for efficient recombination [10,11]. In addition, these functional layers in multilayer OLEDs can also suppress the exciton quenching [12]. As we know, the hole injection layer inserted between the anode and the emissive layer plays important roles in the operating characteristics and stability of OLEDs. Therefore, different hole injection layer materials have been developed. Amongst, certain metal oxides as effective hole injection layers in OLEDs have been widely reported [13–15]. MoO3-based hole injection materials attract more and more attention due to less contamination, easy fabrication by thermal deposition and energy level matching with organic molecules. It is clearly seen that MoO3 is a potential candidate to achieve good hole injection in OLEDs [14–16]. It has recently been shown by the photoelectron spectroscopy studies that the work-function of MoO3 is as large as 6.9eV [17]. Numerous experiments have proven that the utilization of MoO3 as an anode modifier or dopant for the hole injection layer significantly reduces the operational voltage and greatly improves the efficiency and lifetime of OLEDs [13,18–22]. As an interface modification layer on ITO, MoO3 can promote the interface dipole by charge transfer, thus greatly reduce the barrier for hole injection [17,18]. Additionally, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) as the hole injection layer on ITO has also been widely investigated and the device efficiency is also greatly improved, which is attributed to the reduction of the hole injection barrier [23]. However, so far there are limited studies on the systemic and detailed comparison between the effects of MoO3 and PEDOT:PSS as the hole injection layer on the performance of OLEDs, especially on those with different hosts in the emissive layer.In this paper, we compared the effect of MoO3 and PEDOT:PSS as the hole injection layer (HIL) on the electroluminescence (EL) performance in 10-(2-benzothiazolyl)-2,3,6,7-tetrahydro-1,1,7,7-tetramethyl-1H,5H,11H-(1)benzopyropyrano(6,7-8-I,j)quinolizin-11-one (C545T)-based green fluorescent OLEDs with tris-(8-hydroxyquinoline) aluminum (Alq3) and N,N′-di(naphthalene-1-yl)-N,N′-diphenyl-benzidine (NPB) as the host in the emissive layer, respectively. Here, C545T is a green fluorescent dye, Alq3 is a good electron transport molecule and NPB is a high mobility hole transport molecule. They are widely used in the fabrication of OLEDs. It was found that MoO3 and PEDOT:PSS showed different effects on the charge carrier injection and transport balance in devices, resulting in different EL efficiencies. It is clearly seen that, for OLEDs with NPB as the host, higher power efficiency was observed in the device with MoO3 as the hole injection layer, due to the reduction of operational voltage. However, for OLEDs with Alq3 as the host, higher current efficiency was found in the device with PEDOT:PSS as the hole injection layer. Comparatively, the OLEDs with Alq3 as the host exhibit not only higher current efficiency, but also higher power efficiency when PEDOT:PSS was used as the hole injection layer. This indicates the different behaviors of MoO3 and PEDOT:PSS as the hole injection layer can influence charge carrier injection and transport balance in OLEDs based on different hosts.The structures of OLEDs used in this study were as follows:Device A: ITO/MoO3 (10nm)/Alq3: (C545T)(35nm)/Alq3(35nm)/LiF (1nm)/Al (120nm).Device B: ITO/PEDOT:PSS(30nm)/Alq3: (C545T)(35nm)/Alq3(35nm)/LiF (1nm)/Al (120nm).Device C: ITO/MoO3 (10nm)/NPB: (C545T)(35nm)/Alq3(35nm)/LiF (1nm)/Al (120nm).Device D: ITO/PEDOT:PSS(30nm)/NPB:(C545T)(35nm)/Alq3(35nm)/LiF (1nm)/Al (120nm).The commercial ITO-coated glass substrates with a sheet resistance of around 10Ω/□ were used as the anode, which were successively rinsed with detergent, de-ionized water, acetone, and isopropyl alcohol in an ultrasonic bath for 10min, respectively. The cleaned and dried ITO glass substrates were treated with oxygen plasma for 3min. The PEDOT:PSS (AI 4083 purchased from Germany Bayer) was spin-coated at 3000rpm for 60s, and then was slowly dried in oven at 120°C for 30min. The OLEDs were prepared by thermal evaporation in a high-vacuum system with the pressure less than 5×10−4Pa. MoO3, NPB, Alq3:C545T, and Alq3, 1nm LiF and 150nm Al were evaporated onto ITO in turn. The concentration of C545T in Alq3 (NPB) was controlled at 1wt%. The evaporation rates were monitored by frequency counter, and calibrated by Dektak 6M Profiler (Veeco). The overlap area between ITO and Al electrodes was 16mm2 as the emissive size of devices. The devices have the same 35nm Alq3, 1nm LiF and 150nm Al. Fig. 1shows the energy level diagrams of the fabricated devices and the molecular structures of C545T, Alq3 and NPB used in these devices. The current–voltage-brightness characteristics were measured by using a Keithley source measurement unit (Keithley 2400 and Keithley 2000) with a calibrated silicon photodiode. All devices were measured without encapsulation at room temperature.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In summary, we clearly demonstrated the effect of MoO3 and PEDOT:PSS as the hole injection layer on the performance of C545T-based OLEDs with Alq3 and NPB as the host in the emissive layer, respectively. The fact that the low-conductivity hole injection layer, such as PEDOT:PSS, leads to a better efficiency was proved to be due to the host with the better electronic transport property in the emissive layer, whereas a higher efficiency found in devices with high-conductivity injection layer, such as MoO3, was attributed to the host with the better hole transport property in the emissive layer. Our experimental results clearly demonstrate that the different hole injection layers have different roles in the adjustment of electron and hole injection and transport balance. Therefore EL efficiency of OLEDs differs as the host used in the emissive layer is varied. These results should greatly benefit the design of high performance OLEDs.