@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Distributed cooperative spectrum sensing in cognitive radio for ad hoc networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel gradient-based fully distributed cooperative sensing scheme is proposed.A consensus-based algorithm is used to handle the network model with a fixed graph.The proposed scheme does not require any prior knowledge of network topology.Energy consumption and the number of exchanged messages are reduced significantly.The proposed and consensus-based schemes are compared through simulations.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#


@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Cognitive radio refers to an intelligent radio with the capability of sensing the radio environment and dynamically reconfiguring the operating parameters. Recent research has focused on using cognitive radios in ad hoc environments. Spectrum sensing is the most important aspect of successful cognitive radio ad hoc network deployment to overcome spectrum scarcity. Multiple cognitive radio users can cooperate to sense the primary user and improve sensing performance. Cognitive radio ad hoc networks are dynamic in nature and have no central point for data fusion. In this paper, gradient-based fully distributed cooperative spectrum sensing in cognitive radio is proposed for ad hoc networks. The licensed band used for TV transmission is considered the primary user. The gradient field changes with the energy sensed by cognitive radios, and the gradient is calculated based on the components, which include energy sensed by secondary users and received from neighbors. The proposed scheme was evaluated from the perspective of reliable sensing, convergence time, and energy consumption. Simulation results demonstrated the effectiveness of the proposed scheme.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The recent advances in wireless networks demand efficient utilization of the radio spectrum. With the current innovations in smart phones, an explosive increase in data traffic for wireless internet access has led to spectrum scarcity. In 2008, the Federal Communication Commission (FCC) allowed both fixed and portable devices to access unlicensed TV white spaces in rural and urban areas [1]. Cognitive radio (CR) is an enabling technology that allows cognitive radio users (CRUs) to operate in licensed bands. CRUs can modify their own operating parameters according to changes in the radio environment [2].The most important task for CR is to detect the presence or absence of primary users (PUs). If a PU is absent, then the spectrum is available for a CRU (also known as secondary user [SU]), and a spectrum hole (also known as white space) is said to be available. The process of PU detection is achieved by sensing the radio environment, known as spectrum sensing [3,4]. Spectrum sensing involves two key aspects: the primary system should not be disturbed by CRU communication, and spectrum holes should be detected efficiently, as required, for throughput and quality of service (QoS). Thus, spectrum sensing is the most fundamental requirement for CR because CRUs must be aware of changes in the radio environment.The performance of spectrum sensing is determined by the probability of detection Pd, i.e., the probability of a CRU declaring that a PU is present when a PU is actually present, and the probability of false alarm Pf, i.e., the probability of a CRU declaring that a PU is present when a PU is actually absent. The probability of misdetection Pmis simply 1−Pd, and a misdetection may cause a CRU to interfere with a PU. Ideally, a high Pdis required, subject to the constraint of Pf[5].During cooperative spectrum sensing, many CRUs cooperate to achieve better data fusion results. This increases detection performance in terms of Pdand reduces Pm. In infrastructure-based networks, all of the observations made by CRUs are reported to a fusion center, and a final decision about a PU’s presence or absence is conducted at the fusion center [6,7]. Based on the final decision received from the fusion center, each CRU reconfigures its operating parameters, as shown in Fig. 1(a).Wireless ad hoc networks consist of self-organizing devices that can be deployed without any infrastructure. CR technologies have been considered for mobile ad hoc networks, and these are known as cognitive radio ad hoc networks (CRAHNs) [8]. CRAHNs enable wireless devices to establish a network dynamically without any fixed infrastructure or fixed spectrum. CRAHNs are important because they can be utilized for many key applications, such as military battlefield communications, disaster relief, and autonomous vehicular communication. The absence of a central network entity in CRAHNs, i.e., a fusion center, means that the independent operations performed by each user may lead to performance degradation during spectrum sensing. Thus, cooperative schemes are necessary to avoid performance degradation under fading and shadowing conditions. In cooperative CRAHN schemes, each CRU can exchange its local observations with other CRUs in the network, as shown in Fig. 1(b). This means that it is important to investigate the performance of fully distributed cooperative spectrum sensing using CRAHNs.In this paper, a novel gradient-based cooperative sensing (GBCS) scheme is proposed for ad hoc networks that rely purely on the local interaction of CRUs without using any central entity to improve sensing performance. Neighboring CRUs exchange their sensing information to reach a point of consensus, and they compare that point with a predetermined threshold to determine the presence or absence of a PU. The advantage of GBCS over existing fully distributed consensus-based sensing is that it requires no prior knowledge of network topology. In existing schemes, each CRU needs to propagate the degree of the network to all other nodes before the exchange of sensing information with neighbors in the network because the degree of the network may be changed in mobile ad hoc networks whenever nodes change their positions. In graph theory, the number of connections a node shares with other nodes is called the degree, and the maximum degree of the graph is the largest degree among all nodes. In order to validate the GBCS scheme, a simulation was conducted to make a comparison with existing schemes.The main contributions of this paper are as follows:•A novel gradient-based cooperative sensing scheme, which is a fully distributed consensus-based scheme, is proposed.The proposed scheme uses a consensus-based algorithm to handle the network model with a fixed graph.Unlike typical consensus-based schemes, the proposed scheme does not require any prior knowledge of network topology. Energy consumption is reduced significantly, and the number of exchanged messages is also reduced to achieve consensus.Through simulation, the proposed scheme is compared with the consensus-based scheme.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the previously proposed spectrum sensing schemes for CRAHNs are briefly discussed. Section 3 presents a model of the system, and Section 4 describes the GBCS scheme. Section 5 presents simulation results and their detailed analysis. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
