@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
MCHO – A new indicator for insulation conditions in transmission lines

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Mathematical model appropriate for predictive maintenance of transmission line.Based on leakage current the model allows estimating the line insulation status.It is not needed sensors distributed along the line.New indicator of transmission line operation conditions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Leakage current,Capacitance,Permittivity,Transmission line,Detection and diagnosis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Conventionally monitoring operating conditions of a power transmission line is accomplished by periodic inspections along this line. This monitoring allows corrective maintenance by finding faults during the inspection. But in more efficient maintenance, predictive techniques that are characterized by real-time monitoring should be employed. Such predictive techniques allow for verifying the working status of the line by using normal working models to detect faults and fault models for diagnosis. This paper presents a study that used a mathematical model appropriate for application to predictive maintenance of transmission line segments at low cost, without the need for sensors distributed along the line, and presenting a new indicator of transmission line operation conditions. By tracking the leakage current of transmission lines, this model allows for estimating the current line insulation status. Once the current line insulation status is known, it is possible to compare it against other future status and verify the progress of the insulation conditions of that line. The model uses a new indicator, called MCHO, which can detect and diagnose both normal and abnormal operating conditions of a power transmission line. This new indicator is the capacitance of the harmonic frequencies of the transmission line leakage current. The model was validated through measurements obtained on a stretch of transmission line.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The pollution from insulators, vandalism, fires, urban encroachment by building on the right of way of the line can cause faults and resultant outages in transmission lines (TLs). These events can reduce the level of isolation of the line, causing an increase in its leakage current (IL). The evolution of these events is gradual, which presumes the possibility of observing these developments up until the occurrence of the fault. Added to these events has been the phenomenon of aging and natural wear of the line that must be considered when checking the level of isolation thereof. There are methods for real-time detection of faults in TLs, some analyze the line voltage and current, observing the phase between them for locating faults [1]. Other methodologies analyze the characteristics of voltage and current phasors to estimate the state of the transmission lines [2,22]. There are some methods that analyze temporal samples of the voltage and current for measuring the impedance of the transmission line and allow the use of systems for estimating the location of faults [3]. These methods, however, do not have the power to estimate the state of insulation of the transmission line nor predict a fault. On the other hand, work such as that of [4] observed the change in the behavior of ILin the occurrence of flashover. Other works such as [5,6], found that through the harmonic decomposition of the leakage current in contaminated insulators, there is a maximum level of magnitude for certain frequencies, and they signal the malfunction of the insulation. Kanashiro (1996) [7]included in his article the climatic effects added to marine and industrial pollution. In these latest studies it has been found that monitoring the insulation or operating conditions of a TL may be performed through observation of the ILcurrent. This paper uses this finding to develop models to be employed in the detection and diagnosis, thus, to allow for developing a predictive and automatic protection methodology in TLs. This article presents a proper model aimed at the detection and diagnosis of fauls in TL by analyzing the IL. Through this model, a new indicator of the state of operation of TL’s, able to characterize their normal operation and failure modes, is proposed. Another aspect that is influenced by natural wear of a TL is its load carrying capacity and therefore the financial return it can offer. Currently this TL wear is estimated. With the characterization of the operating conditions of the power line, real wear can be considered in calculating the financial return of a TL.The methods for fault detection applied to continuous monitoring and associated with time, enable developing methods to predict faults [8,9]. The detection of faults for prediction should compare, continuously and in real time, the normal system behavior with actual behavior, as suggested by Fig. 1. The signal resulting from this comparison is called a residual. For diagnosis, signal patterns of failure modes and the signals of the residual can be used, as suggested by Fig. 1.To use this methodology, the use of normal operation and failure mode models is necessary.The model to be obtained through the studies presented in this article, is to be employed in the detection of incipient fault by model-based method. This method is based on parametric or non-parametric analytical models, with a precision which allowed performing an analytical redundancy [10]. According to [12] the analytical redundancy is based on the comparison between actual measurements and signals generated by a mathematical model of the system. The analytical model of the behavior of failure modes for the inputs of the system and the fault detection and diagnosis is performed by checking the residual, as shown in Fig. 2. The residual is the difference found between the actual measurements and those calculated by the model [11]. A significant residual does not always represents a failure, it might be unexpected behavior which can be described by correlating the model parameters. If this correlation is lost, then it is because a new element was introduced into the system.Obtaining the residual is the first step for detecting a failure. A second step is to check whether or not this residual represents a failure. In the second step, the information from the residual can have a signature representing a pattern associating the residual signal with the cause of the fault and its location. From the foregoing, one can see the great importance of having a mathematical model of normal operation representing the system analyzed with a high degree of accuracy.It was described in the introduction that monitoring the insulation of operating conditions of a TL can be performed by observing the IL. Moreover, according to [13], the capacitance associated with a resistance represents the TL dielectric losses, i.e. losses represented by IL, since it normally passes through the insulators. In other words, the behavior of ILis directly linked to the value of the capacitance of the line. In the detection of faults in transmission lines proposed in this paper, the residual is the result of the comparison of the measured ILsignal with the ILsignal obtained by the mathematical model of normal TL operation. This comparison allows for detection. The diagnosis can be obtained through the comparison against the fault models. On the other hand, the capacitance of a TL varies with environmental variables (EV’s) and hence the behavior of ILas well. Therefore, for the development of the mathematical model of normal LT is necessary to characterize the ILalso in relation to the EV’s (temperature, relative humidity). This paper does not develop detection and diagnosis. It presents a promising detection and diagnosis tool.The experimental determination of ILis calculated using the theory of Gaussian surfaces. This theory holds that the algebraic sum of the current entering and leaving a closed surface is equal to zero [14]. On a TL section, this theory applies as shown in Fig. 3. This means that when monitoring a stretch of TL, its ILcan be obtained from the vector sum of the output and input currents of this stretch.(1)IL=IGuamáSS-IUtingaSSIn the literature, some methodologies are presented to determine the ILin insulators or lightning arresters. However, cannot be found concerning the determination of ILin a section of TL [21,23,24].For monitoring of electrical and environmental variables, power analyzer and Remote Weather Station (RWS) was installed at each end of the monitored TL. The measurements performed by the analyzers are synchronized via GPS and every second. The RWS measurements are performed every 20min. All these equipments are connected to the intranet of the company responsible for that section of the monitored TL. The database is built in real time with the aid of a personal computer (as shown in Fig. 4), equipped with a Core2Quad 2.0GHz processor with 2Gb RAM memory. The processing time for determining the ILmeasured in the TL and the ILcalculated by the model is approximately 2min and 10s.The EV’s that most influence the capacitance of the TL are: Temperature (Tamb), relative humidity (Uair) and wind speed (Swind). To investigate the behavior of the capacitance with environmental variation, an experimental bench was constructed. A photographic record of this bench is shown in Fig. 5, whose schematic diagram is shown in Fig. 5.This bench consists basically of a coaxial capacitor (C) whose capacitance is connected in series with a resistance (R). The coaxial capacitor is installed in a cube of acrylic, called the test cube, where the environmental conditions (ambient temperature, relative humidity and wind velocity) are controlled. According to the diagram (Fig. 6), the current through the capacitor is measured indirectly by reading the voltage V2 at the terminals of the resistor R. Measurements are performed for various voltage levels and different conditions for Uair, Tamband Swind. Temperatures Tamb1 and Tamb2 are measured at the input and output of the coaxial capacitor. The temperature Tamb3 is taken together with the measurement of wind speed Swind.The tests were guided, maintaining two environmental variables fixed and systematically varying the remaining EV. This is for various voltage levels V3. The temperature intervals were approximately 35–50°C. The interval for relative humidity was 50–90%. The voltage levels were 600V–10kV. The tests were grouped in spreadsheets that served to look into capacitance behavior in relation to the EVs. The behavior of the environmental variable wind speed is constant with respect to the capacitance and hence was not considered in the modeling. Therefore, the EV’s employed were only Tamband Uair. These results are consistent with the work of [18], which determined the relationship of the Corona effect with Tamband Uair, and [15,16] who investigated the effects of Uarin ILin TL’s. The behavior of the capacitance with variation in temperature, relative humidity and voltage can be observed in Figs. 7 and 8. It is possible to approximate the curves displayed in the figures by second order polynomials for the capacitance behavior in relation to the environmental variables temperature and relative humidity.Through numerical extrapolation, the capacitance values with respect to the EV’s for up to 230kV (voltage level of the stretch of TL analyzed) were obtained. This is how the graphs shown in Figs. 9 and 10were obtained, together with the Eqs. (2) and (3) regarding the capacitance as a function of Tamband capacitance as a function of Uair, respectively.(2)C(Tamb)=8.9042×10-12Tamb2-4.4181×10-10Tamb+1.5693×10-8In which C(Tamb) – is the capacitance as a function of temperature.(3)C(Uair)=8.3261×10-13Uair2-1.4097×10-10Uair+1.6145×10-8In which C(Uair) – capacitance as a function of humidity.As the mathematical model allows only one equation that considers the effects on capacitance relative to EV’s. Eq. (4) has been developed that includes the effects of both EV’s simultaneously in the capacitance.(4)C(Uair,Tamb)=∝C(Tamb)+βC(Uair)In which C(Uair, Tamb) – capacitance as a function of Humidity and Temperature, ∝ – adjustment constant corresponding to temperature, β – adjustment constant corresponding to humidity.The constants α and β were arbitrarily determined in order to fit better by approximating the capacitance value measured by the test cube, in this way the values of α and β obtained are 0.5076 and 0.5093 respectively, from which Eq. (5) can be written.(5)C(Tamb,Uair)=0.5076·(8.9042×10-12Tamb2-4.4181×10-10Tamb+1.5693×10-8)+0.5093·(8.3261×10-13Uair2-1.4097×10-10Uair+1.6145×10-8)The model was based on data the constructive from the three-phase Guamá–Utinga TL (between the Guamá substation and the Utinga substation), located in the Amazon region of Brazil, operating at 230kV, with an approximate length of 20km and containing 50 towers. The matrix method [13] was used to calculate the parameters R, L, C. The calculation of these parameters for the TL studied can be seen in [17] where it was obtained:R=1.0955ΩL=0.07525HC=116,767nFThe insulation of a TL can be characterized by a combination of resistance and capacitance, which can be called capacitance of insulation, as in Fig. 11. The ILof TL’s travels this combination. So the ILdepends on the state of the line insulation.In this case the ILis the contribution of the current crossing the insulator (IC) and the current passing along the surface of the insulator (IRC), namely:(6)IL=IC+IRCThe mathematical model of Gary and Skilling-Umoto [20], shown in Fig. 12, is employed to represent the TL, where the TL insulation was shown in Fig. 10. The detection and diagnosis of incipient faults in the insulation of TL’s are checked at frequencies between 120Hz and 3kHz, so despite the model presented, incorporating this Corona effect will not be checked because it is perceived at frequencies between 2MHz and 20MHz [18,19].The mathematical model in blocks by the tool Simulink/Matlab, is represented in Fig. 13, where each block represents a tower. This configuration, which employs several towers, allows for locating the fault in the TL [21].The models found in the literature are not used in the detection and diagnosis of transmission lines; for that reason, it is not possible to compare the results.The capacitance parameter was determined considering the effects of soil and grounding as described in [17]. The capacitance values of the model are in terms of the EV’s according to their verification below (Eqs. (7) and (8)). This value has been adjusted to incorporate the influences of EV’s.(7)IC2=C2(Tamb,Uair)dV2dt(8)IC1=C1(Tamb,Uair)dV1dtThe curves shown in Figs. 14 and 15describe the behavior of ILwithout considering the EV’s. To facilitate visualization, only one of the three phases of the TL is shown. Fig. 14 shows the overlap between the waveforms of ILmeasured, in black, and calculated by the model, in grey.There was a large difference found in the peak value of ILof approximately 6A. Using the Mean Squared Error (MSE) it has an error of approximately 0.8.Fig. 15 represents the decompositions of harmonic components (HDC) of ILmeasured (black) and calculated by the model (grey).It was found that the difference in magnitudes of all frequencies was approximately 0.1, which represents a large error. The improved approximation between the curve obtained by measurement and that obtained by the model is achieved when introducing the EV’s. This introduction of the EV’s into model can be seen in the block diagram of the simulation, shown in Fig. 16, by inclusion of the blocks Tamband Uairand making the block of the insulation capacitance a function of the environmental variables, C(Uair, Tamb) responsible for correlating EV’s and Capacitance.Considering the adjustment of the capacitance as a function of the EV’s, a MSE close to 0.05 (see Fig. 17) was obtained. A decrease in the value of Total Harmonic Distortion (THD) as shown in Fig. 17 was also observed.In Fig. 18we can see the HDC of ILmeasured (black) and ILcalculated by the mathematical model (grey), taking into account the environmental effects of Tamband Uair.Despite improvement in the waveform, the magnitudes of the HDC changed little, maintaining a large error, around 0.1. Signaling for a specific study of the EV’s in the frequency domain.One reason for the big difference between the measured and calculated magnitudes of the HDC of ILare probably that the influences of the EV’s are different for each harmonic [15]. PCA was used to obtain the magnitude of these influences for each harmonic. This simple multivariable statistical method can be used for data compression and dimensionality reduction, feature extraction and data projection. In this article it was used in determining which harmonics are more affected by temperature and relative humidity.Fig. 19shows the contribution of each harmonic of ILto temperature variation.It can be seen that up to the 23rd harmonic there is 96.7% of the complete information, i.e. these are the harmonics that contribute most to the value of capacitance due to temperature variation. Fig. 20is the distribution of each harmonic of ILfor variation in relative humidity.After determination of the magnitudes that each harmonic of the HDC of the ILhas due to the EV’s, these results are used in the model by applying the superposition theorem. This Theorem allows for defining a model whereby each nth frequency (n) of each harmonic contributes as an individual electrical circuit (n), as shown in Fig. 21. The result, considering all the harmonics simultaneously, is obtained through the sum of each individual contribution.In Fig. 22, the waveforms of ILobtained from measurements (black) and the mathematical model (grey) can be seen, with insulation capacitance individually adjusted for each frequency, taking the EV’s into account. In this figure the MSE was around 0.02, thus an error much smaller than the previously presented.Fig. 23shows the harmonic decomposition of the ILmeasured (black) and ILcalculated by the mathematical model (grey), with the insulation capacitance value individually adjusted for each frequency taking the EV’s into account. This MSE was around 0.009.It can be observed that the detection model succeeds in reproducing both the waveform and the harmonic decomposition of with a good degree of fidelity. Through this methodology it is possible to reproduce the waveform of ILby the mathematical model with an acceptable degree of accuracy for detection of incipient faults. Where the determination of the model of normal operation must be obtained is through characterizing the operating state at the time capacitance adjustments were characterized for a given moment in the monitoring of the line. Therefore the model of normal operation should evolve according to the operating status of the TL. Thus this methodology allows verifying the degradation of the line in its normal operating state. So this model also suggests a methodology for evaluating the efficiency of the line based on its natural degradation and not the conditions at the time of its installation and design data. Finally, adjustment of the capacitance for each harmonic frequency suggests that this is the identifier of disturbances in the TL. In other words, this adjustment could diagnose the cause of the incipient failure. With this, a new indicator of the conditions of isolation that LT can be suggested, which is the magnitude of the capacitance of the line in adjusting the leakage current for each harmonic order, known in this article as MCHO (Magnitude of the Capacitance by Harmonic Order). The validation of the finding of this new indicator is the subject of research still in progress.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
