@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Temperature-dependent electrical and dielectric properties of nematic liquid crystals doped with ferroelectric particles

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Electric and dielectric properties of BTO FNPs dispersed in E44 have been studied.BTO FNPs suppress the ion transport, lowering the mobile-ion concentration by 50%.BTO FNPs prolong the electrode-polarization relaxation time up to 16 times.BTO FNPs as a dopant promote the voltage holding ratio up to twice higher.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Liquid crystals,Display devices,Dielectric relaxation,Electrode polarization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We report on the temperature dependence of dielectric properties of nematic liquid crystals impregnated with BaTiO3 (BTO) ferroelectric nanoparticles. The behavior of ion transport at low frequencies is discussed by means of dielectric spectroscopy, which allows the ionic concentration and the relaxation time of electrode polarization to be deduced. The experimental results imply that the ferroelectric nanoparticles can not only increase the traveling time of ions between two electrodes but also suppress the buildup of the electric double layers. Verified by the voltage holding ratio of cells containing various contents of BTO nanoparticles, it is obvious that doping BTO into liquid crystals is a low-cost and easy way to improve the device performance.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Dielectric particles embedded in nematic liquid crystal (LC) materials have recently been demonstrated to result in intriguing anisotropic colloids [1–7]. The colloidal particles in micrometer size generally form defects in LCs and ensembles of these particles and defects cause complex structures [8,9]. In comparison, colloidal particles in nanometer size, termed nanoparticles (NPs) thereafter, do not significantly perturb the nematic director field to produce considerable defects in LCs. However, to take advantage of the NP properties by combining the merits of both the NP material and the host, the concentration of NPs must be reasonably controlled in the limitation set by particle–particle aggregation arising from their large effective surface area. If the concentration of NPs as a dopant is high enough, even the weak deformations in the nematic director can create a rather viscous or an almost rigid suspension [4–6].The effect of ferroelectric NPs (FNPs) dispersed in LCs has been of great scientific interest during the past few years [10–14]. For example, doping FNPs may give rise to an asymmetry in the electro-optical response of LCs [10], enhance the optical diffraction efficiency or beam coupling [11,12], alter the dielectric anisotropy, and shift the phase transition temperatures [13,14]. Beyond anisotropic media, Barner and coworkers found that the sensitivity of isotropic liquids to an applied electric field can be promoted by doping with FNPs [15]. They showed that a long milling process of ferroelectric barium titanate (BTO) particles with spontaneous polarization of 0.26C/m2 in the presence of surfactant can lead to a stable suspension in heptane. Clearly the nanoscale of the particles doped in a LC does not significantly disturb the overall LC orientation. As such, an optimal concentration of well-dispersed FNPs allows them to maintain their ferroelectricity and share their intrinsic properties with the LC matrix without inducing defects.This study is concerned with the temperature-dependent dielectric dynamics properties of a specific nematic LC material doped with BTO FNPs. In recent year, it has been established that the unwanted impurity ions in LC displays strongly impact the device performance, reducing the display or image quality particularly at higher ambient temperatures [16,17]. In order to overcome the ion-induced problems such as decrease in voltage holding ratio (VHR) [18], increase in threshold voltage, image sticking, image flicking, and the slowdown of response speed, this work focuses on several essential ionic properties and tries to provide a promising solution to the field-screening nuisance and the ion-effect issue in general. Confirmed by the measurements of the VHR and dielectric spectroscopy, we demonstrate that doping BTO FNPs can effectively improve the performance of LC device in a reasonably wide working temperature range.We used the nematic LC E44 (Merck) and the BTO FNPs (Nanostructured & Amorphous Materials, Inc.) as the host and the nanodopant, respectively. E44, a eutectic mixture, has a high dielectric anisotropy Δε of 17.2 at 1kHz and 25°C as well as a high clearing point of ∼100°C [19]. BTO single crystals have a tetragonal crystal structure with the [001] polar axis and a spontaneous polarization of 26μC/cm2 at room temperature [20]. The dielectric constants of the BTO single crystals are 168 in the direction parallel to the polar axis and 2920 perpendicular to the polar axis [20]. The BTO particles employed in this work have an average size of 30–50nm and possess an isotropic polyhedron particle shape. The LC suspensions were prepared by dispersing 0.05, 0.1, and 0.55wt% of the said pristine BTO FNPs in E44. Each suspension was concocted by dispersing a mixture in an ultrasonic bath for 1h and then by mechanical stirring for 30min. The temperature of the ultrasonic bath was set at 95°C (beyond the clearing point of E44). Finally, pure E44 and the colloids were injected by capillary action into planar-aligned test cells coated with indium-tin-oxide (ITO) layers. The cell gap is 11.3±0.5μm. The frequency-dependent complex dielectric constant ε′−iε″ was acquired with an LCR meter (HIOKI 3522-50 LCR HiTESTER). The probe voltage amplitude is 500mVrms, smaller than the threshold voltage of the LC. On the other hand, the VHR is an important measure of LC display performance. It can be defined as [18](1)VHR(%)=AtAi×100%,where Aiand Atrepresent the areas under the ideal and actual voltage curves during a frame time, respectively. The data line used in the VHR measurement of this study is a 5V square-wave signal with a frame time of 16.67ms, and the pulse width of the scan line is 15.6μs at 60Hz. A schematic of the VHR measurement is shown in Fig. 1. Totally, four types of samples having distinct FNP contents (0, 0.05, 0.1, and 0.55wt%) were investigated in this work.The frequency (f) range of the space-charge polarization induced by the ion effect is about between 1 and 102Hz dictated by both the concentration and diffusion constant of impurity ions [21]. Furthermore, the characteristics of the electric double layer (EDL) can be explored by means of the dielectric data at frequencies lower than 1Hz [22]. Figs. 2 and 3present the real part ε′(f) and the imaginary part ε″(f) of the dielectric complex functions (ε′−iε″) of pure E44 and doped E44 at various temperatures, respectively. The temperature range for measurement is between 313 and 353K, with an accuracy of about ±1K. In the high-frequency range (104–105Hz), ε″(f) increased with increasing frequency for a given temperature. This observation is ascribed to the pseudo-relaxation originating from the cell geometries [23] rather than the molecular polarization of the NLC. Note that our empty cell can be regarded as a non-ideal capacitor whose effective capacitance and resistance are approximately 0.1nF and 350Ω, respectively, causing a cutoff frequency of ca. 5MHz. The cutoff frequency shifts to a lower frequency of the order of 105Hz due to the larger permittivity of the infiltrated NLC. Consequently, the dielectric complex curves at frequencies beyond 102kHz do not relate to the NLC material’s dielectric property. Figs. 2 and 3 also reveals an essential decrease in permittivity with increasing frequency in the frequency range of f<10Hz. This phenomenon is caused by relaxation of the near-electrode polarization due to a number of factors including EDLs, the space-charge polarization [24], and the near-electrode dipole polarization [25]. Thus, the frequency dependence of the NLC permittivity is very complex. In the low-frequency range (2–102Hz) at room temperature, the frequency dependence of the dielectric complex is dominated by the electrode polarization [24], which can be elucidated by the behavior of impurity ions. It is worth mentioning that the errors in the dielectric data are very small and hence are neglected.In accordance with Uemura’s formulation [25,26], both ε′(f) and ε″(f) are given, respectively, by(2)ε′(f)=2nq2D32ε0πdkBTf-32+ε∞,and(3)ε″(f)=2nq2Dε0kBTf-1,where n is the ion density, q is the electronic charge, D is the diffusion constant of ions, d is the cell gap, kBis the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature, ε0 denotes the dielectric permittivity in vacuum, and ε∞ represents the dielectric constant in the high-frequency limit. The physics and validity of both Eqs. (2) and (3) are well described by Uemura [25] and Iwamoto [26]. Depending on the parameters included in the formulae, the two equations are applicable roughly in the range of 10Hz–1kHz where the space-charge polarization dominates. The derivations these equations are based on the assumption of the long-range movement of mobile ions induced by the space-charge field and diffusion. Thus, these formulas do not describe the EDL formation but can satisfactorily delineate the space-charge polarization. Note that the former may strongly be dependent of the adsorption and desorption efficiencies of the impurity ions whereas the latter is a bulk process of ion transport across a cell. The equation of the ionic-charge adsorbing rate can be expressed as(4)dna(t)dt=ka[nf-na(t)][N-na(t)]-kdna(t),where na(t) denotes the density of the adsorbed ionic charges, N represents the density of the adsorbed sites, nfstands for the density of the free ionic charges existing in the LC bulk, and kaand kdare the adsorption and desorption rate constants, respectively [27]. By fitting the experimental data as given in Figs. 2 and 3 with both Eqs. (2) and (3), one can acquire the diffusion constant as well as ion density simultaneously. We first focus on the ion transport in the colloidal composite based on the electrode polarization. The formulation established by Uemura allows one to investigate the space-charge polarization without the need to consider the EDL polarization. Figs. 2 and 3 disclose that both ε′ and ε″ curves for pristine E44 and BTO-doped E44 shift to higher frequencies as the temperature increases because the viscosity reduces and impurity ions gain more energy to transport at higher temperatures. The effect of temperature on the deduced concentration of mobile ions in both pure and doped E44 is better presented in Fig. 4. It reveals that the ion density of pure E44 is relatively independent of the temperature in the range studied, implying that the dissociation reaction was not present. In addition, the ion density of BTO-doped E44 is lower than that of the neat counterpart at a common temperature due to the immobilization of impurity ions by a strong dipole–dipole interaction between the FNPs and the surrounding LC molecules [10,13]. It is speculated that the ions are attracted to “coat” the FNPs and, thus, the number of mobile ions is reduced. As the temperature changes to a higher one, the difference in ion density between the doped and undoped cells becomes less obvious. This can be understood in that the BTO FNPs can “trap” impurity ions more effectively at lower temperatures, and yet the impurity ions having sufficient thermal energy in a cell can easily depart from the local field of BTO FNPs as the temperature ascends. Fig. 4 depicts the temperature dependence of the ion density for various FNPs contents. It obviously demonstrates a clear trend in reducing mobile-ion density as the BTO content increases. It is worth mentioning that Eqs. (2) and (3) form a set of simultaneous equations, allowing one to find the two unknown parameters n and D by fitting the equations with the data of the real- and imaginary parts of the dielectric function.Next, we discuss the EDL effect in the nematic LC [28]. Due to the low mobility, the EDL polarization can only follow or respond to the vibration (i.e., polarity change) of an alternating electric field when the applied frequency is low. As the frequency is below 1Hz, the polarization of the EDL takes place. From the experimental results, one can calculate the loss tangent; i.e., tanδ, defined as ε″/ε′. Even further, the relaxation time τEP can be fitted by the following equation:(5)tanδ(ω)=ωτEP1+ω2τEP2/M,where ω (=2πf) is the angular frequency, τEP=1/(2πfEP) and fEP denotes the relaxation frequency of the electrode polarization, and M, which is unitless, is determined by the ratio of the cell gap to twice the Debye length. This equation can be simplified when Δε and M are larger than unity, which is valid in our case. The electrode-polarization relaxation time τEP is the time spent that ions diffuse onto an electrode, just forming the EDL at that moment. The results are depicted in Fig. 5, which demonstrates that τEP increased monotonically with increasing FNP concentration up to 0.55wt% because the dipole-induced local field of BTO FNPs obstructed the diffusion of ions to generate the EDL. It is also clear from Fig. 5 that τEP is greater for samples with higher BTO concentrations. For example, τEP for E44 doped with 0.55-wt% FNPs was 26.11ms at 383K whereas it was 1.67ms for the pristine counterpart. As shown in Fig. 5, the curves corresponding to pure E44 and the doped counterpart with 0.01-wt% FNPs almost overlap. Obviously, a small amount of doping does not significantly affect the impurity-ion transport in the LC bulk, but as the doping level becomes higher, the FNPs dispersed can hinder the impurity ions from transfer, causing the mobile ions to spend more time to move to the substrates. Note that the error bars in Fig. 5 are smaller than the size of experimental data points (i.e., the symbols).In order to confirm the above-mentioned results, the VHR data were collected from the four types of samples comprising dissimilar FNP contents. The VHR measurement is widely adopted in the LC-display industry for characterization of device performance. The ion effect has a serious impact on the value of VHR as an overall measure of the performance. Fig. 6illustrates the temperature-dependent VHR of E44 doped with various contents of BTO. It can be clearly seen that the VHR decreases monotonically with increasing temperature, suggesting that the ion effect becomes more severe at higher temperatures. A schematic of the VHR measurement (Fig. 1) and the definition of VHR (Eq. (1)) have been described in the preceding section. Again, the dopant effect on suppression of the impurity ions is apparent, as manifested by the higher VHR in doped cells according to Fig. 6. We observed that the VHR increases with increasing BTO content. At the temperature of 313K, the VHR was promoted from 38.7% to 76.5%. This result clearly indicates the enhancement of BTO in E44, leading to a dramatic apparent increase in VHR at lower temperatures. Similarly at a higher temperature, the VHR of a BTO-doped cell is still greater than that of the neat counterpart. One may conclude that, no matter what the temperature is, BTO FNPs are effective to improve the LC device quality based on the local strong polarization-induced ion transport phenomenon.In conclusion, temperature-dependent electrical and dielectric properties of dilute colloids of BTO FNPs in the nematic LC E44 have been investigated. The dielectric spectrum in the low-frequency range characterizes the electrode polarization contributed by space-charge polarization, whose strength is dictated by the BTO concentration as well as transport behavior of impurity ions. Our study confirms that E44 doped with BTO FNPs has lower mobile-ion density than does the pure E44 in the mesophase. As the temperature increases, the ions gain sufficient energy to transport and the measured mobile-ion density in BTO-doped E44 increases. Moreover, we observed that τEP of EDL rose dramatically up to 16-fold enhancement by BTO nanodopant at high temperatures because the FNPs hinder the impurity ions from transfer in the LC bulk. It is established that the BTO FNPs as a dopant not only localize some impurity ions via the dipole-prompted trapping to reduce the measured mobile-ion density but also effectively improve the VHR in the suspension. As expected, a dispersion with a lower FNP concentration possesses higher colloidal stability. The long-term stability of these dispersions has been examined and FNPs without surface modification are stable in the LC host for at least one month. Since our study reveals that the best concentration is 0.55wt%, we may suggest that the optimal BTO concentration would be around 0.5–0.6wt%. Higher concentrations beyond the percolation limit of ∼1wt% will lead to NP aggregation (data not shown). Here the selection of E44 is to extend our effort from a previous study of E44 doped with TiO2 NPs [29]. In this work we have not observed significant changes in response time and threshold voltage. To fully evaluate the applicability of the conclusions obtained from this study to TFT-grade LC mixtures, further investigations of relevant features of BTO suspensions in high-resistivity LCs are underway in this laboratory.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
