@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A low-power scan driver employing IZO TFTs including an AC–DC type output module

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper presents a low-power and simple scan driver with a new output module.AC–DC output module has a good tradeoff between power consumption and rising time.46 stages scan driver is fabricated by integrating IZO TFTs with BCE structure.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Scan driver,In–Zn–O Thin-film transistors (IZO TFTs),Output module,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a low-power and simple scan driver with a new output module called as AC–DC type output module. 46 stages of the scan driver are fabricated by integrating In–Zn–O Thin-film transistors (IZO TFTs) with back channel etch (BCE) structure on the glass substrate. Under 100 hours’ test, it is shown that the voltage fluctuation of the output signal can be well suppressed by the proposed AC–DC type output module up to the whole 46 stages. The power consumption can be obviously reduced by using the AC–DC type output module compared with the conventional AC–AC type output module. It is measured that the power consumption of one stage for the proposed scan driver with AC–DC type output module at the clock frequency of 16.7kHz is 170μW, as well as 393μW for the proposed scan driver with the conventional AC–AC type output module. It is shown from the simulation results that there is a good tradeoff between the power consumption and the rising time for the proposed AC–DC type output module compared with AC–AC type output module and DC–DC type output module.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In recent years, metal oxide thin film transistors (MOTFTs) have received much attention for them probably substituting a-Si:H TFTs or low-temperature poly-Si TFTs in AMLCD (active-matrix liquid crystal displays) and AMOLED(active-matrix organic light emitting diodes) due to the advantages of good uniformity, high mobility, a low-cost room-temperature fabrication process, and the compatibility with transparent or flexible applications [1–3]. By integrating scan driver with thin film transistors (TFTs) on the panel, the display systems can be cheaper and thinner [4–6]. However, there are some difficulties for MOTFTs to integrate the scan driver due to the considerable leakage current with the gate-source voltage as zero compared with a-Si:H TFTs or low-temperature poly-Si TFTs.There are a few scan driver circuits integrated by MOTFTs using two negative power sources [7–9], series connected two-transistors (STT) structure with a feedback TFT [10], or floating gate method [11] to solve the problems induced by the leakage current at Vgs=0. In this paper, we focus on optimizing the output module of scan driver since the output module occupies most of the power consumption and restricts the speed of the scan driver. For full-bit scan drivers with double negative power supply, normally, the output module may be classified into AC–AC type (Fig. 1(a)) and DC–DC type (Fig. 1(b)). Here, AC–AC type means that the drains of pull-up TFTs in the output module are connected with the clock signal, while DC–DC type means those connected with constant power supply. For AC–AC type, the parasitic capacitor of pull-up TFTs causes large dynamic power consumption. Furthermore, there is obvious voltage fluctuation for the output signal when CLK1 and CLK2 are connected together [7]. For DC–DC type, it has the disadvantage of more rising time because the gate voltage of pull-up TFTs in the output module is not high enough until the clock signal turns high [8].In this paper, we propose a simple scan driver with a new output module called as AC–DC type output module shown in Fig. 1(c), in which the drain of one pull-up TFT is connected with the clock signal and the drain of the other pull-up TFT is connected with constant power supply. The proposed AC–DC type output module may avoid the above disadvantages of the output modules shown in Fig. 1(a) and (b).This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the fabrication process of IZO TFTs and their characteristics. Section 3 describes the function of the proposed scan driver with AC–DC type output module. Section 4 provides the simulated results and experimental results of the scan driver integrated by IZO TFTs, as well as considerable discussions. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section 5.The scan driver is fabricated by integrating In–Zn–O Thin-film transistors (IZO TFTs) with back channel etch (BCE) structure as shown in Fig. 2(a), of which the process is described as follows [3]. A 300nm Al gate metal film was deposited onto glass substrates by DC sputtering and patterned by wet etching. Subsequently, a stacked structure of SiNx(250nm)/SiO2 (50nm) was deposited by plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) at 310°C as gate insulator. A 30nm IZO active layer was deposited on the insulator film by radio-frequency (RF) magnetron sputtering. For the S/D electrodes, a stacked structure of C (1.5 or 3nm)/Mo (200nm) was sequentially formed by sputtering. Finally, a 300nm SiO2 is formed by PECVD as a passivation layer to protect the devices. Fig. 2(b) shows the transfer characteristics of IZO TFTs with W/L as 28μm/7μm. There are good electrical properties for IZO TFTs, such as a saturated field effect mobility of 9.8cm2/(V·S), a sub-threshold swing of 0.43V/decade, an on-to-off current ratio of 8.0×107 and a threshold voltage of 2.0V. There is a good reliability confirmed by hysteresis, thermal stress, positive bias thermal stress (PBTS, VGS=20V, 80°C) and negative bias thermal stress (NBTS, VGS=−20V, 80°C) [3].The schematic of the proposed scan driver with one stage and its timing diagram are shown in Fig. 3(a) and (b), respectively. Fig. 3(c) shows the block diagram which depicts the connection relations among the stages of scan driver. The capacitance can be uniformly distributed on clock signal lines by using the pipeline technology, which may avoid clock skew problem. We employs three supply powers (VDD, VSS and VSSL) and three clock signals (i.e. CLK1, CLK2 and CLK3) with different phases, and the duty ratio of the clock signals is all 1/3. A single stage of the scan driver consists of an input module, an inverter module and an AC–DC type output module. T1 and T2 are connected in series to form the input module, and T3 is a feedback TFT to cut off the leakage current of T2 when the coupling capacitance C2 bootstraps [10]. T4, T4A, T5, T6, T7, T8 and C1 form the clock-controlled inverter to generate QB signal which is the inverse signal of Q. T9, T10, T11, T12 and the coupling capacitance C2 form the AC–DC type output module via which the signals of COUT and OUT are generated. Note that, the drain of the pull-up TFT T11 is connected to VDD instead of the clock signals to avoid the dynamic power consumption caused by the large parasitic capacitor of T11. As shown in Fig. 4(b), the operation of the scan driver includes four periods as follows.In this period, CLK3 keeps low, while the start signal VIN and CLK2 turn to high, and CLK1 turns to low. Then, C2 is charged to the high level since T1 and T2 are turned on. However, COUT is still hold low due to low level of CLK3. At the same time, VDD ceases to charge C1 due to the low level of CLK1. Subsequently, the node QB is pulled down to VSSL since T5 and T6 are turned on by the high level of VIN. Thus, the pull-down TFTs T10 and T12 are turned off. For our inverter module, the direct current path can be avoided when QB outputs low compared with conventional diode-connected inverter [8].CLK1 remains low to keep T4 and T4A off. CLK2 switches to low to turn off the input TFTs T1 and T2 before VIN becomes low. Since the voltage of node Q is bootstrapped up to a higher level by C2 when CLK3 switches to high, COUT can rises to the high level voltage of CLK3 rapidly. Thus, OUT outputs high via the pull-up TFTs T11 which is driven by COUT. It should be indicated that the signal OUT drives the scan line of display panel, while the signal COUT provides the start signal for the next stage as shown in Fig. 4(c). In addition, the signal COUT turns on the feedback TFTs T3 to raise the voltage of node A to prevent the leakage current of T2 [10]. So the voltage of node Q can be maintained as high level within this period. Although T5 and T6 are turned off due to low level of VIN, node QB is still kept stably as VSSL to maintain T10 and T12 off since T7 and T8 are turned on by the high level of COUT. However, to prevent the next stage outputting high level simultaneously in this period, the scan driver with DC–DC type output module may need additional modules to avoid the COUT signal directly charging the node Q of next stage [8].In this period, CLK3 switches to low. And the node Q keeps high since CLK2 keeps low. At the same time, the signal COUT is pulled down to VSSL through T9 quickly. The pull-up TFT T11 is completely turned off due to low level of COUT. And QB is charged to VDD to turn on the T10 and T12 as CLK1 switches to high. As a result, the signal OUT discharges to VSS through T12.Node Q turns to VSSL since CLK2 switches to high. And then node Q keeps low until the start signal VIN turns high in the next frame. QB keeps high by C1 since QB is periodically charged by VDD through T4 and T4A. As a result, COUT and OUT keep low stably in the whole period. Note that, there is no dynamic power consumption for T11 during the whole period since the drain of T11 is fixed with VDD in our AC–DC type output module. However, the dynamic power consumption of T11 may be obvious in the scan driver with AC–AC type output module since the size of T11 is designed to be large for meeting the requirement of driving ability.The power consumption of the scan driver may be expressed as [12–14](1)P=N∗fCLK∗CCLK∗VCLK2+V∗IThe first part is the dynamic power consumption, where N is a fixed coefficient, fCLK is the frequency of clock signal, CCLK is the parasitic capacitance at the clock signal line and VCLK is the difference between high level and low level of the clock signal. The second part is the static power consumption. Note that, the dynamic part occupies the most of the whole power consumption compared with the static one. Normally, the parasitic capacitor on the pull-up TFT T11 is quite large compared with other TFTs because T11 should be designed large enough to ensure the driving ability. For our proposed AC–DC type output module, the drain of T11 is connected to VDD without voltage jumping, which can considerably reduce the dynamic power consumption of the proposed scan driver. For comparing, the AC–DC type output module of the proposed scan driver is replaced by the conventional AC–AC type output module with the same driving schedule and same parameters as indicated in Table 1. The experimental results of the proposed scan driver with AC–DC type output module and that with the conventional AC–AC type output module will be provided in Section 4.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we propose a low-power scan driver integrated by IZO TFTs, which includes a new output module called as AC–DC type output module. There is a good noise-suppressed characteristic and fine reliability even up to 46 stages for the proposed scan driver. It is measured that the AC–DC type output module is helpful for reducing the dynamic power consumption compared with the conventional AC–AC type output module. It is also shown that the rising time of output signal for the AC–DC type output module is much smaller than that for the DC–DC type output module. In conclusion, there is a good tradeoff between the power consumption and the rising time for the proposed AC–DC type output module compared with AC–AC type output module and DC–DC type output module.