@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Input–output signal selection for damping of power system oscillations using wind power plants

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A comparison of various input–output signal selection methods is presented.Wind power plant contribution to power system oscillation damping is studied.Recommendations are drawn to select the best signal pairs available from WPPs.SISO and MIMO control system design approaches are considered.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Controllability,Damping,Frequency domain analysis,Observability,Power system oscillation,Wind power plant,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
During the last years wind power has emerged as one of the most important sources in the power generation share. Due to stringent Grid Code requirements, wind power plants (WPPs) should provide ancillary services such as fault ride-through and damping of power system oscillations to resemble conventional generation. Through an adequate selection of input–output signal pairs, WPPs can be effectively used to provide electromechanical oscillations damping. In this paper, different analysis techniques considering both controllability and observability measures and input–output interactions are compared and critically examined. Recommendations are drawn to select the best signal pairs available from WPPs to contribute to power oscillations damping. Control system design approaches including single-input single-output and multivariable control are considered. The recommendation of analysis techniques is justified through the tools usage in a test system including a WPP.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
As a consequence of increased wind power penetration levels, transmission system operators (TSOs) are concerned with system stability. Wind power plants (WPPs) are required by TSOs to meet Grid Code requirements and sometimes to behave as conventional power plants — capable of providing support to the power system when requested to maintain stability [1–3]. Power system stability is divided in three main groups depending on the response of the system to a fault: frequency, rotor angle and voltage stability [4].Rotor angle stability is defined as the capability of synchronous generators to keep or restore the equilibrium between their mechanical and electromagnetic torques. This stability issue is usually exhibited by synchronous generators as low frequency oscillations (LFOs). The main effects of such oscillations are to limit the power transfer capacity of the system and to cause large grid failures. This problem used to be solved by the installation of power system stabilizers (PSSs) at synchronous generators to increase the damping of the system. Nowadays, due to recent technological advances on power system devices, damping of electromechanical oscillations has been proposed in the literature to be provided by HVDC links, energy storage systems, flexible AC transmission systems and wind power generation [5–10]. It is worth mentioning that wind power is located where wind blows stronger and is more profitable; thus, it is difficult to geographically locate a WPP where its damping capabilities can be best achieved [11]. The physical location of the WPP plays an important role when defining the possible input and output signals for oscillation mitigation if they are measured locally [7,11]. When the WPP is far from the conventional generation, the low frequency oscillation on the electrical signals can be smoothed or hidden. This implies a lower observability, as stated in [7,11].Different methods to select the best feedback signal to damp power oscillations have been discussed in [8,12–16], but the case for WPPs has not been yet well covered. Recent research focuses on the best input–output signal pairs employing controllability and observability analyses such as residues and geometric measures [13,17]. Other works study the interaction between different controllers for a multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO, multivariable) case and try to determine if a decentralized controller could be considered by using the relative gain array (RGA) [17,18]. In [19], fundamental limitations of control design by using local signals to damp remote oscillations are analyzed, where the interaction between local and remote signals has an important influence.The aim of this paper is to compare different controllability and observability and signal interaction analyses for power system oscillation damping employing local signals from WPPs. The main advantages and drawbacks of each alternative are examined. Frequency domain tools such as the RGA and the multivariable structure function (MSF) [20–22] are employed to assess the interaction between signal pairs. Using the frequency domain approach, the arising control design and performance limitations under the presence of right hand plane zeros (RHPZs) are clearly defined [23]. The use of some of these methods is recommended to select the best input–output pairs which ensure a good controllability and observability of the desired oscillation mode, while providing a clear insight of the potential and limitations of the damping controller. These suggestions provide a guideline to select the best input–output signal pairs suitable to damp power system oscillations by means of WPPs signals –either through single-input single-output (SISO) or multivariable (MIMO) control schemes.WPPs comprising variable-speed wind turbines only (either based on doubly-fed induction generators or fully-rated converters) exhibit dynamics which are considerably faster than the synchronous frequency and the electromechanical dynamics found within power systems. Decoupling of WPPs from network dynamics can be achieved through the use of power converters [3]. For these reasons, WPP models can be simplified for small-signal stability analysis.WPPs regulate the active power delivered to the grid through an adequate control of the generator-side converter. The aim is to transfer the maximum active power from the wind turbine following an optimum wind power extraction. On the other hand, reactive power regulation is achieved through the control of the grid-side converter [24]. Due to the availability of active and reactive power measurements for converter control, these could be used potentially as control signals for damping controllers. In general, either local or remote measurements could be selected as input signals for a damping controller sitting at a WPP, where electrical variables can be represented, for convenience, as phasors (i.e., in terms of their magnitude and phase angle).It should be emphasized that the input–output pair (or pairs) selection largely influences the performance of power oscillation dampers. This is particularly critical for the case of WPPs, since they can be located far away from the synchronous generators — where electromechanical oscillations originate.In general, power systems can be described by a set of nonlinear differential and algebraic equations of the form(1)ẋ=f(x,u)y=l(x,u)wherex=[x1,x2,…,xn]Tis the state,u=[u1,u2,…,um]Tis the input,y=[y1,y2,…,yr]Tis the output, andf(·)=[f1(·),f2(·),…,fn(·)]Tandl(·)=[l1(·),l2(·),…,ln(·)]Tare nonlinear functions [4].For small signal analysis, system (1) is linearized around an operating point and can be written in state-space form as(2)Δẋ=AΔx+BΔuΔy=CΔx+DΔuwhereΔx,ΔuandΔyare small deviations with respect to the operating point (thereinafter, theΔsymbol is omitted for simplicity);A,B,C, and D are matrices of adequate dimensions; and the corresponding transfer function is given by(3)G(s)=C(sI-A)-1C+D.Fig. 1shows a feedback loop using a controller K relating the inputs with the outputs of system. It is worth to remark that K represents any linear time-invariant controller.If power oscillation damping is provided by WPPs, the system inputs (or control signals) could be the active (Pwt) and the reactive power (Qwt) delivered by the WPP. Conversely, the outputs (or measured signals) could be defined as the voltage magnitude (Vwt) and the voltage phase angle (θwt) at the point of connection of the WPP. The availability of these signal measurements provides different control alternatives, including both SISO and MIMO control schemes. For instance, if a SISO controller is considered, the input–output pair could be chosen, for example, asu=Pwtwithy=Vwt, or alternativelyu=Qwtwithy=Vwt, among others.For the MIMO case, both inputs and outputs should be considered at the same time (i.e.,u=[PwtQwt]T,y=[Vwtθwt]T). The control scheme could be either centralized or decentralized. In the case of a decentralized controller, the input–output signal pair definition arising from a diagonal control structure has significant importance when designing effective controllers [23]. The pairing selection criteria for both SISO and MIMO control schemes are commonly based on controllability and observability properties, and performance limitations are established following a frequency response analysis of the open loop system [25,26].Controllability indicates how the state variables describing the behavior of a system can be affected by its inputs. Observability is associated with the possibility of determining the states from the outputs. More precisely, the system (2) is said to be controllable, if for any initial statex(t0),t1>0and final statex1, there exists finite input u such thatx(t1)=x1. The system (2) is observable if, for anyt1>0, the initial statex(t0)can be determined fromu(t1)andy(t1)[23].In damping of power oscillations, it is necessary to determine controllability and observability for specific eigenvalues. A brief description of tools commonly used for this purpose is presented next.This consists in evaluating the rank of matrices(4)C(λk)=λkI-Abi(5)O(λk)=λkI-AcjTwhereλkis the kth eigenvalue of the matrixA,Iis the identity matrix,biis the column of B corresponding to ith inputuiandcjis the row of C corresponding to the jth outputyj. The modeλkof linear system (2) is controllable if matrixC(λk)has full row rank. Similarly, the modeλkis observable ifO(λk)is full column rank [23].The rank of matricesC(λk)andO(λk)can be evaluated by their singular values. The singular values of a matrix M are defined asσi=λk(MTM)(k=1,…,n)withσ1⩾…⩾σn⩾0. The matrix rank is then given by the number of non-null singular values. In practice, due to numerical limitations, the rank is the number of singular values greater than a given tolerance. Therefore, the minimum singular valuesσnprovide a measure of how close to singular is the matrix. In the case of matricesC(λk)andO(λk),σnindicates how far is the system of being uncontrollable or unobservable, respectively, with respect to the ith input and jth output.The choice of input and output signals through the PBH test is done by selecting those with the largest of the minimum singular valuesσnof matricesC(λk)andO(λk)[12]. Although this is a reasonable input–output selection criterion to determine the most controllable and observable signals, it is not always clear which pair presents the best joint controllability and observability characteristics. From a control point of view, the joint measure is of great importance.Given the transfer functiongij(s)from the inputuito the outputyj, it is always possible to express it as a sum of partial fractions of the form(6)gij(s)=yj(s)ui(s)=cj(sI-A)-1bi+dij=∑k=1nRks-λk+dijwhereRkis the residue associated to the modeλk[26]. The residueRkprovides an idea of how the modeλkis affected by the inputuiand how visible is from the outputyj. Therefore, the residues are clear measures of joint controllability and observability of a particular oscillation mode. For this reason, residues are commonly used in damping oscillation analysis [4,13,27].The residues can be computed directly from the state-space realization by using(7)Rk=cjϕkψkbiwhereϕkandψkare the right and left eigenvectors of the matrix A, respectively, corresponding to the eigenvalueλk. As in general the residues are complex numbers, the best input–output signal pair is given by the maximum value of the residue magnitude. The residues depend on the scale of the input and output signals and do not always provide a clear comparison among transfer functions associated to variables with different units.The controllability and observability geometric measures, respectively, are defined as(8)mci=cos(θ(ψk,bi))=|biTψk|‖ψk‖‖bi‖(9)moj=cos(θ(ϕk,cj))=|cjϕk|‖ϕk‖‖cj‖whereθ(ψk,bi)is the angle betweenbiandψk, andθ(ϕk,cj)is the angle betweencjandϕk. The geometric measures provide an idea of how aligned the columns of matrix B and the rows of C are with an eigenvector of A. Ifmci=0, the column ofbiis orthogonal to eigenvectorψkand a controller will not be effective to modify the state associated to eigenvalueλk. Similarly, ifmoj=0,cjandϕkare orthogonal and modeλkwill not be observable from the outputyj[28].A joint geometric measure can be defined as(10)mcoij=mcimoj.A zero value ofmcoijindicates thatλkis non-controllable/non-observable from the ith input and the jth output. The geometric measures provide a similar information as the residues, with the advantage of being normalized and independent of the scale of the signals. These measures have been used to determine the best input–output pair in power oscillation damping applications [14,28].Some authors have proposed the use of Hankel singular values (HSVs) for the selection of input–output pairs [8]. However, it is not possible to connect the controllability and observability of a particular mode with the HSVs [23]. For this reason, their use is not considered in this paper.It is well-known that non-minimum phase zeros (or RHPZ) impose limitations on the achievable performance [29,30]. To ensure closed-loop stability, the controller cannot cancel RHPZs and the frequency response of the closed-loop transfers will have fixed points that cannot be altered by the controller. For instance, the sensitivity transferS(s)takes the value 1 at a RHPZ independently of the controller; that is, ifξis a RHPZ, then(11)S(ξ)=(I+K(ξ)G(ξ))-1=1.These constraints become serious limitations if the RHPZs are close to the mode to be damped, since the magnitude of the closed-loop transfer cannot be arbitrarily reduced. If the controller set is reduced to proportional gains, the constraints are more serious. A simple root locus analysis reveals how strong these limitations are. Since the closed-loop poles tend to the open loop zeros, if an open loop pole is close to a RHPZ, a small increment in gain may result in an unstable system and thus it is not possible to affect the lightly damped mode. Therefore, any pair with RHPZs in the range of LFOs should be avoided.The limitations imposed by RHPZs have been used to propose input–output selection procedures in [30,31]. In the context of damping oscillations in power systems they have been used in [8,19].An alternative view on input–output signal pair selection can be obtained from the frequency domain. This allows to evaluate input–output interactions and thus determine if decentralized controllers will be able to achieve a reasonable closed-loop behavior.It allows to evaluate interactions among different inputs and outputs [23]. In the context of input–output pair selection, it helps to determine the pair with the highest interaction and to evaluate the possibility of using multivariable controllers. The RGA matrix H is defined as(12)H(s)=[ηij(s)]=G(s)⊗G(s)-Twhere[ηij]denotes the element ij of the matrix H and the operator⊗denotes the Hadamard or Schur product (element by element product) [23].For example, in case of systems with two inputs and two outputs (2×2system),(13)G(s)=g11(s)g12(s)g21(s)g22(s)and the RGA is given by(14)H(s)=η11(s)1-η11(s)1-η11(s)η11(s)with(15)η11(s)=g11(s)g22(s)g11(s)g22(s)-g12(s)g21(s).The following conclusions can be drawn from the RGA (14)[20,23]:•Ifη11is close to 1, pairsu1-y1andu2-y2are decoupled and can be controlled independently. In this case, a centralized multivariable controller will not achieve a better performance than the decentralized one(16)K(s)=k11(s)00k22(s),in whichk11andk22can be designed independently.Ifη11is close to zero, the RGA indicates that the best pairs for decentralized control should beu1-y2andu1-y2and the controllers can be designed independently if the input–output pairs are reordered.Otherwise, the pairs are not decoupled and the decentralized controller should be designed carefully. For stable plants, input–output pairs with negative steady-state RGA elements should be avoided. Otherwise, if the sub-controllers are designed independently each with integral action, then the interactions will cause instability either when all the loops are closed or when the loop corresponding to the negative relative gain becomes inactive.Notice that the RGA depends on the frequency. Therefore, the previous analysis should be done in the frequency range of interest; i.e., the range where LFOs arise.It is the building block for the individual channel analysis and design (ICAD) framework [32,33]. An appropriate interpretation of the MSF at low and high frequency allows to determine: the existence and required structure of diagonal controllers, the dynamical structure of the closed-loop system, a reliable measurement of robustness, and the possibility to satisfy design specifications [20].In ICAD, the dynamical structure ofG(s)is determined by individual channelsCi(s)resulting from pairing each input to each output by means of diagonal controllers [32]. Consider the 2×2 system in (13) and the decentralized controller (16). Then the closed-loop system can be represented as two SISO individual channelsCi(s), each including a feedback loop and its controller, as shown in Fig. 2. The multivariable structure of the plant is encapsulated by the scalar transfer functionγa(s). This representation is equivalent to the original system with no loss of information [32].In general,Ci(s)has the open loop SISO transmittance(17)Ci(s)=kii(s)gii(s)(1-γa(s)hj(s))where(18)γa(s)=g12(s)g21(s)g11(s)g22(s)is the MSF and(19)hj(s)=kjj(s)gjj(s)1+kjj(s)gjj(s)describes the impact of controllerkjj(s)on the ith control loop, subjected to the disturbances(20)di=gij(s)gjj(s)hj(s)rj(s),which represent the effect of referencerj(s)on channelCi(s). As it can be seen from Fig. 2 and (17)–(20) the behavior ofCi(s)is both affected by its controllerkii(s)and by channelCj(s)[32,33]. Moreover, the MSF [20]:•determines the dynamical characteristics of each input–output configurations and indicates the potential performance of a feedback control system;its adequate interpretation ensures an effective control system design;its magnitude quantifies the coupling between input–output channels in the frequency domain,is related to the plant transmission zeros (zeros of1-γa(s),|G(s)|=g11(s)g22(s)-g12(s)g21(s)=0);γa(s)=1determines the non-minimum phase condition;its closeness to (1,0) in the Nyquist plot indicates to what extent the plant is sensitive to uncertainty in terms of gain and phase margins.If the channels are defined by pairu1-y2andu2-y1, then the MSF is given by(21)γb(s)=g11(s)·g22(s)g12(s)·g21(s)=γa-1(s)and(22)Ci(s)=kij(s)gji(s)(1-γb(s)hj(s)).Notice that the RGA matrix H can be expressed in terms of the MSFs [20]:(23)H=11-γa(s)γa(s)γa(s)-1γa(s)γa(s)-111-γa(s)=γb(s)γb(s)-111-γb(s)11-γb(s)γb(s)γb(s)-1.The different methods presented in Section 3 are assessed through the test system shown in Fig. 3, which has been previously used to show the interaction between conventional generation and WPPs [34]. This is a simple power system model which provides a clear insight of the system dynamics. The WPP including converter-based wind turbines is assumed as a negative load, since the converter dynamics are considerably faster than the electromechanical dynamics that this work is focused on. For the same reason, the transmission lines are modeled as reactances, with the capacitor dynamics in PI representations being neglected. This approach has been previously used in [35]. The system parameters can be found in Appendix A.The linearized system is represented in state-space form as (2), where(24)x=[δωE′]T,u=[PwtQwt]T,y=[Vwtθwt]TThe state variables x represent the angle and frequency of the rotor and the exciter control variable of the synchronous machine. The input u is the aggregated active and reactive power and the output y is the voltage magnitude and phase angle of the WPP. Matrix A has a lightly damped oscillation mode atλ12=-0.0119±8.30375j, with frequency 1.322Hz and a damping coefficient of 0.00144.As it can be seen from (24), the system is2×2. Although simple in nature, it is representative enough to clearly assess the tools presented in Section 3. The use of a more complex system representation is out of the scope of this work; however, the tools here presented could be equally applied to systems with additional inputs and outputs. It should also be noted that the impact of measuring remote signals using wide-area measurement systems could be included through the introduction of time delays, but it is out of scope of this paper. Instead, it is assumed that all signals are available (either through direct measurement or estimation).The controllability and observability measures previously presented were compared using the system under study. According to (24), four possible signal pairs can be analyzed:Pwt-Vwt,Qwt-Vwt,Pwt-θwtandQwt-θwt.The singular values corresponding toC(λ1)andO(λ1)are listed in Tables 1 and 2. Notice that matrixC(λ1)depends on vectorsbiand not oncj. For this reason, Table 1 has only two columns. The same applies toO(λ1), with results in Table 2. The largest of the minimum singular values for the possible signal pairs is highlighted. It can be observed that the most controllable pairs correspond to those with the active power delivered by the WPP (Pwt) as an input. The most observable pairs are those with the phase angle of the WPP connection point (θwt) as an output.It can be concluded that the best signal pair isPwt-θwtsince it renders the largest of the minimum singular values for bothC(λ1)andO(λ1). Also, it can be seen that the worst signal pair isQwt-Vwt. However, the next best possible option is not clear from the remaining alternatives since the PBH test does not provide any joint controllability and observability measure.The magnitudes of the residues are listed in Table 3. It can be observed that the maximum value corresponds to the pairPwt-θwt. This is consistent with the information provided by the PBH test; thus, this signal pair should be selected as a first option. Conversely to the PBH test, the residue analysis clearly defines the best order of the signal pairs due to its joint controllability and observability measurement test.These are given in Table 4. The joint controllability and observability measuremcoshows that the signal pair to be selected must bePwt-θwtsince it has the maximum value among the input–output pairs. This pair presents negligible differences compared toQwt-θwtin terms of controllability and observability; in other words, the use of either pair would provide similar results. These results are consistent with those obtained previously. However, in this case the information is clearer since the values are normalized and presented in per unit.The transfer function corresponding to the system under analysis is given byG(s)in (13), where(25)g11(s)=-0.032727(s+0.5314)(s2-0.08487s+78.87)(s+0.3985)(s2+0.02391s+68.95)g12(s)=0.23117(s+0.4832)(s2+0.01688s+69.35)(s+0.3985)(s2+0.02391s+68.95)g21(s)=0.23766(s+0.4036)(s2+0.0181s+93.34)(s+0.3985)(s2+0.02391s+68.95)g22(s)=-0.021838(s+0.535)(s2-0.2433s+151.9)(s+0.3985)(s2+0.02391s+68.95)Fig. 4shows the Bode plots of the individual transfer functions in (25). For clarity, Fig. 4(a) features the diagonal elementsgii(s)and Fig. 4(b) the off-diagonal entriesgij(s)ofG(s). It can be clearly seen that the damping controller should act in the region 8–11rad/s (1.2–1.75Hz).In Eq. (25), it can be seen a pair of complex RHPZs in the individual transfer functionsg11(s)andg22(s)close to the lightly damped modeλ12=-0.01196±j8.3038. In the Bode plots in Fig. 4(a), a resonance peak caused by the low damping ofλ12can be observed. The contribution of 180 degrees of the non-minimum phase zeros is also clear in these plots. In the rest of the frequencies, the magnitudes ofg11(s)andg22(s)are below −20dB, suggesting a small contribution of inputPwtto outputVwtand inputQwtto outputθwt. Fig. 4(b) showsg12(s)andg21(s). The proximity of the oscillation modeλ12to the lightly damped zeros tends to cancel the resonances peaks; however, in these cases the minimum phase zeros contribute with positive phase. The magnitude of transfer functionsgij(s)is higher compared to that ofgii(s).If disturbances at the voltage are considered, the closed-loop transfer is given by(26)gcl,ij(s)=(1+Kij(s)gij(s))-1.Due to the RHPZs ing11andg22(ξ11=0.0424±8.8808jandξ22=0.1216±12.3242j), regardless the controller(27)gcl,11(ξ11)=gcl,22(ξ22)=1.This implies that it will be difficult to reduce the resonance peak and thus to increase the damping of modeλ12, especially in case ofg11whereξ11is quite close toλ12[29].This preliminary analysis suggests avoiding signal pairs directly associated to individual elementsg11(s)andg22(s)due to the limitations imposed by the presence of RHPZs; i.e., avoidPwt-VwtandQwt-θwt. Nevertheless, since no conclusion has been made about the internal coupling of the plant it is not apparent how the RHPZs ofg11(s)andg22(s)will reflect on the signal pairs associated to off-diagonal transfer functionsg12(s)andg21(s)(i.e., on pairsPwt-θwtandQwt-Vwt).The methods previously presented for determining suitable input–output pairs are used to analyze the system under study (Fig. 3).The elements of matrix H for the2×2system are(28)η11=-0.0132(s+0.54)(s+0.53)(s2-0.085s+77.87)(s2-0.24s+154.9)(s+0.484)(s+0.398)(s2+0.0239s+68.95)(s2+0.018s+92.85)η12=1.013(s+0.48)(s+0.4)(s2+0.017s+69.35)(s2+0.018s+93.34)(s+0.484)(s+0.398)(s2+0.0239s+68.95)(s2+0.018s+92.85)Fig. 5shows the Bode diagrams of the diagonal and off-diagonal RGA entries. It can be seen thatη11(s)(diagonal elements of H) are negative for most frequencies and their magnitude small. This can be concluded after examination of (28) and the phase plot in Fig. 5. Phases of 180° and −540° correspond to negative magnitudes, and overallη11(s)will only be positive for a narrow margin of frequencies between 8 and 10rad/s. Conversely, the magnitude ofη12(s)(off-diagonal elements of H) is close to unity (i.e., 0dB), as shown by Fig. 5. Simple inspection of (28) shows thatη12(s)has a positive magnitude for all frequencies. This is corroborated by the nearly constant phase of 0° in Fig. 5.As outlined in Section 3.3, in case of using decentralized controllers with independently designed elements, input–output pairs with positive diagonal (or off-diagonal) entries are recommended. Since the magnitude ofη11(s)is negative for most frequencies, pairsPwt-VwtandQwt-θwtshould be avoided. Furthermore, since the magnitude ofη12is close to unity, the corresponding input–output pairs (i.e.,Pwt-θwtandQwt-Vwt) could be treated as SISO plants. It should be noted that the change of sign at some frequencies inη11(s)implies that RHPZs are present in plantG(s), which is consistent with (25). However, it is not clear how those non-minimum phase zeros will affect the control system design and performance arising from the pair definition.Using (18) and (21), the MSFs of (25) become(29)γa=76.87(s+0.483)(s+0.404)(s2+0.017s+69.35)(s2+0.018s+93.34)(s+0.535)(s+0.531)(s2-0.0849s+77.87)(s2-0.243s+151.9)γb=0.013(s+0.535)(s+0.531)(s2-0.085s+77.87)(s2-0.24s+151.9)(s+0.483)(s+0.404)(s2+0.0169s+69.35)(s2+0.0183s+93.34)An adequate interpretation of the MSFs allows a complete evaluation of the control system design limitations arising from the presence of RHPZs and the multivariable character of the plant. This goes beyond the information provided by the RGA analysis [20]. SinceG(s)was obtained from a state-space form, the number of RHPZs of(1-γa(s))is given by [22](30)Z=N+P-Q,where Z is the number of RHPZs of(1-γa(s)),Pis the number of right hand plane poles (RHPPs) ofγa(s),Nis the number of clockwise encirclements to(1,0)in the Nyquist plot ofγa(s), and Q is the number of eigenvalues in the right hand plane of the state-space representation. This is an application of the Nyquist stability criterion [22].Fig. 6shows the Bode plots of MSFsγa(s)andγb(s). It can be seen that the coupling resulting from pairingPwt-VwtandQwt-θwtis high for all frequencies, as evidenced by the magnitude ofγa(s)above 20dB. From (29), it is evident thatγa(s)has four RHPPs; i.e.,P=4. As shown by (25), for this systemQ=0. Sinceγa(0)=28.85, the Nyquist plot starts at the right side of(1,0). The Nyquist plot ofγa(s)given in (29) encircles(1,0)four times in counter-clockwise direction, implying thatN=-4. Thus, applying (30)(1-γa(s))contains no RHPZs; i.e.,Z=0.The information obtained from the previous analysis is revealing. When considering the signal pairsPwt-VwtandQwt-θwt, the associated individual channels defined by (17) are non-minimum phase. This is not a consequence of the multivariable character of the plant, as evidenced by the lack of RHPZs in(1-γa(s)), but to those RHPZs appearing in the diagonal transfer functionsg11(s)andg22(s)(Eq. (25)). Examination of the Bode plotsgii(s)in Fig. 4 shows that the frequency of those RHPZs is around the frequency of the oscillation modeλ1. In order to avoid instability, the bandwidth of the oscillation damper should be restricted below the range of frequencies at which it should act to damp electromechanical oscillations. These are two conflicting and irreconcilable control design objectives and, therefore, the MIMO damper design employing signal pairsPwt-VwtandQwt-θwtis not recommended. Even if this was not the case, the fact thatγa(s)has RHPPs implies that(1-γa(s))will preserve such structure. Thus, the damping controller would require the stabilization of an unstable plant with non-minimum phase zeros, which is not a trivial task [23].Fig. 6 also shows that the internal coupling of the plant arising from pairPwt-θwtandQwt-Vwtis weak: the magnitude ofγb(s)is below −20dB for most frequencies except for those where the damping controller should act. From (29) it is evident thatγb(s)has no RHPPs (P=0). The Nyquist trajectory ofγb(s)given by (29) starts to the left of(1,0)and no encirclements to this point occur, implying thatN=0. Applying (30),Z=0and thus (1-γb(s)) contains no RHPZs. Moreover, transfer functionsg12(s)andg21(s)have no RHPZs. In spite of the presence of RHPZs ing11(s)andg22(s), this does not reflect on the input–output channel definition associated toγb(s)in (17). Based on this analysis, the input–output pairsPwt-θwtandQwt-Vwtshould be considered for a MIMO controller design.In order to illustrate the previous results, time domain simulations were carried out. The test system of Fig. 3 was implemented in MATLAB/Simulink. A controller of the formKpss=K(sTw/(sTw+1))was designed using root locus analysis, whereKpsswas formed by a washout filter with a time constantTw=2s, a gain K=3 and a limiter. Such a controller structure was used for the case of independent four input–output SISO pairs and when evaluating MIMO configurations. The controller parameters remained the same in all cases to offer a meaningful comparison while ensuring system stability for all SISO cases. In other words, for the following resultsKpss=k11=k22=k12=k21.Fig. 7shows the simulation results (input and output variables) for SISO designs considering input–output pairsPwt-VwtandQwt-θwtand for the case of a decentralized MIMO design considering the pairs defined byγa(s)(i.e.,C1(s):Pwt-VwtandC2(s):Qwt-θwt). The simulation starts with the system at steady state. At 5s, an impulse variation on the mechanical power reference of the synchronous machine is done in order to excite the oscillation mode existing on the system. As it can be observed, the system becomes unstable for the MIMO design. This was expected since MSFγa(s)features RHPPs and the simple controllers used are not able to modify its structure. It could be argued that a more complex MIMO controller may stabilize the plant, but this is out of the scope of this work. Conversely, the system is stable when considering the designs for the SISO pairs, but non-minimum phase zeros are present. Moreover, the damping contribution is weak in either SISO case and the oscillations are not damped during the simulation horizon. It could be argued that the performance may be improved by increasing the proportional gain of the controller, but care should be exercised since the system may become unstable due to the presence of RHPZs.Fig. 8shows the simulation results for the SISO designs considering input–output pairsPwt-θwtandQwt-Vwtand for the case of a decentralized MIMO design considering the pairs defined byγb(s)(i.e.,C1(s):Pwt-θwtandC2(s):Qwt-Vwt). As it can be seen, in both SISO cases the oscillations are damped after a transient period. When considering the SISO pairPwt-θwt, the magnitude of the voltage, its phase angle and the reactive power show less oscillations than for the SISO case withQwt-Vwt. This was expected from the analysis carried out in previous sections. When using the same controller in both individual channels, it can be seen that the MIMO design produces the best damping performance in all variables except for the case of active power, where the oscillations take a longer time to be eliminated. This superior performance was expected since the MIMO design takes the damping contribution of both feedback loops.It should be emphasized that the results obtained in Figs. 7 and 8 agree on well with the analyses carried out with the controllability and observability tools and the frequency domain approaches from the previous sections. It is also apparent that the best performance for any possible SISO alternative is achieved when considering input–output pairPwt-θwt.From the analysis of the different selection methods previously presented, some recommendations can be outlined with the aim of finding the most adequate alternative for input–output signal pairing (depending on the desired control scheme).Considering the SISO case, controllability, observability and the location of RHPZs determine the best signal pair. Various tools for controllability and observability analyses have been presented. The most useful is the geometric measure since erroneous results caused by different magnitude scales are avoided through the normalization of the controllability and observability measures. The location of RHPZs must also be considered in the study since they might impose serious control restrictions if they appear nearby the oscillation mode to be damped.For decentralized multivariable schemes, the interaction between input–output pairs is also a limiting factor. For this analysis, both RGA and MSF can be used; nevertheless, MSF is more suitable since it provides additional information about the achievable performance levels and limitations associated to RHPZs.When considering the application of the tools presented in this paper, it is worth noticing that the amount of input and output signals will be reduced when considering WPPs with local signals. This substantially reduces the problem complexity as the system will not present a large system matrix. Following this consideration, it is important to take into account weakly damped oscillation modes only. This helps to further simplify the system when a large number of synchronous generators is present. After these simplifications the tools recommended can be directly applied.A brief summary of the selection methods discussed in previous sections is given in Tables 5 and 6. The green checkmark indicates the tool capability to provide the marked property, whereas the red cross stands for those properties which cannot be achieved by the selected tool.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
