@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Analysing the connectivity and communication of suicidal users on twitter

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We investigate the characteristics of the authors of Tweets containing suicidal intent or thinking, through the analysis of their online social network relationships and interactions.Results show a high degree of reciprocal connectivity between the authors of suicidal content when compared to other studies of Twitter users, suggesting a tightly-coupled virtual community.Analysis of the retweet graph identified bridge nodes and hub nodes connecting users posting suicidal ideation with users who were not, suggesting a potential for information cascade and risk of possible ‘contagion’.Retweet graphs of suicidal content exhibit an average shortest path similar to that of a large comparison network, demonstrating large scale information propagation in small-scale networks.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Social media,Social network analysis,Twitter,Computational social science,Suicide,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper we aim to understand the connectivity and communication characteristics of Twitter users who post content subsequently classified by human annotators as containing possible suicidal intent or thinking, commonly referred to as suicidal ideation. We achieve this understanding by analysing the characteristics of their social networks. Starting from a set of human annotated Tweets we retrieved the authors’ followers and friends lists, and identified users who retweeted the suicidal content. We subsequently built the social network graphs. Our results show a high degree of reciprocal connectivity between the authors of suicidal content when compared to other studies of Twitter users, suggesting a tightly-coupled virtual community. In addition, an analysis of the retweet graph has identified bridge nodes and hub nodes connecting users posting suicidal ideation with users who were not, thus suggesting a potential for information cascade and risk of a possible contagion effect. This is particularly emphasised by considering the combined graph merging friendship and retweeting links.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
It is recognised that media reporting about suicide cases has been associated with suicidal behaviour [1]. Concerns have been raised about how media communication may have an influence on suicidal ideation and cause a contagion effect among vulnerable subjects [2]. With the advent of open and massively popular social networking and microblogging Web sites, such as Facebook, Tumblr and Twitter (frequently referred to as social media), attention has focused on how these new modes of communication may become a new, highly interconnected forum for collective communication of suicidal ideation on a large scale. The demographic of online social networks is typically reported to be the younger generation [3,4] and thus teenagers and young adults are at particular risk. The risk of suicide contagion has been found to be especially high in adolescence and youth [5].A limited number of studies have been published, reporting a positive correlation between suicide rates and the volume of social media posts that may be related to suicidal ideation and intent [6,7]. However, to date there is no study that is specifically focused on the connectivity and communication of suicidal ideation between users of social media. Such a study could be important in the light of concern about the normalisation of suicidality and self-harm in social media. There is a small evidence base that suggests a connection between exposure to online self-harm- or suicide-related material and offline self-harming behaviour or suicidal ideation [3].The research presented in this paper comprises an analysis of data collected from the microblogging website Twitter, the text of which has been classified as containing suicidal ideation by a crowdsourced team of human annotators. We study the connectivity characteristics between users and the propagation of suicidal content. To achieve this we have performed a social network analysis (SNA) of the connections of a specific subset of Twitter users who have been identified as posting content related to suicidal ideation. The SNA is applied to friend and follower connections of the subset of users, as well as investigating the potential content propagation by analysing the retweet graph of posts containing suicidal ideation. More specifically we are addressing the following research questions:RQ1: With respect to the friends-followers and mutual graphs we focus on measures of graph connectivity to determine whether there is evidence of high connectivity between these specific type of ‘suicidal’ users, or whether these users are instead more isolated and exist within smaller social networks, as reported in [8,9]. Evidence that would allow us to partially answer this question is expected to be revealed by measurable network characteristics such as ‘average node degree’, ‘graph density’ ‘and ‘shortest path lengths’.RQ2: Regarding the retweet graph, we would expect traditional connectivity metrics to be less revealing as we do not have a complete network of all social ties (friends/followers) between retweeters. This is primarily because we only collected retweets for the sample set of ‘suicidal users’, due to the long time it would take to collect all users given the frequency/time limitations imposed by Twitter. Nevertheless, we can measure the shortest path metrics, which are a measure of information cascade. High values of average and maximal average shortest path imply greater propagation of information though the network. In addition, starting from an individual belonging to the set of ‘suicidal’ users, we can investigate if there is any evidence of social ties between these users and the Twitter users that have retweeted their posts. Evidence of this nature would allow us to gain insight into whether suicidal content is being restricted within the same community of friends and followers, or if it is propagating outside the user’s social community into the wider network, where it could pose a risk of contagion.The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. Section 2 describes the related work on this topic. Section 3 describes the data collection method. Sections 4 and 5 describe experiments used to measure connectivity and communication between suicidal users, and discuss the findings. Sections 6 and 7 draw conclusions from the study and identify possible ideas for future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
