@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Evaluation of hierarchical DHTs to mitigate churn effects in mobile networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This research reviews recent works on flat DHTs under high churn.This research evaluates a flat DHT and a hierarchical DHT with or without churn.This research assesses the performance of two HDHTs with or without churn.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
P2P,HDHT,Churn,Mobile network,OMNeT++,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Existing flat peer-to-peer (P2P) systems based on distributed hash tables (DHTs) perform unsatisfactorily under churn due to their non-hierarchical topology. These flat DHTs (FDHTs) experience low lookup success ratio, high lookup latency and high bandwidth usage as a consequence of the presence of churn. With this, we explore the use of hierarchical DHT (HDHT), specifically the superpeer design, in mitigating the effects of churn. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to intensively examine HDHTs with and without high churn through simulations.Using the OMNeT++ simulator and the OverSim framework, we analyze flat and hierarchical DHTs with and without churn. Results show that the implemented HDHTs perform more satisfactorily than a flat DHT because of better fault isolation and smaller cluster sizes at the cost of higher superpeer traffic. HDHTs are more stable as they have better lookup success ratios. They are more efficient as evidenced by lower lookup latencies and lower average node bandwidth usage. They are more scalable since their performance do not degrade significantly even at high population. With this, the implemented HDHTs can be utilized to alleviate the effects of churn in mobile networks.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Structured peer-to-peer (P2P) network is one type of overlay network that organizes its nodes in a tightly controlled topology [1,2]. It acts as the routing and location service for P2P systems. Because it uses deterministic content placement based on distributed hash tables (DHTs), this type of network is also known as DHTs. Its advantage over the unstructured P2P network, another type of overlay network, is its efficient item location. However, these DHTs require overlay maintenance traffic to constantly reorganize the topology.In this research, we focus on the analysis of structured P2P overlays or DHTs under churn, the process of node arrival and departure. This phenomenon occurs when nodes recurrently connect and disconnect from the network causing transient behavior in the system. When present in DHTs, churn induces routing performance degradation such as low lookup success, high latency and high bandwidth consumption (see Sections 2, 4 and 5).Now that mobile and wireless devices become part of everyday user experience, accessibility to all applications using any machine has been significant. Users expect availability of different applications such as P2P in their devices. Some P2P applications are file sharing, multimedia streaming, Voice over IP (VoIP) and multicasting. In addition, more devices are now and will be connected to the Internet; according to Cisco Systems, “37 billion new things will be connected by 2020” [3].With the growing mobile population and the increasing user expectation, there exists a need to integrate these mobile devices into the P2P community. These devices will be able to properly utilize P2P applications if the routing and location service, or the overlay network, can withstand the dynamic membership and routing performance degradation caused by churn in mobile networks. Thus, the overlay should be stable, efficient and scalable in order for the mobile users to experience seamless network connectivity for their applications.Current DHTs employing a flat design have poor performance when faced with the presence of churn. These overlays experience low lookup success, high latency and high bandwidth consumption. Thus, a flat DHT is not designed for dynamic networks. Some DHTs have a hierarchical topology which has fault isolation due to multiple independent overlays. Such hierarchical design offers good stability, efficiency and scalability. However, to the best of our knowledge, hierarchical DHTs have not been examined intensively under churn through simulations.With this, our research aims to investigate the performance of different DHTs, flat and hierarchical, against the effects of churn. Scrutinizing the impact of churn would assist in determining whether these DHTs would withstand churn effects in mobile networks. Through simulations, the contributions of our paper are as follows:•We have evaluated a flat DHT (FDHT or simply DHT) and a hierarchical DHT (HDHT) with or without the presence of churn under several simulation scenarios. This evaluation determines which design offers better performance when dynamic membership is prevalent.We have evaluated two different hierarchical DHTs with or without churn under several simulation scenarios. This determines whether two different HDHTs would perform similarly and where they can be implemented.In the succeeding sections, we present the problem of churn in P2P overlays over wireless or mobile networks. Section 2 expounds on relevant works in peer-to-peer and the challenges of churn. This section shows how FDHTs perform poorly under churn and how HDHTs can be the better alternative in mobile networks. Section 3 describes the simulation setup and procedures for evaluating the effects of churn on the DHT performance and for investigating HDHTs. Sections 4 and 5 assess the performance of the different DHTs with and without churn. Lastly, Section 6 summarizes all the assessments and recommendations with regards to the implemented DHTs.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this work, we have evaluated three systems, namely, Chord DHT, Chord–Chord HDHT and Chord–Kademlia HDHT, under various operating conditions. We have shown that the flat DHT performs poorly at high churn, prompting the need for a system with better support for mobile nodes. We have shown that the two hierarchical systems exhibit satisfactory performance even at the presence of churn. We discover that both HDHTs are more stable, more efficient and more scalable compared to the flat system and are therefore good candidates in alleviating the effects of churn in mobile networks.Chord–Chord HDHT is better than Chord DHT because of the cluster-based design resulting to better fault tolerance. It is more stable, more efficient and more scalable than Chord DHT. Similar to Chord–Chord HDHT, Chord–Kademlia HDHT also shows good performance.This work’s Chord–Kademlia HDHT implementation can be employed in mobile networks that need to be reliable and delay-intolerant but are not bandwidth-constrained. Such networks require few lookup failures and fast lookup resolution to ensure that time-sensitive materials are received correctly and immediately. However if the main consideration is lightweight mobile application, our work’s Chord–Chord HDHT implementation is the better option. Mobile devices have limited capacities, which means short battery life and unreliable connectivity. Such devices require an application that can provide good lookup success and fast lookup latency, along with small bandwidth utilization to optimize the limited resources. In conclusion, we have shown that by using any of the two hierarchical DHTs, we can integrate mobile devices into the P2P paradigm.For a more realistic scenario, we suggest various modifications to the HDHT designs. First, we propose to introduce multiple superpeers per sub overlay for better fault tolerance in the face of superpeer unreliability. Second, we recommend to introduce more nodes in the network and to have uneven cluster sizes for HDHTs. Practically, a network may span to more than 8000 nodes and each autonomous system has different population sizes. Third, we can incorporate actual file exchange after the successful lookup operation to determine the effects of transmitting large data on the over-all HDHT performance.