@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Electrochemically-switchable emission and absorption by using luminescent Lanthanide(III) complex and electrochromic molecule toward novel display device with dual emissive and reflective mode

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Electroswitching of emission and coloration was achieved by Eu(III) complex and viologen.Coloration of the material was associated with the electrochromic reaction.Emission control was induced by intermolecular energy transfer from Eu(III) ion to viologen.Complex-molecule system can be used as display material with dual emissive and reflective modes.Numeric indication and mutli-color representation of dual-mode display were demonstrated.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Dual mode display,Energy transfer,Lanthanide(III) complex,Electrochromism,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Electroswitching of emission and coloration was achieved by a combination of a luminescent Eu(III) complex and an electrochromic molecule of diheptyl viologen (HV2+), indicating that the complex-molecule combination could be used as a display material with dual emissive and reflective modes. The coloration of the material was associated with the electrochromism of HV2+. Emission control was found to be possible due to the electrochromism of HV2+ via intermolecular energy transfer from the excited state of the Eu(III) ion to the reduced state of HV+. By using this mechanism, dual emissive and reflective representation of numerical characters were demonstrated.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In recent years, reflective displays have attracted much attention as low power consumption display devices. However, reflective displays are not effective under dark conditions. On the other hand, emissive displays such as organic light emitting devices (OLEDs) and transmissive liquid crystal displays (LCDs) using backlights are suitable when dark conditions are required, for example, for displaying movie contents; however, viewing under direct sunlight is difficult in this case. Dual-mode display (DMD) devices can operate in both emissive and reflective modes combining both their advantages and are extremely promising as next-generation displays. By using DMD devices, we can choose either the reflective or the emissive mode depending on the situation. However, few studies have been published on DMD devices because they include two different mechanisms in one device, and hence, the system becomes complicated [1]. For obtaining DMD devices with simple configurations, novel material that enables the control of both emission and reflection in response to external stimuli is required.Materials with stimuli-responsive optical properties have attracted considerable research interest since they are prominent candidates for chemical sensors [2], biochemical sensors [3], molecular logic gates [4], molecular memories [5], and display devices [6]. These materials can change their photophysical properties, such as fluorescence intensity, fluorescence wavelength, and absorption wavelength, in response to external triggers. Various external triggers, such as thermal, electrical, optical or chemical stimuli, are used to realize reversible switching of the optical properties of materials modified with thermosensitive [7], electroactive [8], photoactive [9], or pH-sensitive species [10].Among them, materials with multifunctional response to external stimuli have attracted great attention. Materials showing both fluorescence switching and absorption switching have been reported, for example, a thermochromic system containing a fluoran dye and developer; the aggregation structure of this thermochromic system changes in response to thermal stimuli, and these changes are accompanies by color changes [11]. In this system, fluorescence on–off switching is induced by fluorescence resonance energy transfer from a fluorescent dye to a colored fluoran dye. Photoresponsive multi-functional systems that show both color and emission changes have also been reported; these systems consist of a photochromic diarylethene derivative associated with a luminescent moiety [12]. In fluorophore–diarylethene systems, turn-on/turn-off fluorescence occurs; the initial fluorescent open-ring isomer is switched off during diarylethene photo-cyclization, and closed-ring isomers at best show very weak fluorescence resulting from energy or electron transfer from the fluorophore to the closed-ring form of the diarylethene. The fluorescence can be readily restored through visible light irradiation.Among multifunctional materials, we focused on electrical stimuli-responsive material because this type of stimuli is particularly suitable for display application as the stimuli can be applied rapidly, remotely, and reversibly [13]. As electrochemically active materials, electrochromic materials, which show reversible color changes as a result of electrochemical redox reactions, have been considered as potential candidates for multifunctional devices because they have been successfully applied to functional devices, such as smart windows, dimming mirrors, electrochromic tags, and digital signage [14]. We have reported that both emission and absorption can be controlled through electrochemical reactions [15]. These multifunctional systems were fabricated by integrating a luminescent Eu(III) complex and an electrochemically active material, diheptyl viologen (HV2+). Generally, Eu(III) complexes have unique optical properties such as line-like red emissions, long luminescence lifetimes, high transparency in the visible region (large Stokes shift), and high emission quantum efficiencies, which have resulted in their widespread application, particularly in phosphors, bioassays, and sensor development [16]. In our system, fluorescence switching was caused by energy transfer between the fluorescent material and electrochemically active material in response to electrical stimuli (concept of the composite material is shown in Fig. 1).In this paper, we investigated detailed electrochemical, photophysical properties of the multifunctional material enabling the control of both luminescence and coloration. We employed tris(hexafluoroacetylacetonato) (Eu(hfa)3(H2O)2) and 1,1′-diheptyl-4,4′-bipyridinium dibromide (HV2+) (chemical structures are shown in Fig. 2) as the luminescent and coloration materials, respectively. Coloration and emission control were achieved by only electrochemical reactions. The coloration of the composite material was controlled by the HV2+ electrochromism. Photoluminescence control was also achieved by the HV2+ electrochromism via intermolecular energy transfers from the excited states of Eu(III) ions to colored HV+ and HV. And finally, we demonstrated dual-mode representation of numerical character by using 7-segment device, and we also achieved multi-color DMD representation.Europium acetate tetrahydrate and hexafluoro acetylacetonato (hfa) were purchased from Tokyo Kasei Industries Ltd. 1,1′-Diheptyl-4,4′-bipyridinium Dibromide (HV2+) was purchased from Aldrich co. Ltd., Propylene carbonate (Wako Pure Chemical Industries, Ltd.) was used as a solvent after removing water by molecular sieves. Tetra-n-butylammonium perchlorate (TBAP) (Wako Pure Chemical Industries, Ltd.) was used as an electrolyte (50mmol/L) without further purification.Europium acetate monohydrate (5.0g, 12.5mmol) was dissolved in 50mL of distilled water by stirring at 0°C. A solution of 1,1,1,5,5,5-hexafluoro-2,4-pentanedione (7g, 33.6mmol) was added dropwise to the above solution. The mixture produced a precipitation of white yellow powder after stirring for 3h. The reaction mixture was filtered. The resulting white yellow needle crystals were recrystallized in methanol/water. Yield: 85%. 19F NMR (acetone-d6, 400MHz) δ=−72.80 (s, CF3) ppm. The chemical shifts were determined with hexafluorobenzene as an external standard (δ −162.0 (s, Ar-F) ppm). Anal. Calcd for C15H7O8F18Eu: C, 22.48; H, 0.88%. Found: C, 22.12; H, 1.05%.UV–Vis absorption spectra of the samples were measured using a spectrophotometer (JASCO, V-570) by using quartz cells (path length: 1.0cm). Photoluminescence spectra were obtained using a spectrofluorometer (JASCO, FP-6600). Excitation wavelength of the samples was 337nm. The emission lifetimes were determined by using a N2 laser with a 337-nm wavelength and 4-ns pulse width (Spectra-Physics, VSL337) and a photomultiplier (Hamamatsu Photonics, H10721-20MOD, response time 0.8ns). Samples were excited by nanosecond pulse of N2 laser (337nm). Emission from the sample was guided to the photomultiplier through a sharp-cut filter. Emission decays were monitored with a digital oscilloscope (Sony Tektronix, TDS3052, 500MHz) synchronized to single-pulse excitation. The quantum yields were determined by standard procedures with an integral sphere (JASCO, ILF-533, diameter 10cm) mounted on a spectrofluorometer (JASCO, FP-6600). The solution for optical measurements was purged with nitrogen gas for 20min before each measurement.Cyclic voltammograms and chronoamperometric measurement were recorded on a potentiostat/galvanostat (ALS, 660A) equipped with a computer. A three-electrode cell was constructed with an ITO glass as working electrode, Pt wire as counter electrode and an Ag/AgCl electrode as reference. The scan rate was 50mV/s. Absorption spectra were recorded in situ during the potential sweep using a diode array detection system (Ocean Optics, USB2000). The solution for electrochemical studies was purged with nitrogen gas for 20min before each experiment. In order to measure the emission spectra and the emission lifetime under voltage application, the DC voltage was applied to the cell by using DC source (HIOKI 7011 DC signal source).A two electrodes cell was constructed with ITO glass electrodes and plastic spacer (70μm; Lintec Co.). The PC solution containing Eu(hfa)3(H2O)2, HV2+, and TBAP was sandwiched between ITO electrodes to evaluate the electrochromic and emission property. Concentration of the Eu(hfa)3(H2O)2, HV2+ and TBAP were 10mmol/L, 10mmol/L and 200mmol/L, respectively.The dual mode representations of numerical characters were carried out by using 7-segments patterned ITO electrodes. The DMD cell was fabricated by sandwiching PC solution of Eu(hfa)3(H2O)2, HV2+, and TBAP between 7-segments patterned ITO electrode and plane ITO electrode with keeping inter-electrodes distance of 70μm by plastic spacer. The concentration of Eu(hfa)3(H2O)2, HV2+, and TBAP were were 10mmol/L, 10mmol/L and 200mmol/L, respectively. The negative voltage was applied to certain patterned segments by using DC source (HIOKI 7011 DC signal source).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In conclusion, we have described electroswitchable emission and coloration by using a luminescent Eu(III) complex Eu(hfa)3(H2O)2 and an electrochromic molecule HV2+. The Eu(III) complex emission was controlled by the HV2+ electrochromism via an intermolecular energy transfer mechanism. When HV2+ was in a colorless state, a strong red emission was observed from Eu(hfa)3(H2O)2. On the other hand, the electrochemically colored state of HV+ and HV effectively quenched the red emission of the Eu(III) complex. A prototype 7-segment DMD cell was also fabricated. The cell represented numerical characters with emissive and reflective modes. We also achieved mutli-color DMD representation by introducing suitable materials. Further studies on improvement of the response time and representation of the multicolor representation are in progress. We believe that the results of this research will contribute to the development of novel display devices such as novel monitors, digital signages, and e-papers.