@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Mobility assisted data gathering with solar irradiance awareness in heterogeneous energy replenishable wireless sensor networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Consider a joint design of mobile data gathering and energy replenishment.Propose a novel two layer heterogeneous architecture for wireless sensor networks.Present a mobility assisted data gathering scheme with solar irradiance awareness.Simulation results show that MADG-SIA provides significant improvement in terms of balancing energy consumption and the amount data gathered compared to previous work.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Wireless rechargeable sensor networks,Mobile energy replenishment,Clusters,Solar irradiance awareness,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Wireless sensor networks adopting static data gathering may suffer from unbalanced energy consumption due to non-uniform packet relay. Although mobile data gathering provides a reasonable approach to solving this problem, it inevitably introduces longer data collection latency due to the use of mobile data collectors. In the meanwhile, energy harvesting has been considered as a promising solution to relieve energy limitation in wireless sensor networks. In this paper, we consider a joint design of these two schemes and propose a novel two layer heterogeneous architecture for wireless sensor networks, which consists of two types of nodes: sensor nodes which are static and powered by solar panels, and cluster heads that have limited mobility and can be wirelessly recharged by power transporters. Based on this network architecture, we present a data gathering scheme, called mobility assisted data gathering with solar irradiance awareness (MADG-SIA), where sensor nodes are clustered around cluster heads that adaptively change their positions according to solar irradiance, and the sensing data are forwarded to the data sink by these cluster heads working as data aggregation points. We evaluate the performance of the proposed scheme by extensive simulations and the results show that MADG-SIA provides significant improvement in terms of balancing energy consumption and the amount data gathered compared to previous work.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Wireless sensor networks (WSNs) have been deployed for a variety of applications ranging from health, agriculture, industry to military. WSNs consist of a large number of randomly distributed sensor nodes that sense the environment and send the sensing data to the data collector in an ad hoc manner. These sensor nodes usually have limited energy supply, e.g., from batteries, which makes energy efficiency a critical issue in sensor network design and deployment. Much effort has been devoted to reduce energy consumption by employing power efficient hardware and software architectures, wireless communications and networking techniques [1–6]. Research shows that wireless communications is the dominant energy consumer on sensor nodes, thus how to gather data from sensor nodes is an important issue for energy consumption optimization in sensor networks.One of the most important problems in data gathering in WSNs is to balance the energy consumption among sensor nodes. Unbalanced energy consumption caused by packet relay leads to energy holes in the network, which may disable the packet forwarding toward the data collector, and eventually results in degraded network performance, such as short network lifetime and low data throughput. In a conventional homogeneous wireless sensor network, a statically deployed data collector, referred to as data sink, is used to gather data from the network. Since data packets converge toward the data sink, the nodes that are closer to the data sink have to relay much more data than the nodes that are farther away from the data sink, and they consume energy much faster than other nodes. When these nodes deplete their energy, the data sink becomes unreachable to the rest of the nodes, thus the entire network can no longer operate.Hierarchical WSNs have been proposed to relieve the unbalanced energy consumption problem, in which sensor nodes are organized into clusters [7–13]. Instead of sending all the data to the single data sink in a multi-hop manner, sensors upload data to the aggregation nodes of the cluster they belong to, which are referred to as cluster heads. These data are then relayed to the data sink by cluster heads which are built with stronger wireless communications capability and more energy supply. Such a hierarchical architecture can mitigate energy unbalance to some extent, however, since cluster heads are statically deployed, network lifetime is limited by the nodes around these cluster heads.Mobility has been introduced into WSNs due to its benefits, such as guaranteeing network connectivity, reducing network cost, increasing reliability, and improving energy efficiency [14]. Mobile data gathering uses a mobile data collector to sojourn at different positions in a sensor network to gather data from surrounding sensor nodes. By moving the data aggregation points across the entire network, energy consumption tends to be balanced in the whole network [15,16]. However, a challenge of mobile data gathering is that such a scheme inevitably introduces long data collection latency because the mobile data collector has to visit all the selected positions before it can upload data to the data sink. The positions of data aggregation points also need to be carefully selected depending on multiple factors, such as network topology, energy levels of all the sensor nodes, and the amount of sensing data generated in each sensor node. The computation inevitably increases overhead and operational complexity of the network.Energy harvesting techniques have been recently employed as a solution to prolong network operating time from another aspect. Such a scheme captures energy from the ambient environment, e.g., mechanical, thermal, photovoltaic or electromagnetic energy, to charge sensor nodes. However, the main drawback of energy harvesting techniques is the low efficiency of recharging, since the power output of energy harvesting devices is relatively low compared to the power consumption of the node for sensing and communications [17], especially for the sensor nodes around the data aggregation points.In order to overcome the aforementioned problems, it is desirable to find a novel approach to balancing energy consumption to improve network performance in WSNs. By taking advantage of mobility and renewable energy while shortening data collection latency, we propose a mobility assisted data gathering with solar irradiance awareness scheme, abbreviated as MADG-SIA, to achieve balanced energy consumption in WSNs and prolong network lifetime. We construct an MADG-SIA enabled network with three types of devices: the static sensor nodes that are powered by solar panels, the mobile cluster heads that can be wirelessly recharged, and the power transporters (referred to as PowCars). Different from sensor nodes, the discharge rates of cluster heads are much higher than the charge rate provided by solar panels due to the large amount of data forwarding and movement. We use PowCars to charge cluster heads more efficiently when their energy levels are low. The network has a hierarchical architecture where sensor nodes are clustered and send data to their corresponding cluster heads. The cluster heads sojourn at different positions, referred to as anchor points, in each data gathering period, to collect data from surrounding sensor nodes in a one-hop or multi-hop manner. By carefully moving cluster heads to some positions for data gathering, the energy-consuming data forwarding tasks are shared among all the sensor nodes to balance their energy consumption. On the other hand, as the moving distance of cluster heads is limited, and they communicate with the data sink directly once settled down, the data collection latency in the proposed network is much shorter than that in mobile data gathering. Based on this network architecture, we will find optimal positions for anchor points and moving paths for cluster heads, and develop a clustering approach and determine the routes for sensor nodes to upload data to cluster heads.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The related work is discussed in Section 2. Section 3 describes the framework of the proposed scheme. In Section 4, the system model and the proposed algorithm are presented for WSNs with regular and random topologies. Section 5 evaluates the impact of various parameters on network performance. Finally, the paper is concluded in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Balancing energy consumption is a challenging task in designing a WSN as data collection is usually restricted by the sensor nodes that have depleted their energy, even for sensor nodes with energy replenishment. In this paper, we have proposed a novel mobility assisted data gathering mechanism (MADG-SIA) which balances the energy consumption for data transmission among the sensor nodes to extend the operating time of a heterogeneous energy replenishable WSN. The area is divided into several regions, and a cluster head moves around in each region, sojourns at different anchor points to gather data from surrounding sensor nodes in a pattern with respect to solar irradiance. By employing such mobile cluster heads, the energy distribution in the solar harvesting WSN is balanced, thus data output is increased and the network operating time is prolonged. We present a low-complexity method to find moving patterns for each cluster head. We also present a weighted algorithm for node clustering and routing. We demonstrate that MADG-SIA is efficient in prolonging network operating time and enhancing data output. We provide guidance on parameter selection for designing and deploying such WSNs by evaluating the performance of MADG-SIA with different parameter setups, and we also demonstrate the effectiveness of MADG-SIA in extending network operating time and increasing data output by comparing with the scenarios of data gathering with single data sink (DSDG) and data gathering with statically deployed cluster heads (CHDG-Fixed) in energy harvesting WSNs.