@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Characterization and optimization to improve uneven surface on MEMS bridge fabrication

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We significantly improved the planarity of the sacrificial layer.We improve the planarity of the membrane.We analyse the effect of different etchant gases for releasing the bridge.We released a large membrane without any surface bending.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
RF MEMS bridge,Flatness,Smoothness,Extra hard bake,Reflow,Dry release,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents an optimized fabrication method for developing a freestanding bridge for RF MEMS switches. In this method, the sacrificial layer is patterned and hard baked a 220°C for 3min, after filling the gap between the slots of the coplanar waveguide. Measurement results by AFM and SEM demonstrate that this technique significantly improves the planarity of the sacrificial layer, reducing the uneven surface to less than 20nm, and the homogeneity of the Aluminum thickness across the bridge. Moreover, a mixture of O2, Ar and CF4 was used and optimized for dry releasing of the bridge. A large membrane (200×100μm2) was released without any surface bending. Therefore, this method not only simplifies the fabrication process, but also improves the surface flatness and edge smoothness of the bridge. This fabrication method is fully compatible with standard silicon IC technology.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Radio frequency (RF) micro and nano electromechanical switches (MEMS/NEMS) are an excellent options for the replacement of conventional semiconductor switches as they offer low power consumption, low noise operation, high electrical isolation, and ultra wide frequency band [1]. Electrostatic MEMS/NEMS switches can be categorized based on their structure (shunt or capacitive) or material (metallic and carbon). The impacts of the structure and the material on the performance of these switches were analyzed and discussed by the authors in [2].The structure of a typical RF MEMS shunt switch is shown in Fig. 1. The switch consists of a bridge which is suspended over a coplanar wave guide (CPW) transmission line and fixed at both ends to the ground of the CPW. In this switch, the shape and structure of the bridge membrane are critically important as they directly affect both electrical and mechanical resonant frequencies, and pull in and pull out voltage (Vpull-in and Vpull-out) [3,4].When fabricating a membrane for an RF MEMS switch, three issues are encountered as follows (Fig. 1). It is non-flat and also has two sharp edges with 90° sidewall. The non-flat membrane is occurred because of the uneven surface between signal and ground lines after patterning the first layer of the CPW, the type and the characteristic of photoresist (size, thickness), the techniques of coating (spin, spray, or electro deposition), the lithography parameters (temperature, UV exposure, and developing). This uneven surface causes deterioration in performance of the switch as it increases the fringing capacitance, and reduces the contact between the electrodes [5]. A flat membrane was reported in [6,7] by filling the gap after patterning the CPW followed by a chemical-mechanical polishing (CMP). Although this technique greatly improves the flatness and planarization of the membrane, it is very expensive and complicated. In addition, the sharp edge sidewalls increase the risk of bending or cracking during releasing.The second issue is the thickness homogeneity of the metal along the profile of the bridge after patterning the bridge (Fig. 1). The shadowing effects cause much thinner vertical side walls in comparison to the bridge thickness [8], resulting in the bridge to collapse during the releasing step. Thus, one more step of fabrication process is required for patterning the anchor which consists of: spin coating, soft bake, aligning mask and UV exposure, developing unexposed area, sputtering Aluminum, and lift-off. However, this step not only increases the fabrication time (almost by one day), but is also costly. The steps involved in the fabrication process of RF MEMS switches is shown in Fig. 2. It mainly consists of five steps: (i) patterning electrode, (ii) patterning transmission line, (iii) patterning anchor, (iv) patterning membrane, and (v) releasing the membrane. The whole process takes about four days to complete.The third issue is the collapse and buckling of the bridge during the wet or dry releasing process. The risk of collapse in wet release can be reduced if the membrane is rinsed by low surface tension liquids (acetone, methanol and IPA in order) [9] or dried by CO2 supercritical dryer [10]. Dry release is easier than wet release because it eliminates the collapsing of the bridge. Oxygen Plasma (O2) is used to remove the photoresist in dry release. Saha et al. [11] used two experiments to release a membrane. In the first experiment, the sacrificial layer under the bridge is etched and the membrane is released at 400W. However, using high power O2 plasma for releasing the bridge increases the compressive stress in the membrane, resulting in the buckling of the membrane [12,13]. In the second experiment, etching holes are incorporated in the membrane to avoid the problem of buckling. The membrane is released at 150W because O2 plasma reaches the sacrificial layer under the bridge through the holes on the surface and the two openings at both sides. However, the main disadvantage of the etching holes is the reduction of the beam’s spring constant. Although introducing the etching holes on the beam results in a faster and convenient dry release process, it reduces the resonant frequency of the beam, as well as the isolation of the switch while the switch is in contact [14–16]. The parameters of the releasing process by O2 plasma, power, pressure, and photoresist thickness, were comprehensively investigated by Rahman et al and Yu et al. [17,12]. The releasing became more critical when the photoresist was hard baked as it made a thermal cross link. For example, Saha et al. [11] removed the hard baked photoresist sacrificial layer (baking at 130°) by a combination of dry and wet release. This has two main drawbacks. Firstly, the risk of collapsing is increased as it involves liquid to remove the photoresist. Secondly, acetone cannot remove the hard baked photoresist, and thus other types of etchant liquid such as Microposit 1165, Az 100 or Kwik strip need to be used. It should be noted that if the photoresist is extra hard baked, it may not be removed by liquid etchant.Accordingly, this paper proposes a new method for fabrication of a bridge particularly for RF MEMS switches in order to address the above-mentioned three issues. The contributions of this paper are as follows:•The first contribution of the paper is the introduction of a fabrication protocol for developing a membrane for RF MEMS switch applications based on the extra hard baked photoresist. Motivated in part by the work of Soulimane et al. [6], Saha et al. [11], and Nasabi et al. [18], this protocol not only simplifies the fabrication steps, but also improves the flatness of the bridge and softening the edges.The second contribution of this paper is the introduction of a low power (250W) dry release process for a membrane without any etching hole and extra hard baked photoresist at 220°C. By using this approach, the compressive residual stress is minimized, eliminating the buckling of the membrane.RF MEMS switches were fabricated using the standard photolithography technique. The fabrication process in principal is compatible with the CMOS fabrication process. Fig. 3gives the details of the proposed fabrication process, and Fig. 4shows the details of the cross-sectional view of the fabrication steps of the RF MEMS switch. As can be seen in Fig. 3, the proposed fabrication process consists of 4 steps whereas the conventional fabrication process includes 5 steps. It also important to note that in this fabrication process we ignore the pattern of electrodes as the aim is to study structure of the bridge not the electrical or mechanical behavior of it.Fig. 4(a)–(c), illustrates the deposition and patterning of the Aluminum layer utilizing the lift-off process. Fig. 4(a), shows the first photolithography step to achieve the sacrificial layer for lift-off. A layer of positive resist, AZ4562, was spun at 3000rpm to achieve a thickness of 4μm. Then, the sample was soft baked at 110°C for 90s to evaporate the remaining solvent, followed by UV-light exposure using a EVG6200 mask aligner with a dosage of 150mJ/cm2. Next, the desired pattern was developed by removing exposed area using 1:4 ratio of AZ400K developer to DI water. Fig. 4(b), demonstrates the deposition of the Aluminum film. The metal films were deposited by the Intlvac Nanochrome AC/DC system at a pressure of 3–6×10−7Torr. A 10nm thick Cr layer was deposited as an adhesion layer prior to the deposition of a 1000nm thick Aluminum film. Then, the sample was immersed in acetone and ultrasonicated for 3–5min to remove the photoresist leaving the Aluminum pattern layer on the wafer. Fig. 4(c), shows the patterned Aluminum film after completing the lift-off process.Fig. 4(d), presents the planarisation of the surface of the sample using an additional layer of positive photoresist, AZ1512, with a thickness of 1μm. A layer of AZ1512 was spun at 1500rpm and then the sample was soft baked at 110°C for 90s. We used the same Mask as realizing the CPW transmission line for planarization. Then, the sample was exposed to UV-light with a dose of 75mJ/cm2. Next, the exposed area was removed using 1:4 ratio of AZ400K developer to DI water. It is important to state that eliminating this layer could result in an uneven surface which could result in severe problems such as poor contact in the following fabrication steps. Next, the sample was treated by plasma asher for 3min in order to planarise the surface further.Fig. 4(e) presents the sacrificial layer of the bridge. This layer provides a mechanical support for the bridge prior to release. A positive resist, AZ1512, was spun at 1500rpm to achieve a 1μm thick film. Then, the sample was soft baked at 110°C for 90s. Next, the sample was exposed to UV-light with the recommended dosage of 75mJ/cm2, and then, the exposed area was removed using 1:4 ratio of AZ400K developer to DI water.The sample was hard baked at 220°C for 3min to ensure that the sacrificial can stand the subsequent processing.Next, the Aluminum film was patterned by lift-off to define the bridge. This step was performed using the method described in the second paragraph of this section. Fig. 4(f), illustrates the deposition of the 4μm thick sacrificial layer using AZ4562 for lift-off.Fig. 4(g)–(h) demonstrates the deposition and patterning of the Aluminum bridge structure via the lift-off process. Specifically, Fig. 4(g) presents the deposition of the Aluminum layer while Fig. 4(h) presents the cross-sectional view of the device after the Aluminum bridge patterning. The final release of the bridge was done by removing the sacrificial layer through the modified dry etching technique.In order to investigate the impact of hard baking, we use only a one-mask process fabrication. The photoresist AZ1512 was spun at 700rpm, and soft baked at 110°C for 90s. Then, the sample was exposed to UV-light at 150mJ/cm2 using Mask 3 (mask for the bridge), and then the exposed area was removed by developing in AZ400k. The structures were inspected using a Scanning Electron Microscope (FEG-SEM) and an Atomic Force Microscope (AFM). The results are shown in Fig. 5.Fig. 5(a) shows the impact of hard baking on the roughness of the photoresist at 220°C for 5min. The roughness average value before and after the hard baking for 5μm2, measured by an AFM, are 0.98nm and 0.36nm, respectively. This is because the resin material of the photoresist becomes soften and reflows at the temperature above the glass transition temperature, resulting in atomically smooth surface and also a planar surface [12]. However, the thermal planarization of the resist could stop at very high temperature due to the thermal cross linking of the resin.Fig. 5(b) compares the impact of the baking temperature (100°C, 140°C, 220°C) on 2μm photoresist (AZ1512) for 3min. From the graphs, increasing the temperature reduces the contact angle between the photoresist and the substrate, resulting in a ramp shape photoresist structure. The effect of the baking time (3, 10 and 20min) at 220°C was investigated and shown in Fig. 5(c). The baking time does not strongly affect the shape of the photoresist. Thus, temperature plays a more dominant role on the length of the photoresist (AZ1512) than time. These findings agree well with the thermal reflow studies reported in the literature, e.g [18] and stated in Eqs. (1) and (2).(1)LT=μTtρ(2)μT=4.84×1016exp-484.20Twhere LTis the thermal reflow length, ρ is a photoresist density, μTis the fluid velocity, T is the temperature, and t is the time. It can be seen from the equation that the temperature plays more dominant role than the timeAs discussed earlier, the structure of the RF MEMS switch depends on the stability of the photoresist. The sacrificial layer (AZ1512) should be sufficiently stable to not be dissolved in acetone during the bridge patterning (Fig. 4(f)) but also be able to be removed at the last fabrication step to release the bridge structure (Fig. 4(i)).The increased hard bake temperature results in thermal crosslinking of the resist, and therefore the photoresist is more stable in AZ removers. The range of heat treatment and period to obtain such chemical stability are presented in Table 1. It can be seen that the photoresist was completely dissolved within several minutes in acetone for temperatures below 220°C. Meanwhile, the photoresist that was heat treated above 200°C did not dissolve even after 10min of immersing in acetone as well as after ultrasonication. However, the photoresist can be removed by dipping in AZ100 for 50min at 70°C or plasma ashing by O2. It should be noted that heating above 300°C causes the PR to crack and then lift off from the substrate.Fig. 6compares the surface profile of the sacrificial layer prior to the reflow process and -after the reflow process (Fig. 6(a)). Despite an extra step for planarizing the sacrificial at the second photolithography step Fig. 4(d), it should be noted that we ignore the pattern of electrode layer as the aim is to study structure of the bridge, the sacrificial layer is still uneven around the CPW gap. The prominent feature of the sacrificial layer was measured as 50μm wide and 0.3μm high by using an AFM. The existence of this feature can be due to the misalignment of the photomask to the existing structure, spin coating and the type of photoresist [19]. The sacrificial layer not only was planarized further by a hard bake process at 220°C for 5min (less than 20nm) (Fig. 6(a)), the edge at the sidewalls also became smoother (Fig. 6(b)).Fig. 5 investigated the impact of the hard baking on a single layer photoresist with volume 1. As can be seen, the edges of the bridge structure has been softened. Also, presence of the bumps at edges of the bridge was evident. In contrast, Fig. 6 does not show evidence of such bumps, as additional volume (V2) of photoresist filled the recess and planarised the surface of the bridge. It is also important to note that filling the recess depends on adding additional photoresist. This means that the additional volume may not fill the recess and therefore the bumps could be not disappear. Moreover, the additional volume of the photoresist will not change the natural contact angle of the bridge and the substrate, as this angle is determined by the surface energy equilibrium for three phase photoresist-air-substrate interface [20–22].A set of experiment was carried out to identify the optimized process for removing the hard baked photoresist and releasing the RF MEMS bridge.The fabricated RF MEMS switch is shown in Fig. 7(a). The dry release is carried out in the plasma asher, and it is very important to halt the etching process after 10min for 5min otherwise the PR get baked at a very high temperature, becoming irremovable. The area under the bridge is categorized into 3 zones in order to see how etching process works: Zone 1, Zone 2 and Zone 3 (Fig. 7(b)). After each experiment, we cut the bridge from different points (Zones 1, 2 or 3), inspecting the cross section to verify whether the PR has been completely removed. The Scanning Electron Microscopy (FEG-SEM) is used to inspect under the bridge. The sample was mounted vertically inside the chamber using a carbon tape and a 5kV acceleration voltage to avoid the charging effect.Table 2compares six different recipes for etching the photoresist under the bridge. Each recipe depends on the etchant gas or a combination of them (O2, Ar, CF4) and the etching parameters (power and pressure).The first recipe follows a normal dry release (anisotropic etch) which was discussed earlier. Upon inspection under a SEM, the PR in Zone 1 only was removed after 30min while at other zones still remained intact. More interestingly, the amount of PR remained under the bridge for 30min and 1h etch time were the same. Furthermore, not much improvement was observed by increasing the etch power in the second recipe. The first reason is that the gas has access only through the two sides to reach under the bridge as there was not any holes on the bridge. Another main reason is the interconnection between atoms of the PR which is very strong due to the cross-link at the high temperature.In the third etch recipe, Argon (Ar) was added to O2 with ratio of 1:1. The SEM result showed that this recipe only removed the PR in Zones 1 and 2, not being sufficient to remove the trapped PR in the middle (Zone 3). The reason for the improvement of the etch is that this increases the plasma density as well as dissociation of O2, enhancing a chemical reactivity [23]. Increasing the power from 250W to 550W (recipe 4) leads to removal of photoresist in all zones, and thus the MEMS bridge was released after 30min (Fig. 7(e)). Although increasing the power results in an isotropic etch to remove the photoresist, the residual stress is increased and the membrane bends. The profile of the bridge which is released at 600Watt is shown in Fig. 7(f). As can be seen the released bridge is buckled. The impact of power on the etch rate is discussed in [12].A further enhancement in the etch rate can be achieved by adding CF4 into the Ar–O mixture (recipe 5). The mixture of O2 and CF4 increases the isotropic behavior of the etching photoresist removal. It is seen that the bridge can be released at 250W and 550W after 20min and 10min, respectively. However, the presence of fluorine in the plasma adversely affects the silicon substrate by etching it, and curling the CPW up (Fig. 7(g)).According to the described experiments, the optimized recipe for releasing the RF MEMS switch bridge is given in Table 3. The power and pressure of the chamber were 250W and 580mTorr, respectively. First, O2 was released for 20min to remove the photoresist in Zone 1. Then, Ar was added to O2 (O2:Ar (1:1)) for 10min to remove the photoresist in Zone 2. This helped O2 remove the photoresist. Finally, CF4 was added to O2–Ar for 5min. This increased the isotropic behavior, releasing the bridge.The released bridge with this recipe is shown in Fig. 8(a)–(c). Fig. 8(a), shows the SEM image of the cross section of the bridge in Zone 3. It is seen that there is no photoresist was remained under the bridge. Moreover, the sample was inspected under the optical microscope. The dark field image states that no metal residues were left on the sample (Fig. 8(b)).Fig. 8(c) shows the surface profile of the bridge after releasing. As can be seen, the bridge is released without buckling. The bridge is planar and the unevenness due to the gap between the signal line and the ground is improved. Moreover, the edges at sidewalls become smoother, which improves the reliability.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
