@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
More than topology: Joint topology and attribute sampling and generation of social network graphs

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Existing sampling algorithms are extended to node attributes.A novel sampling algorithm is proposed which allows for joint capturing of structure and attribute characteristics.Topological graph similarity measures are extended to additionally assess attribute related similarity.A graph generation method is presented that reproduces topology and attribute related properties of the original graph based on sampling.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Social networks,Attributes,Graph sampling,Graph similarity,Graph generation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graph sampling refers to the process of deriving a small subset of nodes from a possibly huge graph in order to estimate properties of the whole graph from examining the sample. Whereas topological properties can already be obtained accurately by sampling, current approaches do not take possibly hidden dependencies between node topology and attributes into account. Especially in the context of online social networks, node attributes are of importance as they correspond to properties of the social network’s users. Therefore, existing sampling algorithms can be extended to attribute sampling, but still lack the capturing of structural properties. Analyzing topology (e.g., node degree and clustering coefficient) and attribute properties (e.g., age and location) jointly can provide valuable insights into the social network and allows for a better understanding of social processes. As major contribution, this work proposes a novel sampling algorithm which provides unbiased and reliable estimates of joint topological and attribute based graph properties in a resource efficient fashion. Furthermore, the obtained samples allow for the generation of synthetic graphs, which show high similarity to the original graph with respect to topology and attributes. The proposed sampling and generation algorithms are evaluated on real world social network graphs, for which they demonstrate to be effective.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With steadily increasing size and popularity, online social networks (OSNs) such as Facebook, Twitter, and Google+ have drawn the interest of the scientific community. Analyzing the structure and properties of these networks allows research in various fields. By studying social behavior and finding patterns in the networks’ structure, it is possible to acquire knowledge about requirements and parameters for future networks and applications. Additionally, OSNs have a high impact on today’s users’ choice and consumption of online media. Coupled with widespread availability of mobile Internet, these phenomena give rise to the scientific field of socially aware traffic management [29]. The main idea in this discipline is to utilize social information about Internet users in order to enhance existing traffic management strategies. For example, information from OSNs about users’ interests allows for improved caching solutions. However, complete social networks are seldom available due to privacy restrictions and the OSN providers’ reluctance to publish the core of their business data. Furthermore, running complex algorithms on social network graphs in the order of magnitude of hundreds of millions of nodes is usually infeasible due to time and resource constraints.Graph sampling techniques address the latter issue by examining only a representative subset of a given graph. Formally, the task of deriving a node sample from a given graphG=(V,E)with node set V of size n and edge set E can be defined as finding a subset of nodes VS⊆V whose topological information can be used in order to reliably estimate various properties of G. There are two main quality requirements for sampling strategies. First, the generated sample has to be unbiased. That is, the expected value of the sampled data and the actual value of the estimated parameter are equal. Second, the minimum amount of samples required for reliable results should be low.Unfortunately, state-of-the-art graph sampling techniques are limited to the topological analysis of huge graphs whereas socially aware traffic management requires additional information on user attributes like interests, geographic location, and age. Retrofitting these algorithms with attribute sampling capabilities implicitly assumes the independence of attributes and topology and can provide inferior results. Therefore, this work transfers ideas from graph sampling to graphs with node attributes by proposing a joint sampling of structure and attributes, which takes possible dependencies between topology and attributes into account. The resulting sampling mechanism provides unbiased and reliable estimates of joint topological and attribute based properties of social network graphs in a resource efficient fashion. As an application of this sampling approach, a graph generation method [8] is augmented to use a collected sample for generating synthetic social network graphs, which show joint structure and attribute properties similar to the original graph. In order to quantify this similarity, measures were developed, which assess similarity not only with respect to topology, but also take attributes into account.Thus, the contribution of this work is threefold:•Existing sampling algorithms are extended to node attributesA novel sampling algorithm is proposed which allows for joint capturing of structure and attribute characteristicsA graph generation method is presented that reproduces topology and attribute related properties of the original graph based on samplingTherefore, this work is structured as follows. Section 2 covers relevant related work on attribute sampling and graph generation, and describes the used social network data sets. Section 3 introduces the sampling mechanism and presents results. Topological graph similarity measures are extended to additionally assess attribute related similarity in Section 4. A method to generate synthetic social network graphs from a node sample with attributes is proposed in Section 5. The performance of the algorithm is evaluated for different social network graphs and attributes. The results are discussed and an outlook on future work is given in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
