@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Error bound analysis of indoor Wi-Fi location fingerprint based positioning for intelligent Access Point optimization via Fisher information

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The system relies on the fisher information matrix to derive the error bounds of Wi-Fi fingerprint based positioning.The theoretical relationship between the positioning errors and signal distributions is presented.The error bound of Wi-Fi fingerprint based positioning is an effective criterion for Wi-Fi access point deployment.The intelligent access point optimization approach performs well in time consumption.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Wi-Fi positioning,Location fingerprint,Error bound,Fisher information,Simulated annealing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We observe that the laborious collection of location fingerprints, that could also potentially change with time and space, remains a hurdle towards the widespread deployment of indoor and outdoor positioning systems using the Wi-Fi. Motivated by this, we focus on the error bound analysis of indoor Wi-Fi fingerprint based positioning for intelligent Access Point (AP) placement optimization by using the Fisher Information Matrix (FIM) to characterize the relationship between the positioning errors and signal distributions. We first derive the closed-form error bounds with respect to different system parameters. Second, we use the Simulated Annealing (SA) algorithm to conduct the Wi-Fi AP placement optimization towards the lowest error bounds. Finally, we present the detailed discussion, extensive simulation, and experiment results.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In recent decade, there has been a growing interest in indoor positioning technology that relies on the existing indoor high-speed wireless access networks [1], like the Wi-Fi, Zigbee, and Radio Frequency Identification (RFID). Compared to the conventional trilateration based positioning approach which is vulnerable to the large-scale path loss, multi-path effect, and shadow fading, the location fingerprint based positioning approach [2,3] has been preferred. In Wi-Fi location fingerprint based positioning, a batch of Reference Points (RPs) are first calibrated in the target area. Then, the location fingerprint which is typically a vector of the averaged Received Signal Strengths (RSSs) from the hearable Access Points (APs) is collected at each RP. The set of location fingerprints and the corresponding physical coordinates is named as a radio map. The process of radio map construction becomes significantly time consuming and labor intensive as the dimensions of the target area increase. After the radio map is constructed, for each location query, we match the newly collected RSS against the radio map to report the estimated location of the receiver.Due to the existence of the multi-path effect, shadow fading, and channel interference in indoor Wi-Fi environment, there are significant temporal and spatial variations of RSSs [4–6]. Up to now, there are very few literatures focusing on the theoretical analysis of the errors with respect to the Wi-Fi location fingerprint based positioning, but in fact, the error analysis is very important to the design of the effective indoor Wi-Fi positioning system. Motivated by this, we propose a theoretical model which considers the Gaussian, Rayleigh, and Rice signal distributions in characterizing the variation of RSSs to derive the closed-form error bounds of the Wi-Fi location fingerprint based positioning. Furthermore, the error bounds can be used to address the Wi-Fi AP placement optimization problem.The four main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows. First of all, the Fisher Information Matrix (FIM) is used to derive the error bounds of the Wi-Fi location fingerprint based positioning. Second, the theoretical analysis towards the relationship between the positioning errors and signal distributions including the Gaussian, Rayleigh, and Rice signal distributions is presented. Third, due to the difference of signal distributions corresponding to different Wi-Fi APs, the error bound with respect to the mixed signal distribution is considered. Fourth, the Wi-Fi AP placement are optimized towards the lowest error bounds.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives some related work on the error bounds of Wi-Fi positioning. In Section 3, we derive the error bounds of the Wi-Fi location fingerprint based positioning, as well as conduct the Wi-Fi AP placement optimization for the sake of achieving the lowest error bounds. The extensive simulations are provided in Section 4. Some interesting discussions are shown in Section 5. Finally, we conclude the paper and provide the future directions in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
