@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The effects of 0.2Hz varying latency with 20–100ms varying amplitude on simulator sickness in a helmet mounted display

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Explored the relationship between simulator sickness and latency characteristics.No support found for the relationship between raw latency and simulator sickness.0.2Hz frequency of latency is associated with higher levels of simulator sickness.Varying amplitude of latency is associated with higher levels of simulator sickness.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Simulator sickness,Head mounted displays,Virtual environments,Lag,Latency,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The relationship between the occurrence of simulator sickness (SS) and varying latency in a helmet-mounted display (HMD) was explored in this study. Previous work has always considered latency to be a constant. The aim of this research was to determine if a latency that varied over time would impact the experience of SS for HMD users. An object location task was used while viewing real, live video scenes via HMD. A planned comparisons approach was utilized with four experimental conditions, 2 of them having constant latency (0ms added to system baseline, 200ms added to system baseline) and 2 of them having sinusoidally varying latency (100ms amplitude at 0.2Hz frequency, and 20–100ms varying amplitude at 0.2Hz frequency). These conditions allowed for the assessment of the effects of constant latency vs. varying latency on the experience of SS. The results indicated that a varying latency is associated with greater experience of SS among HMD users than constant latency. Results also indicated, as has other recent research, that added constant latency on its own does not appear to be associated with the experience of higher levels of SS in an HMD.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The purpose of the current study was to assess the relationship between time-varying latency in a helmet mounted display (HMD) and simulator sickness (SS). Previous work has focused on constant latency and the effects of varying latency over time have not been examined in HMDs. However, time-varying stimuli have been shown to influence motion sickness (MS) in non-virtual environment (VE) situations [1]. In particular, this study examines the inherent base latency of the HMD system, compared to constant additional latency and latency varying sinusoidally over time.SS commonly occurs in VEs, including those with HMDs as the visual interface. A variety of potential variables influencing the experience of SS in HMD based VEs have been proposed, including system latency [2–5], field of view [3], image scale factor [6], and occlusion of peripheral vision [7].Latency has received the most attention as a possible factor influencing the experience of SS in HMD VEs. Latency in HMD VEs refers to the time between a head movement and change in the depiction of the environment in the visual display. Latency is associated with the computational processes that occur in reaction to, and to compensate for, actions of the user. In a flight simulator study, Wildzunas et al. [2] found that latencies greater than 267ms were most perceptible to participants and a 533ms latency condition presented a significant increase in motion sickness (MS) symptoms as compared to conditions with lower latency (i.e., 400ms, 267ms, 133ms, and 67ms). An HMD study by DiZio and Lackner [3] had participants make 24 head movements in the range of 12–180° over 2min intervals at different levels of latency. This sequence was repeated five times with 1min breaks between. Participants experienced significant sickness in all latency conditions and significant increases in sickness as the latency increased. HMD studies by Jennings et al. [4,5] had participants wear an HMD with different latency levels while performing a hovering task in a simulator. Participants in both studies experienced MS symptoms such as eye strain, vertigo, dizziness, and nausea with an increase in symptoms as latency increased. All of these studies employed a head tracker or motion tracker of some kind.Moss and Muth [7] sought to isolate the effects of latency from the effects of sensor error associated with motion trackers. They used an experimental setup with an HMD and a camera mounted on top as the sensor. Images from the real world laboratory environment were captured by the camera and participants were asked to locate objects in the environment. Participant experience of SS was measured between each experimental trial. Participants were exposed to either 0ms added latency or 200ms added latency. Unlike previous studies using motion trackers, Moss and Muth found no significant relationship between the experience of SS and exposure to added constant latency. These findings did not support prior research on the relationship between SS and added latency, indicating that something more than addition latency may be affecting participant SS.A study by Wu et al. [8] measured the latency of a system using a magnetometer–accelerometer–gyroscope sensor of the type for tracking orientation that is commonly used in HMDs. Unlike previous works which relied upon averages of measurements, the latency was measured continuously at 1ms resolution in order to observe how it varied over time. Results showed that the latency had an apparent drift over time due to sensor error. The observed latency drift varied at frequencies from 0.5 to 1.0Hz with amplitude of approximately 20–100ms. These frequencies fall within the same range known to provoke MS using horizontal oscillations [9–11] and vertical oscillations [1,12–14] in non-VE, real world environments. It was hypothesized that varying latency due to head tracker error may explain the differences in findings regarding SS associations with latency in head tracked HMDs vs. non head tracked HMDs.The purpose of the current study was to examine the relationship between system latency varying over time in HMDs and the experience of SS, which is a previously unexplored relationship in HMD VE research.A baseline condition in which the only system latency present is a constant was considered to represent a system without a head-tracker. An added constant latency condition was considered to control for the simple addition of latency without the presence of varying latency due to a head tracker. Motivated by conflicting prior research regarding the role of added latency in HMD VEs and the findings by Wu et al. [8] that head tracker error introduces variations in the frequency of latency in ranges previously associated with MS prompted the question “is the result of the sensing error on the perception of the visual scene a variable that influences the experience SS in HMDs?” Hence, two sinusoidally varying latency conditions (100ms fixed amplitude at 0.2Hz fixed frequency, and 20–100ms varying amplitude at 0.2Hz fixed frequency) were used to assess the effects of constant latency vs. varying latency on the experience of SS.Based on the results of Moss and Muth [7], where simply adding latency was not associated with an increase SS and that the current added latency condition replicated the one used by Moss and Muth [7], it was hypothesized that added constant latency alone would not be significantly different than base latency. However, conditions with varying latency, which were used to simulate conditions where a head tracker is present, were hypothesized to yield a significantly higher level of SS compared to both base latency and constant additional latency (200ms) conditions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
