@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Effects of 3D displays: A comparison between shuttered and polarized displays

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We examined the effects of 3D displays (shuttered and polarized displays) on the viewers.People experience brightness or fidelity differently depending on the image conditions (2D or 3D).Readability on a shuttered display is greater than a polarized display.Brightness positively correlated with the effects on the viewers.Flickering negatively correlated with the effects on the viewers.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
3D displays,Shuttered displays,Polarized displays,Stereoscopic images,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The current study investigates the effects of 3D displays (shuttered display vs. polarized display). People experienced superior fidelity and brightness when they watched 2D still images on a shuttered display, rather than on a polarized display. Conversely, people experienced greater brightness when they watched 3D still images on a polarized display, rather than on a shuttered display. Second, people were able to read a smaller font or characters on a shuttered display than on a polarized display. Third, people noticed flickering on a shuttered display when they watched 3D images. Fourth, people experienced greater brightness when they watched 3D moving images on a shuttered display, rather than on a shuttered display. The perceived brightness of the screen positively correlated with enjoyment, content satisfaction, and 3DTV satisfaction when the viewers watched a 3D movie. The flickering, on the other hand, has a negative correlation with enjoyment and 3DTV satisfaction.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In Human–Television interaction (HTI), most studies of displays are about the effect of the resolution, size, or viewing distance on the viewer. In general, more advanced technologies affect the viewer more positively or strongly than incumbent technologies do [1]. Many HTI studies on 3D displays show consistent results in which viewers of 3D images experienced greater presence when they watched a 3D display than when they watched a 2D display [2–4]. Therefore, discussion about 3D television can transition from the effects of 3D pictures to the conditions which increase the effects of 3D pictures.One of the factors that can improve 3D perception is 3D panels. Although several display methods are used in 3D, two methods, shuttered-glasses and polarized-glasses, are the most recent mainstream stereoscopic display methods [5]. On the 3DTV display market, there are major suppliers such as Samsung, Sony, and LG. The shuttered method adopted by Samsung (25%) and Sony (12%) accounts for a great share of the 3DTV market. Although the polarized method adopted by LG (16%) has a comparably small market, it has grown rapidly. Moreover, the polarized method which LG has adopted is the same method as that used by 3D cinemas.Various methods are investigated as a new technology is developed. At that time, standardization is very important. In the 3D field, being selected as a 3D display standard means that the standard becomes the criteria according to which 3D displays and content are produced. Since there are various ways to show 3D images, display standardization is a hot issue in the emerging 3DTV market. Likewise, 3DTV panel selection is an important issue for the 3D market.On the other hand, despite its commercial importance, the 3D panel difference demonstrated by shuttered vs. polarized displays may not be significant to viewers since both panels have 3D depth information. In other words, the differences in the representation methods may be minor, unlike the difference between 2D and 3D displays. Similarly, people better remembered and liked content when they watched it on larger displays. On the other hand, people do not prefer high fidelity displays to low fidelity displays when the differences are visually tenuous [6]. Like this, it is still unclear whether the 3D panel difference has any effect on viewers.Both shuttered and polarized methods have different forms of production in the panels and 3D glasses. There are some differences such as fidelity and brightness between the two methods. Even if people cannot explain the technological differences, they can still detect the effects in the experiment [6,7].The shuttered method uses flickering. If a viewer feels this flickering when they watch the display, the viewer will feel uncomfortable with the mediated environment. People are less interested and evaluate negatively when they feel uncomfortable with the mediated environment, even if they do not know why [6,8]. Therefore, if a viewer recognizes the flickering of the shuttered display, it may have negative effects.The purpose of the current study is to investigate whether differences in 3D panels between shuttered and polarized methods affect the viewer. In particular, we want to study media form variables of the 3D panels—fidelity, brightness, and flickering—and viewing experiences—physical presence, immersion, enjoyment, content satisfaction and 3DTV satisfaction. In the following sections, we will briefly review the two different display methods and discuss implications based on the results of our experiment.Two images that have slightly different angles and distances from an object are used in a 3D display. The polarized display method presents 3D images through polarizing films on the screen. The viewer wears polarized glasses that contain a pair of different polarizing films. Each eye sees a different image, because each film passes only the light that is similarly polarized. The most common polarized display method is the patterned retarder method, in which the images are shown separately as even-numbered lines of an image and odd-numbered lines of the other image (Fig. 1). The viewers can see the added image between even-numbered and odd-numbered lines of the images when they do not wear polarized glasses, while they see separated images when they wear polarized glasses [9].The disadvantages of the polarized display method are: (a) the resolution of an image is halved, because eyes each see only even-numbered lines or odd-numbered lines [10]; and (b) when people watch the 2D images without polarized glasses, the fidelity and brightness of the polarized display may be lower than that of a shuttered display. This can be explained by the attached polarizing film on the polarized display.In contrast, the advantages of the polarized display are: (a) the eyes are more comfortable and the polarized display is brighter when people watch 3D images with polarized glasses rather than shuttered glasses, since there is no flickering on the polarized display; and (b) polarized glasses are cheaper and lighter than shuttered glasses [11].In the shuttered display method, each image is rapidly switching in order. Each eye’s glass is transparent when the image is synced. It becomes dark when the image is not synchronized (Fig. 2). The glasses are controlled by a wireless transmitter that sends a timing signal that allows the glasses to be shut down or transparent [9]. The disadvantage of the shuttered display is that the shuttered glasses are more expensive and heavier than the polarized glasses for a polarized display. In addition, the shuttered glasses need to be recharged. Conversely, the advantages of a shuttered display are: (a) the fidelity is better than that of a polarized display [10]. That is, there is no degradation of the resolution, as each eye sees full resolution images; and (b) when people watch 2D images without 3D glasses, the shuttered display supports higher fidelity and more brightness than the polarized display does, as there is no attached film on a display.Watching 2D images on a 3DTV display is as much important as watching 3D images. People do not use 3DTV for watching 3D images only. They may want to use their new 3DTV set to watch regular television programs with 2D images. Besides, television is not highly immersive media. Nielsen’s survey (2011) found that 42% of Americans who own tablets are using their device when watching television. Only 12% of tablet owners and 13% of smartphone owners never use their device when watching television. This shows a new trend in television viewing, interworking with the Internet to do web surfing, SNS, or e-book (e.g., Google TV or Apple TV). Therefore, watching 3D images is not a sole function of 3DTV, but watching 2D images or reading texts are also important functions of 3DTV. As such, we will examine people’s perception of both 2D and 3D images shown in two different display methods in the current study.The following hypotheses and research questions were proposed based on the previous discussion on the advantages and disadvantages of the two different display methods:Hypothesis 1People will feel that a display’s (a) fidelity is higher and (b) brightness is greater when they watch a 2D image on a shuttered display than on a polarized display.It will be possible for people to read smaller text on a shuttered display than on a polarized display without wearing 3D glasses.People will feel that a display’s (a) fidelity is higher and (b) brightness is greater when they watch a 3D image on a polarized display than on a shuttered display.It will be possible for people to read smaller text on a shuttered display than on a polarized display when wearing 3D glasses.Research question 1. Will people recognize (a) interlaced lines on a polarized display and (b) flickering on a shuttered display?Research question 2. Will people be satisfied differently between a polarized display and a shuttered display?

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
