@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Advanced MEMS-based technologies and displays

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
MEME-based display technologies are reviewed.Projection, reflective, transmissive and novel display modes are included.Typical structures and fundamentals of different display modes are interpreted.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
MEMS,MEMS-based displays,Projection displays,Reflective displays,Transmissive displays,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
MEMS (microelectromechanical systems) are used in many fields including display applications, which are extensively studied both in academia and industry. For practical devices, numbers of advanced technologies have been developed based on MEMS concept. For display technologies, projection displays, reflective displays, transmissive displays and other display modes have been achieved by different MEMS modes. In this review, the current MEMS-based display technologies are introduced and discussed including digital micromirror device (DMD), laser scanning display (LSD), interferometric modulator display (IMOD), digital micro-shutter (DMS), time multiplexed optical shutter (TMOS), grating light valve (GLV) and others. The typical structure and fundamental of each display mode are interpreted.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
MEMS (microelectromechanical systems), which are small systems that integrate mechanical and electrical elements to perform certain functions, have been incorporated in our daily use as sensors, actuators, electronics and micro-structures [1–4]. The sizes are in the level of micrometers (1–100μm) for MEMS components and from 20 to 1000μm for MEMS devices. Due to different components and applications, MEMS have different terms to describe, such as RF MEMS (radio-frequency MEMS) for radio-frequency applications, MOEMS (micro-optoelectromechanical systems) for optical devices, NEMS (nanoelectromechanical systems) in nanoscales and bioMEMS for bio-related applications. The fabrication of MEMS is evolved from semiconductor device fabrication process. They are based upon conventional semiconductor techniques and derive significant benefits from the past experience and the update knowledge in the semiconductor industry. On the basis of lithography, deposition, patterning and etching processes are used to prepare MEMS. The silicon, polymers, metal and silicon carbide or silicon nitride are the basic materials for MEMS [5]. So MEMS are originally developed from silicon wafer fabrication techniques but with dimensions of space, flexion and electrical components in the devices. Because MEMS structures or MEMS devices remain physically movability in operation, i.e., the mechanical elements can be moved by piezoelectric or electrostatic transduction, they are beneficial to the applications in micromachines and microsystems. Thus MEMS devices have the advantages of highly integration, high performance, miniaturization, low cost and low power consumption. In this paper, the advanced MEMS-based technologies and display applications are topicalized. Different display modes based on MEMS are elaborated and discussed.MEMS are interdisciplinary and couple-based systems, i.e., the mechanical behaviors are coupled with electrical inputs [2,6]. For examples, two parallel components, such as two plates, can be operated by electrostatic force and restoring force. In general, there is a non-movable (stationary) part and a movable component in the system, suspended by flexures or flexible beams such as springs. A power source or electrode can supply voltage or electrical charge to the movable component and stationary component. If the positive charges are accumulated on the movable component while the negative charges are accumulated on the stationary part, an attractive electrostatic force will be generated. This force will make the movable component move to the stationary part when the electrostatic force is greater than the spring restoring force at the voltages larger than pull-in voltage. The pull-in voltage means the voltage is greater than a critical voltage that can make the moveable component to move. The pull-in voltage can be related with the resistance of the beam, stiffness, materials and geometry structures. When the voltages are removed, the movable component can stay or be back to initial state in different designs. This is the basic principle of MEMS device operation.MEMS technologies can be used in various fields including data storage, automotive applications, telecommunications, environmental monitoring, medical applications and displays [7–15]. Currently, the commercial application examples of MEMS as shown in Table 1include: (1) sensors such as pressure sensors, infrared (IR) sensors, bio-metric sensors, and motion sensors, (2) resonators such as inertial sensors, accelerometers and gyroscopes, (3) actuators, (4) MEMS microphones, (5) printers such as 3D printers, ink-jet printers using piezoelectrics or thermal bubble ejection to deposit ink on paper, (6) bio-MEMS such as fluid acceleration for micro-cooling, lab-on-chip and micrototalanalysis (biosensor, chemosensor, etc.), (7) micropumps, (8) optical switching for digital micro-switch or mirror switch for data communications, (9) energy harvesting applications including piezoelectric, electrostatic and electromagnetic techniques and (10) displays.MEMS are widely used in display devices and display industry. The commercialized MEMS-based display technologies include projection displays, reflective displays and transmissive displays. In this section, the mainstream MEMS-based display modes are introduced and discussed including typical structure, basic working principle and device examples.The most successful and most well-known product of MEMS-based displays is digital micromirror device (DMD)-based digital light processing (DLPTM) projection displays from Texas Instruments [16–20]. The DMD element is a unique combination of opto-mechanics and electro-mechanics. Fig. 1a gives the DMD structure for a pair of pixels in which one is in its on state (+10°) and the other is in its off state (−10°). The bistable micromirror is suspended on a CMOS chip by a tiny, hidden torsional hinge mount. The mirror size is in micrometer range (14–17μm) and the switching time is in microsecond range (∼20μs). The two stable micromirror states are +10° and −10° (or 12° depending on different models). These two positions determine the deflected direction of the light. The positive tilt is to align the light to the projection lens (on state) and the negative tilt is to align the light to light absorber (off state). The tilt of the micromirror on its diagonal axis can be controlled by electrostatically actuation by the dual CMOS memory elements and mirror clocking pulse in digital driving mode.A two-dimensional array of DMDs (Fig. 1b), such as XGA: 1027 by 768, is used as a DLP chip to form projected images. In the projector system (Fig. 2), each DMD corresponds to a projected or displayed image pixel. The micromirror will reflect light to create a bright pixel when actuated at one tilt direction (on state) or to create a dark pixel by reflecting light to the absorber at the other tilt direction (off state). The bistable operation mode by electrostatically actuation is the basic principal for DLP projector displays. To form color image, color filter or color wheel with red, green and blue (R, G, B) can be used in the projector system (Fig. 2) for at least 16.7 million colors. Additional colors such as cyan, magenta and yellow can be added in the color palette too. Or 3-chip structure might be used for high brightness projectors and more colors (35 trillion colors) can be achieved. To form gray image, the bit-streamed spatial light modulation is used since this binary data processing is extraordinary fast. When a mirror is switched in the on state more frequently than the off state, it reflects a light gray pixel and when a mirror is switched in the off state more frequently than the on state, it reflects a darker gray pixel. In this way, DLP projection system can reflect pixels in up to 1024 gray levels. Thus the DLP can be used from large cinema projection system, TVs, hardcopy projection, table-top projectors, holographic recording systems, DLP-based printer to small head-mounted displays and handheld mobile displays (DLP Pico). For DLP projection displays, high pixel yield is needed to ensure the micromirror to work functionally. So far DLP projector has shown very stable in the reliability test [20,21] and in the practical devices.DMD chip has very high requirement for pixel yield to minimize the number of malfunction pixels. Thus, laser scanning display (LSD) was proposed [22]. One technology based on scanned beam display for mobile projector or picoprojector is offered by Microvision, Inc. and Fraunhofer Institute of Photonic Microsystems [23,24]. A single MEMS device is used to scan a color laser beam. The single bi-axial scanning mirror is used to replace the two dimension pixel DMD array and red, green and blue lasers are scanned and modulated by the mirror to “draw” the image on the screen, pixel by pixel. As shown in Fig. 3a, the opto-mechnical core is referred to as “integrated photonics module” (IPM), which coupled with video processing and laser drive electronics to constitute the projector. The ability of IPM can scan millions of pixels at 60Hz. The size and image performance of the projected display is primarily driven by the MEMS scanning mirror and the lasers. The three lasers are simultaneously scanned for all the pixels, therefore the laser duty cycle is high and the electrical efficiency is higher than DLP or liquid crystal on silicon (LCOS) displays. The MEMS scanning mirror in LSD is a gimbal suspended mirror that is capable of biaxial rotations using electromagnetic actuation, which is shown in Fig. 3b. The scanner includes MEMS die, electroplated coil on the moving frame, small subassemblies of permanent magnets and an electrical interface. The vertical axis of rotation is operated quasi-statically and creates a vertical comb raster trajectory while the horizontal axis is operated on a resonant vibrational mode of the scanning mirror. The key to operate such bi-axial magnetic drive is to superimpose the drive torques in the two scan directions in order to properly excite both scan axes with only one applied drive mechanism [23,24].Qualcomm Mirasol® display is based on interferometric modulator display (IMOD) and MEMS device operation, which is a reflective technology for direct-view portable displays [25–28]. The IMOD device generates color using interference and the MEMS switching mechanism is used to change the pixel state. Similar with Fabry–Perot interferometer, the device is analogous to an etalon and the distance between the reflective interfaces can be modulated electrically. The structure of a single sub-pixel is shown in Fig. 4a. The pixel is consisted by self-supporting, deformable reflective membrane (serving as a mirror) and reflective optical thin film stack. The stack is on the inner surface of the glass substrate while the reflective membrane is suspended under the stack in the device. The air gap is ∼1μm between the membrane and the stack. The fabrication process is in an opposite way, as shown in Fig. 4b, while the sacrificial layer is used to control the air gap. The packaged device structure is shown in Fig. 4c. When external light incidence onto the pixels, it is reflected both from the top of the reflective stack and the reflective membrane to form interference. If the distance between the membrane and stack is different, the reflected light wavelength is different. Each IMOD pixel includes three sub-pixels for red, green and blue color channels. The membrane on each sub-pixel can be moved to the stack by electrostatically actuatable effect when applying a voltage to the electrically conductive thin film stack, thus the phase difference between the reflective light from the reflective membrance and the thin film stack is changed that creates the destructive interference for primary color but constructive interference for UV wavelengths, then the pixel will display black state (absorb layer) from the primary color state. So IMOD gives bistable or 1-bit digital property. The bistability is generated from the inherent hysteresis effect of MEMS actuators, so the deformation of the reflective membrane can be held after the voltage is switched off. The sub-pixels can be transitioned between primary color state and black state in ∼10μs. In order to achieve intermediate colors, spatial or dithering method can be used. Based on interferometric light and MEMS-based color modulation, IMOD mode demonstrates properties of low power consumption and consistent image quality under various ambient lights. Since the MEMS structure is so simple to modulate light and color or to provide memory state, no active thin-film-transistor (TFT) matrix, color filters [29] and polarizer [30] is needed.For Mirasol displays, the color image is formed by primary color (R, G, B) sub-pixels. Each sub-pixel is either in primary color, or in black state, since the gap between reflective membrance and the thin film stack for each sub-pixel can only have two positions. The next-generation technology iteration of Mirasol displays is called single mirror interferometric (SMI) display [31]. In SMI, there are no sub-pixels while each pixel is identical. Each pixel can tune its reflective color continuously across the visible light range and provide white and black states. The gap need to be carefully chosen so as to realize the full optical function while guaranteeing stability regions for actuation. The structure of a single SMI pixel is shown in Fig. 5a. Different from Mirasol display, the electromechanical of SMI not only provide the means for actuating and stabilizing the placement of the absorber, but also constrain the relative saturation and accuracy of the color state as a result of the tendency of MEMS structure to bend. The mirror serves as a middle, movable electrode in between two fixed electrodes: one top electrode that is on the top dielectric layer on the TFT substrate and the other bottom electrode that is formed by absorbing metal layer on the glass substrate. The fixed bias voltages are applied to the fixed electrodes and a variable voltage is applied to the mirror. The electrostatic force on the mirror will anchor the mirror down to the glass substrate by the hinge connected to the mirror. When the mirror moves closer to the absorber layer, the different reflective colors and states (black or white) are achieved by the different gaps between the mirror and the absorber layer, as shown in Fig. 5b. The metallic absorbing layer is sufficiently thin in this case, therefore the light can be partially absorbed and partially transmit.The Qualcomm transmissive display based on digital micro-shutter (DMS) is MEMS-based technology [32]. The DMS MEMS-based display is a new class of display technologies. The DMS is fabricated on the top of TFT-backplane to serve as a light modulator by controlling the shutter position in open or close state. Fig. 6a shows a typical 4-spring DMS structure, which is composed of a shutter, spring, and electrode and is driven by electrostatic actuation in the open or close state, therefore the shutter can be moved horizontally. Fig. 6b shows a typical optical architecture of the DMS display device, in which the layers are TFT-backplane, MEMS layer, aperture plate (AP) and backlight unit (BLU) from the top to the bottom. There are etched slots on the AP and TFT-backplane, so the DMS shutter serves as light valve for each slot by controlling light going through the panel or being blocked by the shutter. Compared with LCDs, no color filter and polarizer are needed since digital field sequential color BLU (red, green, blue and white) is employed. The usage of backlight is highly efficient and even better when recycling light is obtained from the reflective surface of the AP. The shutter speed can be operated at about 200μs. The advantages of DMS MEMS-based displays include high optical efficiency, wide color gamut, low power operation, high contrast ratio, and high speed field sequential color driving [32–39].Another transmissive display based on MEMS is time multiplexed optical shutter (TOMS) technology using the principle of frustrated total internal reflection (TFIR) by UniPixel Inc. [40,41]. As shown in Fig. 7a, the red, green and blue LEDs are placed in a light bar attached to the edge of the light guide such as glass. Transparent conductor pads such as indium tin oxide (ITO) are connected to the TFT for each pixel on the light guide. The light is restricted in the light guide by total internal reflection effect. On the other hand, an active layer, i.e., polymer carrier film, is integrated to the light guide by the adhesive. Micro-lenses are textured on the bottom of the active layer and a continuous conductive common electrode is deposited around or on the micro-lenses. Hundreds lenses are included in one pixel. There is a tiny separation between the active layer and the light guide by the adhesive. When the active layer is compressed down, the lenses will touch the light guide. The light inside the light guide will escape from the light guide since the frustration of total internal reflection [42] causes the light to emit. The light inside the light guide is coupled from light guide to the micro-lenses due to the localized contact, which is the “on” state. If the lenses return to normal position, the light guide traps the light again, which is the “off” state. The different states of a TMOS pixel is shown in Fig. 7b. The conductive pad on the light guide is used to create a voltage differential to attract the conductor on the active layer. The Coulomb attraction force makes the active layer to deflect down and the micro-lenses to touch light guide. For each pixel, the central part of the active layer is deformed by electrostatic attraction and at the edge of the pixel, the active layer is firmly tethered by stand-off adhesive areas. Young’s modulus plays a critical role in determination on driving voltage and restoration force to release the active layer away from the light guide to the original position. The micro-lenses on the active layer can give a large viewing angle. The ultra-fast response speed (2μs) of TMOS pixel actuation enables field sequential color generation. No color filter, polarizer and backlight united are needed.The grating light valve (GLV) is also a digital projection display technology from Silicon Light Machines Corp., in which the device is physically moved to alter the path of light incident to the grating by diffraction [43–45]. It operates using a dynamically adjustable diffraction grating that is an array of movable ribbons mounted on a silicon substrate. A pixel in a GLV consists of 4–6 aluminum-coated beams made by SiN, so called “ribbons”, suspended over a thin air gap in a cavity structure. Movable ribbons can be pulled down by electrostatic charge, as shown in Fig. 8a. When no driving, all the ribbons are in the same plane and reflect light away from the projector’s optical path, like a mirror. The reflected lights from the GLV are blocked, which shows dark state. The movable ribbons are driven by applying a voltage between the ribbon electrode and the bottom electrode. When driving, alternated ribbons in one pixel are pulled down, a square-notch diffraction grating is formed to modulate the phase of light and it can diffract the light of 1st order to the projector’s optical path, which shows bright state, as shown in Fig. 8b. In the un-deflected state (“up” case), the GLV is purely reflecting. In the deflected state (“down” case), the phase delay is changed to λ/4. The ± diffraction orders reaches the maximum intensity and the diffractive light is collected by projector. The pixel is bistable and the switching time is very fast, ∼20ns. A moving image can be displayed on the screen by horizontally one-dimensional scanning. To form color displays, RGB laser beams, color wheel or three set of GLVs can be designed [43].A concept of a vertical movable micro-optical switch (MOS) for transmissive display was proposed recently [46,47]. The MOS consists of two parallel electrodes, as shown in Fig. 9. The first electrode (0.3μm thick Al) is on the glass substrate and the second electrode is suspended by cantilever spring that is supported by anchors on the same substrate. The silicon dioxide is deposited on the first electrode and serves as an insulation layer (0.3μm in thickness). The distance between the two electrodes is controlled at a few micrometers (∼2–3μm). Each electrode has opening (5μm in width) to allow light passing through. The electrode materials (Al) are patterned by plasma etching process. Photoresist is adopted as a sacrificial layer to define the gap between the two electrodes while plasma ashing process is used to remove the sacrificial layer. When there is no electric field applied, the pixel is in open state, in which the light can pass through the two electrodes by light leakage or light reflection between the two electrodes (Fig. 9). When the electric voltage is applied, the suspended secondary electrode would be pulled down and contact the first electrode by electrostatic force. Therefore the light will be blocked by the two electrodes, meaning, the pixel will be in close state. When the applied voltage stops, the second electrode returns to the original position by spring restoring force. The voltage requires to pull in the second electrode is less than 15V and the switching time is in the range of microseconds (30μs from the open state to the closed state and 50μs from the closed state to the open state), thus the field sequential color can be used for color displays. The pixel size has been demonstrated at 254μm by 254μm (100 pixels per square inch) [47].The MEMS can be used for 3D display systems [48–51]. For examples, an ingenious design for autostereoscopic display was proposed using double-sided scanning micromirror array structure [52], as shown in Fig. 10, which demonstrated the feasibility for 3D display. The micromirrors are double-sided mirrors and equal to the display pixel in size. The display pixel is underneath the mirrors. Two pinhole arrays and microlenses will collimate light from pixels. When all mirrors are fixed at a 45° angle, the light path from the display pixel is shown in Fig. 10a. In this case, no 3D display is formed. When fixed mirrors and movable mirrors are aligned alternately, the light can be changed at 2α° if the movable mirrors are lifted up at α° (Fig. 10b) or pulled down at α° (Fig. 10c). Two pairs of interlaced images switch synchronously by the vibration of the micromirror. If the frequency of vibration is fast enough, flickerless stereoscopic display can be achieved by interlaced scanning. The double-sided micromirrors are actuated by both external magnetic force and Lorentz force in this design.Besides, MEMS can be designed and used for other display modes or image processing, such as dual mode (reflective and transmittive) displays [53], helmet-mounted displays (HMDs) for human interface or virtue reality technique [54,55], confocal endoscopic images for medical and bio-applications [60], tactile graphic displays for human–computer interface [56–59], 3-D surface generation systems and refreshable Braille displays (RBDs) for touchable, textual information non-visually presentation [61–63]. The numerous examples based on MEMS technologies show plenty of potential on display applications.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
