@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Endorsement deduction and ranking in social networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
For expertise retrieval purposes we can rely on the endorsements received by members of a social network, with respect to some skill.Skills are correlated, which may affect individual rankings.An endorsement deduction method is proposed, which improves data consistency and completeness.Endorsement deduction makes use of the known correlation among skills.The method is validated in a synthetic network resembling LinkedIn.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Expertise retrieval,Social networks,LinkedIn,ResearchGate,PageRank,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstractImage, graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Directed graphs (digraphs) are an appropriate tool for modelling social networks with asymmetric binary relations. For instance, the blogosphere is a social network composed of blogs/bloggers and the directed ‘recommendation’ or ‘follower’ relations among them. Other examples include ‘trust’ statements in recommendation systems (some user states that he/she trusts the recommendations given by some other user) and ‘endorsements’ in professional social networks. Additionally, weighted arcs appear in situations where such relations can accommodate some degree of confidence (‘trust’ or ‘endorsement’ statements could be partial).LinkedIn and ResearchGate are two prominent examples of professional social networks implementing the endorsement feature. LinkedIn11http://www.linkedin.com.is a wide-scope professional network launched in 2003. More than a decade later it boasts a membership of over 364 million, and it has become an essential tool in professional networking. The LinkedIn endorsement feature, introduced about three years ago,22More precisely, on September 24, 2012.allows a user to endorse other users for specific skills.On the other hand, ResearchGate33http://www.researchgate.net.is a smaller network catering to scientists and academics. It was launched in 2008, and it reached five million members in August, 2014. ResearchGate also introduced an endorsement feature recently.44On February 7, 2013.From the endorsements shown in an applicant’s profile, a potential employer can assess the applicant’s skills with a higher level of confidence than say, by just looking at his/her CV.The two endorsement systems described above are very similar: for each particular skill, the endorsements make up the arcs of a directed graph, whose vertices are the members’ profiles. In principle, these endorsement digraphs could be used to compute an authority ranking of the members with respect to each particular skill. This authority ranking may provide a better assessment of a person’s profile, and it could become the basis for several social network applications.For instance, this authority ranking could be the core element of an eventual tool for finding people who are proficient in a certain skill, very much like a web search engine. It could also find important applications in profile personalization. For example, if a certain user is an expert in some field, say ‘Operations Research’, the system can display ads, job openings, and conference announcements related to that field in the user’s profile. Finally, we can envisage a world where people could vote on certain decisions via social networks. For example, a community of web developers could decide on the adoption of some particular web standard. In that scenario, we might think about a weighted voting scheme, where the weight of each vote is proportional to the person’s expertise in that area.Now, people usually have more than one skill, with some of those skills being related. For example, the skill ‘Java’ is a particular case of the skill ‘Programming’, which in turn is strongly related with the skill ‘Algorithms’. It may well happen that a person is not endorsed for the skill ‘Programming’, but he/she is endorsed for the skills ‘Java’ and ‘Algorithms’. From those endorsements it can be deduced with a fair degree of confidence that the person also possesses the skill ‘Programming’. In other words, a person’s ranking with respect to the skills ‘Java’ and ‘Algorithms’ affects his/her ranking with respect to the skill ‘Programming’.If the members of a social network were consistent while endorsing their peers, this ‘endorsement with deduction’ would not add anything to simple (i.e. ordinary) endorsement. In this ideal world, if Anna endorses Ben for the skill ‘Java’, she would be careful to endorse him for the skill ‘Programming’ as well.55Some people may argue that knowledge of a programming language does not automatically imply programming skills, but this semantic discussion is out of the scope of this paper.In practice, however,1.People are not systematic. That is, people do not usually go over all their contacts methodically to endorse, for each contact and alleged skill, all those contacts which, according to their opinion, deserve such endorsement. This may be the source of important omissions in members’ profiles.People are not consistent, for consistency, like method, would require a great effort. In an analysis of a small LinkedIn community consisting of 3250 members we have detected several inconsistencies. For example, there are several users who have been endorsed for some specific programming language, or a combination of programming languages, but have not been endorsed for the skill ‘Programming’. Deciding whether there is an inconsistency entails some degree of subjectivism, for inconsistencies ultimately depend on the semantics of the skill names. Nevertheless, we can safely assert that practically 100% of the profiles sampled by us contained some evident inconsistency or omission. The Appendix lists some of the more significant inconsistencies and omissions encountered, together with a more comprehensive discussion about LinkedIn’s endorsement mechanism.Skills lack standardization. In most of these social networks, a set of standard, allowed skills has not been defined. As a result, many related skills (in many cases, almost synonyms) may come up in different profiles of the social network. Consider, for example, skills such as ‘recruiting’, ‘recrutments’, ‘IT recruiting’, ‘internet recruiting’, ‘college recruiting’, ‘student recruiting’, ‘graduate recruiting’, etc. which are, all of them, common in LinkedIn profiles. It may well happen that an expert in ‘recruiting’ has not even assigned to him/herself that specific skill, but a related one such as ‘recruitments’, which would hide him/her as an expert in the ‘recruiting’ skill.Endorsement with deduction may help address those problems, and thus provide a better assessment of a person’s skills. More precisely, we propose an algorithm that enriches the digraph of endorsements associated to a particular skill with new weighted arcs, taking into account the correlations between that ‘target’ skill and the other ones. Once this has been done, it is possible to apply different ranking algorithms to this enhanced digraph with the purpose of obtaining a ranking of the social network members concerning that specific skill.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
