@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Dynamic resource allocation in hybrid optical–electrical datacenter networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Joint problem of bandwidth allocation and VM-placement in optical-electrical DC.Challenges: (i) limited reachability due to the size of the optical switch in the datacenter netework, (ii) dynamic creation of optical paths lead to the creation of constrained optical network topology.The problem is formulated as nonlinear optimization problem, that is NP-hard in nature.Input requests from users are abstracted as virtual networks, where a single node in a virtual network is a cluster of VMs, and an edge connecting two nodes is the bandwidth demand between the two clusters of VMs.Three algorithms are developed for embedding input virtual networks on hybrid datacenter network, and their performances are evaluated using simulations.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Datacenter,Bandwidth,Optical,Embedding,Virtual network,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A promising development in the design of datacenters is the hybrid network architecture consisting of both optical and electrical elements, in which end-to-end traffic can be routed through either an electrical path or an optical path. The core optical switch is used to dynamically create optical paths between pairs of electrical edge-switches in such a datacenter network. In this context, the joint problem of bandwidth allocation and VM-placement poses new and different challenges not addressed yet in hybrid datacenter. In particular, we foresee two issues: (i) the number of edge-switches that can be simultaneously reached using optical paths from an edge-switch is limited by the size of the optical switch, (ii) the dynamic creation of optical paths can potentially establish a constrained optical network topology leading to poor performance. In this work, we abstract the requests of tenants as virtual networks, and study the problem of embedding virtual networks on a hybrid datacenter. We formulate the problem as a non-linear optimization problem and analyze its complexity. We develop and analyse three algorithms for embedding dynamically arriving virtual network demands on a hybrid optical–electrical datacenter. Through simulations, we demonstrate the effectiveness of not only exploiting the already established optical paths, but also of using electrical network in embedding requests of virtual networks.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Datacenters today are hosting increasing number of services and applications, which in turn generate tremendous amounts of traffic. The global datacenter traffic growth rate is estimated to be approximately 25% per year till 2017; and the annual global datacenter IP traffic is estimated to reach 7.7 zettabytes (1021 bytes) by the end of 2017 [2]. The annual traffic growth rate between datacenters as well as within datacenters is also predicted to be ≈ 30%. To meet such traffic growth trends, optical switching based on WDM (wavelength division multiplexing) technology has recently been proposed as a promising approach to connect a datacenter [3–5]. Optical networks provide not only huge bandwidth, but also reduce the cabling complexity and power consumption in comparison to electrical networks.An important feature of optical networks is its ability to dynamically reconfigure optical paths between any pair of (electrical) switches connected using an optical switch. We can leverage on this capability to solve one important challenge in datacenters—VM (virtual machine) placement problem. As optical paths between edge-switches (top-of-rack switches, to which server machines are connected) can be created on-demand, there is more flexibility in placing VMs of a request, than in an electrical datacenter network. However, building an all-optical datacenter that provides simultaneous connectivity between every pair of edge-switches is expensive and impractical for large datacenters hosting tens of thousands of servers. This, along with the fact that electrical network is better suited for multiplexing short and bursty traffic, makes a hybrid optical–electrical network architecture the right choice for future datacenters [3,4,6]. A hybrid datacenter gives flexibility in connecting edge-switches with high communication demands dynamically using optical network, while maintaining connections between edge-switches with bursty traffic using electrical network.Fig. 1illustrates a hybrid optical–electrical datacenter network (similar to Helios [3]) considered in this work. In the hybrid architecture, both electrical and optical networks coexist; traffic from an edge-switch to another can be routed either through the electrical switch(es) or the optical switch. The optical switch in the core connects the electrical edge-switches using optical fibers. The number of optical fibers from an edge-switch is limited by design, and defines the reachability factor k. Traffic from a fixed number of ports (on different wavelengths) of an edge-switch is multiplexed into an optical fiber, and switched through the optical switch to any other edge-switch, where it is demultiplexed. For a given number of ports at an edge-switch, the value of k determines a trade-off between the size of the optical switch (in number of ports) and the number of edge-switches that can be simultaneously reached. The higher the value of k, the larger the size of the optical switch and more the number of simultaneous optical paths from an edge-switch. In Fig. 1, k is set to two; hence the maximum number of edge-switches that can be reached from any edge-switch using (one hop) optical paths at a given time is limited to two. This is a cost-effective simple optical network which can connect large number of edge-switches using one or a few optical switches. For example, for k equal to four, an optical switch with 400 ports can connect 100 edge-switches. Although an edge-switch can reach only k other edge-switches simultaneously using the optical paths, due to the dynamic reconfiguration capability of the optical switch it can reach different sets of edge-switches at different times. As the architecture is hybrid, the edge-switches can also reach other edge-switches through the electrical core switches (as shown in the figure).In a datacenter supporting multi-tenancy, guaranteeing bandwidth is important to deliver predictable performance to applications running on the VMs [7]. Recent research works addressed this problem in all-electrical datacenter networks; the corresponding problem in all-optical network is also getting attention [8]. But there are new challenges posed by a hybrid optical–electrical datacenter architecture not yet addressed. While the dynamic creation of optical paths gives flexibility in placing VMs, the reachability factor limits the number of edge-switches that can be reached simultaneously from one edge-switch (using optical paths). Besides, the topology that gets established dynamically may also pose constraints.We abstract a request from a tenant in the form of a virtual network, where a node of a virtual network corresponds to a set of VMs (VM-cluster), and the weight of an edge connecting two nodes gives the bandwidth required between the two corresponding VM-clusters of a tenant. This is a natural abstraction for most applications in datacenters, such as mapreduce, communicating tasks (where each task is carried out by a set of VMs), etc. [9]. We focus on the problem of embedding of virtual networks on hybrid datacenter networks, which translates to the joint problem of bandwidth allocation and placement of VM-clusters such that topology constraints of the virtual network are satisfied.An intuitive way to solve this problem is to create a new optical path for each edge of the virtual network (until no more can be created), and then explore the existing optical paths and electrical network for embedding the remaining edges. But such an approach can potentially create a constrained optical network topology, which may not suit well for future virtual network demands. To investigate this, we develop an algorithm based on the above approach called NLFE (New-Link-First Embedding). In addition, we develop another embedding algorithm called ELFE (Existing-Link-First Embedding) that embeds edges on the existing optical paths and electrical network, and only in the worst case will create new optical paths. We also develop a greedy algorithm, called GLE (Greedy Link Embedding), that is faster than the above two algorithms in selecting the edges of an input virtual network to be mapped on to the hybrid datacenter network. We define a control parameter for flexible control of the proportion of edges that can be embedded on the electrical network of a datacenter. Using simulations, we evaluate these algorithms with different topologies for dynamically arriving virtual networks. Our results provide interesting insights. One, ELFE and GLE algorithms consistently outperform NLFE, demonstrating the effectiveness of exploiting existing optical paths. Two, partial (but limited) embedding of edges on electrical links can decrease the rejection ratio further while still increasing the utilization of optical network capacity. Finally, the greedy algorithm GLE performs as good as ELFE, reinforcing that the restricting factor in embedding virtual networks is the topology constraints and not the capacity.We carried out preliminary work and developed the NLFE and ELFE heuristics in [1]. In this article we extend this work further and make new contributions. We explicitly formulate the problem of embedding a virtual network on a hybrid datacenter network, satisfying the constraints in both the input and the datacenter, as an optimization problem, and present its complexity. We develop a new algorithm based on greedy approach called Greedy Link Embedding (GLE). Algorithm GLE is computationally faster than NLFE and ELFE algorithms and differs in the way edges in an input virtual network are selected for mapping to the hybrid optical–electrical network.After discussing the related works in Section 2, we define and formulate the problem in Section 3. The operations involved in solving the problem of embedding a virtual network are described in Section 4, where we also define the three embedding algorithms—NLFE, ELFE and GLE. Performance studies are carried out in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we addressed the problem of embedding dynamically arriving virtual network demands of tenants on a hybrid optical–electrical datacenter network. We developed three algorithms, NLFE, ELFE and GLE, and evaluated them for different virtual network topologies. Overall, ELFE and GLE algorithms outperformed NLFE algorithm, bringing down the rejection percentage. This highlights the importance of exploiting existing optical paths leading to the formation of a less constrained logical topology. Along with this, embedding part of a request on the electrical network also helps in reducing rejection ratio of requests while maintaining high utilization of optical network capacity. This was achieved using the control parameter (m) which dynamically decides the number of edges of a request that should be embedded on the electrical network of a datacenter.The formation of constrained logical topology leads to higher rejection of requests, as was observed with the case of NLFE algorithm. This insight was reinforced with the performance of GLE algorithm. The GLE algorithm greedily selects the maximum weighted edges to form a subgraph of an input virtual network, and yet performs as good as the ELFE algorithm, though the latter selects the optimal set of edges. This happens as the rejection of requests are mostly governed by the topology rather than the bandwidth demands of the requests. For the same reason, the utilization of the optical network capacity was always below 80%.