@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Wide color gamut and high dynamic range displays using RGBW LCDs

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We analyze the better suitability of RGBW LCDs for wide color gamut than RGB LCDs.We propose an effective method to implement the HDR display using RGBW LCDs.Our HDR displays based on RGBW LCDs can reproduce 1500nits peak luminance.Our HDR displays have very high potential for mass production.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Wide color gamut display,High dynamic range display,RGBW LCD,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
An increasing number of studies on efficient implementation of vivid and realistic displays are being conducted as liquid crystal displays (LCDs) become widely used in TV applications. For vivid displays, the specifications such as wide color gamut (WCG) and high dynamic range (HDR) should be implemented in LCDs. However, the low transmittance rate of the WCG and the significant costs for the peak luminance capability of the HDR are major obstacles. Hence, an RGBW LCD, which is capable of increasing the transmission efficiency, may be a good platform to overcome these problems.In this paper, we estimate the perceived brightness effect of the WCG by using the Helmholtz–Kohlrausch (H–K) effect on RGB and RGBW LCDs. The simulation results showed that the RGBW LCD was more suitable for adopting the WCG than the RGB LCD in terms of the brightness balance of achromatic and chromatic colors, and the results were also confirmed by subjective tests. In addition, we propose an effective method to implement the HDR display based on the RGBW LCD. The data stretch, considering a local adaptation characteristic of a human visual system (HVS), greatly enhanced the details of the dark regions, and the local peak dimming using the white channel analysis and the white channel data itself increased the expressiveness of the peak luminance in irradiative or specular regions to 1500nits.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
During the last ten years, the rapid technological evolution of liquid crystal display (LCD) TVs has mainly concerned their resolution, from high definition (HD) to ultra HD (UHD) via full HD (FHD). Compared with former FHD TVs, recently developed UHD TVs provide a considerably superior picture quality [1]. Furthermore, infrastructures for UHD TVs such as image acquisition systems, data compression methods for broadcasting transmission, and interfacing protocols have been increasingly implemented [2]. Thus, for the time being, the UHD era is expected to continue. Aside from resolution, wide color gamut (WCG) and high dynamic range (HDR) are likely to be the next major technology developments in LCD TVs, because they are the most influential factors to determine picture quality, color and contrast. Several studies on implementing WCG and HDR displays have been performed [3–9]. In the case of WCG, multi-primary or thicker color filters and light emitting diode (LED) backlights based on various phosphors are the main subjects of investigation [3,4]. For HDR displays, methods for contents conversion, i.e., from low dynamic range (LDR) to HDR contents and vice versa, and HDR image acquisition represent major concerns [5–7]. In WCG and HDR technologies, the efficiency of the display device needs to be higher than that of a conventional one, since the WCG is intrinsically a technology with low luminance efficiency [8] and the HDR needs considerably higher luminance [9]. However, cost-effective and mass-producible solutions for these technologies do not seem to appear yet.RGBW LCDs are novel display devices which are composed of RGBW four sub-pixels. As non-emissive display devices like LCDs produce colors by using a color filter through which the white light passes, they lose approximately 70% of that light by heat [10]. However, since the white sub-pixel of the RGBW LCD is fully transparent, the RGBW LCD has transmission efficiency in the pure white approximately 150% higher than that of the RGB LCD. On the contrary, the transmission rate of each RGB primary color decreases by 75% because its total area is reduced by adding white sub-pixels that cannot contribute to the intensity of the RGB primary color. In other words, the transmission efficiency of the RGBW LCDs varies depending on the availability of the white sub-pixel.There are two major factors affecting the availability of the white sub-pixel. One is represented by the display contents, as mentioned above, and the other one is the RGB to RGBW conversion process, which is necessary for the RGBW displays as the standard signal protocol of flat panel displays is RGB. Thus, to review an effectiveness of RGBW LCDs, we consider these two factors as follows. Regarding the display contents, we use the IEC62087 standard video, which is typically used for power consumption measurements in the TV industry and can be considered acceptable as general TV contents. For the RGBW conversion process, we use Kwon and Kim’s method, which is a research on the RGB to RGBW conversion using retinex theory [10]. The simulation results of the performance of RGBW LCDs are shown in Fig. 1based on 1000 sampled images from the IEC62087 video clip. From the results, the RGBW LCD shows about 1.4 times better transmission efficiency than the RGB LCD. Typically, in the LCD TV industry, this efficiency gain has been used to improve the power saving of the backlight.The objective of this paper is to propose various applications using RGBW LCDs as well as present a low power solution, especially for WCG and HDR displays. In Section 2, we simulate the perceived brightness characteristics of the WCG on RGB and RGBW LCDs by applying the Helmholtz–Kohlrausch (H–K) effect, and then review the suitability for the WCG with subjective tests. In Section 3, we review the conditions for the HDR display, and suggest an efficient implementation method for it which uses the peak luminance feature of the RGBW LCD in achromatic colors. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section 4.The majority of the LCD TV panels display approximately 72% of the NTSC color gamut, while an organic light emitting diode (OLED) displays 80–100% of the NTSC color gamut. Since a wider color gamut lets consumers experience more vivid colors, and enables the display device to reproduce more accurate colors, the consumers are expecting increasingly improved performances from LCDs. There are two major methods to expand the color gamut in LCDs. The first one is using a thicker color filter or changing the pigment itself [11], and the second one is enhancing the color purity of the backlight by using high color purity LEDs or optical sheets (e.g., quantum dot sheets) [12]. However, in both cases, the transmission efficiency of the LCD severely decreases [11,12]. Thus, to apply the WCG to an LCD device, the most important consideration is to estimate and improve the loss of transmission.In this section, we suggest a method to estimate the transmission loss of the WCG, as a human visual system (HVS) feels the brightness of the color differently depending on the color gamut of the display device. This phenomenon is well known as H–K effect, which describes the perceived brightness dependency on the color purity and the color itself [13,14]. To simulate the perceived brightness effect, we use the color chart shown in Fig. 2(a), which has a vertical hue axis and a horizontal saturation axis. For each color of the chart, we can measure the (u′,v′) values, and then calculate the H–K effect factor,γVCC,according to the color gamut of the display by using Eq. (1)[13]. The H–K effect factors for the WCG (90% of the NTSC color gamut) and sRGB color gamut (SCG, 72% of the NTSC color gamut) are calculated and shown in Fig. 2(b) and (c) respectively. Owing to the H–K effect, chromatic colors with a higher saturation have a bigger brightness expansion, and also the expansion rates appear different in relation to the hue and saturation of each color.γVCC=0.4462×[1+{-0.8660q(θ)+0.0872KBr}×Suv(x,y)+0.3086]3,(1)q(θ)=-0.01585-0.003017cosθ-0.04556cos2θ-0.02667cos3θ-0.00295cos4θ+0.14592sinθ+0.05084sin2θ-0.01900sin3θ-0.00764sin4θ,θ=tan-1v′-vc′u′-uc′,KBr=0.2717×6.469+6.362La0.44956.469+La0.4495,Suv(x,y)=13[(u′-uc′)2+(v′-vc′)2]0.5.We use 63.66 as the adaptation luminance valueLaand(0.1935,0.4376)as the reference white coordinate(uc′,vc′),respectively. Then, we calculate the luminance values for each point of Fig. 2(a) assuming maximum luminance values of the RGB primary colors equal to 70nits, 250nits and 30nits, respectively, and a luminance loss from adopting the WCG equal to 30%. By multiplying the H–K effect factors and the luminance values for each point, the perceived brightness values are calculated according to the color gamut (SCG and WCG) and the type of LCDs (RGB and RGBW), as shown in Fig. 3.To analyze the perception effect from the color gamut, we normalize the perceived brightness of the RGB and RGBW LCDs adopting the WCG with the brightness of the RGB LCD with SCG. As shown in Fig. 4, the RGBW LCD exhibits more uniform results than the RGB LCD in a brightness ratio, and it indicates that the RGBW LCD with WCG maintains a better brightness balance, according to the hue and saturation, than the RGB LCD with WCG, when the RGB LCD with SCG is considered as the reference display. To verify the cognitive effect of the HVS for this brightness balance, we carried out subjective tests for the RGB and RGBW LCDs with WCG by using the Kodak Lossless True Color Image Suits [15]. We used 9-point scale for the preference of each test item, as listed in Fig. 5(b). Twelve observers (9 males and 3 females) participated in the test, and they observed test materials (47″ RGB and RGBW LCDs with WCG) in the 2.5m viewing distance under about 200 lux illumination. They evaluated 4 test items (contrast, brightness, colorfulness, and naturalness) and overall preference. The RGBW LCD with WCG was far superior in relation to contrast, brightness, naturalness, and overall preference, while the RGB LCD with WCG had a greater result relative to colorfulness. In Fig. 5(a), we presented the overall subjective test results. It appears that the contrast and brightness results were mainly affected by the brightness of the achromatic colors for which the RGBW LCD has 1.5 times higher luminance because the HVS is much more sensitive to luminance than color. Besides, it appears that the brightness balance between achromatic and chromatic colors affected the naturalness results as we analyzed in the above simulation. In the case of RGBW LCDs with WCG, the brightness loss of the achromatic color due to the WCG can be counterbalanced by the high luminance characteristic of the achromatic color in the RGBW LCD, and the brightness loss of the chromatic color can be compensated cognitively by the H–K effect. However, in the case of RGB LCDs with WCG, only the brightness loss of the chromatic color can be compensated by the H–K effect, and the brightness balance between the achromatic and chromatic colors remains uneven.The typical dynamic range of an LCD TV is from 0.5 to 500nits, while the HVS can perceive approximately from 0.001 to 20,000nits [16]. Thus, we can define the HDR display roughly as a display that lets the HVS feel an impression similar to a real scene. To implement the HDR display, two major problems need to be solved. One is the dynamic range expansion of the display device, and the other is to make HDR contents by converting low dynamic range (LDR) legacy contents. RGBW LCDs can serve as a good solution to overcome the first problem. Since the upper dynamic range of the HDR display for the reproduction of an irradiation is mostly mapped to white colors, the RGBW LCD has a luminance 1.5 times higher than that of the RGB LCD. For example, we can implement 3000nits peak luminance with the backlights with which the RGB LCD can be lit up to 2000nits. For the second problem, we propose a novel LDR to HDR conversion method based on the current 8 bits display system and local dimmable backlight. Our proposed method for implementing the HDR display is described in Fig. 6, and the dimming ranges for the dynamic range expansion are split as shown in Fig. 7. The proposed method is composed of mainly two paths. In the first path, we restore the details of the upper and lower dynamic ranges because they are compressed critically during the LDR image acquisition process or the HDR to LDR tone mapping process [17,18]. In the second path, we analyze the irradiation area by using the white channel data, and implement a peak dimming for that irradiation area.The HVS has a dynamic feature in that the resolving dynamic range varies according to the adaptation level, and the adaptation of the HVS occurs locally around the area on which the HVS focuses [19]. To modify this HVS characteristic, we estimate the local adaptation levels in a legacy image, and then expand the data according to those levels. Many previous works proposed a bilateral filtering to calculate the local adaptation levels for both local averaging and avoidance of a halo artifact [20]. However, the use of bilateral filtering with a large kernel size is not appropriate for real-time operations as it uses too many multipliers and adders. To simplify the bilateral filtering, we use pre-determined local block areas. Assuming local block areas and adaptation window as shown in Fig. 8, the weights for N×N neighbor local block areas around the target pixel can be calculated by Eq. (2). The operator|·|indicates the cardinality of a set. The weightωs,tspaceis calculated using the distance between the center position of the local block area, and the target pixel for the local averaging and the weightωs,trangeis calculated using the difference of the intensity between the local block average and the target pixel for the avoidance of the halo artifact. Gaussian-like functions or kernels can be used for the functions, f and g.(2)ωs,tspace=f(px,y-cv+s,w+t),ωs,trange=gIx,y-∑(a,b)∈LBv+s,w+tIa,b|LBv+s,w+t|,ALx,y=∑s∑tωs,tspaceωs,trange∑(a,b)∈LBv+s,w+tIa,b|LBv+s,w+t|∑s∑tωs,tspaceωs,trange,LBv,w:(v,w)-th local block area including(x,y),cv,w:center position of the(v,w)-th local block,px,y:position of a target pixel,Ix,y:intensity of a target pixel at coordinate(x,y),ALx,y:adaptation level of a target pixel at coordinate(x,y),ωs,tspace:weight calculated by a distance betweenpandthe center point of LB,ωs,trange:weight calculated by a similarity betweenpandthe average of LB.After calculating the adaptation levels, a data transfer curve has to be determined to stretch the data around the adaptation level. To get higher stretching rates in the upper or lower adaptation levels, a crossing pointCPx,yof the data transfer curve is calculated as described in Eq. (3).(3)CPx,y=α×(ALx,y-β)+β,IfCPx,y>255,thenCPx,y=255,else ifCPx,y<0,thenCPx,y=0.whereαis the proportional constant for tuning the stretching rate, andβis equal to 128 for 8 bits data. After determining the crossing point, the nodes for piecewise linear curves are calculated according to Eq. (4). Then, the nodes are interpolated, and the data transfer curve is completed as shown in Fig. 9(a).(4)(X2,Y2)=CPx,y-CPx,y2×(CS+1),CPx,y-CPx,y×CS2×(CS+1),(X1,Y1)=CPx,y×(CS-1)2×CS+X24,Y24,(X3,Y3)=CPx,y+Dmax-CPx,y2×(CS+1),CPx,y+(Dmax-CPx,y)×CS2×(CS+1),(X4,Y4)=Dmax-CPx,y×(1-CS)2×CS+Dmax+X34,3×Dmax+Y34,CS:slope of a line passing through CPx,y,Dmax:maximum value in the given bitwidth.255for8bits data.The stretching rate increases as the adaptation level is determined farther away from the mid-gray pointβ, since the crossing point is calculated at a greater distance from the mid-gray point, as described in Eq. (3) and Fig. 9(b). Thus, we can achieve the non-linear mapping for the expansion of the upper and lower dynamic range. However, this non-linear data mapping creates an overlap of the dynamic range between the expanded upper and lower range and slightly expanded mid-range. To solve this problem, we calculate the averages of the stretching rate of each pixel in a pre-determined local dimming block, and then dim the block inversely proportionally to the averages, as described in Eq. (5).(5)Gainx,y=mpx,ypx,yLD1i,j=γ∑(x,y)∈LDBi,j1Gainx,y|LDBi,j|LDBi,j:(i,j)-th local dimming block areaLD1i,j:(i,j)-th local dimming value for a dynamic range expasionmpx,y:modulated intensity of a pixel at coordinate(x,y)Gainx,y:stretching rate of a pixel at coordinate(x,y)whereγis the proportional constant for tuning the dimming rate. The procedure of the dynamic range expansion is explained with two examples in Fig. 7(c) and (d). In the first, local image data are stretched according to the data transfer curve which is determined by Eqs. (2)–(4). The stretching rate of data can be expressed as a gain like Eq. (5). In the case of a dark image patch as Fig. 7(c), since the transfer curve takes the convex shape, the gain values are larger than one. On the contrary, in the case of a bright image patch as Fig. 7(d), the transfer curve is concave, and thus the gain values are smaller than one. Then, the local dimming value is calculated with the average of reciprocal of the gains in the corresponding local block. The local backlight control with this dimming value inhibits the dynamic range overlap arising from the local data stretch, and consequently the dynamic range expands as shown in Fig. 7(c) and (d). The dimming range for this process is controlled within a range 0–33%, as shown in Fig. 7(b).The biggest difference between LDR and HDR displays is the expressiveness of the irradiation of light or shining specular objects. The second part of the proposed method is to find irradiative or shining objects, and calculate control values of local dimmable backlights for the peak luminance of those objects. Since most of the irradiation components are white lights, we analyze the irradiation by quantifying white channel data, in a local dimming block, resulting from the RGB to RGBW conversion process. In addition, since the higher the global adaptation level is, the less the HVS can feel the luminance difference [21], the dimming value is calculated as inversely proportional to the white data average of an entire scene. Applying these properties, the second dimming value is determined as described in Eq. (6).(6)LD2i,j=δ×1|LDBi,j|×∑(x,y)∈LDBi,jWx,y1|∀(x,y)|×∑∀(x,y)Wx,yLD2i,j:(i,j)-th local dimming value for an irradiation,Wx,y:White channel data at the position(x,y)resulting fromthe RGB to RGBW conversion.whereδis the proportional constant for tuning the peak luminance level.Finally, the last dimming value, considering the dynamic range expansion and the irradiation component, is calculated in Eq. (7)(7)LDi,j=LD1i,j×LD2i,jThe simulation results of each algorithm stage are shown in Fig. 10, and the results for a subjective comparison are shown in Fig. 11. The LDR and HDR images are normalized by the maximum value of the HDR image for the display purpose, and a Gaussian-like function is used for the light profile of the local dimming. As shown in Fig. 11, the HDR display using the RGBW LCD has a significantly higher capability, in relation to the peak luminance, than the HDR display using the conventional RGB LCD.We implemented the proposed method in a real-time operational prototype by using a field programmable gate array (FPGA), local dimmable backlights, and 47″ RGBW FHD LCD. We used 32×18 local blocks for the local data stretch and 16×9 local dimming blocks for the local dimming. The measured maximum luminance of the prototype was 3000nits, but we did not use the full capability of the luminance because of the limit of the backlight power and a dazzling effect to the human eyes. The actual peak luminance was measured to 1500nits, and the average power consumption of the backlight was equal to 58.4W in IEC62087 standard video clips, while the luminance of the normal RGB LCD was 350nits, and the power consumption of the backlight was about 50W. Thus, it appears that our HDR displays with RGBW LCD have very high potential for mass production in the point of the luminance and power specifications. The pictures taken from the 47″ HDR prototype are shown in Fig. 12, as compared with the conventional RGB LCD for the subjective evaluation. We adjusted the exposure time of a camera for each scene in order to express the major difference between LDR and HDR displays (for the first row of Fig. 12, low gray detail and deep black, and for the second row, high gray detail and peak luminance) but we used the same exposure time for the same scene. As well as the simulation results, the overall picture quality of our HDR display is distinctly superior to the normal RGB display especially in the expressiveness of the peak luminance and low gray details.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
