@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Online social networks as a tool to support people with special needs

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Design, development and assessment of an OSN to support people with special needs.Long-term and large scale pilot in a residence of people with cognitive disability.Experimentation validates a novel OSN user-oriented design methodology.OSN use improves the residence procedure's efficiency and the quality of service.OSNs positively influence the social relations of residents, family and care professionals.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Online social networks,Management tools,People with special needs,User relational needs,Long-term pilot study,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Supporting people with special needs is a multi-disciplinary endeavour that involves many stakeholders. Social relations have a determining impact on the quality of the related processes. Online social networks (OSN) have demonstrated their capacity to change human interaction paradigms; however, their application to disability is a barely-explored field of research. This paper describes the design, development and deployment of an OSN in a 24/7 residence for people with disabilities in order to improve productivity, enhance the quality of care processes and foster social relations. During fourteen months of operation, 46 people, including caregivers, health professionals (psychologists, occupational therapists, and physiotherapists, among others), supervisors, administrative staff, residents and their family members, used the OSN. Our quantitative and qualitative results indicate adequate OSN technical performance; validate user-oriented design methodology; confirm productivity and quality of service improvement; and confirm the capacity of OSNs to positively influence social relations in such environments.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Online social networks (OSNs) have a great impact on human relationships and can even generate new interaction paradigms [1,2]. People with special needs and their environment are also influenced by OSNs, although less intensively, and perhaps this is why there has been little attention from researchers as yet into this phenomenon [3].In healthcare scenarios, which are closely related to the field of disability, health social networks [4] are identified as a useful tool for patient tracking, assessment and rehabilitation, providing a point of contact between patients and health professionals [5], among healthcare practitioners [6], as a data collection tool for researchers [7], or as a social health-data space [8]. Indeed, there are many thematic OSNs available for specific diseases such as Acor.org (cancer patients); Stupidcancer.org (young adults affected by cancer); RareShare.org (rare disorders); and many more. There are also other OSNs that do not focus on specific diseases but on general health-related issues: Medhelp.org (which connects people with leading medical experts and other people who have similar experiences); “Curetogether.com” (this brings people together to monitor and compare their health data); and “Patientslikeme.com” (where members can share treatments and symptoms to follow and learn about a range of medical results). Many works have analysed these OSNs [9–12]: from these studies we can conclude that the benefits identified can be summarised in two main areas: the increased interactions with others that could provide emotional support; and more available, shared, and tailored information.Offline social networks are very important for health and subjective well-being across different domains of life [13] as a part of this, participation in OSNs also has the same effect [14]. Asselt-Goverts et al. conclude that people with mild intellectual disabilities prefer strengthening existing ties towards family and professionals as opposed to expanding their network [15]. OSNs can help in both scenarios, and are a valuable resource to avoid social isolation [16], to socialize in order to influence decision-makers, to organize collective action and to raise awareness and collect funds [17].Shpigelman and Gill thoroughly analyse the literature related to OSNs and disability, identifying as the main challenges the skill deficiency derived from text-based communication, that affects both accessibility for people with visual disabilities and intelligibility for people with communication disorders (e.g. autism); the loss of privacy, derived from abstract and hypothesis-based privacy rules that may be difficult to understand and the limited access and use of the Internet[3]. Moreover, regardless of OSN's potential benefits and due to its challenges, Tonkin and Tonkin (2013) indicate that different professionals related to disability (carers, occupational therapists, nurses, healthcare assistants, etc.) are not too much in favour of recommending the most popular OSNs to their patients: on a Likert scale of 0 (never recommend) to 4 (often recommend), Facebook scores 2.2, Twitter scores 1.9, Google+ scores 1.7 and Myspace 1.1 [18].Nunes and Miranda develop an OSN for a learning environment of students with disabilities [19]. It is an innovative work that focuses on the creation of a shared informal learning context for teachers and parents, to share experiences and resources using blogs, multimedia, messages and forums. An important conclusion is that while teachers did participate, parents did not really engage in the OSN. The authors point as a possible reason, that parents’ primary needs were not met as they needed more support rather than learning.“People with special needs” is a label that can fit many users [20]. It is usually applied to the elderly and to those with cognitive, sensory or physical disabilities, but somehow, the environment of this target population also has special needs, including next of kin and significant others who are especially affected as their life becomes bonded to their loved one's situation [21].As well as the needs of communication, we can say that the needs of this population are the same as everybody's: those basic requirements (hygiene, alimentation, leisure, self-realization, etc.) are detailed in various classifications of daily living activities [22]. Additionally, they have other requirements derived from their health condition: periodical rehabilitation and therapy, medicine intake, close medical follow up, etc. Of course, these needs must be addressed in all the environments where the users may be: at home or residence regardless of the personal assistance they may have, at the day centre, at work, etc. Often, assistance from third persons with different professional profiles is required, and such teamwork needs to be coordinated and user-centred.As a conclusion, there are usually a large number of people in different scenarios who have the same objective: to meet the needs of the person. Unfortunately, the management and organization of the related processes are not always structured or formalized and there is usually a lack of specific tools. If we focus on day centres (which provide therapy, rehabilitation and also serve as a social hub) or on residences (providing 24/7 attention), this issue can lead to inefficiencies and sometimes deficient performance of the duties that, similarly to ERPs (enterprise resource planning software) in companies, can be notably mitigated using ICT [23]. Although attention to disability is an eminently human-centred process and one that must remain so, some common issues may be identified:-Inefficiency in communication. Attention to diversity is by definition a multi-disciplinary process requiring different professionals (psychologists, occupational therapists, social workers, speech therapists, physiotherapists, among others) to work together with each person. Formal and informal meetings, e-mails, and more recently SMS messaging (e.g. “WhatsApp”) are the instruments commonly used. In an internal audit we conducted within the framework of this research, the association members polled estimated that between 10% and 20% of their time is devoted to these tasks.Format of shared information. As is the case with hospitals, a great deal of paperwork is needed to track records, therapies, evolution, reports, etc. However, unlike currently in hospitals, this is mostly done using paper.Limited office time available. Attention to people leaves little time to complete reports, attend meetings, respond to communications or read other professionals reports [24].Exclusion of user/relatives in the process. Disability varies greatly, making each person unique. Relatives are usually the most experienced in caring for their family member but, once the person enters a residence or day centre, they barely contribute to the care-giving process from that point on.Changes in professionals. There is a considerable turnover of the persons involved in support tasks. This requires specific training with high associated costs in terms of human resources.Little penetration of ICT communication in daily living. Undoubtedly, mobile devices are enabling successful e-inclusion of the elderly and people with disabilities, bringing together remarkable emotional benefits. Regrettably, as the first priority in residences is to ensure that the residents are properly attended to in terms of their basic needs, the emotional aspects derived from communication through new ICT media (pictures, videos and quick messaging) are often neglected.In this paper, we present a successful design, development and evaluation of an OSN as a tool for assisting people with special needs. To the authors’ best knowledge, this is an unexplored area of OSN application which could have a major impact on society. The following section presents the design phase, describes the conceptual approach and the basis upon which the development was implemented. Section 3 presents the implementation phase detailing the OSN backbone platform and the application architecture. Section 4 presents and discusses the results achieved with the actual deployment of the OSN in a residence and its operation over a one-year period. Finally, conclusions and future work are discussed.Any “design for all” project is a challenging process [25], due to many factors, such as the distinctive features of the user, the need for a mixed yet cohesive multidisciplinary team, or the wide variety of stakeholders involved, with a range of objectives throughout the process.Besides the obvious reasons, designing an OSN for people with special needs is a challenge, due to the wide disparity of the user profiles and their expectations (since usually people with and without disabilities will share the OSN). That results in different intertwined user levels, according to their capacities (people with and without disabilities); their technological skill (from expert users to the technologically illiterate); and their roles within the community (patients, therapists, relatives, caregivers, etc.). In addition, there are also noticeable variations within each role (different types and degrees of disabilities, different specialties of therapists, or different levels of responsibility of the job, among others). Hence design and development processes need to be user-centred, focused on both the common and the differentiating factors in each subgroup, while striving to respond to each user at all points of heterogeneity at each level. Moreover, the novelty of the technology and the lack of methodological references in this area require a design process flexible enough to be adapted to any emerging issues that may arise. Therefore, the challenge is to use appropriate methodologies to address the user needs in the framework provided by OSN technology.The project methodology we followed has been designed, validated, and improved in the course of several OSN projects for people with special needs. In the first attempts, the methodology depended mostly on user profiles, with an extensive initial design phase, followed by successive cycles of development, evaluation and redesign. This process achieved very good results in terms of accessibility, usability and user experience, but required too much time and human resources to later implement the design in an OSN engine. This experience allowed us to develop a specific design methodology, “Community”, that seeks a better balance between OSN technological foundations and user-centred design. This methodology focuses on how users interact in their offline social groups and on how these processes would be virtualized, according to the relationships defined by OSN groups. In this way we achieved consistently good results in meeting the functional requirements, while notably reducing the implementation and optimization effort.Providing the right answer to all of the users involved was a major concern, since as stated before, some cases of OSN with different profiles failed to engage with any of the user profiles [19]. Furthermore, regarding attention to disability, the user focus is usually the person with special needs, while the proxies being relegated to the background. As our aim was precisely to ensure the quality of this care, we elevated proxies to primary users.The first step was the profiling of the users involved, defining groups (e.g. residents, families, carers and professionals) and subgroups that met these conditions: the individuals’ different capabilities, their role within the community and their ICT skills. For example, in the professional group, the subcategories were based on their disciplines, combined with their position in the workplace hierarchy (manager, administrator, coordinators, supervisors or direct care staff), and with their information access permissions.We then identified the needs, preferences and concerns of each group, using both qualitative and quantitative methodologies to gather this information, in a funnelling strategy that included literature reviews, tests and semi-structured questionnaires, focus groups [26], and “extreme” single-case analysis through interviews and ethnographic techniques such as video self-recording [27]. Main issues identified have been already detailed in previous section.From the conclusions of the needs assessment phase, we devised workshops with designers and developers, based on the Personas-Scenarios method[28,29], in order to facilitate focusing on and visualizing the diverse types of user (archetypes), understanding and empathizing with them, and reaching an inter-disciplinary agreement about the outcomes.Finally, we created and developed “Community” as the main tool of relational groups’ methodology. We use it to (i) define relational needs and requirements arising from the idiosyncratic group interplays of an OSN and (ii) construct required network spaces where the interactions among user profiles take place.Software design is usually formulated from a linear perspective, mainly considering intrinsic profile issues. Nevertheless, when dealing with social networks, as they evolve in uncontrollable and sometimes unpredictable ways, it is necessary to consider how different users’ profiles will influence one another, generating unexpected needs and restrictions. Therefore, the “relational need” concept defines the need of a particular user profile with regard to the other user profiles of the virtual community, bringing to light actors’ interdependences which had not yet emerged or had not been sufficiently considered. This will have direct repercussions on process of defining the platform requirements as well as on the specifications hierarchy. The procedure consists of the following steps:(1)To graphically delineate the interaction flows between the archetypes generated in the Personas-Scenarios method, defining which profiles should be connected and which should not (see Fig. 1). In line with Service Design theory, it is useful to establish two conceptual interaction areas: the “backstage” and the “onstage” areas [30]. The backstage is the sphere “invisible” to the final user, where processes that build services take place. Here communication revolves around the internal management of human resources and the official communication about the patient. The onstage is the visible part that includes the service recipients, residents and family in this case.To formulate the relational needs of each archetype, following the next scheme: “As [user profile], I need [other user profile/other users from my own profile] (not) to [action]”. In our case, we define sentences like “As [coordinator], I need [the relative] to [receive the information as soon as possible]” or “As [director], I need [the supervisor] to [be the only person who sends the notifications to the relative (to avoid misunderstandings)].The first two steps can also be done in reverse order or iteratively. For example, we noticed in the second step that patient reports should reach the family only through the coordinator; thus, we cancelled the online links between other professionals and family (see Fig. 1).To build the “Network Spaces”, defined as virtual workspaces with different objectives and subjects, where the interactions take place, and which comprise one or various user profiles or archetypes. Interaction can be internal or external to conceptual interaction areas, determining the “touchpoints” between the OSN and the users. Fig. 1 illustrates the correspondence between interaction flows, network spaces and conceptual interaction areas; Table 1details these network spaces objectives and the users involved. Both will serve as the main guide for later technological OSN architecture, defining modules, profiles, access rights, etc.From the relational needs, interaction mechanisms and network spaces, we developed a feature tree for each user profile, which informed the OSN architecture. With this, we developed several prototypes at increasing levels of detail, in an evolutionary process of design-evaluation that allowed us to assess specific aspects as the final solution was being modelled. We executed them using rapid prototyping programs, combined with graphic design and Flash software. In early low-fidelity prototypes we found a quick way to explore navigation functions and to analyse organizational issues and data hierarchy, so we sketched the contents of each screen paying no regard to the final layout definition. As prototypes were functional, evaluation was done by experts through cognitive walk-through technique [31], recording all the sessions with screencast software.Evidently, the simplicity of prototypes was inversely proportional to the completion of the iterations. The process ended with the development of high-fidelity prototypes (see Fig. 2), and with the specification of a Style Guide (Fig. 3), containing a detailed definition and dimensions of the general layout and the distribution of the elements in all sections. At this point, the functional prototype was identical in appearance to the final implementation; so we were able to evaluate aspects such as usability, accessibility, and user experience with end-users. The methodology used for the functional assessment of the prototypes relied on the Wizard of Oz technique, which simulates the OSN functionality, generating the responses that the system would provide to the users’ actions [32]. Final users, without previous knowledge of the prototype and without any external help, were asked to carry out some platform activities, while the process was observed by an examiner (checking the right and wrong actions performed, collecting their difficulties and other details such as user gestures and reactions) all of which were recorded by the screencast software.When we consider the development of an application based on social networks, the first idea that comes to mind is working with an existing social network such as Facebook. However, this presents some drawbacks such as not having full control over the application or possible functionality limitations. But the most important concern is privacy: Who will have access to the data? Is it acceptable to store users’ information on external systems? Moreover, even if we were able to successfully address such security concerns, users are usually reluctant to provide sensitive data (medical, psychological, etc.) to such external mainstream platforms.That led us to face the challenge of developing our own social network platform. On this premise, rather than coding the entire application from scratch, we decide to use an existing platform that provides the basis for ours. There are a number of solutions for developing social networks, such as Elgg [33], Diaspora [34], and OpenSocial [35], which are open-source and free to use, as well as commercial alternatives such as Ning [36] and Get Satisfaction [37]. Among these alternatives, we chose Elgg because its plugin-based architecture allows us to easily include all the desired functionalities and there is a highly active developer community around this platform.As mentioned, Elgg architecture is based on the use of plugins, which provide the desired functionality (see Fig. 4).The Elgg Engine implements the core functionalities, such as database access or content generation, while basic functionalities such as messaging, user management or popular components (blog, wall, etc.) are implemented by plugins that are bundled with the main Elgg distribution. Platform functionalities can be extended using plugins provided by the community, which are not included in the default distribution, but behave in a similar way than core plugins. Depending on the requirements of our application, it is also possible to develop custom plugins to provide such functionalities, as well as personalizing the look and feel of the platform with a custom theme.The platform follows a classic MVC (model-view-controller) pattern in which the engine (the controller) responds to page requests, and forwards them to the appropriate handler based on a context-subscription mechanism. The page handler then retrieves the required content and generates the appropriate view that is returned to the navigator.Basically, Elgg data (Fig. 5) is modelled by the ElggEntity class, which contains common properties such as identification, type or name. Particularly, the derived ElggObject class serves as a basis for any other content, such as blog entries, files, discussion topics, etc. These objects are connected with Relationships, which, for example, are used to define which users belong to each group or whether two users are friends. Modelling the particular properties of each object (e.g. the content for a blog entry) is based on defining metadata and annotations that allows any object to be fitted on the model, and the information to be store without requiring having to modify the database.Regarding views, their generation is based on a rich set of functions used to render most of the elements we can find in the page. For example, in Fig. 6we can see a typical Elgg page listing entities, where every element is generated by calling an Elgg function. These functions are tasked with rendering a specific view by producing an HTML output related to the parameters provided, and the appearance of these elements can be adjusted using CSS markup.In the example, the entities we want to display are retrieved using a request to the database and stored as an array of entities. Then, for generating the content, we call the ElggListEntities function with the referred array, and this function internally calls ElggViewEntity with all the entities to generate a specific view for that entity, as well as handling list navigation by using another function. Actually, ElggViewEntity looks for a view (a PHP file) suitable for rendering the HTML output related to the entity, and executes it. Once the HTML output of the list is produced, it is passed to the ElggViewLayout function, which arranges the content in one column plus a sidebar (whose content can be set automatically according to the context). Finally, the entire page is generated by calling ElggViewPage, which in addition to the list and the sidebar, will include other elements such as a main menu, a navigation breadcrumb or general elements like the header, the footer or the site logo.An interesting feature that Elgg provides, is the view overriding and extending mechanism. Basically, when we develop a custom plugin, Elgg allows us to replace existing views (for example, how a button is displayed), by creating a file with the right name and in the right place of our plugin, so that it overrides the default view provided by Elgg. We can also extend existing views to add specific content after (or before) the output generated by the original view. This eases development, as we can use existing components without worry about “breaking something”. Also, as the platform permits enabling or disabling available plugins, we can modify the behaviour of our application without interfering with the base platform.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper we have described a successful case of applying an OSN as a tool for assisting people with special needs. This included the design and development of the OSN and its evaluation over a one-year period of real operation of the platform.As an important aspect of this application, we confirm the importance of differentiating users according to their profiles, as it encompasses very different realities, and we furthermore stress the relevance of tackling the OSN design and development from a different point of view: that derived from the natural interaction between actors, and from what an actor “expects” from the users he relates with. The concepts of Relational Groups, Relational Needs and Network Spaces arise as convenient mechanisms to address the OSN design process.Further, it is important to bear in mind the specific features of the OSN when developing the application. Following a traditional software design and development approach and putting the focus on the requirements may probably lead to complexity and wasted efforts (which in practice will entail higher maintenance costs and unsustainability), whereas including platform capabilities in the analysis allows alternative models to be found that can meet the application's requirements with less effort required for its development. Therefore, developments should include an in-depth review of the OSN model to ensure that it strikes a good balance among functionalities, complexity and costs.The one-year pilot evaluation clearly demonstrates the utility of the OSN in the support of people with special needs. It provides benefits in terms of productivity and quality of service, as well as contributing to relations between users. This has been evidenced by means of a deep quantitative analysis based on the platform operations and confirmed with a qualitative evaluation with different profiles of the OSN users.