@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Modified Köhler illumination for LED-based projection display

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An improved design of conventional Köhler illumination is proposed for projection display.The modified Köhler illumination can significantly reduce the system volume.An actual pocket-sized CF-LCoS projector is designed, simulated and analyzed.High light efficiency and illumination uniformity are both available.Tolerance analysis shows that the system is well acceptable for current machining.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Projection display,Geometrical optics,System design,LED source,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Common projection optics use Köhler illumination to achieve a required lighting. These systems always prevent the realization of a compact optical configuration along with a high lumen output. Based on conventional Köhler illumination, a modified Köhler illumination system for LED-based projection display is presented in this paper, which can significantly reduce the system volume while allowing for adequate and homogeneous illumination. Equipped with the proposed system, a pocket-sized CF-LCoS projector with a physical dimension of 27.4mm×19.4mm×9.6mm is designed, simulated and analyzed. Compared to conventional approaches, this design could offer an average 43% volume reduction with acceptable tolerance. To the best of our knowledge, the screen uniformity of 90.2% and the light efficiency of 56.5% are competitive as compared with those of the currently commercialized pocket-sized CF-LCoS projectors.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Currently, the development of communication systems and portable devices greatly enriches our daily lives. These communication approaches make the information transfer simple and convenient. However, miniaturization of portable devices is still urgently needed. Projection display system is certainly one of them. Up to now (to our knowledge), there have been two types of widespread adopted pocket-sized projectors: the LCoS-based projector [1] and the DMD-based projector [2]. Small imager size and high pixel count are of vital importance to the pocket-sized projectors. Both of these features are required for high-resolution and small-footprint display application that suitable for next generation of digital projection systems. For commercial applications, a tiny CF-LCoS based pocket-sized projector would be a promising candidate due to its inherently simple optical structure and color production. Nowadays, a compact light emitting diode (LED) light source is used in place of conventional lamps, which makes for power conservation and faster on–off delay time [3,4]. By combining an LED with a CF-LCoS projection system, a reduction in the size of the whole optical engine becomes possible. Moreover, the color filters integrated on the LCoS chip mean that primary colors can be created by a single white LED instead of being laboriously filtered.Given a vested luminous efficiency of light source, the illumination system is the key factor in deciding the optical performance and the physical dimension of the projector [5]. An illumination system always includes a source, integrator components, a prism and an image storage panel. The goal of an illumination system is to produce an adequate and homogeneous illumination on the display panel, for which Köhler illumination is the most commonly adopted. Conventional Köhler illumination develops two approaches for projection display: the light-integrator method and the lens-array method. Based on the light-integrator method, the uniformity of a projector is proportional to the length of its light integrator [6,7]. Similarly, a homogenizer with a lens array will determine the system uniformity by the number of micro lens [8,9]. But it is more difficult to process a lens array and ensure the machining accuracy. Analyzing the two conventional illumination systems, one can find that they have one thing in common: a relay lens system is needed insides. The source’s intermediate image produced by the homogenizer is located at the end of the light integrator or a micro-lens array. The relay lens system is applied to transfer the intermediate image and realize the overlapping illumination on the display panel. In other words, the requirement of compactness and simple optical architecture makes conventional Köhler illumination an inappropriate choice for a pocket-sized projector.To offer an appropriate solution to improve conventional Köhler illumination, we present an effective illumination system design approach, namely modified Köhler illumination. It can greatly reduce the system complexity and satisfy the optical requirements synchronously. Only two compact lenses are applied in the illumination part of the optical engine to replace conventional Köhler illumination optics. The relay lens system is no longer needed. A condensing lens is first designed to collect the LED’s Lambertian light and limit the illuminating beam width, and then a beam-reshaping lens is introduced to control the illumination field and the semi-view-angle for the CF-LCoS panel. The condensing lens is the common entrance of incident ray bundles for the following system. The beam-reshaping lens can further direct more incident ray bundles to the destination and increase the system efficiency. The mapping of the LED’s uniform intensity distribution and the illumination on the LCoS panel is established that the emitting rays from every point of the LED surface can fill the active area of a CF-LCoS panel. This ensures the homogeneity of the projection display. By using this modified Köhler illumination system, a pocket-sized projector for personal use is designed and demonstrated to offer both high performance and low space utilization.As shown in Fig. 1, the components of the CF-LCoS illumination system includes an LED source, a lens group, a polarization beam splitter (PBS) and a CF-LCoS image storage panel. Even though the LED source’s illuminance distribution may be non-uniform, there has uniform intensity distribution of the source indeed. This characteristic is used in the design of a modified Köhler illumination system. The LED emitting rays are collected by the Lens I (i.e., condensing lens). The aperture of the lens limits the width of the collected ray bundles. It also determines the amount of light entering the illumination system and reaching any given point of the destination plane. Lens II (i.e., beam-reshaping lens) is located behind the Lens I to control the illumination field and the semi-view-angle of the LCoS panel. The surface curvature and aperture size of Lens II limit the extent of the field at which the incident bundles can get through to the destination plane. Although the above system still follows the Köhler illumination principle, one can find that such an appropriate design can reduce the system volume while allowing for adequate and homogeneous illumination. This is just the reason that we present this improved system.The mapping of the LED’s uniform intensity distribution and the illumination on the LCoS panel is depicted in Fig. 1. The ray bundles from every point of the LED emitting surface can fill the whole image panel through the lens group. Given the three-dimensional space that far from the source, the illuminance distribution over a small area is independent of where the flux originated. This tends to provide uniformity over portions of the source’s intensity distribution. The direct radiation and the flux from the LED source become an effective mapping source for a modified Köhler illumination system. Consequently, this mapping approach ensures the homogeneity of the projection display.The optical simulation software of the TracePro® [10] is used to describe the characteristics of the proposed system. Owing to the nature of the extended Lambertian light source, the emission angle of an LED chip is still so large that a traditional optical element cannot collect the light effectively. The light source file referred to is from the company of LumiEngin® [11]. The LED chip is a standard size, 1mm×1mm. Tailoring the surfaces of Lens I can provide a desired center-to-edge uniform illumination [13]. The fundamental specifications of the CF-LCoS panel include the diagonal dimension, the active area and aspect ratio, which are 0.29in., 6.39mm×3.6mm and 16:9, respectively. The destination illumination is determined by these specifications. To keep simple and easy-fabricated, the front surface of Lens II is designed as a planar surface, and the back surface is a cylindrical one. The Lens II is different from other cylindrical lens that compresses light beam [12]. One is that Lens II contains only a cylindrical surface to directly reshape the incident light beam, but the cylindrical surface can be flexibly replaced by other freeform surface based on the principle of modified Köhler illumination; the other is that Lens II could not only compress light beam, but also control the system NA, which reveals that the uniformity of the lighting pattern should be insensitive to the beam-reshaping lens design. The cross-section of the designed lenses and the corresponding illumination system are shown in Figs. 2and 3(a), respectively. Obviously, high spatial utilization ratio is obtained. The ray-tracing perspective is shown in Fig. 3(b), in which two important phenomena can be observed: the aperture of Lens I that limits the size of the collected ray bundles defines the collection efficiency of the projection system indeed; the illumination field is finally determined by Lens II, which can well match the active area of the CF-LCoS panel. The simulation results coincide well with the fundamental principle of the modified Köhler illumination.To evaluate the modified Köhler illumination, a type of pocket-sized projection system is designed, simulated and analyzed. As shown in Fig. 4, the whole projection system mainly includes the LED source, the illumination lens group, the polarization beam splitter, the CF-LCoS panel and the projection lenses. In place of conventional Köhler illumination, this illumination system that only employs two compact lenses can compress the optical engine’s size down to 27.4mm×19.4mm×9.6mm. The TracePro simulation function is used to trace 106 rays. The output lighting patterns emergent from the condensing lens and the beam-reshaping lens are shown in Fig. 5. The circular illumination with a diameter of 8mm is compressed into an output elliptical spot by the beam-reshaping lens. It is obvious that the reshaped lighting pattern is better matchable for the rectangular display panel. By a comparison of Fig. 5(a and b), one may observe that the uniformity of the lighting pattern becomes insensitive to the beam-reshaping lens design. This accord with the principle of modified Köhler illumination. The simulated illumination distribution map and the illuminance contour lines of the LCoS panel are shown in Fig. 6. The total efficiency of the modified Köhler illumination system is 56.5% without the consideration of the polarization loss. The efficiency is approximate to the limit of the circular-beam-illuminated projection system. The degree of the illumination uniformity is calculated to be 90.2% by using the minimal illuminance divided by the maximal one. Fig. 7shows the angular distribution on the CF-LCoS panel. The Lambertian-distributed light from the LED chip is compressed into a semi-view-angle about ±15°. This illumination system requires a projection lens whose f-number is 1.9. The results demonstrate that the proposed system exhibits an improvement on conventional Köhler illumination, which can reduce the system size and simultaneously satisfy the optical requirements of practical projection display.To show its advantages more specifically, the designed illumination system is compared with conventional Köhler illumination systems that are most commonly applied in projection systems. The illumination systems equipped with a light integrator or a lens array are optimized and built. As shown in Fig. 8, optical architectures of three illumination systems can be directly compared. Obviously, the modified Köhler illumination system has the most compact length of 20.62mm, as compared with the light-integrator based system of 30.87mm and the lens-array based system of 43.38mm. Based on the same panel, the improved system can provide a 33.2% and 52.47% volume reduction, respectively. The positions of aperture stops within the illumination systems are depicted in Fig. 8. Obviously, the proposed design follows Köhler illumination principle. But the stops are integrated into the lens aperture that can greatly reduce the system complexity with a simpler optical structure.The light distribution outside the CF-LCoS panel is shown in Fig. 8. The illumination pattern is reshaped into a rectangular one by the illumination systems equipped with a light integrator or a lens array. Although rectangular pattern is more appropriate for the LCoS panel, other limitations should be taken into account. For example, the illumination system equipped with a light integrator will be not able to use an LED chip equipped with a packaging lens. Once the LED emitting surface has a certain distance away from the light integrator, the system efficiency will decrease sharply. As shown in Fig. 9, approximately 15% drop occurs when the distance of source and light integrator changes from 0.4mm to 1mm. A similar situation relates to the illumination system equipped with a lens array. The light efficiency is sensitive to the diffusion angle of incident light according to the dotted line drawn in Fig. 9. In other words, tolerance control should be carefully considered within conventional Köhler illumination systems, but the modified Köhler illumination system provides a better design flexibility.The parameters of the modified Köhler illumination system, such as the material, the dimensions, the aperture shape and the LED chip size, influence the system performance significantly. Among these parameters, the influence of the LED chip size is the most pronounced. Thus, to explore the proposed system’s potential, the optical performance is investigated based on different LED chip sizes. The light efficiency, the illumination uniformity and the maximum semi-view-angle on the LCoS panel are mainly discussed. The results are shown in Table 1, where the efficiency and the uniformity are calculated and represented in percent. Simulation results show that the efficiency and the semi-view-angle gradually decrease with the increase of the LED chip size. The illumination uniformity has a large fluctuation between 66.7% and 90.2% when the LED size changes. To realize approving optical performance, the LED chip size should be around 1mm×1mm for the presented projection display system.Tolerance analysis is important for that installation errors cannot be avoided in real applications. As shown in Fig. 10, the installation errors can be summarized as horizontal deviation, vertical deviation, axial deviation and rotational error represented as dx, dy, dz and dθ, respectively.For this analysis, value ranges of dx, dy and dz are set to be (0.1mm, 0.3mm), and value range of dθ is set to be (1°, 5°). The value ranges of tolerance analysis are set larger than the actual machining and assembly accuracy. The position deviation in the actual optical system can be controlled at less than 0.1mm based on the actual production experience, but the simulation condition should be expanded to 0.3mm for the tolerance analysis. The effect of installation errors are given by tables shown in Tables 2 and 3.Table 2 shows the influence on the system’s performance when dx, dy or dz changes 0.1–0.3mm. It is found that the uniformity decreases to around 75% when the position deviation reaches 0.2mm, and the light efficiency decrease is more serious under the effect of dz. Compared with the position deviations, the effect on the incident angle on the LCoS panel seems more sensitive. The maximum incident angles expand up to 16° on the LCoS panel when three types of position deviation are reached 0.1mm. As shown in Table 3, the uniformity reduction is approximately 5% when dθ increases from 0° to 2°, and the efficiency is obviously more tolerant to the rotational error than the position deviation.It is found that the tolerances are sensitive to all of the three types of position deviation, which should be paid more attention in the actual application. The illumination system would be well acceptable if the installation errors were controlled within 0.1mm for the position deviation and 2° for the rotational error.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
