@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The rich and middle classes on Twitter: Are popular users indeed different from regular users?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Popular users tweet slightly earlier than ordinary users during the growth of Twitter eventsPopular users engage with a Twitter event for slightly longer than ordinary usersPopular users write more original tweets than retweets, while the trend is the reverse for ordinary usersTweets by popular users are retweeted more than tweets by ordinary usersPopular users are the quickest to retweet tweetsThe volume of tweeting by popular users is however not different from that of ordinary usersPopular users also do not seem to have an influence on the event growth ratesEventual popularity attained by an event is positively correlated with participation by popular users, but causality is hard to establish

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Twitter,Behavioral characteristics,Popular users,Event detection,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Online social networking (OSN) websites such as Twitter and Facebook are known to have a wide heterogeneity in the popularity of their users, which is counted typically in terms of the number of followers or friends of the users. We add to the large body of work on information diffusion on online social networking websites, by studying how the behavior of the small minority of very popular users on Twitter differs from that of the bulk of the population of ordinary users, and how these differences may impact information diffusion. Our findings are somewhat counter intuitive. We find that on aggregate metrics such as the tweeting volume and degree of participation on different topics, popular users and ordinary users seem similar to each other. We also find that although popular users do seem to command an influential position in driving the popularity of topics on Twitter, in practice they do not affect growth rates of user participation and the causality of popular users driving event popularity is hard to establish. Our observations corroborate the findings of other researchers who show that user popularity in terms of number of followers does not translate into driving event popularity, but that event popularity may be driven by extraneous factors to do with the importance of the event.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Online social networking (OSN) websites such as Twitter and Facebook have millions of users, and due to this sheer volume they have spawned entire new industries and research directions. They have become advertising properties by providing eyeballs that are arguably measurable in the number of impressions and clicks created, with tight targeting on voluntarily revealed personal user information. They have become barometers of user perception on topics ranging from news events to business, politics and products, by analyzing the subject matter and sentiment of user generated content shared on the OSN platforms. They provide an opportunity to sociologists and political scientists to understand the formation and propagation of public perception at large scales. Consequently, there is a large volume of research focused on building better algorithms for these applications.We focus on a research question in this context to understand how the behavior of popular users on Twitter defined as those with many followers differs from the behavior of less popular users, specifically on aspects that may influence the spread of information. These popular users with thousands of followers are typically celebrities in real life and are considered to be highly influential in making topics popular by leveraging their large reach. First, studying three topics in the Indian context – politics, entertainment, and sports – we find out whether popular users defined at those in the top 0.1 percentile of the number of followers, tend to tweet more frequently or adopt topics earlier or engage for longer, than ordinary users who form the bulk of the user population. Second, we find out whether popular users show any preferences in retweeting tweets by other popular or ordinary users, and whether they seem to influence growth rates or the popularity of specific events that are discussed on Twitter. This can help understand if indeed popular users are influential in driving the popularity of events, and in uncovering events that may otherwise go unnoticed.We make some surprising findings. On the first question, we find that popular and ordinary users do not differ much from each other in the volume of tweets, or the stage at which they become interested in events, and given that popular users end up participating in 90% of events, our conclusions therefore point towards the idea that just tracking popular users who are a small fraction of the overall Twitter userbase should be sufficient for most trend detection algorithms. On the second question, we find that being connected with popular users indeed gives an opportunity to less popular users to push information into the limelight, but popular users do not seem to have any influence on the event growth rate. Even the popularity eventually attained by different events does not seem to be influenced by the presence or absence of the participation of popular users in the event, and rather it may be extraneous factors to do with the real life importance of the events themselves that may drive their popularity.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
