@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A novel cell-selection optimization handover for long-term evolution (LTE) macrocellusing fuzzy TOPSIS

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Optimal cell-selection scheme that allows a roaming UE to reconnect to the most suitable cell while maintaining its quality of service (QoS) requirements.Very low ping-pong handover ratio and handover failure ratio.Higher cell throughput gain.Considering uplink and downlink conditions make a reliable radio link connection.A comprehensive investigation of proposed scheme at varying UE speeds is demonstrating its robustness.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cell selection,Fuzzy TOPSIS,Handover (HO),Throughput,Multiple-criteria decision-making (MCDM),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
To satisfy the demand for higher data rate while maintaining the quality of service, a dense long-term evolution (LTE) cells environment is required. This imposes a big challenge to the network when it comes to performing handover (HO). Cell selection has an important influence on network performance, to achieve seamless handover. Although a successful handover is accomplished, it might be to a wrong cell when the selected cell is not an optimal one in terms of signal quality and bandwidth. This may cause significant interference with other cells, handover failure (HOF), or handover ping-pong (HOPP), consequently degrading the cell throughput. To address this issue, we propose a multiple-criteria decision-making method. In this method, we use an integrated fuzzy technique for order preference by using similarity to ideal solution (TOPSIS) on S-criterion, availability of resource blocks (RBs), and uplink signal-to-interference-plus-noise ratio. The conventional cell selection in LTE is based on S-criterion, which is inadequate since it only relies on downlink signal quality. A novel method called fuzzy multiple-criteria cell selection (FMCCS) is proposed in this paper. FMCCS considers RBs utilization and user equipment uplink condition in addition to S-criterion. System analysis demonstrates that FMCCS managed to reduce handover ping-pong and handover failure significantly. This improvement stems from the highly reliable cell-selection technique that leads to increased throughput of the cell with a successful handover. The simulation results show that FMCCS outperforms the conventional and cell selection scheme (CSS) methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In long-term evolution (LTE), the delivery of higher data rate while being mobile constitutes a primary challenge for evaluating the network performance. Maintaining the ongoing session while the user equipment (UE) moves from one evolved node base (eNB) to another is known as handover (HO). The third-generation partnership project (3GPP) has specified hard handover for LTE that is based on reference signal received power (RSRP) mechanism [1]. In general, handover can be classified into two phases: initial access and handover. Initial access phase involves a cell-searching and cell-selection phase that is controlled by the UE when the radio resource control (RRC) is in idle state, whereas the handover phase represents an handover procedure that is controlled by eNB, when the RRC is on connected state [2,3]. During cell search, the UE extracts necessary information from the system information for random access. These steps are necessary for the users, like all communication systems, before they can send or receive data upon roaming as shown in Fig. 1.In LTE, the conventional cell selection is based on S-criterion, where S refers to signal quality in the downlink defined as RSRP. The S-criterion for cell selection becomes a precondition for handover to suitable cells.Many studies have focused on handover procedure as described in [4–10] and reviewed in [11] with all its three phases: handover preparation, handover execution, and handover completion. However, only a few research studies focused on initial access [12,13], involving cell selection and/or reselection. Conventional cell-selection/reselection procedures and specifications have been mentioned in [14]. In this specification, the UE performs cell selection and reselection in idle mode within a certain time in the tracking area. The authors in [12] proposed an optimized version of the standard method that has been introduced in [15], which is based on cell identity (ID) information. They assume that there is no overlapping among cells, so it optimizes the handover parameters by comparing the number of cell-boundary crossings and the number of handover that UE executes. RSRP measurement is solely employed for target cell selection and handover decisions. To optimize the handover, the authors in [13] proposed a cell-selection scheme that considers the uplink situation for UEs in addition to RSRP in the downlink. Authors in [16,17] have proposed a cell-selection method, but it is for load balancing rather than for handover mechanism in which the excess traffic is offloaded to those low-loaded cells, making the resources to be more abundantly utilized.In [18], the authors proposed a cell-selection scheme for mobile WiMAX using the analytic hierarchy process method for criteria weighting together with TOPSIS as a multiple-criteria decision-making (MCDM) scheme to meet the user requirements during handover. They showed that MCDM is a powerful method to overcome the weakness because it relies on only one criterion as in the conventional method.In [19–22], the authors presented a dynamic cell selection on downlink coordinated multi-point (CoMP) strategy, in which it selects a link that is better than that of the serving cell whenever a user is in a multi-coverage or handover region. This is similar to fast cell-selection scheme used in High Speed Packet Access (HSPA) [23]. The dynamic cell selection can be treated as a special case of site-selection diversity transmission (SSDT) described in [24]. In dynamic cell selection, one base station (BS) is selected from a cooperative BS set to provide services to users. An enhanced dynamic cell selection has been proposed in [22] in which it mutes the second highest received power to reduce the interference. However, the system spectrum efficiency may degrade since frequency reuse of one is not maintained and resource blocks (RBs) and power may not be fully utilized. Further improvements have been introduced in [19] for frequency and power efficiency. This is done by way of adaptive muting mode selection, which is based on capacity calculation and flexible power allocation. However, overhead signaling in uplink interface will increase as does UE power consumption. All the aforementioned cell-selection methods focused on improving the cell-edge user throughput and mitigate interference. In [25], dynamic cell selection has been proposed for load balancing between macro- and pico-heterogeneous networks. Other methods in heterogeneous handover as presented in [26,27] focused on handover optimization only for increasing the cell throughput. On the one hand, the authors in [28] have introduced a new cell-selection method called network-coordinated cell selection, which allows a UE within the range expansion to be offloaded to pico-cell based on its load and the achievable throughput. However, they did not present any cell-selection mechanism for handover.The main drawbacks of cell selection for handover when the selected cell is not the best are the increase in interference, handover ping-pong ratio, and handover failure ratio. Handover ping-pong is the situation when a UE is handed back to the same serving cell within5 s. During handover ping-pong, RBs are first reserved and then released on the target cell before handover ping-pong timer expires, which reduces the resource utilization of the cell (i.e., bandwidth), while handover failure is the situation when a UE detects a radio link failure (RLF) during handover [29]. High handover ping-pong ratio may cause increased handover delay and probability of RLF and as a result decreases the cell throughput. In this paper, we introduce a new parameter in cell-selection phase for handover optimization called fuzzy multiple-criteria cell-selection (FMCCS) scheme using fuzzy TOPSIS. The proposed scheme considers the S-criterion, availability of RBs at target cell, as well as UE uplink signal-to-interference-plus-noise ratio (SINR).The main contribution of this paper is to provide an optimal cell-selection scheme in macrocells that allows a roaming UE to reconnect to the most suitable cell while maintaining its quality of service (QoS) requirement. This is achieved at a lower handover ping-pong and handover failure, respectively, resulting in higher cell throughput gain. Fuzzy TOPSIS is employed as an MCDM that performs ratings and weights represented by linguistic variables. The choices to be made are the candidate cells to be selected by the decision-maker, which, in this case, is a UE, based on the new proposed criteria, which are RBs and uplink interference as well as S-criterion. System-level simulation shows that FMCCS outperforms both the conventional and cell selection scheme (CSS) methods in handover ping-pong ratio reduction by approximately 27%−23% and handover failure ratio reduction by 19%−15%, respectively. It results in a throughput gain of approximately 11%−8% over the conventional and CSS schemes, respectively. Both numerical results and simulation results agree that FMCCS is effective for a reliable cell-selection technique. It is shown that FMCCS is an outperformance of all previous studies as an optimal cell-selection scheme for handover.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the cell-selection handover procedures in LTE. A detailed fuzzy TOPSIS method is presented in Section 3. In Section 4, the proposed FMCCS scheme is described followed by performance evaluation in Section 5. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section 6.Even though eNB can represent one or more cells, in this paper, we consider the case when an eNB represents only one cell [30]. When the UE moves outward (Cell 1), there are always two more alternative cells to be selected, Cell 2 and Cell 3, as shown in Fig. 2.Cell selection and/or cell reselection is a process to connect and/or reconnect the UE to the best target cell. A UE performs cell selection when it is either just being powered on from an off state, or when a handover failure occurs. In idle mode, when the UE has no data to send or receive RRC_IDLE, it must camp on a cell to receive system information, listen to paging messages, and establish RRC connection to access the available services. When a UE is powered on, a public land mobile network (PLMN) is selected by non-access stratum (NAS). The NAS shall provide a list of equivalent PLMNs that the access stratum (AS) shall use for cell selection and cell reselection [14]. Upon PLMN being selected, cell selection starts based on S-criterion. One of the essential features of mobility support is cell searching, which is needed to identify the unique physical cell identities (PCIs) [15]. Upon successful cell search, the UE is able to detect the physical broadcast channel (PBCH). Broadcast information sent by an eNB includes master information block (MIB) (sent on PBCH) and a number of system information blocks (SIBs) [sent on physical downlink shared channel (PDSCH)]. At this stage, the UE can read all these information as in Table 2, which is very important to be used for the new FMCCS scheme. The UE stays in idle mode until it transmits a request to establish an RRC connection. After receiving the RRC connection setup, the mode changes to the RRC connected to be able to execute handover.In LTE, cell selection is initiated based on idle mode measurements when the UE fulfills S-criterion as expressed in the following equation [14]:(1)Srxlev>0where Srxlevis the cell selection received level value (dB) and is calculated as(2)Srxlev=Qrxlevmeas−(Qrxlevmin+Qrxlevminoffset)−Pcompensation(3)Pcompensation=Max(PEMAX_H−PPowerClass,0)where Qrxlevmeasis the measured received signal level of the cell referred to as RSRP, expressed in dBm. The RSRP is computed by averaging the squared values of the cell-specific reference signals received by the UE. Based on the cell identity information, the UE estimates the reference signals positions in the OFDMA symbol [31] and extracts the resource elements (REs) corresponding to the reference signals positions and estimates Qrxlevmeas. The other parameters of Eq. (2) are provided via system information. Qrxlevminis the minimum required received power level in the cell (dBm). Qrxlevminoffsetis the offset to Qrxlevminthat is only taken into account as a result of a periodic search for a higher priority PLMN while camped normally in a visited PLMN (VPLMN) [32]. Pcompensationis the maximum of (PEMAX_H– PPowerClass) and 0 (dB) is as expressed in Eq. (3). PEMAX_His the maximum transmitted power level a UE is allowed to use when transmitting uplink in the cell (dBm). PPowerClassis the maximum power of the UE according to the UE power class; for example, for class 3, a maximum of 23 dBm has been defined in [33].The cell-reselection timer is Treselection, from 0 to 7 s. Q hystis a positive bias to the serving cell, default value is 0 dB; this hysteresis value is used to allow a UE to choose the highest ranking cell and avoid handover ping-pong [34]. Treselectionand Q hystdepend on UE speeds in idle RRC mode, whereas time-to-trigger (TTT) and handover margin (HOM) are considered in connected RRC mode. In addition, LTE provides scaling factor (SF) with three ranges depending on various UE speeds. The scaling factor can be High, Medium, and Normal with High, Medium, and Normal speed, respectively.(4)SDTreselection=Treselection*SFwhere SDTreselectionis the total speed-dependent time for cell reselection.A fuzzy set is defined as a class of objects with a continuum of grades of membership. Such a set is characterized by a membership (characteristic) function, which assigns to each object a grade of membership ranging between 0 and 1. This was first published by Zadeh [35]. Fuzzy is the term that refers to the situation whose set of activity boundaries are not well defined. In addition, linguistic weightage is used for the criteria instead of numerical values. TOPSIS uses crisp values for MCDM problem, while the fuzzy TOPSIS apply to the cases of imprecise and fuzzy performance ratings [36,37]. These are the reasons for us to use fuzzy TOPSIS.The fuzzy seta˜in a universe of discourse X is described by a membership functionμa˜(x)that associates with each element x in X a real number in the interval [0, 1]. The function valueμa˜(x)is the membership grade of x ina˜[35]. The nearer the value ofμa˜(x)to 1, the higher the grade of membership of x ina˜. Our method utilizes triangular fuzzy membership due to its simplicity [38], less computational process, and ability to immediately comply with the relevant optimization criteria [39]. A triangular fuzzy numbera˜can be denoted by a triplet (a1, a2, a3), as shown in Fig. 3. The mathematical form is expressed as follows [40]:(5)μa˜(x)={0,x≤a1x−a1a2−a1a1<x≤a2a3−xa3−a2a2<x≤a30,x>a3Leta˜=(a1,a2,a3)andb˜=(b1,b2,b3)be two triangular fuzzy numbers; both are real numbers, and therefore, the vertex method is an effective method to calculate the distance between them. The distance measurementd(a˜,b˜)is identical to the Euclidean distance [41], as in Eq. (6):(6)d(a˜,b˜)=13[(a1−b1)2+(a2−b2)2+(a3−b3)2]Leta˜,b,˜andc˜be three triangular fuzzy numbers. The fuzzy numberb˜is closer to fuzzy numbera˜than the other fuzzy numberc˜if and only ifd(a˜,b˜)<d(a˜,c˜)[41]. The basic operations, for multiplication, on fuzzy triangular numbers [36] are denoted as follows:(7)a˜×b˜=(a1,a2,a3)×(b1,b2,b3)=(a1×b1,a2×b2,a3×b3).MCDM refers to making decisions in the existence of multiple, usually conflicting, criteria [42]. TOPSIS is one of the known MCDM that is based on chosen alternatives that should have the shortest distance from the positive ideal solution (best solution) and farthest from the negative ideal solution (worst solution). It was first developed by Hwang and Yoon [42]. In this paper, the decision-maker D as in [36,43] is the UE. The MCDM problem can be expressed in a matrix form D as follows:(8)C1C2C3...CnD=A1A2A3...Am[x11x12x13...x1nx21x22x23...x2nx31x32x33...x3n............xm1xm2xm3...xmn](9)W=[w1,w2,….,wn],and∑j=1nwj=1where Ai, i = 1, 2,…, m, are the alternatives (options) to be chosen; Cj, j = 1, 2,…, n, are the criteria (attributes) with which alternative performances are measured; xijis the numerical outcome of ith alternative with respect to jth criterion; and wjis the weight value of each criterion.A fuzzy rule system has four main modules: a fuzzy rule base (fuzzification), a fuzzy inference engine, and defuzzification [44]. Defuzzification is the process that converts the fuzzy output of the inference engine to crisp output using membership functions to the ones used by the fuzzifier. In fuzzy TOPSIS, after fuzzification of the numerical data, matrix D, which defines the MCDM, is formed based on the membership function. The main point for integrated fuzzy with TOPSIS is its ability to model the interaction between criteria in a flexible way [45]. The fuzzy MCDM problem can be expressed in a matrix formD˜as follows:(10)C1C2C3...CnD˜=A1A2A3...Am[x˜11x˜12x˜13...x˜1nx˜21x˜22x˜23...x˜2nx˜31x˜32x˜33...x˜3n............x˜m1x˜m2x˜m3...x˜mn](11)W˜=[w˜1,w˜2,........,w˜n]where Ai,i = 1, 2,…., m, are the alternatives to be chosen; Cj, j = 1, 2,…, n, are the criteria with which alternative performances are measured;x˜ijandW˜jare linguistic triangular fuzzy numbers, wherex˜ij=(aij,bij,cij)andW˜j=(aj1,bj2,cj3).x˜ijis the performance rating of the ith alternative with respect to jth criterion; andW˜jis the degree of importance of each criterion, Cj.The weight, which represents the relative importance of a criterion, can be determined directly by assuming a number, or indirectly by assigning it using pairwise comparisons [46]. The weight of each criterion and the ratings of qualitative criteria are considered as linguistic variables. Linguistic variables are the variables whose values are in linguistic form [47]. These linguistic variables can be expressed in positive triangular fuzzy numbers, as in Fig. 4. Fuzzy triangle is commonly used as membership functions. The decision-maker uses the linguistic variables to evaluate the importance of criteria and ratings of alternatives with respect to various criteria. We use Table 5 proposed in [36] to transform the values for the performance ratings and for the criteria weights. There are five levels of fuzzy linguistic variables: very low (VL), low (L), medium (M), high (H), and very high (VH).As a rule of thumb, each rank is assigned an equally spread membership function with intervals of 0.25−0.30. According to these assumptions, transformation for fuzzy membership functions table can be inferred as shown in Table 1.For instance, the fuzzy variable (Very Low) has its associated triangular fuzzy number with a minimum of 0.00, mode of 0.10, and a maximum of 0.25. A similar concept is applied to the rest of the fuzzy variables (Low, Medium, High, and Very High) as used in [36,48].The normalized fuzzy decision matrix can be expressed as(12)R˜=[r˜ij]m×nThe weighted normalized fuzzy decision matrixV˜is obtained by multiplying the weightsW˜with normalized fuzzy decision matrixr˜ijas follows:(13)V˜=[v˜11v˜12v˜13...v˜1nv˜21v˜22v˜23...v˜2nv˜31v˜32v˜33...v˜3n............v˜m1v˜m2v˜m3...v˜mn]=[w˜1r˜11w˜2r˜12w˜3r˜13...w˜nr˜1nw˜1r˜21w˜2r˜22w˜3r˜23...w˜nr˜2nw˜1r˜31w˜2r˜32w˜3r˜33...w˜nr˜3n............w˜1r˜m1w˜2r˜m2w˜3r˜m3...w˜nr˜mn]As explained above, in the fuzzy theory, the fuzzy TOPSIS procedures can be described as follows:Step 1:Formulate the linguistic ratingsx˜ijfor alternatives with respect to each criterion and the appropriate linguistic variablesW˜jof criteria weights.Normalize the data using Eq. (14) for the benefit criteria and Eq.(15) for the cost criteria.(14)rij=[xij−min{xij}][max{xij}−min{xij}](15)rij=[max{xij}−xij][max{xij}−min{xij}]Formulate the weighted normalized fuzzy decision matrixv˜that is calculated by Eq. (13).Determine fuzzy positive ideal (FPIS) and fuzzy negative ideal (FNIS) indicated as (A*) in Eq. (16) and (A−) in Eq. (17), respectively:(16)A*=(v˜1*,v˜2*,….,v˜n*)={(maxviji|i=1,2,….,m),j=1,2,….,n}(17)A−=(v˜1−,v˜2−,….,v˜n−)={(minviji|i=1,2,….,m),j=1,2,….,n}Compute the Euclidean distance (separation measures) of each alternative from A*and A−using Eqs. (18) and (19):(18)di*=∑jnd(v˜ij,v˜j*),i=1,2,....,m(19)di−=∑jnd(v˜ij,v˜j−),i=1,2,....,mCalculate the closeness coefficient or similarities to an ideal solution using Eq. (20):(20)CCi=di−di*+di−Choose the alternative with the highest CCi, which is the best solution or ranking.Generally, the conventional cell-selection method is based on the downlink signal quality for optimizing handover. However, this method is inefficient to find the suitable cell due to rapid fluctuations of signal strength in a real environment. This leads to an increase in handover ping-pong and handover failure ratio, resulting in a heavy burden on the LTE networks. The FMCCS promises good QoS guarantee, especially for real-time services. We deploy multicriteria optimization, which is the process of determining the best feasible solution according to the criteria [49]. It consists of two main phases: collecting the data and ranking the alternatives.Typically, a UE may receive signals from several cells from different network operators. Simply put, the UE will look for the strongest cell signal, once it is powered on or after getting handover failure. The UE should continue listening to the paging message to be aware of incoming calls and any system information changes. The UE needs to monitor physical downlink control channel (PDCCH) continuously every 1 ms. To reduce UE power consumption, DRX (discontinuous reception) cycle is broadcasted in SIB2, a procedure for listening discontinuously to paging message, typically made of 128 radio frames (1.28 s) [34]. After the successful execution of cell searching, the UE acquires all system information, as in Table 2.The UE computesthe S-criterion and acquires all other information needed for our multi-criteria decision scheme. At this phase, the conventional cell-selection method only considers RSRP in the downlink, whereas in FMCCS we take advantage of information provided to UE through two additional criteria, viz., number of RBs and uplink SINR. This helps in improving the cell-selection performance. It is represented as the information-gathering phase to configure the new cell-selection criteria in FMCCS, as depicted in Fig. 5. If the cell meets the FMCCS requirement, then the FMCCS process (fuzzy TOPSIS procedures) begins. Otherwise, the UE should continue searching for a cell until Treselectionexpires.Table 2 describes the important information that a UE already acquired in idle state, and FMCCS exploits it to configure new criteria. More information on eNB broadcasting can be found in [3,50].The S-criterion can be calculated using Eqs.(2) and (3). In the cellular downlink transmission systems, the received signal quality can be affected due to several parameters, such as the channel condition of the serving cell, interference from neighboring cells, the noise level, and the technology implemented by UE [3]. The RSRP is an important criterion, but this alone is inadequate to determine the best feasible solution.The other two new cell-selection proposed parameters could be evaluated from Table 2. The first one, broadcasted in MIB, is the number of resource blocks (NRB). The RB for physical RB (PRB) is the smallest unit of bandwidth assigned to UE by the eNB scheduler [50]. Transmission bandwidth is the number of active RBs in a transmission. As the bandwidth increases, NRBincreases. The admission control is typically dependent on RBs availability. In FMCCS, we are concerned with the reduction of handover failure and maintenance of the QoS; this is done by selecting a cell with higher bandwidth as additional criteria. In LTE, the physical layer specifications allow NRBto be of any value within the range 6 ≤ NRB≤ 110, all radio frequency requirements (and thus a complete LTE specification) are defined only for the values in Table 3[51].The second new parameter considered in FMCCS is uplink SINR (SINRul). Even though uplink and downlink are the same in the use of basic transmission resource structure, there is one important difference, which is the coverage. The uplink coverage is smaller than the downlink coverage due to the limited maximum transmission power of the UE when compared with the eNB [3]. Moreover, uplink coverage is more varied due to changes in UE data traffic and location. Therefore, taking consideration of SINRulis essential to assure suitable cell connection. The uplink interference level can be measured by means of interference over thermal (IoT), which is defined as the ratio between the interference plus thermal noise over thermal noise. The uplink aggregate IoT of macrocell,IOTmul, and SINRulare evaluated by [52]:(21)IOTmul=10log10(IOTmmul+IOTmful+NN)dB(22)SINRul=SulIOTmmul+IOTmful+NdBwhereIOTmulis uplink macrocell-to-macrocell interference;IOTmfulis uplink macrocell-to-femtocell interference; and N is background noise power. Sulis the received power at a cell; SINRulis uplink signal to interference plus noise ratio; and N is background noise power.To compare the proposed scheme, several indicators have been defined such as throughput, handover failure, and handover ping-pong. The high uplink interference may reduce the coverage area by desensitizing the receiver and increasing the noise floor. Throughput rate also suffers when interference lowers the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), preventing UE of higher modulation coding schemes (MCS) and efficient RB allocation as the scheduler attempts to avoid the affected spectrum [53]. Another reason for degraded throughput, as aforementioned, stems from frequent reserved and released RBs between the serving cell and target cell due to handover ping-pong, which wastes the RBs. Throughput calculation can be expressed as in Eq. (23), Shannon's Equation. Furthermore, the UE may not be able to connect to a cell due to poor radio link quality. After collecting the data, the FMCCS uses fuzzy TOPSIS procedures, described in Section3.4, to weigh the criteria and select the cell accordingly. The throughput of UEmis estimated using Shannon capacity as in the following equation:(23)Tm=Wsublog2(1+SINRm)where Tmis the throughput of a UE, Wsubis the bandwidth of subband assigned to a UE, and SINRmis the SINR of UEm.The cell throughput in each cell is the total throughput of UEs in the corresponding cell and is expressed as(24)Tcell=∑m=1MTmwhere M is the number of UEs in a cell.Handover failure occurs when the SINR falls below the threshold of the handover execution. Three main handover failure scenarios can occur, and they are categorized based on the timeliness of their occurrence. First, handover may occur too early, that is, shortly after a successful handover. Second, it may occur too late, i.e., before the handover is initiated or during the handover. Third, it can happen to the wrong cell, such as in the case of a connection failure shortly after the handover is completed, and UE attempts to re-establish a new cell other than the source and the target cell [54].The handover failure ratio can be calculated as follows: the ratio of handover failure (HOF) indicates the number of HOF relative to the total number of handover (HO) attempts (successful HO and HOF), expressed as:(25)HOF(%)=NHOFNSuccessfulHO+NHOFHowever, handover ping-pong is a successful but unwanted handover because of the increased signaling overhead, delay, and degraded cell throughput. In a manner similar to the handover failure ratio, the ratio of handover ping-pong (HOPP) indicates the number of HOPP relative to the total number of (HO) attempts (successful HO and HOF), where the successful HO includes both number of non-ping-pong HO and number of HOPP, as expressed in the following:(26)HOPP(%)=NHOPPNSuccessfulHO+NHOFThe three criteria in FMCCS for C1, C2, and C3 are RSRP, NRBand SINRUP, respectively. We need to identify the benefit and cost criteria in which higher RSRP and NRBare more preferred by the UE to meet FMCCS requirements. On the other hand, lower SINRUPis more preferred by the UE, especially with real-time data traffic. Therefore, RSRP and NRBare considered as benefit criteria, which should be maximized, while SINRUPis a cost criterion, which should be minimized. The information on three criteria is chosen to be input to the FMCCS algorithm for selecting a suitable cell for handover. The three alternative cells are A1, A2, and A3. In the handover region, there are always three candidate cells for the UE to choose from, i.e., either one of the two neighboring cells or keep within the serving cell.The decision process of selecting an appropriate cell in FMCCS has to consider the new criteria RSRP, NRB, and SINRUP; therefore, a compromise solution is needed with conflicting criteria to help the decision-maker, the UE in this paper, to make the final solution. The importance of each criterion must be determined in a methodical manner. There are unseen interactions between the criteria; in other words, score of a criterion does not reflect the scores of the other criteria. For instance, downlink and uplink qualities of signals are nearly influenced by the same channel in terms of path loss, fading, and shadowing. However, the value of RSRP does not reflect the value of NRBor SINRUP, and vice versa. The weights of FMCCS criteria are fixed, equal for each criterion. The weight of each criterion is 1/3 for C1, C2, and C3, respectively. The weights can be assigned according to the decision-maker preferences. We choose the weights of the criteria equally, intolerant decision-makers demand that all criteria have to be equally met [45]. In addition, equally weighted criteria are leads to simplify the system process [55] and can achieve fair tradeoff level among interactions criteria.In this section, system analysis is presented in both numerical and simulation results. A comparative result of the proposed FMCCS scheme with two other methods is introduced.In practice, the system criteria are often characterized by different units (i.e., noncommensurable) and conflicting (i.e., competing) criteria, and therefore, normalization is necessary to transform the different criteria units into unit-less criteria that allow us to deal with all of them without ambiguity.The system analysis is described below; this gives one case of computational details, while the rest are presented in Table 8.(27)RSRPNRBSINRUPD=Cell1Cell2Cell3[−1005−1−928−2−804−4](28)W=[13,13,13]Next, we normalize the data using Eq. (14) for the benefit criteria (C1, C2) and Eq. (15) for cost criteria (C3), as in Table 4.As shown in Sections 3.1 and 3.2, we use Table 1 to construct the linguistic rating matrixD˜, as in Table 5, for fuzzy triangular membership functions. The fuzzy linguistic variables are then transformed into a fuzzy triangular membership function as shown in Table 6.Using Eq. (7), the fuzzy multiplication equation, the result is fuzzy weighted decision matrix, as illustrated in Table 7.From Table 7, we can calculate FPIS and FNIS as indicated by A*in Eq. (16) and (A−) in Eq. (17), respectively. The distance, (di*) and (di−), of each alternative from A*and A−can be calculated using Eqs.(18) and (19), as shown in Table 8. Next, we calculate the similarities to an ideal solution (i.e., closeness coefficient) using Eq. (20). The last step is to determine the preference for the FMCCS alternatives according to the closeness coefficient value CC1, CC2, and CC3as shown in Table 8. We show that the preferred choice is the larger closeness coefficient value, at the defined UE speed:0.403 > 0.308 > 0.304 At UE speed 3 km/h;0.545 > 0.216 > 0.199 At UE speed 30 km/h; 0.517 > 0.461 > 0.199 At UE speed 120 km/hA2 > A1 > A3 At UE speed 3 km/hA2 > A3 > A1 At UE speed 30 km/hA1 > A3 > A2 At UE speed 120 km/h,respectively.At a UE speed of 3 km/h, for instance, the preferred cell to select based on FMCCS is A2(cell 2). All cell-selection preferences and comparisons are exhibited in Table 9.We next implement this method, FMCCS, on a system-level simulation LTE-Sim [30]. The simulation environment comprises 19 cells with radius equal to 1 km and varying UE speeds of 3 km/h for pedestrian scenario, and 30 km/h and 120 km/h for vehicular scenarios with random direction model. Each cell serves up to 40 users. The UEs move within the coverage area. A real-time video streaming is considered with modified largest weighted delay first (M-LWDF) scheduling algorithm used [56,57]. The other simulation parameters are as in Table 10.As shown in the previous section, the best cell (highest priority) based on FMCCS is Cell 2 at a speed of 3 km/h. In contrast, the best cell based on conventional method is Cell 3 due to higher RSRP. According to CSS described in [13], Cell 1 is the best cell due to the best uplink SINR (i.e., lower SINRUP). In Table 9, we compare the alternatives of FMCCS with CSS and conventional methods in terms of cell-selection ranking at various UE speeds.The FMCCS results demonstrate their ability to reduce handover ping-pong and handover failure as well as increase throughput. The tradeoff between handover ping-pongand handover failure has been presented in [5]. This tradeoff in the FMCCS is designed to be less disruptive through feasible cell-selection criteria and absence of handover parameters.In addition to the aforementioned, the most distinguished features of FMCCS is that it does not incur further delay to the network (Treselectionas default), and the UE can read all the system information within 1.28 s. In idle state, Q hystis zero, which eliminates the conflict of tradeoff between handover ping-pong and handover failure. In other words, when Q hystis increased to avoid handover ping-pong, it leads to increased handover failure due to long delay. In our case, the reduction of handover ping-pong stemmed from the introduction of extra cell-selection criteria of FMCCS. Moreover, we do not need a specific message between UE and a cell. In addition, we do not apply any other handover parameters optimization such as HOM, TTT, and layer 3 filtering, which needs an intelligent control system to pick a good combination. Handover parameters can achieve further improvement for handover procedure, when it is deployed only in RRC connected state rather than in RRC idle state, which is applied in the cell-selection procedure. Therefore, the complexity will not increase except some additional computational processes that are not as complex.Fig. 6exhibits the handover ping-pong ratio against the time for cell selection. The higher rate of handover ping-pong is attributed to the conventional method, since only downlink signal quality is considered. The RSRP tends to fluctuate due to shadow fading, and accordingly cell selection becomes unstable leading to high handover ping-pong ratio. The higher the handover ping-pong is, the more RB is wasted due to switching back and forth of the user data. The small reduction in handover ping-pong in CSS stems from considering uplink SINR, but at the cost of UE experience (i.e., not considering the bandwidth). In our algorithm, the handover ping-pong can be handled better by using multiple criteria. Thus, the UE can camp on a suitable cell that satisfies its entire requirement to proceed for a successful handover process. The best performance comes from FMCCS that reduces handover ping-pong by approximately 27%−23%, at UE speed of 3 km/h, over the CSS and conventional methods, respectively.Fig. 7illustrates the handover failure performance. Generally, handover failure should be higher at high UE speeds due to weakened radio link connection and Doppler shift effects, which lead to a higher RLF. On the one hand, high handover failure ratio happens in conventional method because it does not consider RBs and uplink SINR. On the other hand, the CSS introduces a very small improvement of less than 5% over the conventional method at a UE speed of 3 km/h, which can be attributed to its consideration of uplink SINR. The FMCCS achieves the lowest handover failure ratio by taking RBs and uplink SINR into consideration. Since handover procedure consumes RBs, it is significant that FMCCS managed to reduce the high occurrence of handover in the form of handover ping-pong, as a result of which handover failure is reduced. Moreover, FMCCS considers that too low an uplink SINR could make the cell “deaf,” and cannot “listen” to any UEs. In this case, a high interference could most likely lead to frequent RLF. The FMCCS achieves reduced handover failure by approximately 19%−15% over CSS and conventional methods, respectively, at a UE speed of 3 km/h.A comprehensive investigation of FMCCS of varying UE speeds is given in this section. In handover, high UE speeds present the most severe challenge to an algorithm, to demonstrate its robustness.Fig. 8illustrates the superiority of FMCCS over both conventional and CSS schemes to reduce the handover ping-pong. This is attributed to the intelligence built in the cell-selection criteria. Generally, at low speeds, the number of handovers is lower than that at high speeds, because the number of cells that a UE crosses over is less. At high speeds, more frequent handovers occur.In the conventional method, the handover ping-pong ratio is higher at a low speed of 3 km/h, than at high speeds; this is because of receiving more fluctuating signals. In contrast, at high speeds, the UE penetration of a cell is faster, which leads to lower handover ping-pong ratio. The CSS has an acceptable performance gain in terms of the reduction of handover ping-pong at lower speeds, which is attributed to its consideration of uplink coverage, but there are no improvements at higher speeds of 120 km/h where the same behavior as in the conventional method described above takes place. This stems from the absence of admission control requirement that is considered in FMCCS. For these reasons, the FMCCS appears to be the most suitable scheme to be applied for cellular networks with varying UE speeds scenario. Simulation results show that the FMCCS gains a significant handover ping-pong reduction over those of the conventional and CSS schemes.Fig. 9depicts the handover failure performance of FMCCS that surpasses both conventional and CSS schemes to reduce the at multiple UE speeds. Contrary to handover ping-pong, the handover failure ratio is higher at high UE speeds, and likewise for lower UE speeds, which shows lower handover failure ratio. This can be attributed to the weakness of radio link connections at high speeds. Although the 3GPP LTE has been standardized, an SF to adjust the timer of reselection, as explained in Section 3.2, the handover failure could happen immediately after a successful handover. The FMCCS provides an optimization technique for minimizing handover failure and handover ping-pong. The conventional scheme shows a higher handover failure ratio at all speeds. The CSS shows a little enhancement over the conventional scheme but only at low speeds, whereas its performance is undesirable at high speeds. The CSS shows the same performance as the conventional scheme at high speeds. This is presented in Table 8, where the CSS and the conventional methods have the same cell choices. The FMCCS achieves the best performance over both CSS and conventional methods, due to consideration of multiple criteria and the method for making a decision for selecting a suitable cell for handover.Fig. 10illustrates the sum of cell throughput performance of the proposed FMCCS scheme. FMCCS is designed to choose the best cell according to MCDM. This will reduce the interference together with handover ping-pong reduction leading to higher throughput gain. In general, a limited enhancement in throughput can be achieved in the absence of transmission power control [3]. FMCCS shows approximately 11% cell throughput gain over the conventional scheme at a UE speed of 3 km/h.From the results shown in Fig. 10, it is clear that the average throughput increases as the number of UEs increases. This is surprising because the average throughput is expected to decrease when the number of UEs increases because the same amount of RBs has to be shared among a higher number of UEs. This can be first explained from the fact that FMCCS always selects the most suitable cell for handover, which has less interference relative to the existing schemes, even without deploying any interference mitigation techniques. Second, FMCCS decreases the handover ping-pong and handover failure. Third, the M-LWDF is a suitable packet-scheduling algorithm for real-time data traffic; it results in higher system throughput as the number of users increase [60]. It is also able to handle all the offered traffic and reduce packet delays, at the expense of increased delays for other flows [56]. The third reason is interpreted as the slight throughput increase in the conventional scheme with UE increase, some more throughput enhancement in CSS over the conventional one stems from little handover ping-pong and handover failure reduction. The results in Fig. 10 demonstrate that FMCCS always performs better than the conventional and CSS schemes.The results depicted in Fig. 11are more investigation of FMCCS for being a robust cell-selection scheme for handover even at high speed. The results show that the average throughput decreases with high speeds for all the presented schemes. This, as has been highlighted earlier, arises from the weakening of radio link connections at high speeds, in handover failure case; when UE moves with high speeds, the data rate becomes lower due to poor RF links. Furthermore, it is obvious that at higher speeds, more frequent handover takes place, hence increasing the signaling overhead, which will consequently reduce the performance of the system [61]. Therefore, this behavior is observed; i.e., the higher the UE speeds, the lower the UE throughput becomes.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
