@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Visual ergonomics of video-display-terminal workstations: Field measurements of luminance for various display settings

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We have analyzed the International Standards on ergonomics of human–system interaction.We have assessed luminance conditions of displays through in-field measurements.Displays were rated on 14 different Contrast–Brightness combinations.Displays have met the requirements only for some Contrast–Brightness combinations.Analysis has shown the importance of a rapid assessment of display performance.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Requirements for electronic visual displays,Field assessment of display luminance,Display luminance,Luminance ratio,Contrast non uniformity,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Electronic visual displays have shown a rapid technological evolution in the last two decades. With reference to the ergonomic requirements for video display terminal (VDT) workstations (ISO 9241), at an international level, attention is focused on the human–system interaction. With reference to visual ergonomics, the aim of this study is to assess luminance conditions through in-field measurements in order to evaluate: luminance and contrast ratios, luminance and contrast non-uniformities. The assessment was applied to widespread flat screen displays and repeated for fourteen combinations of Contrast–Brightness. The analysis carried out by the Authors shows the importance of realizing a simple and quick procedure to determine the performance levels of displays used in VDT workstations. The proposed assessment could be used as a practical tool for staff assigned to assess the risks arising from VDT use in the workplace within the Occupational Health and Safety Assessment Procedure.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The introduction of computers has led to dramatic changes in work practices for many people. Today, activities such as reading, writing, and typing can be carried out without moving from a computer. This change in work practices has been accompanied by an increase in complaints about a number of health problems associated with working at video display terminals (VDT) [1]. Eye discomforts and also hand/wrist problems are often associated with VDT work. Results of different studies suggest that VDT users have increased the risk of developing eye discomforts, musculoskeletal pains and mental load [2–7]. As the work force becomes more and more dependent on computers, the need for proper and efficient design of VDT workstations [8] and also the need for risk assessment procedures [9] become increasingly critical.With special reference to visual ergonomics, the main device of the VDT workstation is the monitor, because it represents the primary object of vision. The task of the monitor is to reproduce information; the quality of the information reproduced can sometimes be crucial for properly carrying out work tasks, especially if particular workstations are considered such as those used in mission critical control rooms (i.e. control rooms in airports, police stations, civil protection units,…).As a visual object, a monitor is substantially different from a sheet of paper in many ways and viewing a monitor is much more visually demanding than viewing paper [10]. Unlike paper, a self-illuminated monitor, which is refreshed at a certain rate, and consists of different combinations of background and foreground causing different contrasting color objects that influence visual fatigue and can contribute to the outbreak of the Computer Vision Syndrome [11–14]. The objects displayed on a monitor consist of a series of pixel-based dots with decreasing brightness on their outer edges, thus making it hard for the eyes to focus. In addition, the viewing distance between the eyes and the computer screen is important and often not easily adjusted, especially if compared with the simple movement of a book to adjust viewing distance [12,14–18].Monitors have undergone a rapid technological development and over the past 20–30years we have gone from CRT phosphor monochrome displays to CRT color displays and then from LCD displays to the current LED displays. This evolution has resulted in an increase in the resolution and consequently in an improvement of visual performance and visual comfort as demonstrated by Ziefle [19]. Although displays realized with these new technologies can be considered photobiological risk exempt, as demonstrated by the extensive studies on the equipments commonly used in office workplaces [20–24], their effects on visual fatigue are still under investigation.To obtain good visual performance while working at a VDT it is very important that luminance contrast and screen luminance are appropriate. Luminance contrast is an important factor in visual performance and display quality: the effect of luminance contrast on visual acuity and on the perception of the worker is huge, as shown in [25–29]. A significant improvement in both visual acuity and visual comfort can be obtained by increasing the luminance contrast, however this contrast must not exceed the value of 8:1, above which comfort falls again [8].Electronic visual displays have had an extremely rapid technological evolution in the last two decades. They have reached increasingly higher performance levels and have changed the way that work is carried out in numerous professional jobs. For this reason, recently, with particular reference to those professional activities which require particular visual tasks (or time prolonged tasks) and high levels of precision, the need was felt to standardize the parameters to be evaluated in order to guarantee an ergonomic use on behalf of users. Currently, at an international level, attention is focused on the human–system interaction in light of the ergonomic requirements for office work with visual display terminals. In the EN ISO 9241-300 subseries standards, aspects of the ergonomics of the human–system interaction are treated in relation to the requirements of electronic visual displays. The subseries is structured as follows:•Part 300 (2009): Introduction to electronic visual display requirements;Part 302 (2009): Terminology for electronic visual displays;Part 303 (2012): Requirements for electronic visual displays;Part 304 (2009): User performance test methods for electronic visual displaysPart 305 (2009): Optical laboratory test methods for electronic visual displays;Part 306 (2009): Field assessment methods for electronic visual displays;Part 307 (2009): Analysis and compliance test methods for electronic visual displays;Part 308 (2008): Surface-conduction electron-emitter displays (SED) [Technical Report];Part 309 (2008): Organic light-emitting diode (OLED) displays [Technical Report].This group of standards establishes the requisites that displays are required to meet during normal work use in order to guarantee adequate visual ergonomic performance.In particular, EN ISO 9241-303 specifies the requirements for the ergonomic design of electronic visual displays stated as performance specifications, aimed at ensuring effective and comfortable viewing conditions for users with normal or adjusted-to-normal eyesight. On the other hand, EN ISO 9241-306 specifies optical, geometrical and visual inspection methods for field assessment of a display in various contexts of use according to EN ISO 9241-303. Finally, EN ISO 9241-307 specifies analysis and compliance test methods for electronic visual displays for a wide range of visual display tasks and environments.In order to satisfy the human–system interaction, different requisites have been introduced, grouped into categories and shown in Table 1. From Table 1 it can be observed that the majority of requisites clearly refers to intrinsic display characteristics and to information display modalities, while some refer to the work environment (i.e. special physical environments) and others refer to user posture (i.e. viewing distance, viewing direction).EN ISO 9241-307 describes methods of analysis and testing to implement for evaluating all the requirements for electronic visual displays. This standard refers to both field and laboratory assessments and furnishes specific indications in relation to display technology. In particular, the displays dealt with are Cathode Ray Tube (CRT) Displays, flat panel Liquid Crystal Displays (LCD), Plasma Display Panels (PDP), front screen projection visual displays with fixed resolution and emissive, reflective or transflective LCDs for handheld devices. In this standard, displays are further subdivided according to whether they are anisotropic displays (luminance, contrast and color vary with viewing direction) or isotropic displays and whether the information which is predominantly displayed during the execution of the visual task is artificial (objects and scenes that do not have originals in our world, for example, text, graphical signs, symbols, etc.) or real (imaging of objects and scenes that do have existing originals in our world).In this paper the Authors are particularly concerned with the analysis of luminance through in-field measurements in order to evaluate the following requisites: luminance ratio, contrast ratio, luminance non-uniformity and contrast non-uniformity. For this reason, together with a specific analysis of the display itself, it is necessary to conduct a simultaneous analysis of the workstation’s detailed lighting (i.e. the desk) and, more in general, the lighting of the work environment (i.e. the background walls). Analysis of the work environment lighting may be developed through (refer to EN ISO 9241-5 and EN ISO 9241-6) luminance measurements (i.e. on desk, computer keyboard, surfaces behind the display), calculation of luminance ratios in both static and dynamic visual conditions, illumination measurements (on the various work planes involved in the visual task), calculation of luminance average uniformities on the various surfaces [9,30]. Furthermore, it is necessary to assess postural ergonomics in relation to the workstation and to the entire work environment. For example, in work environments in which the interaction with a display is carried out with an erect torso, the viewing angle between line of sight and display should be in the range 0–40° and the user head tilt angle should not be greater than 25°.Displays are required to guarantee, for the entire operational lifespan and in consideration of the ambient lighting where they are installed, a minimum value of luminance needed to allow sufficient recognition of displayed information. In this respect, EN ISO 9241-307 recommends, according to the display’s technology (e.g. CRT, LCD) and the type of information predominantly displayed, the minimum and recommended luminance values that the display is required to produce (see Table 2). For handheld devices, instead, EN ISO 9241-307 introduces a minimum value of luminance according to the level (high, medium or low) of the visual display task.It should be noted that for activities carried out in insufficient lighting (or in darkness), display luminance should not be too high in order to avoid limiting the adaptation of the user’s visual system. In this regard, it should be remembered that in electronic display devices the background luminance and/or the contrast between character and background must be easily adjustable by the user. It should be noted that in order for the symbols on the screen to be visible, it is necessary that there be sufficient contrast with respect to the background; symbols and background must therefore have a different value of luminance (or, obviously, a different color). The difference in luminance between symbols and background may be evaluated by measuring the luminance and calculating the contrast ratio (see Section 3.2).Furthermore, it should be noted that a strongly lit environment can contribute to modifying the brightness of on-screen images (at times also their color). In most cases, ambient lighting cannot be adjusted by the user, thus it is necessary to make display brightness easily adjustable in order to guarantee an adequate balance between display brightness and the average luminance of observed surfaces during work [9].In order to guarantee that the user is able to read information (both textual and graphical) correctly, rapidly and effortlessly, the distribution of luminance on the display’s surface should be as uniform as possible. If this requisite is not met, it may lead to difficulty in reading or, worse, comprehension errors regarding the displayed information.This requisite is described by the parameter Luminance Ratio (LR), defined as follows (EN ISO 9241-303):(1)LR=Lmax/Lminwhere Lmaxand Lminare respectively the maximum and minimum luminance values emitted by the display and measured in a predefined matrix (see Section 4). Clearly, with Lmax⩾Lminit follows that LR⩾1.EN ISO 9241-307 establishes that for all display types and independently of the information which is predominantly displayed, the luminance ratio shall not exceed a maximum value of 1.7 and, in order to guarantee optimal visual performance, should not exceed a value of 1.4.If the luminance ratio value is not met, it may lead to difficulty in reading the displayed information or, in the worst case, comprehension errors from which errors in the execution of work tasks may ensue.Furthermore, the luminance ratio parameter defined in EN ISO 9241-303 is needed in calculating luminance non-uniformity (see Section 3.3).The difference in luminance between adjacent zones (luminance contrast) proves to be particularly important in that it is responsible for the perception of luminance and colors. If this difference is not adequate, an erroneous perception of the displayed information could ensue. It should be remembered that the sensibility of the human eye with regard to differences in luminance, depends on the visual task, size of the object of vision, luminance of the object of vision as well as the surrounding areas and background and sensitivity of the user.For this reason the Contrast Ratio (CR) parameter has been introduced, and is defined (EN ISO 9241-302) as:(2)CR=LH/LLwhere LHis the higher luminance (luminance of the white element, for example, in the case of textual information, this element is generally the background) and LLis the lower luminance (luminance of the black elements, in the case of textual information these are generally the characters). It should be noted that on the surface of most of the displays available commercially, LLis nearly constant while LHvaries considerably. Consequently, it is possible to determine several values for the contrast ratio and in particular to identify the maximum (CRmax) and minimum (CRmin) values needed in order to calculate contrast non-uniformity (see Section 3.4).Luminance Non-Uniformity (LNU) between different areas of the screen surface is defined (EN ISO 9241-306) as:(3)LNU=1-(Lmin/Lmax)=1-(1/LR)where LR is the Luminance Ratio (see Section 3.1). Obviously, being LR⩾1, yields 0⩽LNU<1. According to the recommendations in EN ISO 9241-307, the maximum value LNU=0.412 is obtained with LR=1.7 and the recommended value LNU=0.286 is obtained with LR=1.4. LNUvalues are generally expressed as percentages.Contrast must be as uniform as possible and commensurate with the visual task to be carried out. The Contrast Non-Uniformity (CNU) is defined as the unintended variations in contrast in the active area of the screen. CNUvalues may be calculated using the following relation (EN ISO 9241-306):(4)CNU=1-(CRmin/CRmax)=1-(LHmin/LHmax)where CRmin=LHmin/LLand CRmax=LHmax/LL, and where LHminand LHmaxare respectively the minimum and maximum luminance values of white targets. Targets are square or rectangular shaped areas on the display that identify the position in which the measurement is carried out. CNUvalues are generally expressed as percentages.In cases where the maximum and minimum luminances of white targets (LHmaxand LHmin) correspond respectively to the maximum and minimum luminances emitted by the display (Lmaxand Lmin), obviously the luminance non-uniformity (LNU) given by Eq. (3) corresponds to the contrast non-uniformity (CNU) as calculated with Eq. (4). This appears obvious in those cases where the values of Lmaxand Lminare measured with a white display background, an extremely frequent circumstance.For an intended uniform appearance, EN ISO 9241-307 specifies that for all display types and independently of the type of information which is predominantly displayed, the CNUshall not exceed 50%, which implies from Eq. (4) that the following must be true: LHmax⩽2LHmin.EN ISO 9241-306 defines the field assessment criteria of requisites introduced in EN ISO 9241-303 (see Table 1). The measurements of luminance on the display surface, according to what is foreseen in EN ISO 9241-306, must be carried out by measuring the luminance in predefined positions (see Fig. 1) both with a model having white targets on a black background and with a model having black targets on a white background. The measurements must be carried out by placing the luminance meter probe perpendicularly to the display surface and ensuring that the target area shall be at least 100% larger than the measurement area of the luminance meter.Field assessment of luminance requisites were applied to three displays (M1, M2, M3) of the same model utilized in three different office workstations (see Fig. 2) on which mostly artificial information was displayed. The analyzed displays are of the flat screen type having TFT (Thin Film Transistor) active matrix LCD panels and their essential characteristics are shown in Fig. 2. The measurements were carried out by using the photo-radiometer Delta Ohm HD2102.1. The HD2102.1 is a portable instrument, composed of a datalogger with a large LCD display that can be connected with different probes in order to perform illuminance and luminance measurements across VIS-NIR, UVA, UVB and UVC spectral regions. For the display luminance measurements a LP471Lum2 probe was used having the following operating characteristics: suitable for contact measurements; measurement range 0.1–1999.9 (cd/m2); resolution 0.1 (cd/m2); optical angle 2°; calibration uncertainty<5%; agreement with photopic response V(λ)<8%; instrument reading error<0.5%; temperature coefficient α<0.05%/K.Prior to conducting the measurements, in accordance with the recommendations of EN ISO 9241-307, within the test environment the artificial lighting system was turned off and the windows were completely screened. Furthermore, in accordance with what is indicated in EN ISO 9241-306, the display surfaces were cleaned and the display luminance was allowed to stabilize by waiting at least 20min after power on.The measurements were carried out by varying the display contrast and brightness values each time (manually configurable by the user in the range 0–100) so that 14 C–B (Contrast–Brightness) combinations were selected in order to perform the measurements. From an interview regarding users (survey on a broad sample of users, [23]), the most frequently utilized combinations areh(C=75%, B=75%) andp(C=100%, B=100%). More generally, the combinations having Contrast and Brightness values above 50% are preferred (i.e. combinationsf,g,h,i,n o,p). Obviously, combinationa(C=0%, B=0) represents an extreme situation and is shown only for comparison purposes.For each combination the measurements of luminance were carried out by displaying a measurement pattern on the display constructed according to normative criteria (see Fig. 1). The six measurement patterns are described in Fig. 3. The measurements were performed in the center of each rectangle (black or white) that the screen was subdivided into, through the display of black and white full-screen images. In Fig. 3 the rectangles of each pattern are unambiguously denoted using a matrix notation, for example, the rectangle in the first row and the first column in Pattern 6 is denoted by “11”, the one in the center of the display (fifth row, fifth column) is denoted by “55”.All measurements were performed with both an RGB setting of 100% and 50% (the RGB setting was changed using the display’s setup menu). These measurements returned equivalent outcomes and therefore the following results may be considered as being characteristic of both settings.Tables 3 and 4show the detailed results of the measurements performed on the three analyzed displays. The measurements carried out on the black rectangles of the various displayed patterns are not shown in the text as the luminance proved to be less than 1cd/m2 (in this paper, it is assumed that the value of luminance (LL) is LL=1cd/m2).Table 3 shows the values of luminance (LH) measured on three displays (M1, M2, M3) in C–B combinations fromatop, for Patterns 1, 3, 4 and 5 and for the significant positions indicated in Fig. 3. Table 4 shows the values of luminance (LH) measured on three displays (M1, M2, M3) for Pattern 6, in C–B combinations fromatopand for the significant positions indicated in Fig. 3.Fig. 4shows, for each analyzed display and for each C–B combination, the evolution of the luminance (LH) for each of the nine measurement positions placed on the main diagonal of the display related to Pattern 6 (see Fig. 3 and Table 4). From Fig. 4 it is clear that for most of the combinations the luminance is not constant along the diagonal. This variation is accentuated in combinations with higher Contrast (C) and Brightness (B) values. It is interesting to note that, in all combinations, the luminance reaches maximum values (LHmax) in the center of the display (position 55) and decreases linearly toward the edges. Positions on the main diagonal which are equidistant from the center present luminance values some of which differ greatly, for example, on monitor M1 in combinationg(C=50; B=100) in positions P22 and P88 the readings are, respectively, (LH)P22=119cd/m2 and (LH)P88=133cd/m2 yielding a difference which is greater than 11%.It should be noted that the three analyzed displays were acquired in 2008 (the field measurements were carried out at the beginning of 2014) and have been utilized for normal office tasks by different users and for a varying amount of time estimated in approximately 7000h for display M1, 9000h for display M2 and 12,000h for display M3. Such diverse usage accounts for the, somewhat pronounced, differences in the results of luminance measurements.For this reason, Fig. 4d displays the evolution of luminance values (LH) measured on the three displays for combinationp(C=100; B=100), for Pattern 6 and in the positions located on the display’s main diagonal. In particular, from Fig. 4d it may be observed that the values of LHmaxare 235cd/m2 for display M1, 231cd/m2 for display M2 and 196cd/m2 for display M3 with a percentage reduction of approximately 9% from display M1 to M2 and approximately 17% from display M1 to M3.The measurement results were used to determine the parameters previously described in order to verify the display luminance (L), the luminance ratio (LR), the luminance non-uniformity (LNU) and the contrast non-uniformity (CNU) with the limit values set out in EN ISO 9241-307 related to LCD displays and the display of artificial information (see Table 5).Table 6shows the measurements carried out on three displays (M1, M2, M3) in all combinations (fromatop) utilizing Pattern 1 (position P55, see Fig. 3), that is to say the central position with a white full screen display. Table 6 shows the results of the comparison of these measurements with the minimum value (20cd/m2) and with the recommended value (150cd/m2) of luminance. In Table 6, a Y (Yes) indicates that normative values are met (i.e. the display’s luminance is greater than the normative value), whereas an N (No) indicates that the normative criteria are not met.From Table 6 it can be clearly observed that the minimum recommended value of luminance corresponding to 20cd/m2 is met in all C–B combinations except in the limit casea(C=0, B=0). Furthermore, it should be noted that the recommended luminance value is met in only a few cases, in particular, for values of C and B simultaneously less than 75% (combinationsh,i,o,p) for all three displays, in combinationnfor displays M1 and M2 and in combinationgfor display M1. Thus the combinations most frequently utilized by users (combinationshandp, see Section 4.1) meet the normative requisites.Table 7shows the calculated values of Luminance Ratio (LR) for each display (M1, M2, M3) in all C–B combinations. These values were obtained by measuring the luminance values in significant positions of the main and secondary diagonals relative to Pattern 6. In particular, Table 7 shows the maximum luminance (LHmax) and minimum luminance (LHmin) values for each display in each combination.It should be noted that, as previously stated, the value of LHmaxis always obtained in position P55, while the value of LHminneeds to be located each time even though, in most cases, it corresponds to position P11 (extreme superior end of the main diagonal). For example, Table 7 shows that for display M1, in combinationgthe minimum value (116cd/m2) corresponds to position P11, in combinationlthe minimum value (44cd/m2) corresponds to position P99 and in combinationothe minimum value (192cd/m2) corresponds to position P22.Table 7 shows the outcome of the comparison of these results with the maximum luminance ratio (1.7) and with the recommended luminance ratio (1.4) as specified in EN ISO 9241-307.In Table 7 a Y (Yes) indicates that normative values are met (i.e. the display’s luminance ratio is less than the normative value) whereas an N (No) indicates that the normative values are not met. From Table 7 it may be observed that the maximum luminance ratio (LR⩽1.7) is met in all combinations and for all three displays. The recommended luminance ratio (LR⩽1.4), however, is always met except for displays M1 and M3 in combinations in which the brightness is set to 0 (combinationsa,eandl) and for display M2 in combinationsb,candl.Table 7 also shows, for each display (M1, M2, M3) in all C–B combinations, the contrast non-uniformity (CNU). Table 7 shows the results of the check CNU⩽50% as established by EN ISO 9241-307. Here too, a Y (Yes) indicates that the normative values are met (i.e. the display’s luminance ratio is less than the specified normative value) whereas an N (No) indicates that normative values are not met. These values were obtained by applying equation (4).From Table 7 it may be observed that contrast non-uniformity was verified for all three displays (M1, M2, M3) in all foreseen combinations (fromatop). Moreover, the higher CNUvalues (greater than 30%) were obtained in combinations in which the recommended luminance ratio was not met.Electronic visual displays have had an extremely rapid technological evolution in the last two decades. They have reached increasingly higher performance levels and have changed the way that work is carried out in numerous professional jobs. With reference to the ergonomic requirements for office work with visual display terminals (EN ISO 9241 series), at an international level the attention is focused on the human–system interaction. In order to satisfy the human–system interaction, different requirements have been introduced: viewing conditions, luminance, special physical environments, visual artefacts, legibility and readability, legibility of information coding, legibility of graphics and fidelity. In order to carry out a visual risk assessment, together with a specific analysis of the display itself, it is necessary to conduct a simultaneous analysis of the workstation lighting and, more in general, an analysis of the work environment lighting (i.e. the background walls). Analysis of the work environment lighting may be developed through luminance measurements, calculation of luminance ratios in both static and dynamic visual conditions, illumination measurements, calculation of luminance average uniformities on the various surfaces.In this paper the Authors deal, in particular, with the analysis of luminance through in-field measurements in order to evaluate the following parameters: luminance ratio (LR), contrast ratio (CR), luminance non-uniformity (LNU) and contrast non-uniformity (CNU). Requirements for field assessment of luminance have been applied to three flat screen type displays with TFT active matrix (M1, M2, M3) of the same model, utilized in three different office workstations. The three displays were acquired in 2008 and have been utilized for normal office tasks by different users and for varying lapses of time estimated in approximately 7000h for display M1, 9000h for display M2 and 12,000h for display M3. The results show that the three displays analyzed meet the requirements of the International Standard only for some C–B (Contrast–Brightness) combinations.The analysis carried out by the Authors shows the importance of realizing a simple and quick procedure to determine the performance level of the monitors used in the VDT workstation in an office. In these workplaces, VDT workstations are widespread and monitors are generally inexpensive devices. The method proposed by the Authors is based on field measurements and can be periodically repeated, with fixed assessment cycles, to evaluate the residual performance level. This procedure could be used as a practical tool for staff assigned to assess the risks arising from VDT use in the workplace within the Occupational Health and Safety Assessment Procedure.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
