@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Enhanced user performance in an image gallery application with a mobile autostereoscopic touch display

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We studied subjects’ interactions with a stereoscopic image gallery application.A 3-inch autostereoscopic touch display was used.We examined the effect of stereoscopic depth on image search time and user experience.The results show that a small depth (disparity range of 2.3–3.9arc min) allows faster image search times.The results show that a medium depth (disparity range of 4.7–7.0arc min) makes the image search slower.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Interaction,Mobile device,Autostereoscopic display,Touch display,Image gallery,Visual search,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this study, we explored how stereoscopic depth affects performance and user experience in a mobile device with an autostereoscopic touch display. Participants conducted a visual search task with an image gallery application on three layouts with different depth ranges. The task completion times were recorded, and the participants were asked to rate their experiences. The results revealed that the image search times were facilitated by a mild depth effect and that too great a depth slowed search times and decreased user-experience ratings.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Today, the popularity of 3D media on mobile devices is increasing, and devices with three-dimensional autostereoscopic displays are becoming more common. The possibilities of autostereoscopic displays that do not require additional glasses for the stereoscopic effect are intriguing, especially for mobile devices. Stereoscopic three-dimensionality offers the possibility of utilizing the small display area of a mobile device in an efficient manner in 3D user interfaces and applications such as 3D digital content consumption and 3D maps. The limitations of the mobile context, including the small physical screen size and limited input modalities, can be overcome to some degree by interactions in 3D.There are several studies supporting the idea that an autostereoscopic display brings added value to the user interface of a mobile device [1,2]. Stereo effects on an autostereoscopic display have been reported to improve the viewing experience and naturalness of the visual content [3]. One study found that in a visual search task, stereoscopic depth can reduce the impact of the visual crowding effect [4].Interactivity is a key feature for 3D user experience on mobile devices. It is desirable that the user engage with 3D content actively instead of being a passive consumer. Several user-input alternatives are currently available on mobile devices, including touchscreen-based input, inertial trackers, and camera-based tracking. Each has its advantages and disadvantages. Among them, touchscreen-based interfaces have emerged as the standard input technique for mobile devices. Because touch-based interaction provides a direct means of interacting with 3D content by directly touching and manipulating 3D graphical elements, it is also a natural and appealing style of input for 3D applications.However, there are several difficulties related to combining touch-based input with autostereoscopic mobile displays. In stereoscopic displays, each eye is expected to see a slightly different perspective of the scene. If the user is to interact with the 3D user interface, the question arises as to where they would touch the 2D surface to select the 3D elements. Furthermore, for single- or multi-touch screen UIs, the main limitation is that interactive elements should be presented in at least a 1×1cm square on the touch surface to be selected by an average finger. In return, this limits how many UI elements can be rendered on the display.In this paper, we investigate the usability of a three-dimensional image gallery application on a mobile device equipped with lenticular autostereoscopic display. The user experience is compared with a layout in which three rows have different depths, which creates an amphitheater-type layout. The visual search task completion times are reported, and participants’ subjective image-quality and user-experience evaluations are reported.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
