@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Design and characterization of new lanthanide fluorides and their optical properties

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
LnF3 has been synthesized through three different ways.They all can exhibit red emissions.Eu3+-doped LaF3–CaF2 phosphor can be emissive under longer wavelengths.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Functional composites,X-ray diffraction,Microwave processing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Three kinds of lanthanide phosphors (LaxLu1−xF3: Eu3+, LaF3–CaF2:Eu3+ and LaF3: Eu3+) have been successfully synthesized based on three different ways such as molten salts, co-precipitation, supersonic and microwave irradiations. The as-prepared powder materials all exhibited red luminescence. Their crystal structures or morphologies were studied by means of X-ray powder diffraction and scanning electronic microscope. Eu3+-doped LaF3–CaF2 phosphor can be emissive under excitation at longer wavelengths (466 and 533nm) excitations. Supersonic and microwave irradiations have shortened the reaction time of LaF3: Eu3+ crystals in 40min under very low temperature (50°C).

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Lanthanide inorganic functional materials with optical properties remain to be challenging issues due to their sharp emission bands, excited state lifetimes and high color purity [1–3]. Their extraordinary fluorescent features can be promising as the replacement for quantum dots. From the perspective of rare earth activated materials, oxides, borates, vanadates and phosphates were usually considered as hosts in terms of internal phases and stabilities [4–6]. Except the above mentioned systems, rare earth fluorides have also been the focus of extensive studies in recent decades because of their potential uses in optics and optoelectronics. Particularly, the up-conversion nanoparticles derived from rare earth fluorides with lower energy irradiations could exhibit higher energy output emissions. They have been considered as promising bioimaging probes with several advantages including less scattering and deep penetration in biological tissues [7]. Hence, the exploration of the efficient method is urgently necessary [8–13]. Efforts have been dedicated to investigate their micro-structures and methodology. It is known that lanthanide fluorides (abbreviated as LnF3) with different morphologies have been obtained. Still, it has not been reported that the general methodology studies for its preparation and comparison based on a systematic way.In this work, the synthesis of LnF3 can be described as three sections. Firstly, LaxLu1−xF3: Eu3+ with characteristic red emissions was successfully achieved in terms of different fluxes (NaCl, KCl, NaNO3, KNO3) via a molten salt method. The effects of fluxes and sintering temperature on fluorescence properties were extensively studied. Secondly, we demonstrate a co-precipitation route to synthesize LaF3–CaF2:Eu3+ and its red luminescence can be detected. The activator concentration (Eu3+), La/Ca ratio and temperature were also investigated.In order to enhance chemical reactivity and decrease reaction time or increase yields, ultrasound and microwave irradiations were employed to stimulate the reactive systems. Here in this case, we have prepared LaF3 crystals by means of two approaches. A pure phase lanthanum fluoride could be obtained using this simple treatment. These experimental results will offer fundamental insights into the luminescence control and formation of nano-scale materials.All the starting materials were obtained from commercial suppliers and used as received. Lanthanide oxides and NaF were provided by Shanghai chemical reagent company. Lanthanide nitrates were prepared from oxides through nitration. The supersonic assisted microwave reactor was commercially available and produced by Nanjing Xianou technology company, China (XO-SM50). Fluorescence spectra were measured in an Edinburgh FLS920 spectrometer, respectively. Scanning electronic microscope (SEM) was measured with JSM-6360LV. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was performed in JEM-2100HR. X-ray powder diffraction was investigated at Y-2000 of Dandong Aolong company, P.R. China. Fluorescent microscope images were acquired from a Nikon Eclipse TS100 inverted fluorescence microscope system (Japan), equipped with a 50W mercury lamp.Stoichiometric portions of La2O3 (1.6mmol), Lu2O3 (0.4mmol), Eu2O3 (0.12mmol) and NaF (6mmol) were mixed together in a crucible and ground into powders for 20min. NaNO3 or other salts (20mmol) was added into the mixture and continued to grind into fine powders. Then the sample was put into a muffle oven and sintered at different temperatures (500–1000°C). The as-derived powders were collected and kept in vacuum for measurements. La/Lu ratio, europium concentration, temperature and molten salts can be variable according to different comparison tests.In a typical preparation, La(NO3)3 (0.6mmol), CaCl2 (0.4mmol) and Eu(NO3)3 (0.05mmol) were dissolved in 20ml distilled water. NaF (2.6mmol) was added in the above solution. pH value was adjusted to 7.0 by the addition of NaOH. Then the mixture was stirred at 75°C for 2 hours. The precipitate was retrieved by centrifugation, washed by ethanol and distilled water twice. The precursor was put into a muffle oven and sintered at different temperatures (500–900°C). The as-derived powders were collected and kept in vacuum for measurements. La/Ca ratio, europium concentration and sintering temperature can be changed according to different comparison tests.La(NO3)3 (2mmol), NaF (6mmol) and Eu(NO3)3 (0.06mmol) were dissolved in distilled water (40ml). The mixture was transferred to a three neck flask which adapted the reactor. Microwave power was set as 400W and reaction temperature remained to be 50°C. Supersonic power was 400W with the reverse duty cycle 2s. All the operation time was fixed as 40min. The as-derived sample was retrieved by centrifugation, washed by ethanol and distilled water twice, then dried at 60°C in vacuum. The reaction time, temperature and frequency could be changed in terms of comparison experiments.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We demonstrated the general synthesis of LnF3 crystals and discussed the structures, properties and morphology via different methods. Three types of lanthanide fluorides were achieved and all exhibited characteristic red emissions. NaNO3 was proved to be the most suitable molten salt to fabricate LaxLu1−xF3: Eu3+. The as-derived Eu3+-doped LaF3–CaF2 phosphor can be excited under various visible lights (466 and 533nm). The employment of supersonic and microwave irradiation plays a predominant role in obtaining LaF3: Eu3+ crystals within 40min under very low temperature (50°C). These data will certainly enrich the contents of lanthanide solid state luminescent materials synthesis.