@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A perceptual evaluation of grating frequencies and velocities in the analysis of dynamic images

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
To propose visual evaluation methods recommendations for displaying dynamic images.To examine the influence of psychological factors of dynamic images on viewer.To meet the best grating feature combinations of viewer.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cognition,Grating,Visualized evaluation,Dynamic images,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Dynamic images that possess beauty and are user-friendly can increase the use of digital technology. In addition to information conveyance, dynamic images also act as a communication bridge in the human–machine interface. Dynamic images are widely used in the application of digital media. Therefore, understanding the visual effects of dynamic images on viewers is a very important issue. From a visual communication design perspective, dynamic images influence not only image quality, but also the viewers’ perception and impression of the displayed image. In the contemporary age characterized by universal usage of dynamic images, designers should attain synchronized knowledge and understanding of relevant media technology so as to present preferred design quality in the management of digital design such as animation design, Web page design, multimedia design, and so on. The current study noted that psychological effects such as viewers’ visual attention, preferences, and understanding were more important than image quality. Therefore, this study adopted the viewpoint of “visual design” and conducted a perceptual evaluation of grating frequency and grating velocity. The pair-comparison method and scale method were adopted in the research methodology to simplify perceptual evaluations and enhance their validity. The purpose of this study was: (1) To propose recommendations for displaying dynamic images and improving image performance using perceptual evaluation methods. (2) To examine the influence of psychological factors on viewer’s comfort when they experience dynamic images. (3) To identify the best grating feature combinations that meet viewer’s psychological characteristics and propose recommendations for dynamic images design. The study concludes that it is useful to establish criteria for evaluating users’ perception and to, develop perceptual evaluations of dynamic images. It is recommended that designers find a balance between watching a moving imaging display “clearly” and watching it “comfortably” for successful reception by the viewer.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the digital era, dynamic images that possess beauty and afford comfort can increase usage efficiency [1]. In addition to information conveyance, dynamic images also act as a communication bridge in the human–machine interface [5]. Dynamic images are used on a major basis in the application of digital media. Therefore, understanding the perceptual effects of dynamic images on viewers in order to meet the requirements of successful digital design communication is a very important issue [2]. To effectively control the quality of dynamic icons, not only clear identification, but also aesthetic factors, such as pleasure in particular, are taken into account [3,14]. Due to the impact of a digital life on the present age, liquid crystal displays (LCD) have become more widely available in our daily life. The reason for the increasing popularity of the LCD is its capacity to display complex dynamic images and transfer messages through its portability and delicate interface. Examples include TV videos, motion pictures, web browses, and others. The research exploring evaluation methods for image quality has, therefore, received increased emphasis. In the past, evaluations of image quality mainly focused on physical methods such as measurement machines to obtain objective data. Unlike perceptual evaluation methods that account for the psychological mechanisms involved, these evaluation methods tend to disregard them. Consequently, establishing a standardized evaluation method characterized by an evaluation pattern that takes account of both the human eye and the machine has become a significantly valuable research subject. As numerous digitalized dynamic images must be transmitted via LCD, the current study suggests that synchronized and advanced knowledge of media technology with respect to dynamic images display is necessary in the fields of multimedia design and visual communication design in order to demonstrate that visual design is able to offer improved quality control. In light of the essentiality of establishing and applying a perceptual evaluation method to dynamic images, the current study adopted a perceptual evaluation method and applied it to image output frequencies. Verification tests were conducted using the parameters gained from the evaluation results and high-speed photography. The pair-comparison method and scale method were adopted in the research methodology. The purpose of this study was: (1) To propose a perceptual evaluation method and make recommendations for displaying dynamic images and improving image performance. (2) To examine the influence of psychological factors with respect to dynamic images and the viewer’s comfort. (3) To identify the best grating feature combinations that allow for optimal performance of the viewer’s psychological characteristics and to propose recommendations towards dynamic images design.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
