@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Is the 3× reading rule appropriate for computer users?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Computer Vision Syndrome describes eye and vision problems associated with computer use.Up to 40% of individuals report tired eyes at least half the time during computer use.For optimum comfort, the text size should be at least twice the visual acuity.Higher values of acuity reserve may be necessary for older subjects.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Computer Vision Syndrome,Digital eye strain,Reading,Viewing distance,Visual acuity,Visual threshold,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
When reading from an electronic screen, many individuals report symptoms such as tired eyes or eye strain. To minimize these symptoms, a 3× acuity reserve has been suggested, i.e., the minimum print size should be at least 3 times larger than the size of the letters at the reader’s acuity limit. This study evaluated whether the 3× rule is appropriate, or if an alternative relationship between visual acuity and letter size would be preferable. The experiment was performed on 25 visually-normal subjects who viewed a series of random words on a computer monitor. The threshold distance (T) at which the text could be resolved was determined. Both reading speed and accuracy were measured during a 10min task performed at T and at 0.5T, 0.33T and 0.25T. In a second study, the procedure was repeated at 0.5T and 0.33T for 1h. Immediately following the 1h trial, subjects completed a questionnaire concerning symptoms experienced during the task. The mean T for the 10min trial was 131.4cm. While the mean reading speeds for the 0.5T, 0.33T and 0.25T conditions were significantly different from the 1T condition, they were not significantly different from each other. For the 1h trial, reading speed at 1T was significantly different from both the 0.5T and 0.33T conditions, but no significant difference was observed between the 0.5T and 0.33T trials. A significant increase in the total post-task symptoms was found after reading at the threshold distance (T), compared with 0.5T and 0.25T, but no significant difference in symptom score was found between the 0.5T and 0.25T conditions. Accordingly, based on a change in viewing distance (and angular print size) in young, visually-normal subjects, a 2× rule may be appropriate, i.e., for sustained comfortable reading, the text size should be at least twice the individual’s visual acuity. However, higher values may be necessary for older subjects, or individuals with visual abnormalities.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The American Optometric Association defines Computer Vision Syndrome (CVS) as the combination of eye and vision problems associated with the use of computers [1]. This condition has also been referred to as digital eye strain [2]. In modern society, electronic devices, ranging from desktop machines to handheld instruments are used for a broad range of activities. As portable technology is developing, users are now able to view their devices at any location.Enhanced access to electronic devices has significantly increased the amount of time digital displays are viewed today. For example, a recent investigation of over 2000 American children between 8 and 18years of age reported that in an average day they spend approximately 7.5h using entertainment media, comprising 4.5h watching TV, 1.5h on a computer and over an hour playing video games [3]. Indeed, adults may spend even more time viewing electronic screens, with an average duration around 9.5h per day [4].As the time spent viewing these screens rises, the prevalence of visual symptoms increases [5]. Rossignol et al. [6] reported that the prevalence of visual symptoms was significantly higher in individuals who spend more than four hours per day working on video display terminals. Common symptoms include eyestrain, headaches, ocular discomfort, dry eye, double vision (diplopia), and blurred vision at near [7–13]. Additionally, it has been noted that visually fatiguing work may result in lowered productivity, increased error rate and reduced job satisfaction [12].It is difficult to estimate accurately the prevalence of ocular and visual symptoms associated with viewing electronic screens as both working conditions and the methods used to quantify symptoms vary widely. Nevertheless, Thomson suggested that between 64% and 90% of computer users experience visual symptoms which may include eyestrain, headaches, ocular discomfort, dry eye, diplopia and blurred vision either at near or when looking into the distance after prolonged computer use [7]. It should be noted that the resolution of modern computer displays is significantly better than was found at the time of Thomson’s study in the 1990s. Therefore, the prevalence of symptoms today might be expected to be lower and indeed, a recent investigation of office workers in New York City noted that 40% of subjects reported tired eyes “at least half the time”, while 32% and 31% reported dry eye and eye discomfort, respectively, with this same frequency [8].In order to minimize visual symptoms during prolonged computer use, it has been suggested that a 3× visual acuity reserve (VAR) should be adopted for comfortable reading, i.e., the print size of the displayed text should be three times larger than the individual’s visual acuity (or the smallest letter that can be resolved) [14]. This 3× rule appears to originate from a low-vision treatment protocol whereby a magnifier is prescribed to enlarge the text to three times the size of the smallest letters that could be resolved for sustained viewing [15]. Interestingly, Grundy [16] stated that no task can be performed efficiently when the task detail is close to the resolving limit of the eye. He suggested that the visual acuity required to carry out a task should be at least 2× the minimum value. However, no experimental data was provided to support his claim.In a comprehensive review of the effect of varying print size on reading, Legge and Bigelow [17] noted that the legibility of print depends on the physical characteristics of the text as well as the task demands, viewing conditions and vision status of the reader. In an earlier study of both normal and low vision patients, Legge et al. [18] examined the magnification needed to produce maximum reading speed. Reading rates were assessed for different size text scanned across the screen of a TV monitor. The screen was masked so that a single line of text was visible during each trial. The findings for normal subjects showed a sharp rise in reading rate to a peak that occurred when the print size was between 6 and 18 times greater than threshold acuity. However, reading individual lines of text scanned across a screen is very different from scanning the eyes across stationary text. Accordingly, these results may not be applicable to more conventional reading techniques. Additionally, the resolution of modern computer displays is significantly better than was found in television sets produced in the 1980s.In a recent paper, Ko et al. [19] required subjects to perform near vision tasks at differing levels of VAR. VAR is the ratio of the size of the font to the size where characters can just be resolved accurately, i.e., the visual acuity threshold [20]. Both visual search and matching tasks were used, and task performance was assessed in terms of productivity (correct responses per minute) and accuracy, as well as a subjective rating of task difficulty. Three levels of VAR were tested, namely 3.7, 4.3 and 6.1, and the level of VAR adjusted by varying both the letter size and the viewing distance. No significant difference was observed between 3.7 and 4.3 VAR for either task productivity or accuracy, although significant improvements were found in these parameters for the 6.1 VAR condition. A linear improvement in perceived task difficulty was noted with increasing VAR. However, the use of large values of VAR (greater than 3) may not be practical with contemporary portable digital devices. For example, Bababekova et al. [21] noted that the mean font size when viewing a webpage on a smartphone subtended 12.6min of arc. To provide a VAR of either 4 or 6 would require the ability to resolve targets that subtend 3.15 and 2.1min of arc, respectively. These correspond to visual acuity values of 6/3.81Visual acuity is conventionally recorded as a fraction (called the Snellen fraction), where the numerator refers to the standard test distance (typically 6m or 20feet) and the demominator denotes the distance at which the letter subtends 5min of arc.1(20/12.7) and 6/2.5 (20/8.3), respectively, which would be beyond the visual capability of most individuals.Additionally, the term critical print size (CPS) has been used to describe the smallest print size below which reading speed begins to decline sharply. In a review of this concept, Legge and Bigelow noted that CPS typically ranges between 9 and 18min of arc, depending on stimulus factors such as font and the technique used to estimate CPS [17]. These authors also pointed out the difference between CPS and conventional acuity measurements. CPS is an estimate of the smallest character size for which reading is possible at maximum speed, whereas time is generally not restrained during visual acuity measurements. CPS has been used to evaluate reading performance in both normal and abnormal individuals [22–24].The aim of the present study was to evaluate the 3× reading rule in normal subjects, and to examine the decline in performance when smaller VAR values are used for sustained reading from an electronic monitor. In this investigation, the angular subtense of the letters was varied by changing the viewing distance.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
