@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An improved least-significant-bit substitution method using the modulo three strategy

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We proposed a novel method to embed a series of ternary secret data based on LSB.The proposed scheme can hide two ternary numbers into each grayscale pixel, normally only modify the two LSBs of the pixel.Our proposed scheme has higher resistance ability and achieves a higher PSNR.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
High embedding capacity,Modulo three strategy,LSB scheme,Steganalysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, we proposed a novel method to embed a series of ternary secret data into a cover image based on an improved Least-Significant-Bit (LSB) scheme using the modulo three strategy. Our new method can hide two ternary numbers into each grayscale pixel, normally only modify the two LSBs of the pixel, while it may cause overflow/underflow and a carry/borrow. We solve these problems by adding 1 to the pixel or subtracting 1 from the pixel before embedding. The embedding capacity of our method can be 3.1699bpp. At the same time, the quality of the stego image of our new method also is better than traditional LSB scheme when the embedding capacity is greater than 3bpp with a Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR) greater than 37dB. Extensive experimental results indicated that our new method is capable of getting a higher PSNR than traditional LSB scheme when the embedding capacity is greater than 3bpp, and it has higher resistance ability against the chosen steganalysis algorithm when the embedding capacity is low.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In recent years, with the rapid development of multimedia and computer networks, Internet is becoming popular and popular. Because of the popularity of the Internet, more and more people are transmitting large amounts of data via networks. However, the risk of illegal access and the loss of sensitive information have increased rapidly [1,2]. One of the most important reasons is that digital media are transmitted in an open channel.Data hiding is one of the most popular technologies to prevent the loss of sensitive information. In data hiding, secret data are protected by embedding them in an ordinary original image, called the cover image, to create a so-called stego image[1]. Data hiding consists of two parts, i.e., the embedding process and the extraction process. Just as its name implies, the embedding process is to embed secret data into a cover image, and the extraction process is to extract the secret data from the stego image.Data hiding also can be classified by whether the stego image can be restored after the secret data have been extracted. If the cover image can be restored, then it is called reversible, and this process often is used for military and medical images. Otherwise, the process is said to be irreversible. The premise of data hiding is that all of the data embedding operations on cover images should be imperceptible, i.e., illegal observers should not be able to perceive the distortion when a stego image is delivered to the receiver. In addition, the secret data must not be modified [3]. If the embedding methods are used inappropriately and changed some statistics of cover images, some abnormal phenomena that cannot be detected with the naked eye often can be detected by using appropriate statistical testing and analysis, this statistical analysis on test and analysis technique known as steganalysis [4–6].Over the past decades, many data hiding methods have been proposed by scholars to address the issue of information security [7–19]. These methods generally can be classified into three types, i.e., the spatial domain [7–11], the frequency domain [12–14], and the compressed domain [15–19]. The most popular criteria for measuring the performance of data hiding are PSNR and embedding capacity. PSNR measures the difference between the cover image and the stego image. If one hiding method can maintain a quality stego image with low distortion, which is visually identical to the cover image, then its PSNR must be high. We consider this method to be a good image hiding method. However, we also want to get a high embedding capacity. Embedding capacity refers to the maximum number of bits of secret data that can be embedded per pixel (bpp) in a cover image, and the higher this number is, the better the process is.Bender et al. [20] first proposed the concept of data hiding, a form of steganography, which embeds data into digital media for the purpose of identification annotation and copyright. In their paper, they proposed an LSB scheme that just replaced the least significant bits of the cover image with the secret data. This method is used extensively due to its low computational complexity and a high embedding capacity. Chen et al. [21] introduced a data hiding method with high payload using the LSB and hybrid edge detection steganography mechanism. They simply constructed a hybrid edge detector using a fuzzy edge detector and the Canny edge detector, and their method achieved both high embedding capacity and high quality of the stego image through our human visual system (HVS). Wang et al. [22] used a genetic algorithm to generate a substitution table to improve the quality of the stego image. Chang et al. [23] improved upon Wang’s method by proposing a dynamic programming method to efficiently pick out the best substitution table, thereby achieving a better performance. In order to get a high embedding capacity, Wang [24] used the modulus value as a threshold value to decide the number of bits of the secret data could be incorporated into the cover image, and they obtained a higher embedding capacity.Although many scholars have proposed different methods to deal with binary secret data, the studies seldom have focused on data hiding methods for ternary secret data. Using ternary numbers has many advantages over the use of binary numbers. Ternary secret data can be carried by each pixel by doing nothing, by adding one to the grayscale value, or subtracting one from the grayscale value [25]. When the binary secret message is encoded in the ternary format, it becomes shorter, and we potentially can hide more data in the cover image [26]. Jheng et al. [27] proposed two data hiding methods, i.e., ternary data hiding (TDH) and coded-ternary data hiding (C-TDH) over ternary computers. They stated in their paper that the TDH method can provide a higher PSNR and that the C-TDH method can increase the embedding capacity. Chiou et al. [28] proposed an efficient side match vector quantization (SMVQ) based reversible data hiding method. They translated the secret data into a ternary string and embedded the ternary string into the cover image. This approach was more efficient, and it was capable of hiding a larger amount of secret data. Chen et al. [29] formulated a theoretical model of reversible data hiding over a special ternary cover and proposed the construction of a code to achieve reversible data hiding over the ternary cover, which provided both high embedding capacity and improved image quality.Based on the LSB scheme and the good performance of the ternary number approach, in this paper, we proposed a new method to embed a series of ternary secret data into a cover image. In our new method, to achieve a high embedding capacity, we embedded two ternary numbers into each pixel, and we normally modified two LSBs of the pixel. However, our method may cause a carry/borrow and result in overflow/underflow problem. To solve these problems, we added a preprocessing with addition and subtraction 1 operation, which is discussed in Section 2.3. The embedding capacity of our method was greater than 3 bpp, and the quality of the stego image also was better than that of the traditional LSB schemes when the embedding capacity was greater than 3 bpp and the PSNR was greater than 37dB.In the following sections, in Section 2, a detailed description of the embedding and extracting is provided for our new method. The experimental results and analyses are in Section 3, and our conclusions are represented in Section 4.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we proposed a novel steganography method that is suitable for a ternary number system and achieves high embedding payload with capacity greater than 3bpp. For example, our method can be applied to a controller with three signals, i.e., 0, 1, and 2. We can embed a large series of important control commands into cover images without transforming or wasting bits. Our method improved the traditional LSB scheme, making it easy to embed and extract data while having a high embedding capacity. When the embedding capacity is low, our method does not perform better than the traditional LSB scheme, but our proposed scheme is less detectable against the modern detector SPAM. When the embedding capacity is greater than 3bpp, our method performs much better than the traditional LSB scheme. The experimental results confirmed that the proposed method is outstanding in achieving a high PSNR when the embedding payload is high, i.e., greater than 3bpp. In addition, the proposed scheme is less detectable at a low embedding capacity against the modern detector SPAM.