@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Fixation and creativity in concept development: The attitudes and practices of expert designers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Interview study with expert designers.Design fixation is a real problem in professional practice.Designers are aware of fixation and take steps to address it.Fixation is influenced by a wide range of contextual factors.Reflecting on fixation helps designers to guard against it.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
creativity,innovation,engineering design,design fixation,qualitative research,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Interviews were conducted with thirteen professional designers to understand their attitudes towards fixation and the practices they adopt to address it. Fixation was thought to be encouraged and discouraged by a wide range of factors related to the project, the client, the design team, the organisational culture and the design activities employed. The experiences that designers accumulate during their professional lives were associated with fixation in different ways. The experience of prior design failures was thought to encourage fixation whilst the experience of varied solutions was thought to discourage fixation. Recognising fixation episodes and reflecting on them was described as the means by which designers could guard against such episodes in the future and thus be more creative.The development of new products requires creative work to be done by engineers, designers and technologists. Design processes, whether systematic or intuitive, are often claimed to unlock this creativity by discouraging premature commitment to a particular representation of the design problem or to possible solutions to that problem. Despite this, it is often stated that designers do, in fact, become ‘set’, ‘blinkered’ or ‘blinded’ when developing ideas. The term ‘design fixation’ is often used to refer to this broad set of phenomena, or is used more narrowly to refer to the way in which designers inadvertently carry over specific and unhelpful features from a previous example when they are designing something new (Cardoso & Badke-Schaub, 2011a; Jansson & Smith, 1991; Purcell & Gero, 1992; 1996). These fixation effects have been described with respect to many areas of design practice, including not just engineering design, architecture and industrial design (as discussed later), but also, for example, software design (Goddard, 1976), interaction design (Hassard, Blandford, & Cox, 2009) and service design (Moreno, Hernández, Yang, Linsey, & Wood, 2014).Researching fixation is important for developing an understanding of what the barriers are to creative design and how those barriers might be avoided or overcome. Much experimental research has been conducted over the last few decades, providing valuable insights into how fixation is induced and how its effects might be mitigated. However, to gain experimental control, this research has often eliminated many of the factors that characterise real design projects, including long time scales, multiple stakeholders, team work, concurrent projects and design expertise.1There is still a lack of in-depth qualitative research on fixation and so the concept has not been framed with respect to the real-world settings that the experiments simulate. To provide a more contextually rich account of design fixation in practice, this paper reports on an interview study with professional designers working in innovation consultancies. The resulting analysis enriches our understanding of designers' attitudes towards fixation and the practices they adopt to overcome it. This provides a firm grounding for the planning of future fixation research and for developing tools and training that might mitigate fixation effects.The paper is structured as follows. Section 1 reviews the literature on creativity and fixation, primarily with a view to establishing the relevant concepts and methods that might inform research on fixation in design practice. Section 2 outlines the methodological approach taken in the study reported here, describing the designers involved and the nature of the data generated. Section 3 presents the findings from the study, focussing on the designers' attitudes towards fixation and the practices they adopt to tackle it. Section 4 discusses the implications of these results for design research, practice and education and proposes further related work, both qualitative and experimental.Although creativity is often freely spoken about, it can be difficult to conceptualise clearly and many different definitions have been proposed (Sternberg & Lubart, 1999, p. 4; Taylor, 1988). However, what these definitions often share is the joint requirement that the creative idea be both novel (to an individual, a group or the world2) and appropriate (Runco & Jaeger, 2012). It is sometimes additionally required that the idea be non-obvious, surprising or efficient (e.g. see Howard, Culley, & Dekoninck, 2008). These different features of creative ideas are elegantly combined in Newell, Shaw and Simon's (1962) multi-part definition of creative thinking, a definition that is particularly well-suited to considering the role of fixation in design work:‘1. The product of [creative] thinking has novelty and value (either for the thinker or for his culture).2. The thinking is unconventional, in the sense that it requires modification or rejection of previously accepted ideas.3. The thinking requires high motivation and persistence, taking place either over a considerable span of time (continuously or intermittently) or at high intensity.4. The problem as initially posed was vague and ill-defined, so that part of the task was to formulate the problem itself.’ (pp. 65–66)In reviewing this definition, we can see that the first part describes an idea or approach that overcomes the conventional view described by the second part. The third part indicates that this breakthrough is not trivial and the fourth part describes the types of problems that are characteristic of design (Simon, 1996). Creative design thus involves the active modification or rejection of previously accepted ideas, ideas that might otherwise block progress.The term ‘fixation’ is used by psychologists to describe the variety of blocks that can impede insight, often resulting from the counterproductive effects of prior knowledge (Smith, 1995).3This phenomenon and its variants have been demonstrated in a number of now-classic experiments, including Maier's (1931) and Duncker’s (1945: Ch. 7) demonstrations of how people's fixation on the conventional function of artefacts inhibits their capacity to see new possible functions.4Related to this are Luchins' (1942) demonstrations of the Einstellung effect, where people become mentally set in a particular approach to solving problems. The concept of ‘design fixation’ was developed from these studies, with the term initially being used to refer to ‘a blind adherence to a set of ideas or concepts limiting the output of conceptual design’ (Jansson & Smith, 1991: p. 3).5Over time, ‘design fixation’ has often been used in a more narrow sense to refer to an over-reliance on the features of pre-existing designs (Youmans & Arciszewski, 2014). This narrower conception of fixation corresponds with the experimental paradigm that is used to induce fixation and measure its effects.Whilst the concept of design fixation is often explicitly connected to psychological work on functional fixedness,6mental set and the Einstellung effect, Purcell and Gero (1996) note that fixation might exist in a number of forms and that ‘we as researchers need to be wary of becoming fixated on our conception of what fixation is’ (p. 381). In line with this, various types of design fixation have recently been suggested. For example, Hatchuel, Le Masson, and Weil (2011) classify fixation as it relates to examples, learning processes, other people's ideas and the design process itself. More formally, Youmans and Arciszewski (2014) suggest that researchers categorise fixation as relating to either design concepts or to domain knowledge, and then orthogonally, as being an instance of unconscious adherence, conscious blocks or intentional resistance.7In the complex commercial settings in which design takes place, this broader range of concepts might all be relevant and the boundaries between them might be difficult to discern. As such, this paper does not adopt a narrow experimentally-oriented perspective on fixation, but instead admits any inadvertent or unknowing limitation of the spaces that are explored during design work. Such limitations need not necessarily have negative consequences but fixation is considered here in a negative light because it increases the possibility that useful ideas will be overlooked.In its broader interpretation, the concept of fixation can be related to the way in which a specific frame of reference enables skilled performance within that scope whilst severely inhibiting creativity beyond that scope (Perkins, 1981, pp. 178–181).8This can be applied not just to individual psychological phenomena, but also to accounts of how ideas become ‘entrenched’ in organisations, where social factors such as hierarchy, expectations, norms, status, risk, incentives and leadership are influential (Dane, 2010: p. 585; Stempfle, 2011). Related to this is Kuhn's (1962) model of scientific progress, which is often used as a basis for understanding the process of conceptual development in general and design development in particular (Crilly, 2010; also see Addis, 1990; Vincenti, 1990). This model describes the formation of a dominant paradigm, the paradigm-induced blindness that results and the struggles by which new ideas are generated and accepted. Of particular note here is that in technology studies, Kuhn's work has given rise to the concepts of ‘dominant designs’ and ‘normal technologies’ which might remain largely unquestioned until they are displaced by sudden ‘technological discontinuities’ or ‘technological revolutions’ (Abernathy & Utterback, 1978; Anderson & Tushman, 1990; Constant, 1980; Dosi, 1982; Tushman & Anderson, 1986).Just as the fixation concept can be extended from individuals to organisations, it can also be extended from short term experiments to episodes that span months or years. Supporting this is the real-world account of design progress that French (1971/1998) offers for the development of early aircraft gas turbines. He describes this development as involving an ‘arbitrary decision’ which was carried over from standard practice in steam turbines (the product predecessor). Despite being problematic in its new application, this repetition of a previous design element seemingly went unchecked for over a decade until engineers designed in features that were specific to gas turbines rather than steam turbines.9In considering this development, French advises us to ‘notice the role of established ideas … in obscuring an important freedom of choice’ (p. 202). It is this ‘obscuring’ of design options that research into design fixation has sought to study since Jansson and Smith brought the concept to prominence in the early 1990s. This research is reviewed below, first with reference to the experimental work and then by collecting the various existing fragments of qualitative research that are related to design fixation.Empirical research into design fixation has typically involved experimental studies that intentionally induce fixation by exposing designers to stimuli that might limit their thoughts. Participants are set a design task in which a problem is posed and an example solution is provided to some of the participants (e.g. as an annotated sketch). Researchers then identify the repetition of features from these examples in the design solutions that are proposed by the participants. What is often observed is that exposure to example solutions is associated with a reduction in the variety, quantity and quality of solutions that designers generate in response to a brief (e.g. Jansson & Smith, 1991; but also see Purcell & Gero, 1992). When considering a qualitative study of design fixation in professional practice, four questions might be asked of the existing experimental literature: First, what is it that designers become fixated upon and why? Second, what design methods might be used to mitigate fixation? Third, how might accumulated design experience influence the occurrence of fixation? Fourth, how aware are designers of fixation events and thus how amenable is the phenomenon to study by self-report? These questions are considered in turn below.The experimental literature suggests that designers can become fixated on prior solutions unless they gain exposure to the right kinds of stimuli at the right time (Tseng, Moss, Cagan, & Kotovsky, 2008). These stimuli include alternative representations of the problem (Collado-Ruiz & Ostad-Ahmad-Ghorabi, 2010; Linsey et al., 2010; Linsey, Wood, & Markman, 2008) and example solutions that are represented in the right modality (Sarkar & Chakrabarti, 2008), are at the right level of detail (Cardoso & Badke-Schaub, 2011b), are relatively novel (Perttula & Sipilä, 2007), are partially obscured (Cheng, Mugge, & Schoormans, 2014) or that are atypical relative to ideas that might otherwise be generated (Agogué, Kazakçi, Hatchuel, Le Masson, Weil, Poirel, & Cassotti, 2014). There is also strong support for the idea that designers should be exposed to ideas that are an appropriate ‘distance’ from the design domain that is otherwise being considered (Chan et al., 2011; Fu et al., 2013; Gonçalves, Cardoso, & Badke-Schaub, 2013; Tseng et al., 2008). This distance serves to promote the construction of analogies (Linsey et al., 2010; Moreno, Hernández, Yang, Linsey, & Wood, 2014; Moreno, Hernández, Yang, Otto, et al., 2014) but even cross-domain stimuli (e.g. in bio-inspiration) can lead to fixation on specific features rather than general principles (Helms, Vattam, & Goel, 2009; Mak & Shu, 2008). To be stimulated by examples (rather than becoming fixated on them) is thought to require abstracting from those examples prior to ideation (Goldschmidt, 2011; Zahner, Nickerson, Tversky, Corter, & Ma, 2010).Although most design fixation studies focus on the effects of visual or verbal stimuli, experiments have shown that fixation can be reduced through dissecting physical products (Toh, Miller, & Okudan Kremer, 2013) and by constructing physical models or prototypes (Kershaw, Hölttä-Otto, & Lee, 2011; Youmans, 2011; also see Christensen & Schunn, 2007; Jang & Schunn, 2012). However, this might only be the case where these models do not require the investment of too much time or effort as such investment could give rise to a sunk cost effect that inhibits change (Viswanathan, Atilola, Esposito, & Linsey, 2014; Viswanathan & Linsey, 2013). Beyond design methods that permit interaction with physical objects, there are also those that relate to how designers interact with each other and with the design problem. Fixation can seemingly be avoided or reduced by working individually rather than sharing ideas in groups (Kohn & Smith, 2011; but see Youmans, 2011), taking a break from the task (Kohn & Smith, 2011; Koppel & Storm, 2014; Smith, 1995; Smith & Linsey, 2011; but see Wiley, 1998) and using design heuristics such as those codified in triz and scamper (Yilmaz, Seifert, & Gonzalez, 2010).Design fixation effects are thought to vary with the designer's age and experience (Agogué, Poirel, Pineau, Houdé, & Cassotti, 2014; Bonnardel & Marmèche, 2004). Fixation has been observed in school children's design work (McLellan & Nicholl, 2011; Nicholl & McLellan, 2007) and this may actually increase with educational attainment (Genco, Hölttä-Otto, & Seepersad, 2010).10However, it has also been suggested that because expert designers are better at problem framing than novice designers, experts are also more attached to their initial concepts in comparison to novices (Kim & Ryu, 2014). In a different context, studies on chess players showed that moderate levels of expertise did not prevent fixation on known (but inferior) solutions, but very high levels of expertise did (Bilalić, McLeod & Gobet's, 2008a). These findings fit with more general accounts that domain expertise can give rise to a lack of flexibility (Dror, 2011; Frensch & Sternberg, 1989) but also suggest that ‘super-experts’ can acquire an awareness of the pitfalls of expertise and learn to overcome them. When considering the effects of experience in the experimental studies, it is important to recognise that there are differences between mental blocks that are the result of domain knowledge (such as that which experts bring to problems) and blocks that are the result of recent exposure to stimuli. Low-knowledge subjects can combat fixation on stimuli by distributing their efforts over a prolonged period (when priming effects fade), whereas high-knowledge subjects demonstrate more flexible thinking when they engage in continuous effort (allowing the more active suppression of prior knowledge) (Wiley, 1998: p. 727; also see Smith and Blankenship, 1991).Studies have shown that people may be unaware that they are fixated at the time of fixation (Linsey et al., 2010; also see Bilalić, McLeod, & Gobet, 2008b), may not in retrospect believe that they were fixated (Bilalić & McLeod, 2014)11and may not have insight into the cause of defixation (Maier, 1931).12Furthermore, explicit instructions to avoid reproducing the features of example stimuli have sometimes been ineffective (Jansson & Smith, 1991; but see Chrysikou & Weisberg, 2005). Despite this, Luchins (1942) found that having subjects write ‘don’t be blind’ on a piece of paper sometimes helped to reduce the prevalence of fixation effects. Going further, Lane and Jensen (1993) showed that knowledge of fixation can help prevent it, with subjects given a hint about the fixation effect moving more easily (than other subjects) from a rehearsed complex method to a new simpler one.13There is also more recent work indicating that receiving education about fixation has the potential to mitigate its effects (Howard, Maier, Onarheim, & Friis-Olivarius, 2013). This is consistent with studies in which designers have been shown to recognise the restrictive frames of reference that they are imposing on a problem and then identify the explicit design moves that they employ to break out of those frames (Akin & Akin, 1996).14Design fixation research often claims that the various phenomena observed in experimental settings are relevant to real-world design practice.15However, the experimental settings differ from typical professional design contexts in a number of ways. For reasons of convenience and control, fixation studies typically exclude many factors that shape design work in commercial settings, including the effects of organisational culture, project timescales, project management and workload (e.g. see Carkett, 2004). Fixation studies also often use student participants working in isolation, tackling relatively simple problems over short time periods (but see Moreno, Hernández, Yang, Linsey, & Wood, 2014). As is often the case in experimental research, there is the risk that the setting for these studies is itself influential, potentially reducing both ecological and external validity (Cash, Hicks, & Culley, 2013; also see Christensen & Schunn, 2007). For example, developing concepts in a limited time may cause stress for the participants, reducing their creativity and thus giving rise to (or exacerbating) the fixation effects that the studies measure.16Perhaps a particular concern for fixation research is the risk of introducing ‘demand characteristics’, cues from which participants infer the intentions behind the experiment and thus act so as to be a ‘good subject’ (Nichols & Maner, 2008; Orne, 1962). In reporting on his classic experiments into the Einstellung effect, Luchins' (1942) presents qualitative data that reveals the possibility of demand characteristics in fixation research. In his three water jars study, where the participants were seemingly fixated on the complex (three-jar subtractive) ‘E’ method and failed to see the possibility of the simpler ‘D’ method, they afterwards explained their motivations: ‘I thought I had to subtract’; ‘I thought I had to use all three jars’; ‘I thought you wanted to see how well I knew the old (E) method’; ‘I saw that (the D) method but thought it was too easy and it might be wrong to use it.’ (p. 48).17Luchins also reports on the participants' apparent understanding of the experiment: ‘“I am not a fool”; “I am not that dumb”; “Trying to catch me?”’ (p31) and ‘“I think I see the point of the experiment—I was supposed to become mechanized.”’ (p. 39). Later experimental studies have seldom reported participants' interpretations in this way, even though these quotations show the potential influence of participants developing an understanding of the experimenters' intentions (whether or not that understanding is correct).Separate to the issue of experimental artefacts is the matter of how fixation research has more generally been shaped by the experimental method. Fixation research has so far seemingly focussed on investigating issues that are amenable to experimentation rather than necessarily considering the most interesting or pressing research questions that might be asked about fixation (irrespective of what methods might answer them). One focus for fixation research that would be complementary to the existing experimental work would be to understand how fixation is experienced and addressed in practice. To investigate such issues, many different kinds of study could be performed, but there is good precedent for the use of qualitative approaches in creativity research. In particular, there are strong arguments for the value of studying individual lives (Wallace, 1989), conducting concurrent or retrospective think-aloud studies (Perkins, 1981) and collecting multiple interviews for synthesis and comparison (Csikszentmihalyi, 1996; Shekerjian, 1991). More specifically focussing on creative design activities, there is a long history of reporting on interviews and case studies with individual designers, some of which have provided reflections on fixation-like effects, even if that was not the main research objective. These accounts are now provided here as they have not previously been collected and related to each other in the fixation literature.With a focus on the creative work of architects, Darke (1979) and Rowe (1987) describe case studies that examine the way in which designers bring ‘primary generators’ and ‘organising principles’ to a problem. This allows designers to make sense of a problem, impose an interpretation on it and thus make progress with a project. However, as Rowe acknowledges, these impositions can mean that design involves ‘moments of “blinding” followed by periods of backtracking’ (p. 35).18Considering both Darke and Rowe's work, Cross suggests that ‘It is as though the designer adopts a blinkered approach, overly focussed on a particular solution concept, and doggedly “pressing on” when a more considered and reflective approach, and consideration of alternative solution concepts, might save time and effort in the long run’ (Cross, 2011: p. 36).19Considering their own interview studies with race car engineering designer Gordon Murray, Cross and Cross (1996) say that Murray insists on keeping experience ‘at the back of your mind, not the front’ so that the designer is always designing things as though for the first time (p. 98). This reflection on the potentially negative effect of accumulated knowledge was also evident in Roy's (1993) comparative case study of expert designers. Reporting on James Dyson's work, he says that Dyson believes that when developing a new design ‘it is often better to be relatively uninformed at the early concept stage so as not to be hampered by prior solutions’ (p. 440; also see Candy & Edmonds, 1996).20Busby and Lloyd (1999a; 1999b) report on interview- and observation-based research that focuses on the way in which organisational factors and experience influence the reuse of design knowledge. Although they do not provide firm evidence for fixation phenomena (if defined narrowly), they do describe the way in which organisational contexts provide candidate solutions upon which designers could become fixated (Busby & Lloyd, 1999a: p. 169). However, they also give examples where designers are seeking to avoid rather than replicate known solutions (e.g. avoiding patent infringement), and they list various aspects of good practice that the designers undertake to avoid fixation-related biases. These practices include formal concept evaluation processes, eliciting cross-domain critique and separating the roles of idea generation and idea implementation (Busby & Lloyd, 1999b: p. 141). Herring, Chang, Krantzler and Bailey's (2009) interview study with professional designers also briefly describes the practices that firms adopted to avoid fixation, such as bringing in people from outside the project to keep the team from being ‘so entrenched in the process that they can't think outside the box' (p. 90).Reporting on interviews with designers in several engineering companies, Eckert, Stacey, and Earl (2005) state that when looking for solutions to specific problems, designers need to know about past designs and prior solutions (pp. 13–14). One consequence of this is that the identification and adaptation of prior work imports more into the new design than just a solution principle. It also carries assumptions about physical properties, materials, manufacturing processes and context of use. Whilst some of these assumptions may be required, others may be inappropriate, having been unintended in the new context and going unrecognised as the project progresses (Eckert et al., 2005).21Also studying engineering design, Robertson and Radcliffe’s (2009) participant observation study revealed some negative effects of CAD systems on creativity, including premature fixation, circumscribed thinking, and bounded ideation. Where the development of CAD models acted to discourage making major design changes, ‘a resistance developed to ideas which would lead to too many changes to the model, even if these changes would solve numerous problems or make other improvements such as reducing overall project risk’ (Robertson & Radcliffe, 2009: p. 137).22Results from a follow up questionnaire study showed that designers seek to reduce this effect through the delayed implementation of a highly structured model (Robertson & Radcliffe, 2009: p. 141).The fragments of qualitative material collected above indicate that non-experimental methods can effectively contextualise the concept of design fixation. However, this has mostly been from studies that were not exclusively focussed on fixation (but just touched on it). As such, we still have very little information about whether designers recognise the concept of fixation, what their attitudes are towards it or how consciously they adopt practices to address it. Methodologically, there remains a question as to whether fixation is amenable to introspection, but support for this comes from Sanger's (2012) study of ‘entrenchment’ in management practice. This involved interviewing Chief Marketing Officers (CMOs), showing that they experience both organizational and personal entrenchment, that they are alert to entrenchment traps and that they deploy various disruptive strategies to break free, sometimes with success. Sanger notes that ‘the CMOs were unaware of their personal entrenchment until they got disrupted’ but that they can describe these episodes in hindsight (p. 32).23On this basis, the study reported in this present paper takes fixation as its main focus, both in the enquiries that were made of designers and the analysis that was conducted on the resulting data.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
