@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Robust access control framework for mobile cloud computing network

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose robust access control framework for a network which has allowed smart devices to be connected to the internal network in order to enable seamless data sharing.Smart device’s sensor data such as location, app usage pattern, unlock failures are being considered for access control and data confidentialityThese sensor data and conventional static credentials are combined to develop a secure framework which verifies the users access privileges in run-timeThe algorithm supports both the access control and data confidentiality simultaneously.Algorithms are validated via simulation and the results show that the performance is comparable with existing schemes.Existing schemes are thoroughly surveyed and different between proposed and existing schemes are clearly highlighted.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Access control,Smart devices,Attributes,Encryption,Cloud computing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Unified communications has enabled seamless data sharing between multiple devices running on various platforms. Traditionally, organizations use local servers to store data and employees access the data using desktops with predefined security policies. In the era of unified communications, employees exploit the advantages of smart devices and 4G wireless technology to access the data from anywhere and anytime. Security protocols such as access control designed for traditional setup are not sufficient when integrating mobile devices with organization’s internal network. Within this context, we exploit the features of smart devices to enhance the security of the traditional access control technique. Dynamic attributes in smart devices such as unlock failures, application usage, location and proximity of devices can be used to determine the risk level of an end-user. In this paper, we seamlessly incorporate the dynamic attributes to the conventional access control scheme. Inclusion of dynamic attributes provides an additional layer of security to the conventional access control. We demonstrate that the efficiency of the proposed algorithm is comparable to the efficiency of the conventional schemes.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Nowadays organizations demand a host of tools, including desktop and smart devices, email, instant messaging, voice mail, presence information and audio, video and web conferencing. When these tools are integrated into a system that allows seamless data sharing among devices then it’s called unified communications network. Integrating smart devices within traditional network increases productivity among employees as well as new security vulnerabilities. Traditionally, organizations store data in local servers while employees access the data using access control techniques. However, the recent trend towards cloud computing, outsourcing, smart devices or Bring-Your-Own-Devices (BYOD), and high bandwidth mobile broadband has enabled organizations to share information anywhere and anytime. Data could be shared using public data storages such as cloud computing infrastructure which can provide flexible computing capabilities, reduced costs and capital expenditures and charge based on to usage.In particular, BYOD became a hot topic after the 2012’s Cisco survey which has found that 95% of the employees are allowed to use their mobile devices within their organizations [14]. Since then the number users use their personnel device for work has increased exponentially across the globe [15,16]. This trend is against the tradition where employees are allocated with company devices embedded with specific softwares and policies to achieve security. Currently researchers are focusing on developing techniques to securely virtualize the user device hence the corporate data will be protected from data breaches [41,42]. Samsung and BlackBerry use technologies called KNOX, and BES12, respectively to enforce the corporate security policies on user’s device [29,30].This trend requires new ways to control the access of data stored in cloud. Traditionally, we assume that data owners, users, and storage server are in the same domain and also that the server is fully trusted [1–9]. However, in BYOD, cloud computing and outsourcing environments, data confidentiality is not guaranteed since the data is stored and processed within the third party environment. Personnel information of the data owners and commercial interests of users can be leaked to third party if the data owners store decrypted data in public servers. To overcome this challenge, the data confidentiality in a distributed environment is achieved via attribute based encryption (ABE) technique [10–13].ABE is considered as a promising cryptographic technique and supports both the data confidentiality and access control simultaneously [10–13]. Using ABE, the data owners can encrypt the data using fine-grained access policies. For instance, let us assume, an employer uploads encrypted file to the cloud using ABE, where access policy of that file is defined using the following attributes and functions AND and OR: “Manager” OR “Finance Office” AND “Company A”. Hence, an employee who is a “Manager” employed at “Company A” can decrypt the file. There are two major types of ABE schemes: single authority based ABE [11] and multiple authorities based ABE (MA-ABE) [32] schemes. In a single authority based ABE scheme, only one authority called attribute authority (AA) is responsible for monitoring all the attributes. In MA-ABE, in contrast to the single authority ABE scheme, there are multiple attribute authorities responsible for a disjoint sets of attributes.When it comes to BYOD, the ABE cannot directly be used to protect the data due to the user’s mobility. It should be noted that the data confidentiality in the ABE schemes relies only on predefined static attributes such “Manager”, “Finance Office”, and “Company A”. Let us consider the previous example, where an employee has the long term credentials for the following attributes: “Manager”, and “Company A”. Hence, she can access the encrypted file while she is traveling in public transport using her personnel mobile device. However, the risk level associated in this context is high. In fact, people in her proximity might easily see confidential data via shoulder surfing. It is also possible for an adversary to steal the employee’s mobile device, and get unauthorized access to the corporate data if there is no real-time verification (assuming that the credentials for static attributes are stored within mobile). Hence, evaluating the data collected by smart device’s sensors in real-time provides additional layer of security. In particular smart device attributes such as location, app usage patterns, unlock failures, Wi-Fi networks and proximity of devices could be exploited for real-time verification. We refer the attributes collected via smart devices as dynamic attributes since they change every time with the user’s mobility.In this paper, we propose a new algorithm which supports the organizations to incorporate dynamic attributes within the ABE scheme for robust access control. The novelty of our algorithm are listed below:1.New algorithm enforces the dynamic attributes to the conventional ABE scheme.New algorithm does not compromise the security of the conventional ABE scheme.New algorithm supports both the single authority and multi authority schemes.Performance of the new algorithm is comparable with the conventional ABE scheme.The reminder of this paper is organized as follows: we review related works in Section 2. We describe the system architecture and various types of attacks in Section 3. In Section 4, we propose the static and dynamic ABE scheme for single authority scheme followed by a MA-ABE scheme in Section 5. We compare the performance of the proposed schemes against the conventional ABE schemes in Section 6. Section 7 is dedicated for analyzing the security and privacy issues of the proposed schemes. Conclusions, limitations and future works are discussed in Section 8.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
