@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimized electro-optical properties of polymer-stabilized vertical-aligned liquid crystal displays driven by an in-plane field

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The proposed polymer cells have the stable molecular structure at high voltages.The turn-off response is improved by TA-9164 polymers with stronger anchoring.2wt% polymer concentration is the optimum selection for TA-9164 VA-IPS cells.The fast turn-on response at the low operating voltage (⩽12V) is demonstrated.The superior gray-level response with an improvement of ∼30% is achieved.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Polymer networks,Vertical-aligned liquid crystal,Molecular reorientation,In-plane switching,Strong anchoring,Responses,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Polymer networks are employed in vertical-aligned liquid crystal (LC) cells to stabilize the LC molecular configuration under the in-plane field driving. Two different polymer morphologies, respectively produced by the monofunctional and bifunctional acrylate monomers, are assembled on the glass-substrate surface. The enhanced electro-optical performance is observed on the LC cell with bifunctional acrylate polymer networks, and the appropriate display cell is developed at an optimum concentration of 2wt%. This type of polymer-LC cell shows the fast turn-off and turn-on responses at the low driving voltage, which are attributed to the strong anchoring and the stable LC reorientations, respectively. Furthermore, around 30% improvement in the gray-level response on the 2-wt%-TA-9164-polymer-LC cell is successfully achieved, as compared to the pure LC cells.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Liquid crystal displays (LCDs) have been widely used since they possess many attractive properties such as their low operating voltage, low power consumption, and thinness. However, the slow response of liquid crystal (LC) molecules is regarded as the major drawback of LCDs in dynamic display applications [1,2]. In the various advanced display modes, in-plane switching (IPS) [3,4], multi-domain vertical alignment (MVA) [5], and patterned vertical alignment (PVA) [6] display modes are dominant technologies in the current LCD industry because they provide a superior wide viewing angle. The conventional IPS display mode usually involves the rubbing process to effectively govern the arrangement of the LC molecules during cell fabrication [7]. After long-term driving in the IPS mode, an irreversible director deviation of LC molecules from surface polyimide alignment causes a reduction in the quality of the contrast ratio (CR) [8]. The VA-type LCDs without the rubbing process exhibit a high CR because the LC molecules are vertically aligned against the substrates with an excellent dark state, but such an alignment of negative dielectric anisotropy LC (negative LC) leads to a longer response time [9]. The turn-on time (τr) can be reduced by applying high voltage via the overdriving method [10], but sophisticated driving schemes must be employed. The turn-off time (τd) is only related to the cell gap thickness and material parameters of the negative LC, such as rotational viscosity and the bend elastic constant [9] (although the gray-level τd responses can be improved by an under-shooting driving method). The negative LC, which usually has higher viscosity, is disadvantageous to the τd and more expensive than the positive LC. To eliminate the drawbacks of VA-type LCDs, the VA-IPS display mode using the positive LC has been proposed in order to realize good electro-optical properties and fast response times [11–13].Polymers have been employed in forming the surface pretilt direction of LCs to improve the turn-on time τr in the MVA, PVA, and VA-IPS modes [14–18]. However, the polymer stabilized pretilt angle may deteriorate the turn-off response time τd and cause light leakage in the dark state, which will sacrifice the high CR. Recently, Lee et al. produced a 3D polymer network in a VA cell during the process of polymerization [19]. The volume polymer anchoring reduced τd, but a very high driving voltage (∼80V) is required to obtain a fast τr. Generally, the in-cell polymer networks form the anchoring with respect to the substrate surface in order to improve the switching process of the LC cell, while the adverse effect on the electro-optical properties such as the transmittance, threshold voltage (Vth), and on-state voltage may be revealed [20]. This indicates that the electro-optical properties of the LC cell with polymers require optimizing.In this paper, to realize superior electro-optical characteristics for information display devices, VA-IPS LC cells with polymer networks are fabricated. The polymer networks used here enhance the anchoring effect on the LC molecular reorientation, and thus provide satisfactory electro-optical performance for this display mode due to the well-controlled concentration of the selected monomer. The higher concentration doping can significantly enhance the response time, but it also gives rise to the sacrificed transmittance and increased on-state voltage. Thus trade-offs between the monomer concentration and electro-optical properties are needed to improve the performance of VA-IPS LCDs.In this study, VA-IPS LC cells were driven by indium-tin-oxide (ITO) interdigital electrodes, which were processed on the bottom glass-substrate surface. The electrode width (w) was 4μm and the period was 12μm. Both the top and bottom glass substrates were coated with the VA polyimide (AL60101L) and heated at 200°C for 1h. After that, 4-μm glass spacers were used to control the cell gap (d) of the assembled substrates. The LC E7 (Δn=0.2179, and Δε=+14.5, from Merck) and monomers (UCL002 with monofunctional acrylate from DIC Corp. and TA-9164 with bifunctional acrylate from Tatung University) were mixed and then injected into the assembled cell by capillary action. The mixed concentration, which is defined as the ratio of monomer weight to the sum of monomer and LC weight, is approximately 2wt%. In addition, higher mixed concentrations of 4wt% and 5wt% were only produced using the TA-9164 monomer in order to further investigate the electro-optical properties of cell. These cells were illuminated with ultraviolet (UV) light (365nm, 16mW/cm2) for 30min to form the polymers on the substrate surface. The cell structures before and after the UV illumination are respectively illustrated in Fig. 1(a) and (b). In the electro-optical measurement, the laser light with a 650-nm wavelength and ac voltage with 1kHz square waveform were applied to the cells, sandwiched at 45o (strip-electrode direction) between two crossed polarizers.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The cells of VA LCs incorporating polymer networks and an in-plane switching field are fabricated, and their electro-optical characteristics are investigated in detail. Different morphologies of ULC002 and TA-9164 polymer networks are formed on the substrate surface. The alignment transformation is not observed in the polymer-LC cells, suggesting the stable molecular reorientation, even at high driving voltage. Compared with the pure LC cell, the TA-9164 polymer cell with cross-linking polymer formation improves the turn-off response of the LC molecules, resulting from the stronger anchoring effect on the LC configuration. TA-9164 polymer of 2% concentration is the optimum selection for the polymer-LC cell that has stable molecular reorientation, yielding fast turn-on response at a low driving voltage. Moreover, this type of polymer-LC cell exhibits a 30% improvement in the gray-level response. Although the high concentration of monomer mixed with E7 LC can further enhance the response performance, Vth and VTmax are also increased due to the polymer anchoring effect. This study demonstrates that the suitable monomer and concentration employed to the cell are very significant.