@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Hollow-core polymeric nanoparticles for the enhancement of OLED outcoupling efficiency

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The hollow core nanoparticles can improve the luminance of OLED.The HCNPs can enhance the external quantum efficiency by a factor of 2.5.The HCNPs have been produced continuously by using the microfluidic self-assembly.The HCNPs-dispersed polymer layer has been also demonstrated successfully.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OLED,Hollow core nanoparticles,Outcoupling,Microfluidic,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This work presents the possibility of the hollow core nanoparticles to improve luminance in an organic light emitting diode device. The finite difference time domain simulation estimates the effect of the hollow core nanoparticles on the external quantum efficiency of the organic light emitting diode device. The efficiency depends on the size and the volume fraction of the hollow core nanoparticles in the polymer layer, together with the refractive index and the thickness of the polymer layer. It is shown that the hollow core nanoparticles dispersed in a polymer layer can enhance the external quantum efficiency by a factor of 2.5. This work also introduces a continuous production method of the hollow core nanoparticles by using the microfluidic self-assembly of amphiphilic polymers and the layer formation dispersed with them for the rigorous light scattering.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Organic light emitting diodes (hereafter, OLED) have unique characteristic as a thin film light source. It has drawn attention for flexible transparent mobile display, large scale display, and planar lighting applications. However, the light trapping inside the device has been issued recently. In the OLED device, half of the light generated inside the organic layer is trapped as waveguide mode in the organic–ITO layer, and then 30% of the light is reflected again in the interface of glass and air. Therefore, only 20% of the generated light can escape to be useful light.To improve outcoupling efficiency, various optical elements such as a scattering grid have been incorporated in the OLED device [1–4]. Since the largest portion of light is trapped within the organic–ITO layer, the most efficient way to improve the outcoupling efficiency is to insert an optical scattering structure, close proximity to the ITO layer. High index grating of silicon nitride was used to extract the trapped light [5]. To fabricate the grating structure, nano-imprinting was also used [6]. However, these periodic structures cause spectral shift depending on the viewing angle. To this end, the nanostructures were randomly patterned on the ITO by using simple wet chemical etching [7], and buckling structures with random period were also reported [8]. Recent approach was to provide the optical scattering by incorporating the polymer layer with the dispersed scattering nanoparticles [9]. The scattering layer formed by simple spin coating was effective to achieve the external quantum efficiency (hereafter, EQE) to 1.5 times enhancement than that of the ordinary OLED.In the nanoparticle dispersed polymer, the optical scattering efficiency is mainly dependent on the index contrast between the nanoparticle and polymer. In this work, the hollow core nanoparticles (hereafter, HCNPs) were examined to provide the largest index contrast achievable in the nanoparticle dispersed polymer. The HCNP was easily obtainable from a polystyrene/silica nano-composite [10]. Because the HCNP has refractive index of air, if one can increase the refractive index of polymer, the nanoparticle dispersed polymer could have much higher refractive index contrast than any other previous works. Especially, by using a finite difference time domain (FDTD) method, the parameters of the HCNP and the polymer material are studied to maximize the EQE. In addition, the continuous production of the HCNPs was introduced by using the microfluidic self-assembly of the amphiphilic polymers and the polymer mixed with the HCNPs was coated to form the HCNPs-dispersed layer.The OLED device consists of aluminum cathode, ITO anode, and the organic layers where the electron–hole transfers and recombines to emit light. Although the organic layers are composed of several materials with the different electron energy level, they are considered to be single layer in the FDTD simulation because of their similar optical refractive index. To compare the outcoupling efficiency of the OLED, two comparative device structures, the conventional OLED and the HCNPs-dispersed OLED, were considered as shown in Fig. 1.The light trapping is resulted from the reflection on the Al electrode and the ITO-glass interface, in which the large index difference causes significant total internal reflection (TIR). If the high index polymer (HIP) with the dispersed HCNPs, as depicted in Fig. 1(b), has the refractive index close to the ITO, the light penetrates into the HIP without TIR, and then it is strongly scattered by the HCNPs. In the simulation, the HCNPs were distributed randomly within the HIP layer, and the volume fraction and the size of HCNPs were also varied.The optical parameters of the OLED materials are summarized in Table 1. The absorption coefficient of the ITO was obtained from the commercial display device, which corresponds to the transparency of 97% through the 100nm-thick ITO for normal incidence. The absorption coefficient of the HIP layer depended strongly on the polymer material. Particularly, the material such as the metal oxide nanoparticle used for increasing the refractive index affects the material absorption. Due to the large thickness of HIP, its absorption coefficient strongly affects the extraction efficiency. Therefore, in this study, the light extraction efficiencies were investigated for the various absorption coefficients, α of the HIP.Spatial grid size (Δx, Δy, Δz) in the FDTD must be set as small as possible to reduce calculation error for designing thin film structure consisted of multiple layers of several hundred nanometers. However, by considering the memory size and calculation time, spatial grid size was set to 20nm in each direction. A boundary condition was set as periodic boundary to replicate the infinite device size in x and z direction. The emitted light had a central wavelength of 530nm with a bandwidth of 50nm reproduced by using a Gaussian wave packet. In addition, the incoherent planar source emitted over a wide area was implemented as a number of point dipole sources with random initial phase [3]. Detector was placed under the glass for detecting light power escaping out of OLED device in y direction.In the OLED device, the outcoupling efficiency depends upon the device structure. In specific, the position of emitting layer is important. For the variables of electron transfer layer thickness (tETL) and hole transfer layer thickness (tHTL), the FDTD simulation was conducted to find the optimum OLED structure. As shown in Fig. 2(a), the reference device exhibited the periodic behavior depending on tETL and tHTL. For the variation of tETL, the maximum value occurred at close to the first and second antinode position, 68nm and 204nm, respectively. The HTL thickness affected the micro-cavity distance, and produced maximum at around 40nm and 200nm, respectively. On the contrary, based on the results of the HCNP-dispersed OLED as shown in Fig. 2(b), the periodic behavior was observed only for the change of tETL. This is because the HIP with similar refractive index of ITO removed the reflection from the interface of ITO and glass. The thickness of ETL and HTL was 180nm and 60nm, respectively for the simulation of the HCNP-dispersed OLED. The resultant improvement was 2.2 times higher than the reference OLED for the α of 126cm−1, the HIP thickness of 1200nm, the HIP index of 2.0, the HCNP fraction of 10%, and the HCNP size of 400nm. Even with the HCNP enhancement layer, the light could not be completely extracted because the metal and organics absorb the light before it is coupled out of the device.There are several variables to be optimized to achieve the highest outcoupling enhancement, which includes the size and the fraction of the HCNP and the optical properties of the HIP. The volume fraction was calculated as the ratio of total volume of the HCNP over the original volume of HIP without HCNP. To maintain constant volume fraction, the number of HCNPs reduces as the HCNP size increases. Firstly, to find the effect of HCNP, the enhancement of EQE was calculated as a function of the size as shown in Fig. 3(a). As a result, even for the larger HCNP, the scattering efficiency was not increasing because the number of scattering source was decreasing. In the fabrication of OLED, the large HCNP will cause the roughness on the organic coated surface, so that the size of HCNP is better to be smaller than 400nm. In Fig. 3(b), for fixed size of HCNP, the effect of HCNP fraction was calculated from the HCNP volume fraction of 1%. The maximum EQE occurred at 10% fraction, and then it was decreasing as the fraction was increasing. This is due to the strong scattering of the light normally incident on the boundary, which should be out-coupled if there was no scattering layer.With the optimum HCNP size of 400nm and HCNP fraction of 10%, the optical property of HIP was investigated to achieve the highest EQE. The thickness of HIP with HCNP affected the EQE as shown in Fig. 4(a) for various refractive indices of HIP. For efficient light extraction, effective refractive index of HCNP dispersed HIP should be matched to that of ITO. For the HIP index of 2.0 and the HCNP fraction of 10%, the effective index becomes 1.9 which is close to ITO index. Hence, the result exhibited the highest enhancement for the HIP index of 2.0 and 2.2. For the larger thicknesses above 1200nm, the EQE was almost saturated.The absorption coefficient of HIP strongly affects the EQE enhancement because HIP could absorb the trapped light before it is scattered. As shown in Fig. 4(b), the enhancement ratio was decreasing rapidly as the absorption was increasing. The absorption given on the right side of Fig. 4(b) is calculated for the light incident at normal to the sample surface with 2000nm HIP. If the polymer has absorption of 5% for the normal incident light, the enhancement factor was reduced to 2.2, while it was 2.5 in case of no absorption. In Fig. 4(c), the EQE enhancement was calculated as a function of HIP thickness for various absorption coefficients. Compared to Fig. 4(a), it was found that the thick HIP was not effective because of the absorption of the trapped light before it could be scattered to escape.The HCNP is the submicron size polymeric particle with empty core. Various methods have been developed to produce hollow polymeric nanoparticles and they typically use self-assembly [11], removal of sacrificial templates [12], surfactant emulsions [13] or their combination [14]. However, each of them has its own disadvantages such as stability of self-assembled systems, difficulty in removing the template, multi-step assembly process, and wide dispersion of size.Recently, the microfluidic synthesis method has been introduced due to the advantage of smaller size dispersion and the facilitation of the continuous production based on the flow-through self-assembly. It utilizes the interfacial reaction obtained from laminar flow and self-assembly of polymers in a microchannel [15]. When two or more miscible fluids are introduced into the microchannel, a multi-layered flow forms due to its small hydraulic diameter [16]. The lamination flow is extremely resistant to external disturbances such as impact. The width of the flow layer can be accurately controlled by regulating the inlet flow rate. Hence, this can address very stable and controllable reaction process in the nanoparticle production, together with continuous production.Amphiphilic block copolymers are proven to be the best candidate for exhibiting the self-assembly. The block copolymers with hydrophobic and hydrophilic ends are dissolved in an organic solution. Then, an aqueous solution such as water and the organic solution are introduced into the microchannel to form the laminar flow. Owing to their amphiphilic characteristic, they arrange in the interface of two flow layers. Then, the block copolymers start to self-assemble to form the polymeric nanocapsules encapsulating the organic solution. Finally, the HCNPs are obtained by evaporating the organic solution.Among the family of the block copolymers, poly(styrene-block-methylmethacrylate) (PS-b-PMMA) was considered [17]. Atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP) is a powerful technique to synthesize the PS-b-PMMA with the desired properties such as well-defined morphology and size. The commercial copper (I) bromide (CuBr, 99.999%), N,N,N′,N′,N″-pentamethyldiethylenetriamine (PMDETA, 99%), Benzyl bromide (98%) and Congo red (97%) are prepared. Monomers, styrene (Aldrich 99%) and methyl methacrylate (MMA, Aldrich 99%) are purified by standard distillation process and stored in dry atmosphere of purified nitrogen. Dimethylformamide (DMF) and butyl acetate (BA) are also purified according to the standard procedure.Polymerization reactions were performed under a purified nitrogen atmosphere using the standard schlenk techniques The typical procedure is that, in a schlenk flask, the calculated amount of catalyst (CuBr/PMDETA), solvent (butyl acetate), monomer (styrene) and initiator (benzyl bromide) were added sequentially and stirred until the Cu complex was formed. It was then allowed to polymerize at 110°C until the monomer conversion was obtained to be over than 80%. An aliquot of the sample was withdrawn using a nitrogen purged syringe for analysis. The block copolymers were further synthesized by adding the calculated amount of MMA in the same reaction flask and was polymerized. The block copolymers thus were precipitated in hexane and purified by precipitation. The halogen(Br)-terminated final block copolymer was purified by passing through ion-exchange resin and precipitated in hexane.A part of the PMMA block was further hydrolyzed to methacrylic acid using 20% dilute sulfuric acid solution [18]. The block copolymer was dissolved in toluene in a RB flask and sulfuric acid (1:30) was added. The reaction flask was then heated up to 60°C for 10h with continuous stirring, and quenched in the ice-water bath. The product was then washed thoroughly with water in order to remove H2SO4 and dried overnight at 50°C under vacuum.The self-assembly of the block copolymer to form the nanocapsules in the interface of two infused solutions occurs explosively. The self-assembled nanocapsules are easily attached on the channel surface and agglomerated to cause the blocking of the channel. Therefore, the microfluidic channel device for producing nanocapsules should be carefully designed to prevent channel blocking.To retard the rapid self-assembly, a channel structure with five inlets was considered. The aqueous solution is introduced into the central inlet channel, and the polymer-dissolved organic solution into the side inlet channels positioned on the right and left sides. Two additional intermediary channels are located between the central channel and the side channels in order to introduce the organic solution for controlling the explosive self-assembly by regulating the polymer concentration.To prevent the attachment of the nanocapsules on the inner surface of fluidic channel, the cross-sectional size of the microchannel was designed by considering convective mixing and velocity distribution for the various aspect ratios of height to width of the microchannel. Through the numerical analysis for the inlets with two different solutions, the mixing in the stream-wise direction was examined. As the aspect ratio increased, the maximum mixing efficiency was obtained near the top and bottom surface of the channel, where the velocity was zero due to the boundary condition of no-slip. This implies that the attachment of the nanocapsules on the top and bottom surface of the microchannel is increasing as the aspect ratio increase. On the contrary, if the aspect ratio decreases, the channel height also decreases. As a result, the nanocapsules easily attach on the surface of the channel to cause the clogged channel by the clustered particles. The simulation results shows that the aspect ratio of the microchannel of between 1.0 and 3.0 can reduce the attachment of the nanocapsules.At the end of mixing channel, to stop further self-assembly of the polymers, the channel was bifurcated into three outlets. The organic solution dissolved with the PS-b-PMMA polymers is flown into two side outlet channels. The reaction-completed nanocapsules are separated through the center outlet to prevent the additional assembly of the nanocapsules. If the width of the central outlet is larger than that of the aqueous layer containing the self-assembled nanocapsules, the organic solution with the PS-b-PMMA polymers enters the central outlet and they can keep self-assembling to increase the size of the nanocapsules. If the aqueous layer is too thin, it is difficult to construct the channel for collecting the aqueous solution only. Thus, a diffuser structure was added to expand the thin aqueous layer to the desired width for the selective separation. In the diffuser design, the maximum angle was considered to be 22° to avoid the generation of a back flow resulted from adverse pressure gradient.For the purpose of polymer concentrate regulation, reduced channel clogging, and selective particle separation, the microfluidic channel for producing nanocapsules was designed as shown in Fig. 5. The device was fabricated on a 200μm-thick 4 inch silicon substrate by using double step deep reactive ion etch (DRIE). The 100μm-deep and 50μm-wide channel was fabricated, the aspect ratio of 2.0. Then, the 100μm-thick Pyrex glass (#7740) was anodically bonded with the etched silicon substrate to form the microchannel.As an organic solution, the DMF containing 1wt% PS-b-PMMA was prepared. De-ionized water as an aqueous solution was introduced into the center inlet channel and the DMF with 1wt% PS-b-PMMA was infused into the two side inlet channels. Also, the DMF without the block copolymer was injected to the intermediary channels to retard the explosive self-assembly by regulating the concentration of the block copolymer. In the nanocapsule production, the inlet flow rates of the water and the DMF with 1 wt% PS-b-PMMA were used as 20μl/min and 50μl/min, respectively. The inlet flow rate of the DMF was 20μl/min.Fig. 6(a) describes the synthetic process of the HCNPs in the interface formed between aqueous solution and organic solution. A five-layered stable laminar flow was generated due to the low Reynolds number flow. It is assumed that the amphiphilic PS-b-PMMA polymers arrange in the interface where two solutions meet. With the convective diffusion, the mixing occurs in the interfacial surface and after returning to equilibrium from thermodynamic instability, the block copolymers positions near the interface to fold owing to the tendency of minimizing water contact. This results in the formation of the hydrophobic shell around the hydrophilic core of the PS-b-PMMA. Then, as shown in Fig. 6(b) the hollow nanocapsules were obtained by evaporating the DMF included in the nanocapsules in vacuum. Fig. 6(c) shows the TEM image which proves the hollow feature of the produced nanocapsule.To examine the layer formation with the produced HCNPs, they were mixed with polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), advantageous of adhesion, and film formation. If the concentration of the PVA is increased, the dynamic viscosity of the solution also increases so that it is difficult to coat it thin. In the experiment, the 1wt% PVA was prepared in the water and mixed with the HCNPs. To fabricate the thin PVA film dispersed with the HCNPs, various rotational speeds were tested. Under a low speed of 500rpm, the layer thickness was too thick, while over a speed of 2000rpm, the PVA was not coated over the whole surface. Fig. 7shows the SEM images of the HCNPs-dispersed PVA layer coated on the silicon substrate at a rotational speed of 1000rpm and its cross-sectional view. The thickness of the coated layer was measured to be around 400nm. This result indicates that it is possible to fabricate the thin polymer film dispersed with HCNPs. The produced sizes of the HCNPs were distributed from 100nm to 800nm in the preliminary production. From the FDTD simulation results, the size of the HCNPs in the range of 100–1000nm could enhance the EQE of the OLED to 2.2 times. Thus, the produced HCNPs are acceptable for the OLED application. However, to control the size of the dispersed HCNPs, the production conditions are required to be optimized.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In order to increase the light extraction efficiency of the OLED, the scattering layer incorporated with HCNPs was inserted to extract the trapped light inside ITO–organic layer. The effect of the size and volume fraction of the HCNPs was investigated, and then the optical properties of the polymer material were optimized to maximize the enhancement factor of EQE. For the volume fraction of 10%, the highest EQE appeared, and less than 400nm size of the HCNP was appropriate. Based on these values, the EQE dependence on the properties of the HIP such as thickness, refractive index and absorption coefficient was examined. As a result, it was estimated that the EQE of the HCNPs-dispersed OLED could be enhanced up to 2.5 times than that of the reference device for the polymer refractive index of 2.0, the thickness of 1200nm, and the negligible absorption. The EQE enhancement factor was reduced to 2.2 times when the absorption coefficient was increased to 126cm−1.The HCNPs-dispersed polymer was prepared and coated on a silicon substrate as a preliminary demonstration of scattering layer of OLED. The HCNPs were produced continuously by using the flow-through self-assembly of the 1wt% PS-b-PMMA in the microchannel and their size was distributed in the range of 100–800nm. For the feasibility study of the thin film formation, they were mixed with the 1wt% PVA in water and spin-coated on the silicon substrate at a rotational speed of 1000rpm. The 400nm-thick PVA film dispersed with the HCNPs was obtained. The size of the HCNPs and the thickness of the thin polymer film can be further improved at the optimum conditions.