@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Privacy-friendly load scheduling of deferrable and interruptible domestic appliances in Smart Grids

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We design a protocol for scheduling appliances when renewable energy is available.User identities and appliance consumption patterns are not exposed to the schedulers.We provide formal proofs of the security guarantees of the proposed protocol.The privacy-friendly scheduler yields a scheduling delay similar to the optimal one.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Load scheduling,Shamir Secret Sharing,Smart Grid,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The massive integration of renewable energy sources in the power grid ecosystem with the aim of reducing carbon emissions must cope with their intrinsically intermittent and unpredictable nature. Therefore, the grid must improve its capability of controlling the energy demand by adapting the power consumption curve to match the trend of green energy generation. This could be done by scheduling the activities of deferrable and/or interruptible electrical appliances. However, communicating the users’ needs about the usage of their appliances also leaks sensitive information about their habits and lifestyles, thus arising privacy concerns.This paper proposes a framework to allow the coordination of energy consumption without compromising the privacy of the users: the service requests generated by the domestic appliances are divided into crypto-shares using Shamir Secret Sharing scheme and collected through an anonymous routing protocol by a set of schedulers, which schedule the requests by directly operating on the shares. We discuss the security guarantees provided by our proposed infrastructure and evaluate its performance, comparing it with the optimal scheduling obtained by means of an Integer Linear Programming formulation.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
One of the most relevant goals in the design of the future energy grid is the massive introduction of power plants exploiting Renewable Energy Sources (RES, e.g. wind, solar and geothermal energy) to reduce carbon emission and shift towards a more sustainable power usage. However, due to the intrinsic unpredictability in the production of “green” power caused by the intermittent nature of renewables, the new Smart Grid scenario will cope with numerous issues related to the balancing of energy generation and consumption within the grid, in order to satisfy the energy demand while avoiding power waste. In addition, the energy market will experience more uncertain conditions, which could possibly affect the dynamics of energy pricing [1].In order to increase the flexibility of the energy utilization, three complementary approaches have been proposed. The first is to equip the grid with high capacity storage banks, capable of storing energy surpluses and to release them in case of energy production deficits [2]. However, today’s state-of-the-art technology is still immature to allow a widespread introduction of storage plants, which would require tremendous installation and maintenance costs. A second possibility is to induce some modifications in the user’s energy utilization behavior by designing time-variable tariffs or introducing incentives to shift the use of some appliances to off-peak hours [3]. Unfortunately, this approach does not provide any form of direct control on the load conditions of the grid. Finally, the third alternative relies on load scheduling approaches operating at single household level or at neighborhood/microgrid level with the aim of shaping the energy demand profile in order to meet the production trend. Such mechanisms work according to the following principle: delay-tolerant and/or interruptible operations can be scheduled and initiated only when the green energy production conditions are favorable, while in case of power shortage the starting time can be postponed or the service can be momentarily interrupted. Moreover, a wide category of appliances (e.g. refrigerators, air conditioning, cooling/heating systems) can tune (up to a certain extent) their power consumption according to the grid state.The drawback of the load scheduling approach is that it requires the users to communicate to the scheduler their preferences about the time of use and the energy consumption profile of the appliances to be scheduled, which makes the system prone to appliance load monitoring attacks (e.g. Non Intrusive Load Monitoring (NILM), load disaggregation algorithms, and transient analysis). In fact, it has been widely proved that, by analyzing the power consumption trend of an individual household, very detailed information about the personal habits of the occupants can be inferred [4,5], making it possible even to identify the specific electrical appliances working in a given time period. Therefore, designing a load scheduling system capable of preserving the privacy of the users is still an open issue.In this paper, we propose a privacy-friendly infrastructure to perform appliance load scheduling within a neighborhood, which directly exposes neither the time of use and the energy consumption pattern of the single appliances, nor the identity of the users specifying the scheduling requests. Our solution relies on a set of schedulers which collaboratively perform the load planning by means of a MultiParty Computation (MPC) protocol based on Shamir Secret Sharing scheme. The proposed architecture is in line with the recent proposals by regulation bodies: for example, the California Public Utilities Commission [6] fosters the realization of Energy Data Centers aimed at the collection and elaboration of energy consumption data and run by governmental or public entities. While such Data Centers are assumed to be honest, our proposed architecture ensures no violation of the customers’ privacy even in presence of collectors behaving according to the “honest but curious” model.The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 provides a short overview of the related literature, while Section 3 recalls some background notions. Section 4 describes the privacy-preserving scheduling architecture. The attacker model and the security analysis of our proposed infrastructure are discussed in Section 5. In Section 6, the scheduling problem is formulated as an Integer Linear Program (ILP), which is used as a benchmark for the complexity and performance assessment provided in Section 7. Conclusions are drawn in the final section.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper proposes a privacy-preserving framework for the scheduling of power consumption requests generated by electrical Appliances in a Smart Grid scenario. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt to address the problem of securely handling user data to provide a load scheduling service. The energy consumption requests generated by the smart Appliances located in the users’ households within a neighborhood are anonymously conveyed to a set of Schedulers by means of a Crowds-based routing protocol. The Schedulers collaboratively define the schedule of the requests using a Multiparty Computation mechanism based on Shamir Secret Sharing scheme. We evaluate the security guarantees provided by our proposed infrastructure assuming an honest-but-curious attacker model and show through numerical results that the additional delay is modest with respect to the optimal solutions obtained by means of an Integer Linear Programming formulation.