@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A new compensation pixel circuit with all-p-type TFTs for AMOLED displays

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The proposed pixel circuit is realized by all-p-type TFTs.The brightness uniformity of AMOLED display will be enhanced.The effect of the parasitic parameters is sufficiently analyzed.A high contrast ratio can be achieved by the proposed pixel circuit.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Active-matrix organic light-emitting diode (AMOLED),Pixel circuit,Thin film transistors (TFTs),p-Type,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a new pixel circuit with all-p-type TFTs for AMOLED displays. The proposed pixel circuit can effectively compensate for the threshold-voltage shift of the driving TFT, the degradation of OLED and the parasitic resistance of the power supply line. And thus, the brightness uniformity of AMOLED displays can be enhanced. It is shown that the nonuniformity of the OLED current with an average value of 7.3% can be achieved by the proposed pixel circuit, while that of the conventional 2T1C pixel circuit is 73%. Moreover, a high contrast ratio can be also obtained by the proposed pixel circuit since there is no light emitting except for the emission period.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Active-matrix organic light-emitting diode (AMOLED) displays have attracted much attention due to various advantages such as wide viewing angle, fast response time, low power consumption, light weight and high brightness [1]. The AMOLED is usually realized using low temperature polysilicon thin film transistors (LTPS TFTs) technology [2,3]. LTPS TFTs can be used not only for the pixel circuit of AMOLED but also for the integration of the peripheral driving circuits on the same substrate [4–6]. However, the threshold voltage of LTPS TFTs in the AMOLED panel differs from each other due to the random distribution of grain boundaries in the polysilicon material [7–9], which results in nonuniform gray-scale over the display area. Moreover, the threshold voltage of OLED degrades during long-term operation [10,11]. On the other hand, for the application in large display size, the voltage drop caused by the parasitic resistance through the power supply electrode should be also taken into account [12]. As a result, the conventional two-TFT one-Capacitance (2T1C) pixel circuit is not suitable for AMOLED displays with high quality due to its nonuniform OLED current. In the design of AMOLED pixel circuit, the compensation techniques should be developed to eliminate the effect of the threshold voltage shift of LTPS TFTs, the degradation of OLED and the parasitic resistance of power supply line on the brightness uniformity of AMOLED displays.The driving schemes of pixel circuits can be classified into current programming methods [13–15] and voltage programming methods [16–18]. The current programming methods can compensate for both the mobility variations and the threshold voltage variations of TFTs. However, the voltage programming methods are more attractive to AMOLED display due to their fast programming time. Lin and Shieh [12] proposed an effective ac driving scheme to compensate the voltage drop caused by the intrinsic parasitic resistance of the power supply line. However, the threshold voltage shift of the driving TFT has not been compensated in the proposed pixel circuit. Lu et al. proposed a five-TFTs and one-Capacitor pixel circuit to compensate for the threshold voltage shift of the p-type driving TFTs and the drop in the supply voltage [19]. However, there is evident current flowing through OLED in the first two stages except for the emission stage, resulting in lowering the contrast ratio of AMOLED displays. Both the 4T1C pixel circuit developed by Ono and Kobayashi [20] and the 3T2C pixel circuit by Chaji and Nathan [21] can compensate for threshold voltage shift of the driving TFT. However, the proposed pixel circuit needs a programmed power supply which makes peripheral driving circuits of AMOLED displays be complicated. So they may be not suitable for AMOLED displays with high quality.In this paper, we present a new pixel circuit with all p-type TFTs for enhancing the brightness uniformity of AMOLED displays. The proposed pixel circuit can not only compensate for the threshold voltage shift of the driving TFT and OLED, but also compensate for the voltage drop caused by the parasitic resistance of the power supply line, as well as has a high contrast ratio.Fig. 1a shows the schematic diagram of the proposed pixel circuit and its driving scheme. This circuit is composed of five TFTs and two storage capacitors (C1 and C2). Where T2 is used for a current source and the other TFTs are used for a switching function. Vdata, Vdd, and Vss represent a voltage data signal line, a constant voltage source line, and a ground line, respectively. Vctr1, Vctr2, and Vctr3 are the control signal lines. The operational scheme of the proposed pixel circuit is divided into three stages as shown in Fig. 1b, which are described as follows.(1) Initialization and threshold-voltage detecting period: Vctr3 signal goes to high voltage to turn off T4, Vctr1 and Vctr2 goes to low voltage to turn on T1, T3 and T5. Vdata is set as zero. The voltage at node C (VC) is charged up to Vdd through T5. Simultaneously, the voltage at node A (VA) is charged up through T5, T2, and T3 until T2 is turned off. And then VA is equal to Vdd+Vth, where Vth is the threshold voltage of the driving TFT (T2) and it is negative for p-type TFTs. Consequently, the gate-source voltage of T2 stored at C2 is the threshold voltage of T2, i.e., VC2=Vgs=Vth. Note that, the OLED does not emit any light during this period since T5 is on and then VCis charged up to prevent OLED from emitting.(2) Data input period: Vctr1 remains low and Vctr3 remains high, and Vctr2 signal goes to high voltage to turn off T3. During this period, a negative data voltage is input through T1. VCremains to be Vdd. And then VA will become Vdd+Vth+(C1/(C1+C2))Vdata due to the capacitor coupling effect since C1 is in series with C2 with node A floating. Consequently, the stored voltage in C2 will be maintained as Vth+(C1/(C1+C2))Vdata until the data is updated in the following frame. It is obvious that there is still no current flowing through OLED in this period since T5 is on and T4 is off.(3) Emission period: Vctr2 remains high to keep T3 off, while Vctr1 goes to high voltage to turn off T1 and T5 before Vctr3 goes to low voltage to turn on T4. During this period, the OLED is turned on for emitting light. And then the voltage at node C will decrease to be Vdd–VOLED, where VOLED is the turn-on voltage of OLED in the emission period. Since the storage capacitor C2 continues to sustain the gate-source voltage (Vgs) of T2 as Vth+(C1/(C1+C2)) Vdata, consequently, VA becomes Vdd–VOLED+Vth+(C1/(C1+C2))Vdata. The corresponding OLED current is determined based on the VGS of T2 since T2 is working in the saturation region. As a result, the OLED current can be expressed as(1)IOLED=β(Vgs-Vth)2=β(VAC-Vth)2=βC1C1+C2Vdata+Vth-Vth2=βC1C1+C2Vdata2withβ=0.5μCOXW/Lwhere W, L, μ, and Cox are the channel width, the channel length, the field-effect mobility, and the gate oxide capacitance per unit area, respectively. As seen from (1), the OLED current is only affected by the data voltage, and it is independent of the threshold voltage of T2 and OLED, as well as the power supply.The operational scheme described above is the ideal situation for the proposed pixel circuit. And the effect of the parasitic parameters (such as parasitic resistances and parasitic capacitors) will be discussed carefully as follows. Fig. 2shows the schematic diagram of the proposed pixel circuit including parasitic parameters which may affect its operation. As seen from (1), the OLED current is independent of power supply as seen from (1) for the proposed pixel circuit. That is because the stored voltage in C2 is maintained as Vth+(C1/(C1+C2))Vdata in the emission period and the corresponding OLED current is only dependent on it. Therefore, the parasitic resistance of the power supply line will not affect the operation of this circuit. However, it should be indicated that the value of Vdd should satisfy the condition that T2 is still working in the saturation region when the maximum current follows through the parasitic resistance. For the corresponding 2T1C pixel circuit as shown in Fig. 3, the parasitic resistance of the power supply line may cause a voltage drop when the driving current passes through it. This phenomenon causes the brightness to be nonuniform from the top to the bottom in the panel.Generally, the TFT parasitic capacitor is due to the overlap between source/drain electrode and gate electrode. In this paper, we assume the gate/source overlap and the gate/drain overlap are identical for all TFTs, and then Cgs=Cgd. Moreover, Cxirepresents the Cgs/Cgd of Ti (i=1, 2, 3, 4, 5). The effect of parasitic capacitors on the operation of pixel circuit is that the stored voltage in C2 will vary due to the capacitor coupling effect when the control signals jump. At the beginning of the period (2), the Vctr2 signal goes to high voltage to turn off T3 after the threshold voltage of T2 has been detected at the end of the period (1). And then, the node A turns into the charge conservation state after T3 is turned off. As a result, the variation of the voltage at node A due to capacitor coupling effect by Cx3 can be approximated as(2)ΔVA1=Cx3C1+C2ΔVctr2At the beginning of the period (3), the Vctr1 signal goes to high voltage to turn off T1 and T5 after the data voltage has been input at the end of the period (2). The variation of the voltage at node A due to capacitor coupling effect by Cx1 can be approximated as(3)ΔVA2=Cx1C2ΔVctr1In the emission period, the voltage at node C will decrease to be Vdd–VOLED from Vdd, i.e,ΔVC=-VOLED. Similarly, the variation of VA due to turn-on of the OLED can be approximated as(4)ΔVA3=-C2C2+Cx1+Cx3VOLEDAs a result, the entire variation of the stored voltage in C2 (VAC) caused by parasitic capacitors in the whole programming periods can be expressed as(5)ΔVAC=ΔVA1+ΔVA2+ΔVA3-ΔVC=Cx3C1+C2ΔVctr2+Cx1C2ΔVctr1-C2C2+Cx1+Cx3VOLED+VOLED≈Cx3C1+C2ΔVctr2+Cx1C2ΔVctr1+Cx1+Cx3C2VOLEDFor (5), the first term is caused by the Vctr2 signal jumping from low level to high level, the second term is caused by the Vctr1 signal jumping from low level to high level, and the third term is caused by the OLED changing from “off” state to “on” state. After taking into account ΔVAC, Eq. (1) for the OLED current should be modified to(6)IOLED=βC1C1+C2Vdata+ΔVAC2As seen from (6), it is clear that the variation on VAC due to capacitor coupling effect will affect the precision of the threshold voltage compensation. However, since the parasitic capacitor is much smaller than C1 or C2, ΔVAC should be much smaller than the shift of threshold voltage (ΔVth). So the effect of parasitic capacitors can be ignored although it can not be avoided in the pixel circuit. And the parasitic capacitors can be minimized by improving the precision of TFT technologies.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper presents a new voltage-programmed pixel circuit with all-p-type TFTs for AMOLED displays, which is composed of five TFTs, two storage capacitors and three control lines. The proposed pixel circuit can effectively compensate for the threshold-voltage shift of the driving TFT, the degradation of OLED and the parasitic resistance of the power supply line. We also analyze the effect of the parasitic parameters on the operation of the proposed pixel circuit. It is shown that the OLED current nonuniformity is evidently restrained by the proposed pixel circuit compared with the conventional 2T1C pixel circuit, and thus, the brightness uniformity of AMOLED display will be enhanced. Furthermore, a high contrast ratio can be achieved by the proposed pixel circuit since there is no current flowing through the OLED except for the emission period.