@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
IZO deposition by RF and DC sputtering on paper and application on flexible electrochromic devices

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We deposited IZO by DC Sputtering on heat sensitive substrates such as paper.The materials displayed high electric conductivity and optical transparency.Electrochromic materials were deposited using screen-printing.Solid-state electrochromic devices were assembled, showing an excellent performance.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
RF sputtering,DC sputtering,Paper,IZO,Screen-printing,PEDOT:PSS,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The present work describes indium-zinc oxide (IZO) sputtering depositions onto several types of papers, using radio-frequency (RF) and direct current (DC) sputtering with a ceramic IZO target. The electrical and optical properties of the resulting materials were optimized; by studying the argon and oxygen gas flow rates and the sputtering power effects. At optimal deposition conditions, thin films of IZO were achieved with a low sheet resistance (about 20Ω/sq) and an optical transmittance of ca. 80% in the visible spectrum range. These materials retained these properties for more than 8months. Electrochromic devices (ECDs) with several configurations were built with those conductive papers and life cycling and contrast were measured for the ECDs. These devices exhibited a very good color contrast (as defined using L*a*b* color coordinates, =32) and electrochromic cyclability up to 30,000 redox cycles.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Over the last years, the use of transparent conductive oxides (TCO) has been spread within many applications. Research on this topic has drastically increased and a vast amount of work has been published describing new materials, new deposition techniques and new approaches. This huge response is mostly due to the use of TCO in portable electronics, displays, flexible electronics, multi-functional windows, solar cells, transistors and electrochromic devices, which are a fast growing, market [1].Nowadays, ECDs are commercially available in the automotive field, in smart rear view mirrors and in smart windows [1]. The employment of ECDs in disposable applications has been evaluated presenting a growing interest in the printed electronics field [2–5]. The ECDs require at least one TCO depending on the final application and on the structure used to build them. The most common choice is indium-tin oxide (ITO) as a thin film sputtered onto glass [6,7]. ITO presents a wide band gap, good electrical conductivity and high transmittance; however, ITO must be deposited at high temperatures and then annealed at a temperature above 300°C for good electrical conductivity and high transmittance. This annealing temperature causes the ITO films to be crystallized and roughened [8]. The annealing step is also necessary to increase the film density and, therefore, to increase the resistance to H2O and O2 penetration and the device lifetime [9]. On the other hand, the use of high temperatures limits the application on flexible substrates like plastic or paper. Because of that limitation, IZO appears as an attractive alternative to ITO films. IZO also has a wide band gap (>3.5eV), good electrical conductivity (>103Ω−1cm−1) and a high transmittance (>80%) in the visible region of the spectrum [1]. Amorphous IZO has a better structural and chemical stability at a relatively high temperature compared to ITO [3]. It can be deposited at room temperature without any annealing step and still be a very stable material [10]; it also has a very low roughness, internal stress [11] and a higher elastic modulus than ITO [12]. Indeed, the elasticity of amorphous IZO makes it adequate to be deposited on flexible substrates. In this work, IZO was deposited onto several types of papers, using RF and DC sputtering. An IZO ceramic target (composition: In2O3:ZnO (87:13wt%)) was used. Since the target is conductive enough, both RF and DC sputtering could be used. Insulating targets require the plasma excitation to be performed by an RF power supply, since with DC excitation no plasma can be ignited. DC power supplies are significantly more cost effective than RF power supplies and, therefore, of these two processes, DC sputtering deposition is the most widely used technique industrially [1]. In the present work, the deposition of IZO with an RF power supply was performed to create a “conductive paper”, while DC power supply-based depositions were used to prove that the process can be implemented industrially. ECDs with several configurations were built with the obtained conductive papers. Life cycle analysis and contrast were assessed. To characterize the deposited films, techniques such as Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM), UV–Vis spectroscopy and cyclic voltammetry were used.The films were deposited on glass and various paper substrates (pasteboard paper, glossy coated paper and drafting paper) at room temperature by RF and DC sputtering from an In2O3:ZnO (87:13 wt%) alloy target (99.99% purity, from Testbourne, Ltd.) with 7.5cm diameter and 3mm thick.The depositions were made at INESC-MN on an Alcatel SCM450 sputtering system, with a base pressure of ∼1×10−7Torr maintained by a rotary and turbo molecular pumps. For RF sputtering, power was varied from 40 to 50W, and pure Ar plasma was maintained with Ar flow rates from 20 to 50sccm (standardcc/min). For DC sputtering, oxygen (O2) gas was also incorporated into the plasma at a flow rate of 0.8sccm. Power was set to 40W. The sputter deposition rate was derived from stylus profilometer measurements of film thickness. The typical IZO film thickness ranged from 100 to 200nm. These thicknesses would require long deposition times (30min) and substrate cooling (achieved through copper heat sink substrate holder mounted in contact with a water cooled table) is a key factor. Deficient cooling of the substrate would cause film degradation, with a dark signature rather than transparent.For printing methods, we have selected screen-printing technique to deposit PEDOT:PSS patterns on flexible PET and paper substrates. The screen-printing equipment used in this study was a manual machine (printable, SAMPAS) and a polyester screen with 140wires/cm. The electrochromic ink was purchased from Heraeus (PEDOT:PSS Clevios S V3 HV) and two layers were deposited on each pattern in order to achieve the desired contrast on the electrochromic colored state.The main architecture of the devices is shown in Fig. 1, where both electrode and counter-electrode contain the same electrochromic material deposited by screen-printing. Besides paper coated with IZO, the substrate used was also PET coated with ITO, which presents a sheet resistance of 60Ω/sq (purchased from Sigma–Aldrich and used as received).This architecture allows the measurement of light absorption (when the substrate is transparent) between on and off states, since the electrochromic patterns of the electrode and counter-electrode are different. The electrolyte was spread-coated over the electrochromic layer at the electrode; the counter electrode was laminated over the electrolyte, which was then exposed to the ultraviolet 250mWcm−2 UVA radiation for curing, during 1min (Honle UV Technology, UVAHAND 250GS).The electrolyte formulation is composed by a polymer based on poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) containing organic groups which promote cross linking of the polymeric chains, a mixture of aprotic solvents, a salt and a photo initiator. The electrolyte was prepared by dissolving the desired amount of salt in the aprotic solvents under stirring in a closed flask at room temperature. The solvents were used as received. When the salt is completely dissolved, the cross-linkable PEO based polymer powder is added to the solution and the components are homogenized with a spatula. The solution becomes a gel when complete dissolution of the polymer in the solvents occurs. This step takes place by leaving the mixture under mechanic stirring for a few hours until the desired solution viscosity is attained (close to 40kcp at room temperature). Then, the flask was protected from the light with an aluminum foil, the photo initiator was added and the mixture was left under stirring for a few minutes, until a homogeneous yellowish gel is obtained. The solid UV electrolyte is transparent and, therefore, does not interfere with the color exhibited by the electrochromic layer.Two different configurations were tested:1.Paper/IZO/PEDOT:PSS/UV electrolyte/PEDOT: PSS/ITO/PET.Paper/IZO/PEDOT:PSS/UV electrolyte/PEDOT: PSS/IZO/drafting paper.Sheet resistance measurements were performed following the method described in the IEC Standard 93 (VDE 0303, Part 30). Fig. 2represents this method. On top of deposited conductive thin film, two contacts with 1cm length, made with a highly conductive tape, are placed 1cm apart from each other. The resistivity of the film is given by:(1)ρ=R∗d∗a/b(Ωcm)where a is the length of contacts, b the distance between contacts, d the film thickness and R is the resistance. In the present case a=b, which allows the calculation of sheet resistance, Rsh:(2)R(sh)=ρ/d(Ω/sq)To convert this method into an easiest and fastest way of measuring sheet resistance, a homemade wood box was build. This wood box incorporates two metallic contacts with 5cm long and assembled with 5cm distance between them. The metallic contacts are connected to the terminal of a multimeter to read directly the sheet resistance obtained when those metallic terminals are in contact with a conductive surface. The wood structure is used to ensure that the weight of the experimental setup is constant and reproducible.The optical transmittance measurements were performed using a UV–Vis spectrophotometer Cary 300 Bio in the wavelength range from 380 to 800nm.The film surface morphology of the bare substrates and the IZO coated substrates was analyzed by field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) (JEOLJSM7001F), in secondary electron mode, at 10.0kV.Cyclic voltammetry measurements on IZO coated paper were performed in a conventional three-electrode cell. The IZO film deposited on paper was the working electrode, a platinum wire was used as counter-electrode and a saturated calomel electrode (SCE) was the reference electrode. The supporting electrolyte was acetonitrile with 0.1M lithium perchlorate. The equipment used was a potentiostat/galvanostat Model 20 Autolab from Eco Chemie BV (Utrecht, The Netherlands). The collection of data was controled by GPES version 4.9 Eco Chemie BV software. No IR compensation was used.To perform this evaluation, a lab-made system was built. A camera, a lamp (to control the luminosity) and a Color Checker accessory (color pattern) were placed inside an isolated box (chamber). The electrochromic device is placed inside this set-up (box) and connected to a function generator. While the function generator applies a selected potential square waveform (changing from positive to negative), the camera is recording, from time to time, 150pictures during a calculated period of time, enough to see a complete redox (oxidation–reduction) cycle of the device (during several hours, days or weeks depending on the durability of the device). The pictures are then treated with a Matlab software converting RGB coordinates obtained from the film into L*a*b* coordinates. Then, the evolution of the L*a*b* values is monitored in order to obtain a percentage of degradation across the number of cycles performed by the device.The method used to perform mechanical tests (bending) was the Mattia method (ISO 7854-method A) using a De Mattia Flexing tester F15.The Mattia method is used to test samples for resistance to cracking or cut growth by repeated flexing.Two samples were tested: a drafting paper with IZO and a PET with ITO, for comparison. The resistance of the tested film was measured during the time of the experiment using a digital multimeter (Agilent 34410).Two sets of grips on either side of the sample are reciprocated at constant frequency for a preset number of cycles controled by a cycle counter. The electrodes of the multimeter were placed and fixed just after each grip.Samples are loaded so that they are flat when the grip are tightened and flexed but not elongated during tester operation. The samples were subject to 100 bending cycles at a speed of 5 bending cycles per second. The distance between grips was 70mm±1mm (flat sample) and 13mm±0.5mm (flexed sample), causing a bending radius in the sample of 28.5mm±1mm. The samples were 114mm±1mm long and 20mm±0.5mm large. The contacts were placed 53mm±1mm apart.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this work we presented the deposition of IZO thin films using RF and DC sputtering on different paper-based substrates with an excellent performance for electrochromic devices applications. The thin films presented sheet resistances around 20Ω/sq (30Ω/sq for drafting paper) with an average transmittance of 80% in the visible part of the spectrum and an electric conductivity stability above 8months, with a slight increase of sheet resistance but still perfectly usable in the suggested application. Being DC sputtering a technique used in industrial environment, it was demonstrated that these results could be implemented in a large-scale production. The devices built on these paper-based electrodes showed a very good performance with 22% of degradation after 30,000 cycles in the best case. It was also demonstrated that having one or two paper electrodes in a device would not affect the performance. It was also demonstrated that paper samples are more flexible towards bending than commercial PET/ITO.