@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Resource allocation using Link State Propagation in OFDMA femto networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
RALP local scheduler – RALP uses messages exchanges and a global allocation algorithm to assign allocation units (AUs) to the various FAPs. In this article, we have proposed a local scheduling scheme that each FAP uses to assign AUs to the various user equipments (Ues). The algorithm uses the modulation and coding scheme (MCS) of the AUs to do the assignment.The global allocation algorithm assigns AUs to the various FAPs. However, one FAP might require more AUs than what it has been assigned. If the neighboring FAPs are not using all their assigned AUs, then this FAP can borrow AUs from the neighboring FAPs and use it to satisfy its requirements. The borrowing algorithm describes how FAPs can borrow AUs from other FAPs.RALP’s main disadvantage is its convergence time as the message exchange rounds depend on the neighborhood graph. In this article, we introduce the concept of clusters, where the data transfer can proceed after a certain number of message exchange rounds.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
OFDMA,Femtocells,Allocation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Femtocells offer many advantages in wireless networks such as improved cell capacity and coverage in indoor areas. As these femtocells can be deployed in an ad hoc manner by different consumers in the same frequency band, the femtocells can interfere with each other. To fully realize the potential of the femtocells, it is necessary to allocate resources to them in such a way that interference is mitigated. We propose a distributed resource allocation algorithm for femtocell networks that is modelled after link-state routing protocols. Resource allocation using Link State Propagation (RALP) consists of a graph formation stage, where individual femtocells build a view of the network, an allocation stage, where every femtocell executes an algorithm to assign OFDMA resources to all the femtocells in the network and local scheduling stage, where a femtocell assigns resources to all user equipments based on their throughput requirements. Our evaluation shows that RALP performs better than existing femtocell resource allocation algorithms with respect to spatial reuse and satisfaction rate of required throughput.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Wireless capacity has increased significantly due to reduced cell sizes and transmission distance, making it possible for wireless networks to support high data-rate applications. The infrastructure needed for reducing the cell size, namely the macro base stations, is expensive. One possible alternative is to deploy femtocells [1], that are short range, low cost and low powered base stations, in homes or offices. Femtocells can be deployed in ad hoc manner by different consumers. Femtocells increase capacity and improve coverage by the short transmit-receive distance between base stations and users. This also improve macrocell reliability as some users are offloaded to femtocells, freeing up macrocell resources.There are two kinds of interference that can occur when femtocells are deployed in a macrocell. Cross-tier interference occurs between femtocells and macrocell, whereas intra-tier interference takes place between multiple femtocells using the same frequency spectrum. We study resource allocation among femtocells to mitigate intra-tier interference in this article.We focus on OFDMA femtocell networks where the frame consists of time–frequency slots. Our unit of allocation, which we refer to Allocation Unit (AU), may be a time-subchannel slot, as in WiMAX networks or a resource block, as in LTE networks. Any other resource allocation unit can be also referred to as an AU. AUs may have different rates for different femtocells, as an AU can have different modulation and coding parameters for different femtocells, due to the adaptive modulation and coding feature of OFDMA networks. Every femtocell consists of a femtocell base station, which we also refer to as a femtocell access point (FAP), and one or more user equipments (UEs). We use the terms femtocell BS and FAP interchangeably from now on.The authors in [2] compared different resource allocation techniques and concluded that a centralized co-channel assignment, where every femtocell can use any of the resources, results in the best network performance. However, as large number of femtocells can be deployed randomly without any central coordination, a centralized resource allocation scheme is not practical. We propose the resource allocation using Link State Propagation (RALP) algorithm – a distributed and scalable framework where femtocells construct a global view of the network and derive an allocation map of resources to each femtocell that is consistent. Hence, our algorithm behaves as a centralized co-channel assignment algorithm, but it is distributed in reality and no centralized coordination is needed.RALP works in three stages. In the first phase, user equipments (UEs) sense the channel and find out the interference patterns. This information is relayed to the serving femtocell and hence the femtocells knows about its neighbors. At regular intervals, a FAP broadcasts its ID and the IDs of all its neighbors. This infomation is conveyed to all the other FAPs in the macrocell via UE relaying. After this information is exchanged, each femtocell constructs a network graph with femtocells as nodes and interference between femtocells represented as edges. The entire network, with multiple femtocells under a single macro cell, is represented as a graph with one or more connected components. In the second stage of the RALP protocol, each femtocell independently executes an allocation algorithm to assign AUs to itself and other femtocells in its connected component. All the femtocells in a connected component of the graph must execute the same allocation algorithm, so that the AU allocation is consistent. This stage assumes that all the AUs have the same rate. In the last stage of RALP, the local scheduler at each FAP allocates AUs to UEs based on their throughput requirement and the modulation and coding scheme (MCS) of the AUs.We evaluate our algorithm by comparing it with two existing algorithms that focus on femtocell interference management – Distributed random access scheme (DRA) [3] and Femtocell Cluster-Based Resource Allocation Scheme (FCRA) [4].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
