@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Tactile display using shape memory alloy micro-coil actuator and magnetic latch mechanism

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The tactile pins are actuated by an SMA coil actuator and latched by magnetic force.The pins remain in place even if the electrical current to the SMA actuator is cut off by the latch mechanism.The 100-pin tactile display consists of 10 stacked modules and latch parts.The magnetic latch mechanism can control the stroke of the pin accurately without any feedback control.The magnetic latch mechanism realizes lower electrical consumption and high density of the tactile pins.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Tactile display,SMA coil actuator,Magnetic latch mechanism,Braille display,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A two-dimensional tactile display for visually impaired people was fabricated and successfully operated. Character and graphic information is dynamically displayed by an array of pins in up and down positions. The contraction of shape memory alloy (SMA) micro-coil actuators moves the pins up and down when the SMA actuator is heated by an electrical current. A tube fabricated from magnetic material is attached to each pin and a permanent magnet accurately positions the pins in an up or down state without any feedback control. This latch mechanism overcomes problems of heat storage and electrical consumption of the SMA actuator because the current is supplied only when the pins move. The tactile display has a 100 (10×10) pins array. The tactile information is displayed sequentially every 0.3s and the tactile pins are latched at 0.1N by magnetic force. The pins are arranged at a pin interval of 2.5mm and move 2mm up and down. Furthermore, in order to offer tactile graphic information, the interval between pins is narrow. A module for the tactile display with pin intervals of 1.27mm has also been developed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
For accurately obtaining character information, the blind and visually impaired utilize not only sound but also tactile information. Tactile character information is conventionally displayed using Braille. Braille points are varied arrangements of raised dots representing characters that are identified by touch. Generally, six Braille points (2×3) represent one character, the diameter of the point being about 1–2mm and the distance between points being 2–4mm (standards of the Braille points differ by country) [1].Recently, the population of the blind or visually impaired is increasing due to diabetic retinopathy. The blind or visually impaired are generally over 40years of age and cannot read Braille skillfully. Not only Braille, but also the shape of characters and graphic information can be displayed via a computer by the up and down movement of a two-dimensional array of SMA actuated dynamic pins. Dynamic tactile displays using a piezoelectric actuator [2,3], an electromagnetic actuator [4,5], an electrostatic/pneumatic actuator [6,7] and an SMA microactuator [8,9] have been developed. Dynamic tactile displays utilizing piezoelectric bimorph actuators are commercially available. The SMA actuators can generate large displacement with relatively small volume and realize a high-density array of pins which other actuators cannot achieve. On the other hand, although accurate control of the amount of actuated displacement is not suitable, by using a latch mechanism, the stroke of the SMA actuator can be controlled without any feedback control. A dynamic Braille display whose pins are moved up or down using SMA micro-coil actuators and kept in an up or down state using a magnetic latch mechanism has been developed [10]. In this paper, for the display of not only Braille but also the configuration of a character and graphic information, a 100 (10×10) pin tactile display which consists of a 10 (1×10) pin module was fabricated and its actuation was confirmed. In addition, in order to provide accurate tactile information, the module for the tactile display of which the pin intervals are 1.27mm was developed and characterized.The two-dimensional tactile display consists of many stacked modules. The module structure of the tactile display is illustrated in Fig. 1. The module consists of a magnetic latch, an SMA micro-coil actuator and a driving circuit. The SMA micro-coil actuators contract and move the pins up and down when an electrical current is supplied via the driving circuit. Two magnetic material tubes are attached to each pin and a permanent magnet sheet with through holes fixes the position of the pins in an up or down state. This magnetic latch mechanism makes electrical consumption of the SMA actuator low because an electrical current is supplied only when the pins are moved up or down. The driving circuit realizes actuation of the pins simultaneously by high-speed switching and an electrical addressable latch.Fig. 2shows the working principle of pin actuation. Fig. 2a shows a module and Fig. 2b shows the cross section of A–A′ in Fig. 2a. The SMA is soldered on the polymer parts and the electrode. When an electrical current is supplied to the lower half of the SMA actuator, it is heated above a certain transition temperature and contracts. As a result the pin is pushed upward by the SMA actuator. The pin is kept in the up position even if the electrical current is cut off because a permanent magnet attracts and fixes the magnetic material tube, as shown in Fig. 2c. Conversely, when the electrical current is supplied to the upper half of the SMA coil actuator, the pin is pushed downward and latched, as shown in Fig. 2d. The magnetic latch mechanism contributes to solutions of electrical consumption and heat accumulation of the SMA actuator. If this module did not have the latch mechanism, the SMA actuator would have to be heated while pins were kept in up or down positions. As a result, the heat of actuation is conducted to the next pin. On the other hand, by utilizing the latch mechanism, the electrical current can be cut off after the pin is moved.The process flow of the module fabrication is shown in Fig. 3. Two polymer parts which are fabricated from printed circuit board are fixed to a steel rod of 0.3mm diameter as shown in Fig. 3a. The fabricated pin and the SMA micro-coil actuator (BMX-50, TOKI Co., Japan) are coated with Cu by electroless plating. The external diameter and wire diameter of the SMA micro-coil are 0.2mm and 50μm, respectively. The SMA is fixed to the two polymer parts and is extended from the length of the memorized shape between the two polymer parts (Fig. 3b). The SMA is physically and electrically fixed by solder to the electrodes on the printed circuit board at three points. The middle of the SMA is fixed to the common electrode and both ends of the SMA are fixed to the other electrodes (Fig. 3c). At this time, since the SMA coil is well-filled with solder, the soldering between the SMA and the electrode is stabilized physically and electrically. After Cu etching (Fig. 3d), magnetic material (carbon steel) tubes, pin caps, a permanent magnet sheet (HSB-CA, Hitachi Metals Ltd.), a frame, a driving circuit and an electrical connector are assembled (Fig. 3e). Finally, by the stacking of fabricated modules, the pins are arranged two-dimensionally.Fig. 4shows an assembled two-dimensional tactile display consisting of ten stacked planar modules of which the pin interval is 2.5mm (Fig. 4a), each with an array of ten pins. The modules are stacked at a pitch of 2.5mm, which is the standard of the Braille point system in Japan, thus, not only the shape of characters and graphic information but also Braille can be displayed by using the tactile display. The height, width and thickness of the fabricated device are 90mm, 50mm, and 50mm, respectively (Fig. 4b). Pin stroke and latching force are 2mm and around 0.1N, respectively, for tactile display.Furthermore, in order to offer high resolution tactile graphic information, a narrower pin interval of the pin display is needed (Fig. 5a). A test module with a pin interval of 1.27mm was fabricated, which has the same characters of actuation and latching as the 2.5-mm pin interval module mentioned above. The fabricated module has 16 pins and the thickness of the module is 1.27mm, as shown in Fig. 5.The operation system and diagram are shown in Fig. 6. The tactile display is connected to a PC via a USB interface and power source. Each module has a shift register with an addressable latch (DN8648FBP, Panasonic Co.) and each circuit is mutually electrically connected. For control of pin motion, a control program using the Visual Basic software has been developed (Fig. 7). Configurations of graphical and character data are divided by 10×10 pins and the pin information which should be actuated up or down is previously loaded to the software. When some graphical data must be displayed, the data of the pin state is sent to every shift register. Then selected pins are actuated simultaneously.A tactile display with 100 pins having a pin interval of 2.5mm has been operated using the developed program and evaluated by blind subjects. The protrusion length of the pin cap from the frame and latching force were measured using a laser displacement meter (AT-1200, GRAPHTEC Co.) and a digital force gauge. The measurement results of the length and force were 1mm and 0.1–0.15N, respectively. Response time of the pin actuation was also measured by using a laser displacement meter, and the response time was 0.3s in the case of a supplied current of 120mA. The electrical current was calculated by input voltage from a power source and electrical resistance of the SMA. In the present study, operation conditions of a supplied current of 120mA to the SMA, a 0.3s input time and a 0.3s repetition time were used to drive the SMA. Measurement results are shown in Table 1. The pin stroke and interval are sufficient for the visually impaired to sense tactile information since the pin stroke and interval are almost the same as the standard Japanese Braille point system. Furthermore, the latching force, which is more than 0.1N, is same as the commercialized tactile display (DV-2, KGS Co., Japan). Alphabetical letters, numerals and simple graphics (circle and cross) are displayed continuously (Fig. 8). Use of the developed tactile display, by two blind persons was successful (Fig. 9), displayed tactile information being easily identified by touch.Electric current (120mA/0.3s) was supplied to the each pin of the fabricated 1.27mm interval module, resulting in successful actuation. The peak-to-peak displacement of the pin stroke was 2.0mm and the magnetic latching force was 0.1N, almost the same as in the 2.5mm pin interval module. By stacking this module, high resolution two-dimensional tactile display can be realized, which can help the blind to accurately sense character and graphic tactile information.The number of repeated actuation cycles was counted using a photo-coupler. The light of the photodiode is interrupted when the pin is positioned upward, and the counter circuit counts the cycles. The operating frequency and actuation condition are 1Hz and 120mA/0.3s, respectively. The latching force and the distortion ratio of the wire of the SMA coil were 0.1N and 4.3%, respectively. The service life was measured at room temperature (around 25°C), and as a result, around 250,000 repeated actuation cycles were observed. Furthermore, peeling and cracking were not observed at the soldering part on the printed circuit board, although the SMA coil broke away at the actuation part between the common electrode and the upper electrode.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
