@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Quantitative analysis of time-course development of motion sickness caused by in-vehicle video watching

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We evaluated how severely in-vehicle video watching brings motion sickness.Video-watching aggravated motion sickness 2.7 times as much as ordinary car-riding.Video-watching aggravated motion sickness 25% less severely than book-reading.A statistical protocol was introduced to analyze incomplete within-subject data.The new model can handle missing entries and capture the time-course development.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Visual–vestibular sensory conflict,Susceptibility,Statistical analysis,Random-component location-scale model,Incomplete within-subject design,Onboard TV,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
It has been common and popular to watch videos in moving vehicles. An important issue in developing comfortable in-vehicle video watching systems is to understand how passengers get motion sickness. With this in mind, the goals of this paper are (1) to introduce an experimental protocol and a statistical analysis procedure for quantitatively evaluating how motion-sickness is developed during car-driving, and (2) to demonstrate their practical usefulness with a working experimental study. In the experimental protocol, motion sickness was induced to subjects by requiring them to watch an in-vehicle video during 15-min driving, and the time-course development of motion sickness was recorded by asking subjects to evaluate their degree of motion sickness every one minute. A main difficulty in analyzing data from these studies is how to incorporate the individual difference in motion-sickness susceptibility. Since susceptibilities are markedly different among subjects, within-subject design experiments are preferred. However, it is practically difficult to conduct complete set of trials because subjects who are not willing to continue experiment (due to heavy motion sickness) should be able to withdraw from the subsequent series of trials in accordance with ethical requirement. To cope with this incomplete data issue, we introduce a statistical data analysis procedure that enables to estimate and impute missing entries in the within-subject design table. Using a working example, we demonstrated that the protocol and the procedure are useful for quantitative assessment of the time-course motion sickness development. We conducted an in-vehicle motion-sickness study with 31 subjects, where the time-course motion sickness developments of video-watching, book-reading, and normal riding conditions were compared. The results indicate that video-watching brings on 2.7 times more severe motion sickness than normal riding, but 25% less severe than book-reading.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Recent advancement of video-screen technology allows us to watch videos in moving vehicles such as cars, boats, and airplanes. An important issue in the development of in-vehicle video systems is to understand how easily and severely passengers get motion sickness. It is well known that reading books or maps in a moving vehicle brings on and aggravates motion sickness. This is known to be the result of sensory conflict [1], that is, the vestibular system conveys sensory information of body movement, while the visual system conveys stationary information creating the sensation of the body being immobile.Watching a video in a moving vehicle is considered to trigger sensory conflict in the same manner as book-reading [2]. Schoettle and Sivak [3] investigated the frequency and the severity of motion sickness experienced from in-vehicle video usage by a questionnaire survey. The study indicated that video watching in a moving vehicle caused motion sickness less often than book-reading, but more often than normal riding. Kato and Kitazaki [4,5] also investigated the influence of in-vehicle video display on carsickness by their experimental studies. It showed that reading still images (news text) or watching moving images brought on more severe carsick than the case that passengers were allowed to see external view.In order to offer comfortable video-watching in moving vehicles, it has been desired to develop new video systems that can reduce motion sickness. For developing such new video systems, it is essential to establish an experimental protocol that can quantitatively evaluate how motion-sickness is developed during car-driving. To assess the severity of sickness in series during an experimental trial, it must be briefly evaluated in an instant at every measuring time. A variety of subjective rating methods [e.g., 4–7] and magnitude estimation methods [8] have been frequently used for that purpose. Short Symptoms Checklist [9] is also adopted for evaluating the severity of symptoms at given intervals (e.g., every 5min) during stimulus periods. Another estimation method, in which subjects respond with a joystick instead of replying with numerical ratings, has been used for continuous measurement [10]. In this paper, we first introduce an experimental protocol and a statistical analysis procedure for quantitative assessment of time-course motion sickness development. Then we demonstrate with a working experimental study that our new approach is practically useful for understanding how motion-sickness is developed during car-driving.In the experimental protocol, motion sickness is induced to subjects by requiring them to watch a video via an in-vehicle video display during 15-min driving along a winding road. The time-course development of motion sickness is recorded by asking subjects to evaluate their degree of motion sickness every one minute of 15-min driving. The degree of motion sickness is subjectively evaluated with 11 grades (0–10) on a rating scale, which is essentially the same as the well-being score introduced by Reason and Graybiel [11].One of the difficulties in experimental studies on motion sickness is how to incorporate the individual difference in motion sickness susceptibility which differs markedly among individual subjects. When different stimulus conditions are compared such as video-watching, book-reading, and normal-riding, subjects who have similar susceptibilities should be evenly assigned to each stimulus condition. In some previous studies (e.g., [4–6]), individual susceptibilities are scored by questionnaire such as the Motion Sickness Susceptibility Questionnaire (MSSQ) [12,13] in advance, and the subjects were evenly assigned to each stimulus condition based on the score. However, since motion-sickness susceptibilities are markedly different among individuals, stratification based on questionnaire score is not reliable enough, and the results highly depend on subject assignments.Therefore, it is desirable that every stimulus condition is evenly tested by each subject (within-subject design). In practice, however, it is difficult to carry out the complete set of trials, i.e., same number of trials with every stimulus condition by each subject. It is because subjects are allowed to withdraw from the subsequent series of trials in accordance with ethical requirement (subjects who had severe motion sickness in the previous trial would not be willing to try it again). As the result, the within-subject design table inevitably has several missing entries. Even worse, those missing entries arise with bias because subjects who have more severe motion sickness tend to withdraw more often than those who have no motion sickness. This kind of practical problem is a formidable issue more or less common to experimental motion-sickness study.To handle this incomplete data issue, we introduce a simple statistical model for time-course development of motion sickness. This approach allows us to estimate and impute the missing entries in the within-subject design table, and to compare the motion sickness severities among different stimulus conditions. In this paper, for the purpose of demonstration, we conducted an in-vehicle motion-sickness study with 31 subjects, where the time-course motion sickness developments of video-watching, book-reading, and normal riding conditions were compared. The conclusion of the analysis was consistent with previous studies [3–5], i.e., video watching brings on more severe motion sickness than normal riding, but is less severe than book-reading.In this section, we present the experimental protocol by describing the experimental setup of our working example study on time-course motion sickness.N=31 subjects (21 males and 10 females), approximately 20years of age, participated in the experiment. None of the subjects reported any medical problems and all presented with normal vestibular functions. Every subject was briefed on the purpose, procedures, risks, and benefits of the study, and gave written informed consent before participating in the experiment. It was also explained that the subjects could withdraw from the experiment whenever they requested, that is, when they could no longer endure the nausea of motion sickness, they could immediately get out of the car and terminate the experimental trial. The experimental protocol used in this study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Faculty of Engineering, Mie University.The experiment was performed using a minivan, which had three rows of seats and a boarding capacity of 7 persons. Subjects, one or two in each experimental trial, were seated in the second row of the car. Two in-vehicle video displays were installed separately behind head rests of the first row of the seats by means of the arms fixed to the side roof. They were located about 60cm apart in front of the individual subjects. The displays had an 11 inch-type wide LCD panel, 244mm (width)×138mm (height), whose resolution was 800 (horizontal)×480 (vertical) pixels. The horizontal and vertical viewing angles for the subjects were about 23 and 13 degrees, respectively. Movies were played on the in-vehicle video displays using a DVD player. Sound was provided by speakers attached on the side doors through an FM radio.The experiment was performed to compare the effect of riding conditions on motion sickness. Subjects rode in the car for T=15min under one of the following K=3 conditions: (1) video-watching, (2) book-reading, and (3) no-task conditions. Under the video-watching condition (k=1), subjects were required to watch a movie shown on the in-vehicle video displays. The movies used in the experiment did not include any scenes of an intense nature or uncomfortable scenes. They were selected from among romantic and family comedies (“Legally Blonde”, etc.) that had not been watched by the subjects, so that the subjects could concentrate their attention on the scene. The sound was provided in the native language of the subjects (i.e., Japanese) and subtitles were not superimposed. Under the book-reading condition (k=2), subjects were required to read a picture book (“Where’s Wally?”) that had few letters but lots of small fine figures. The task for readers was to look for one or several particular figures which got mixed in among lots of similar ones on each page. In the no-task condition (k=3), subjects were simply asked to remain still and quiet. They were allowed to look outside of the car freely. To ensure the subjects obeying the instructions, their behavior was observed by an experimenter seated in the third row of the car.The driving course used in the experiment was a suburban road with numerous curves and occasional gentle slopes. It had no traffic signals but two stops. There were no houses along the road, and the traffic, if any, was not heavy. The driving course was a 2.1-km circuit, and it took 3min to drive around. The car went around the course 5 times for a total of 15min in each experimental trial, and was driven by a single driver in order to minimize the variance in driving manner throughout the whole experiment. The driver was instructed to drive along the traffic lane on the road as accurately as possible while keeping a constant speed under the legal limit (50km/h), and the experimental design and details were not informed to the driver. The driving course had 19 sharp curves in one circuit and the maximal angular velocities of yaw in the individual curves were around 8–35deg/s (mean±SD: 14.8±7.2deg/s).During a T=15-min trial, subjects required to subjectively evaluate their degree of motion sickness in a rating-scale such as well-being scores [11]. They were asked to answer it orally according to the experimenter’s request every one minute. The subjective severity was expressed in 11 numerical categories (severity scores) from 0 (normal condition with no sickness) to 10 (limit of subject endurance of severe nausea: endpoint). The subjects were instructed to assign one of the numerical categories as a severity score in proportion to the degree of motion sickness severity. When subjects withdrew in the middle of a trial due to severe sickness, severity scores for the rest of the trial were regarded as the maximal point of 10.As mentioned in Section 1, drop-outs of some subjects are inevitable in within-subject-design motion-sickness studies. Also in our working study, scheduled trials were sometimes canceled since the subjects were free to withdraw from the subsequent series of trials in accordance with ethical requirement. Consequently, 11 subjects withdrew after trials in a single condition, and 13 subjects attended trials in two of the three conditions before their withdrawal. Seven subjects attended trials in the all conditions. Excluding trials by the subjects participated only in a single condition, experimental records of 20 subjects were used for subsequent statistical analysis. They participated in 23, 24 and 34 trials in the video-watching, book-reading and no-task conditions, respectively. It means that our within-subject design table from the 20 subjects contains several missing entries. Those missing entries are estimated and imputed by the statistical analysis described in the following Chapter 3.Every subject participated in the experiment at least one day apart. One or two subjects attended each experimental trial. They were seated in the second row of the minivan. After a dozen of minutes driving (without any task) to get to the starting point of the course, subjects had a rest for 10min before starting the trial. One of the above-mentioned tasks was assigned to subjects during a 15-min riding period. The subjective severity of motion sickness was recorded at the starting time and every one minute during 15-min driving. When subjects felt severe nausea and desired to withdraw, they could get out of the car and discontinue the trial at any time. The numbers of trials terminated in this way were 3, 3 and 0 in the video-watching, book-reading and no-task conditions, respectively. Only in one case out of the 6 terminated trials, two subjects participated in the experiment together and one of them withdrew from it. We restarted the trial with the other subject after letting the former off. The interruption of the driving was shorter than 30s.In this section, we present the statistical analysis procedure for analyzing the data obtained from experiments such as the working example in the previous section.Since individual difference of motion-sickness susceptibilities are very large, within-subject design is best suitable for these studies. However, planned trials are often canceled because subjects should be allowed to drop off from the experiment at any stage in accordance with ethical requirement. Accordingly, the following difficult issues must be addressed in statistical analysis.(1)First, the procedure must have a mechanism to impute the missing entries in the within-subject design table.Second, the procedure must be able to capture the time-course development of motion sickness, in which both the average and the variability (variance) of the severities have increasing trends with riding time.Let us denote yk,t,ibe the severity score given by subject i after t-minutes riding with condition k. Here, we use the subscript k∊{1,⋯, K} to distinguish K stimulus conditions. Similarly, we use the subscript t∊{0,1,⋯, T} to specify the riding time. The subscript i∊{1,2,⋯, N} represents the subject index.The random-component location-scale model is formulated as(1)yk,t,i=μk,t+σk,t·δi+εk,t,i,where μk,tand σk,t⩾0 are the average (i.e., location) and the standard deviation (i.e., scale) of the motion sickness severity scores over subjects at riding time t with stimulus condition k, respectively. Furthermore, δidenotes the random component indicating the susceptibility to motion sickness of subject i, and we assume, for identifiability, that{δi}i=1Nhave zero mean and unit variance. Finally, ɛk,t,iis the Normally distributed error term independently and identically distributed for all (k, t, i) with the mean zero. The main goal of the analysis is to estimate the average{μk,t}t=0Tand variability{σk,t}t=0Tof the motion sickness severities for each stimulus condition k∊{1,⋯, K}.In the model (Eq. (1)) we do not assume any functional relationship between the average severities μk,tand the riding time t because the scores are ordinal scale (not distance scale). Instead, we assume that the average severities are monotonically increasing along the riding time t, i.e.,(2)0≤μk,0≤μk,1≤⋯≤μk,T≤10,for allk.In addition, we introduce the restrictions on the lower and the upper bounds of the expected severities:(3)0≤μk,t+σk,t·δi≤10,for allk,t,andibecause the range of the severity scores is limited to [0,10].Note that the motion sickness susceptibility δiis independent of stimulus condition k. It roughly implies that a subject who is prone to get severe motion sickness in one stimulus condition tends to have severe motion sickness in other conditions as well. This separability of the susceptibility parameters δiand stimulus condition parameters (μk,t, σk,t) enables us to impute the missing entries in our within-subject design table. Namely, hypothetical motion sickness trend for a subject i with stimulus condition k can be estimated by substituting δiandμk,t,σk,tt=1Tinto the random-component location-scale model.The parameters of the model are estimated using least-squares method (i.e., maximum likelihood estimation under the Gaussian noise). The sum of the squared errors between the observed and the estimated severity scores are minimized under the aforementioned constrains (Eqs. (2) and (3)). The problem is mathematically formulated as(4a)min{μk,t,σk,t}∀k,∀t,{δi}∀i∑(k,t,i)∈Dyk,t,i-μk,t+σk,t·δi2(4b)subject to0≤μk,0≤μk,1≤⋯≤μk,T≤10,for allk,(4c)σk,t≥0,for allkandt,(4d)0≤μk,t+σk,t·δi≤10,for allk,t,andi,(4e)∑i=1Nδi=0,(4f)1N-1∑i=1Nδi2=1,where D in Eq. (4a) represents the set of all possible triplets (k, t, i). The optimization problem is solved by a simple iterative procedure using Matlab CVX package (http://cvxr.com/cvx/). The Matlab code is available by request.After fitting the model and estimating these parameters, we compute severity index skas a summary statistic of motion sickness severity with stimulus condition k. It is defined as(5)sk:=1T∑t=1Tμˆk,t,whereμˆk,tis the estimated value of μk,tand T is the total riding time. We examine the statistical significance of the difference in the severity indices among different stimulus conditions. Consider testing the difference between two stimulus conditions k and k′. The test statistic is simply defined as(6)Δsk,k′:=sk′-sk.Here, the null hypothesis is that there is no difference in motion sickness between the conditions k and k′, and the alternative hypothesis is that the stimulus condition k′ yields more severe sickness than the condition k. To compute the statistical significance (p-values), we use permutation-based approach [17].Permutation-based approach is a general procedure to compute null distribution and statistical significance based on randomized sampling. A hypothetical experimental data under the null hypothesis is generated by randomly permuting the stimulus condition index ofyk,t,it=1Tbetween k and k′ as if they were gotten in either condition of the two jumbled together. Then we fit the random-component location-scale model (Eq. (1)) with the randomized hypothetical data and compute the test statistic in Eq. (6). By repeating the randomized sampling process many times (10,000 times in our analysis), we obtain the null distribution of the test statistic, and p-values can be simply computed by(7)p:=1B∑b=1BIΔsk,k′≤Δsk,k′(b),where B is the number of randomized sampling (B=10,000 in the current analysis),Δsk,k′(b)is the test static computed from the b-th randomized data, and I is the index function defined as(8)I(z)=1,ifzis true,0,ifzis false.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In motion sickness studies, an important issue is how to treat the individual difference in motion sickness susceptibility. Although the issue can be circumvented by completing within-subject design experiment, it is difficult in practice to carry out the complete set of trials because subjects are allowed to withdraw from the subsequent trials in accordance with ethical requirement. In this study, we introduce an experimental protocol and a statistical analysis procedure to handle such incomplete experimental data, and demonstrate that the protocol and the procedure are useful for quantitative assessment of the time-course development of motion sickness severity.The present experimental study evaluated how severely in-vehicle video watching in a moving vehicle brings motion sickness on passengers in comparison with book-reading and ordinary car-riding. Time-course development of motion sickness severity was measured every one minute during 15-min driving along a winding road under the three riding conditions. The severity increased almost in proportion to the time of car-riding under every condition. Watching a video aggravated motion sickness 2.7 times as much as ordinary car-riding, and 25% less severely than reading a book. We can say with fair certainty that the aggravation of motion sickness is attributable to a lack of external view which increases visual–vestibular sensory conflict. It is most likely that an external frontal view, partially visible while watching a video, lessened motion sickness compared with that while book-reading. The head posture might also affect the degree of sickness.