@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A secure alert messaging system for safe driving

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We analyze vulnerabilities of an approach for alert message broadcasting to the position cheating attack.We demonstrate how the position cheating attack delays the transmission of alert messages.We propose a solution based on collaboration among neighbor vehicles to detect nodes cheating about their position.We demonstrate how our detection mechanism ensures a correct estimation of vehicles transmission range.Our detection mechanism allows a quick broadcast of the alert message.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Inter-vehicular communication,Vehicular safety,Alert messaging warning,Position cheating attack,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Vehicular safety is an emergent application in inter-vehicular communications. As this application is based on fast multi-hop message propagation, including information such as position, direction, and speed, it is crucial for the data exchange system of the vehicular application to be resilient to security attacks. To make vehicular networks viable and acceptable to consumers, we have to design secure protocols that satisfy the requirements of the vehicular safety applications. The contribution of this work is threefold. First, we analyze the vulnerabilities of a representative approach named Fast Multi-hop Algorithm (FMBA) to the position cheating attack. Second, we devise a fast and secure inter-vehicular accident warning protocol which is resilient against the position cheating attack. Finally, an exhaustive simulation study shows the impact of the attack on the protocol FMBA on delaying the transmission of alert messages. Furthermore, we show that our secure solution is effective in mitigating the position cheating attack.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Annually, road crashes result in almost 120,000 fatalities and 2.4 million injuries in the European Region [1]. Road traffic injuries represent the leading cause of death among adolescents and young adults. Moreover, the economic burden of road crashes is as much as 3% of gross domestic product. Although, many potential preventive strategies exist [2], they are not completely effective. Hence, it is desirable to take up the challenge and reduce the burden of road traffic injuries. The basic approach consists in using advanced technologies that can prevent vehicles from being involved in accidents. In this direction, one of the most promising techniques is based on the use of inter-vehicular communication (IVC) [3]. In fact, many applications are possible in this context, yet local danger warning systems remain the most prominent ones. Clearly, the effectiveness of such safety related application is based on the reliability of the broadcast information.Alert messaging is a building block component of intelligent transportation systems and an emergent application for vehicular communications. Vehicles can communicate between each other, without needing the intervention of any external communication infrastructure. However, to effectively broadcast an alert message from a vehicle involved in an accident to all the following vehicles in the car platoon, the transmission of the message should be done as quickly as possible.Current approaches are generally based on intermediate neighboring nodes, since the transmission of the alert message through infrastructures on the road would add delays that could have fatal consequences on life loss, injuries, and vehicle damages. For this purpose, different alert messaging applications have been proposed to broadcast an alert message very fast [4–7]. However, it is crucial for such data exchange to be resilient to security attacks in order not to lose its potential effectiveness in saving lives. Attackers might run malicious actions to inject false information or alarm, thus rendering ineffective the safety application [8–12]. Although many alert message applications have been thoroughly studied in the past years [4–6], most of the obtained results did not take the security threats into account. Instead, the benefits in terms of reduced number of vehicles involved in a chain accident, thanks to a properly working alert message broadcast, is clearly shown by Palazzi et al. [5].Contribution. In this paper, we review the contribution of [13] and further thoroughly investigate the impact of the position cheating attack on a representative algorithm for alert messaging, i.e., the Fast Multi-hop Broadcast Algorithm (FMBA) [4] for vehicular safety application. First, we highlight the vulnerability of FMBA to the position cheating attack and we study the impact of this attack on this algorithm. We show that this weakness we found could be leveraged by an adversary in a very effective way. Then, we discuss a solution we developed for broadcasting safety related messages, which is both fast and secure against the position cheating attack. We named this solution Secure FMBA and we assessed its effectiveness with a thorough simulation study.Organization. This paper is organized as follows. The next section presents the notation and model assumptions. Section 3 reviews the proposed solutions in the literature, and provides the necessary background information related to the FMBA protocol. In Section 4, we show the vulnerability of FMBA to the position cheating attack. In Section 5, we present our position verification method. In Section 6, we evaluate the performances of FMBA under different position cheating attacks, and Secure FMBA with position cheating detection. Finally, in Section 7 conclusions are drawn.In this section, we present the assumptions and the notation (Table 1) used in this paper. In our model, we assume that one malicious vehicle is on the network, in order to show the impact of the attack with a minimum number of attackers. We did not assume and model the presence of obstacles or buildings along the road. We considered a symmetric communication range: if a verifier vehicle V hears a verified vehicle P, then we can also assume that P can hear V.Moreover, we assume that V does not know in advance its transmission range and that it communicates directly with the prover node P. Each vehicle knows its own location, for instance, using GPS that provides accurate information about current time and actual position. All the vehicles belong to a Public Key Infrastructure [14,15]; i.e., each vehicle has a public/private pair of keys and a unique identity certified by a Certification Authority. We assume that the certification authority corresponds to the government agency responsible to assign license plates: a vehicle can be used only if it is provided with a unique license plate, a PKI certificate associated to its plate ID, and the public key of the Certification Authority. We assume also that certificate revocation lists are updated at given time interval (e.g., daily) by the vehicle and stored in a local memory. The power and computational resources are supposed to be large enough for our application’s requirements, and the network is loosely time synchronized.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
