@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Rating analysis and comparisons of resonant circuit based sustain drivers for PDPs

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper derives theoretical analytic models for switch current and voltage ratings of various PDP sustain drivers.The PDP drivers in terms of switch current and voltage ratings are systematic compared.Based on analytical expressions and comparative features, the sustain drivers are evaluated from standpoint of switch ratings.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Sustain driver,Resonant circuit,Current ratings,Voltage ratings,Plasma display panel (PDP),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Industrial and academic researches have, in the last twenty years, matured the plasma display panels (PDPs) to the successful product level for commercial flat screen television sets. The sustain driver with resonant operation, converting high dc voltage to ac square-wave voltage with high frequency for strong visible light emission, have great influence on the entire circuit efficiency and cost, from driving circuit point. Although circuit losses and costs of PDP drivers are of the utmost importance, comparative study of the sustain drivers has been missed in literature, despite numerous publications for PDP drivers. This paper, in detail, presents the theoretical analyses and systematic comparisons of the PDP drivers, in terms of switch current and voltage ratings. Based on analytical expressions and comparative features, the sustain drivers are evaluated from standpoint of switch ratings.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The ac plasma display panels (PDPs) have been one of the most popular products for wall-mounted displays and TV sets, due to its thinness, wide view angle, large screen, and long lifetime [1–4]. Continuing requirements to account for predominance over other FPDs by improving performance/cost ratios have, however, placed challenges for PDP manufacturers [4–13]. Because the PDP sets utilize plasma discharge operation, high voltage waveforms with high frequency are required for plasma ignition. As a result, the PDP drivers have been realized with switch-mode circuits based on a number of high-voltage switching components, such as Metal Oxide Semiconductor Field Effect Transistors (MOSFETs) or Insulated Gate Bipolar Junction Transistors (IGBTs), which have great influence on the entire module cost and performances [8–11]. In particular, the resonant circuit based sustain drivers, converting high dc voltage to ac square-wave voltage with high frequency for strong visible light emission, are regarded as a key part of the overall PDP driving system. Thus, in recent years, industrial and academic researches have introduced numerous sustain drivers to address distinctive characteristics [6–13,19–21]. However, most of the presented works have focused on operational modes and their own advantages of the specific structures, without granting relevant comparisons with other structures from standpoint of performance. As a consumer product, one of the most important performances required for the PDP drivers is circuit losses and consequent efficiency, along with costs.This paper systematically analyzes and compares current ratings and voltage ratings of switching devices, such as MOSFETs and IGBTs, in PDP sustain drivers. Current ratings as well as voltage ratings of high-voltage/high-frequency switching components are considered as important factors in evaluating switching based circuits like the PDP sustain drivers [14,15]. The switches exposed to exceeding voltage ratings lead to almost immediate destruction resulted from rapid local melting inside the devices. On the other hand, current ratings, such as mean and rms currents through switching devices, are related to losses and concomitant efficiency of the switches. The rms current ratings are more suitable for MOSFETs, since their loss mechanism is ohmic correlation. In the meantime, the IGBTs, with loss mechanism due to voltage drops across the devices, are closely associated with the mean current ratings [15]. As a result, increased voltage and current ratings of the switching devices imply increased driver cost resulted from higher rated switches and additional heat sinkers, in addition to increased losses. This paper develops, in detail, theoretical rating models of various resonant circuit based sustain drivers, which are classified according to their operational, structural, and energizing characteristics. Based on the classification, the basic principles of exemplary sustain drivers selected in respective class are addressed with distinguishing features. In addition, mathematical equations of the switch current ratings are explicitly derived in closed-form expressions. Utilizing the quantitative rating analysis, the sustain drivers selected in respective class are clearly compared. Based on analytical expressions and comparative features obtained through theoretical derivations, the resonant circuit based sustain drivers are evaluated from standpoint of switch ratings.The resonant circuit based sustain drivers are classified based on four standpoints in this paper: (1) Type of resonant energy source – the resonant circuits can be fed by a capacitive voltage source or an inductive current source. According to the energy source types, a resonant circuit flows the inductor current continuously or only during panel voltage transition. (2) Location of resonant circuit – the resonant circuits are implemented with the capacitive panel itself in either coupled or decoupled structures. The resonant circuit in the coupled configurations is placed across the X and Y sustain electrodes, while the decoupled structures entirely separate resonant circuits on the respective X or Y electrode. (3) Number of levels of panel voltage waveform – the panel voltage waveforms Vyxcan assume two (Vs, −Vs), three (Vs, 0, −Vs), or five levels (Vs, Vs/2, 0, −Vs/2, −Vs). (4) Resonance during the panel voltage commutation between zero and Vs– the panel voltage commutates from zero and Vsand vice versa with the quarter-wave, half-wave, or full-wave resonance. In this paper, seven exemplary resonant circuit based sustain drivers, classified with the above four categories, are reviewed and assessed in terms of switch ratings. Table 1shows the classifications of the seven resonant circuits based sustain drivers.The resonant circuit based sustain driver, often referred to as the Weber-type driver, is shown in Fig. 1along with the panel voltage, the inductor currents, and the conducting devices [3]. The Weber-type drive is based on the voltage-fed resonant energy source, since it charge and discharge the panel capacitor using the capacitive voltage sources, Cy1 and Cx1. Moreover, this driver is entirely separated with the panel capacitor, leading to the decoupled structure. As shown in Fig. 1(b), the resonant circuit is activated only during the commutation periods notated by Tcommto swing the panel voltage from zero to the sustain voltage Vsand vice versa, conducting the sinusoidal capacitor displacement current. The diodes, Dy1, Dy2, Dx1, and Dx2, are placed to prevent over-voltage across the inductor by providing freewheeling paths, with no active functionality for normal operation. During the period Tclamp, when the panel voltage clamps to either Vsor −Vs, the gas-discharging current flows through the panel to generate visible light. This paper does not include the switch loading of the gas-discharge current, because the waveform of the gas-discharging currents is independent of the driver structures.The inductor current of the Weber-type driver during the up-commutation period is(1)iLy(t)=VS2CPDPLsintLCPDP,if0⩽t⩽TcommFrom the operation of this driver as seen in Fig. 1(b), the commutation period Tcomm, transiting the panel voltage between Vsand zero, is related with the LC resonance period Tresas(2)Tcomm=Tres/2=πLCPDPThe mean and the rms switch currents are found by integrating the absolute current through the device and its square value over one sustain cycle Tsus, respectively [15]. Assume that the mean and the rms switch current ratings include both the current though the switch and the corresponding freewheeling diode in the rating analysis. Due to the completely symmetrical structure and operation of the Y and the X drivers, it is sufficient to consider the switch current ratings of the Y driver. The mean switch currents of the Weber-type drive can be expressed by(3)IavgYg=2IavgYr(Yf)=2IavgDyr(Dyf)=2CPDPVsfsus,IavgYs=0where fsus(=1/Tsus) denotes the sustain frequency. The rms switch currents can be calculated by(4)IrmsYg=2IrmsYr(Yf)=2IrmsDyr(Dyf)=VS2πCPDPfsusCPDPL,IrmsYs=0The peak switch currents for all the switching devices in the Weber-type driver are equal as(5)IpeakYg=IpeakYr(Yf)=IpeakDyr(Dyf)=VS2CPDPLSince the sustain switch Ysin this driver is utilized to only conduct the gas-discharging current, the current ratings of Ysin this analysis is considered to be zero.The power losses of the switching devices consist of conduction losses and switching losses. The conduction losses of an IGBT can be calculated, using the on-state voltage drop and the conducting current through the device, by(6)PSWcond=1T∫0TVCEO+RKiC(t)CFCiC(t)dtwhere VCEO, RK, ic, and CFC denote constant bias voltage drop, dynamic resistance, current through the IGBT, and curve fitted constant, respectively. The constants in (6) can be obtained from the manufacturer’s data sheet by applying a first-order curve fitting of the on-state loss characteristics, depending on the conducting currents through the switching devices [16–18]. The conduction losses of the IGBT and the diode are abbreviated to PSWcondand PDcond, respectively. The switching losses also are, similarly, determined by the switching energies, which can be expressed as an approximate first-order curve with currents through the devices at the instant of switching transition [17,18]. Acronyms of PDoff, PSWoff, and PSWondenote the diode turn-off losses, the IGBT turn-off losses, and the IGBT turn-on losses, respectively. All the devices in the Weber driver turn on and off on the zero current conditions at every turn-on and turn-off instants due to the sinusoidal inductor currents produced by the resonant operation. Thus, the switching losses occurred in this driver can be negligible, notwithstanding high switching frequency of the sustain operation. The conduction loss resulted in single IGBT, such as Yr, can be, based on (1) and (6), derived as(7)PSWcondWeber(Yr)=1Tsus∫0TcommVCEO+iLy(t)RKiLy(t)dt=CPDPVSfsusVCEO+π8VSRKCPDPLwhere fsus(=1/Tsus) denotes the sustain frequency. Moreover, the conduction loss term of the diode Dyris expressed with the bias voltage drop of diode VFOand the diode on-state resistance RDas(8)PDcondWeber(Dyr)=CPDPVSfsusVFO+π8VSRDCPDPLAll the IGBTs and the diodes used in the Weber driver are assumed to have the same device characteristics, including the bias voltage drop and the on-state resistance, respectively. Consequently, the total loss of the Weber driver, PTotal, is(9)PTotalWeber=6CPDPVSfsus(VCEO+VFO)+π8VS(RK+RD)CPDPLFrom (9), it can be concluded that the semiconductor loss of the Weber driver is affected by three parameters: the resonance parameters (CPDPand L), the switching device parameters (VCEO, RK, VFO, and RD), and the panel voltage waveform (Vsand fsus). Since the Weber driver is designed in such a way that each switching device exclusively works, the inductor current does not flow the same device twice during Tsus. Thus, the losses of the switching devices are expected to be quite balanced. The sustain IGBTs, Ysand Xs, serve to only conduct the gas-discharging currents. On the other hand, the freewheeling diodes of Ysand Xsare implemented for the purpose of protection by providing the freewheeling path of possible residual inductive energy. It should be noted that, considering that the IGBT and the corresponding freewheeling diode are generally realized with single switching package, the ground switch packages are exposed to the highest losses and the resulting thermal effects.Fig. 2presents a driver, termed as the quarter-wave driver, with the key waveforms, which is energized by the sustain voltage Vsand the ground level, instead of Vs/2 of the Weber-type driver, when charging and discharging the panel capacitor, respectively [6]. As a result, the duration of the panel voltage transition, Tcomm, in this driver is reduced by half, compared with the Weber-type driver, assuming that the same inductances and panel capacitances are used for the drivers. The possibly faster sustain operation of the quarter-wave driver can lead to the high-speed sustain operation, which is desirable for high-resolution PDP products with increased addressing lines. Moreover, the over-excited resonant circuit enables the panel voltage to fully rise up to Vsand fall down to the ground, despite of unavoidable parasitic resistance on the circuits, such as the forward voltage drop of diodes as well as on-state resistance of switches, parasitic resistance in wires and inductors. It should be noted that the diodes Dy1, Dy2, Dx1, and Dx2 are essential for functionality of the quarter-wave type driver, although the counterparts in the Weber-type driver is only aimed for the purpose of protection.The inductor current of the quarter-wave type driver can be, from the waveform in Fig. 2(b), expressed as(10)iLy(t)=VSCPDPLsintLCPDPif0⩽t⩽TcommVSL1+π2LCPDP-tifTcomm⩽t⩽Tcomm+LCPDPNote that the commutation period Tcommis equal to the one fourth of the LC resonance period Tresas(11)Tcomm=Tres/4=(π/2)LCPDPThe mean switch currents are derived as(12)ImeanYg=(5/2)CPDPVSfsus(13)ImeanYr(Yf)=ImeanDyr(Dyf)=2ImeanYs=2ImeanDy1(Dy2)=CPDPVSfsusThe rms switch currents are calculated by(14)IrmsYs=IrmsDy1(Dy2)=VSCPDPfsus3CPDPL(15)IrmsYg=VSπ2+13CPDPfsusCPDPL(16)IrmsYr(Yf)=IrmsDyr(Dyf)=VSπCPDPfsus4CPDPLThis driver has a double peak switch current rating of the Weber-type driver as(17)IpeakYg=IpeakYr(Yf)=IpeakDyr(Dyf)=IpeakDy1(Dy2)=VSCPDPLIt can be seen that the switch of the quarter-wave type driver has higher mean and rms current ratings than current ratings of the counterpart in the Weber-type driver. Moreover, unlike the Weber-type driver, the sustain switch Ys as well as the clamping diodes Dy1 and Dy2 of the quarter-wave type driver is exposed to the current ratings. The ground switch of the quarter-wave driver also has to the greatest mean and the rms current ratings, just same as the Weber-type driver.The conduction loss of the IGBTs conducting during Tcomm, such as Yr, can be, from Fig. 2(b), (6) and (11), calculated by(18)PSWcondQ-wave(Yr)=CPDPVSfsusVCEO+π4VSRKCPDPLThe diodes conducting during Tcomm, such as Dyr, generate the conduction loss by replacing VCEOand RKof the IGBT in (18) with VFOand RDof the diode. On the other hand, the diodes conducting during Tclampor Tzero, such as Dy1, produce the conduction loss written by(19)PDcondQ-wave(Dy1)=CPDPVSfsusVFO2+13VSRDCPDPLThe total conduction losses of the quarter-wave driver, PTotal_cond, is(20)PTotal_condQ-wave=6CPDPVSfsusVCEO+23VFO+VSπ4RK+49+π6RDCPDPLUnlike the Weber and the asymmetric Weber drivers, all the IGBTs and the diodes placed in the resonant network are forced to turn off once the panel voltage reaches±VS(0). Thus, the switching devices in the resonant network are driven to turn off at the highest displacement current level corresponding toVsCPDP/L, which considerably increases turn-off losses and reduces energy efficiency. Note that the ground IGBTs Ygand Xgas well as their freewheeling diodes keep on at the end of Tcomm, yielding no turn-off losses. All the IGBTs are turned on at the instant of the zero-current condition, leading to zero switch turn-on losses. Besides, although the freewheeling diodes of the sustain and the ground IGBTs as well as the clamping diodes are subject to the turn-on losses, the turn-on losses of the diodes generally negligible.As shown in Fig. 3, graphs of the switching energies of the IGBT and the diode are approximately expressed with the first-order relationship and the logarithm relationship, dependent on currents through the devices at the instant of the switching transitions, respectively. The turn-off and turn-on loss coefficients of the IGBTs, ξSWoff1, ξSWoff2, ξSWon1 and ξSWon2 as well as the diodes, ξDoff1 and ξDoff2, can be determined by the manufacturer’s data sheets by applying a first-order curve fitting of the turn-off switching energies of the IGBT and the diode, respectively [6].Considering that the current values at the turn-off instants and the number of forced turn-off operation per sustain period, the total switching losses of the quarter-wave driver, PTotal_SW, can be expressed with the IGBT turn-off loss PSWoffand the diode turn-off loss PDoffas(21)PTotal_SWQ-wave=PSWoffQ-wave+PDoffQ-wave=4fsusξSWoff1VSCPDPL+ξSWoff2+ξDoff1lnVSCPDPL+ξDoff2The switching loss of the quarter-wave driver are functions of the resonance parameters (CPDPand L), the switching device parameters (ξSWoff1, ξSWoff2, ξDoff1, and ξDoff2), and the panel voltage waveform (Vsand fsus). The total loss of the quarter-wave driver can be obtained by adding (20) and (21).In order to obtain higher luminescence by increasing Vsof PDPs, the neutral-point clamped multilevel (NPC-ML) type driver with the five- level panel voltage waveform is shown in Fig. 4, which utilizes low-voltage-rating devices [7]. As shown in Fig. 4, this driver consists of series assembly of two Weber-type drivers, where the low-side Weber-type drivers are concerned with the panel voltage between zero and (Vs/2). In the meantime, the panel voltage between (Vs/2) and Vsis processed by the high-side Weber-type driver. The inductor current is given by(22)iLy(t)=VS4CPDPLsintLCPDP,if0⩽t⩽Tcomm2The full-wave resonance occurs during the duration Tcomm, changing the panel voltage between zero and Vs, as(23)Tcomm=Tres=2πLCPDPThe mean switch currents can be expressed by(24)ImeanYg1=2ImeanYs1=4ImeanYr1(Yr2)=4ImeanYf1(Yf2)=4ImeanDyr1(Dyr2)=4ImeanDyf1(Dyf2)=2CPDPVSfsus(25)ImeanYg2=3CPDPVSfsus,ImeanYs2=0The rms switch currents are derived by(26)IrmsYg1=2IrmsYs1=2IrmsYr1(Yr2)=2IrmsYf1(Yf2)=VS2π2CPDPfsusCPDPL(27)IrmsDyr1(Dyr2)=IrmsDyf1(Dyf2)=VS4π2CPDPfsusCPDPL(28)IrmsYg2=VS43πCPDPfsusCPDPL,IrmsYs2=0This driver has a half peak switch current rating of the Weber-type driver as(29)IpeakYs1=IpeakYg1(Yg2)=IpeakYr1(Yr2)=IpeakYf1(Yf2)=IpeakDyr1(Dyr2)=IpeakDyf1(Dyf2)=VS4CPDPLAs same as the Weber-type and the quarter-wave type drivers, the ground switches Yg1 and Yg2 of the NPC-ML type driver have higher mean and rms current ratings than the sustain and the resonant switches. In particular, the upper ground switch Yg2 is exposed to the greatest mean and rms current ratings.The conduction loss of the IGBT, such as Yr1, which conducts single half sinusoidal inductor current, can be, from Fig. 4(b) and (22), calculated by(30)PSWcondNPC-ML(Yr1)=CPDPVSfsus2VCEO+π16VSRKCPDPLThe conduction loss of the diodes, such as Dyr1, which flows single half sinusoidal current during Tcomm, can be obtained from (23) by replacing VCEOand RKof the IGBT with VFOand RDof the diode. It can be, from Fig. 4(b), seen that the upper ground IGBTs Yg2 and Xg2 are exposed to the highest conduction losses, due to three the half-sinusoidal inductor current flown through the devices every sustain period. The total losses of the NPC-ML driver is(31)PTotalNPC-ML=10CPDPVSfsus(VCEO+VFO)+π16VS(RK+RD)CPDPLIn case that the switching devices are assumed to have the same on-state characteristics as the Weber driver, the total loss of the NPC-ML driver is higher than that of the Weber driver due to the increased number of the switching devices. However, the lower on-state resistances of the switches with lower blocking voltage can more or less compensate for the loss increase resulted from more switching devices.Fig. 5depicts the switched capacitor-multilevel (SC-ML) type driver, which is designed in such a way to reduce device numbers and complexity of the NPC-ML type driver as well as utilize low-voltage components [8]. This driver generates the exactly same panel voltage and inductor current waveforms as the NPC-ML drive, as shown in Fig. 5(b). Likewise, the commutation period Tcommin this driver is also equal to the LC resonance period Treslike the NPC-ML type driver. Simpler circuit structure with fewer components than the NPC-ML type driver is due to the fact that one common LC resonant circuit is utilized, compared with two distinct counterparts of the NPC-ML type driver. In addition, the driver can be characterized with the dc power supply corresponding to half of the sustain voltage, Vs/2.The mean switch currents are given by(32)ImeanYg1=2ImeanYs1=2ImeanYr(Yf)=2ImeanDyr(Dyf)=2CPDPVSfsus(33)ImeanYg2=3CPDPVSfsus,ImeanYs2=0The rms switch currents are calculated by(34)IrmsYg1=2IrmsYs1=2IrmsYr(Yf)=2IrmsDyr(Dyf)=VS2π2CPDPfsusCPDPL(35)IrmsYg2=VS43πCPDPfsusCPDPL,IrmsYs2=0The peak switch current of this driver is equal to the NPC-ML type driver in (31). It should be noted that the mean and the rms current ratings of the sustain switch Ys1 as well as the ground switches Yg1 and Yg2 in the SC-ML type driver are the same as the ratings of the counterparts in the NPC-ML driver. On the other hand, the mean and the rms current ratings of the resonant switches Yrand Yfin the SC-ML type driver is two and2times of those of the counterparts Yr1 and Yf1 in the NPC-ML type driver. This is due to the fact that two resonant circuits in the NPC-ML type driver are replaced with one resonant circuit in the SC-ML type driver.As expected from the operational principle with the common resonant network and Fig. 5(b), the conduction losses of the switching devices in the resonant network of the SC-ML driver are two times those of the NPC-ML driver. In the meantime, all the other switching devices, except the devices in the resonant network, of the SC-ML driver are exposed equal conduction losses of the counterparts in the NPC-ML driver. The lower ground switch Yg2 in the SC-ML driver generates the highest conduction loss, as same as the NPC-ML driver. As a result, the total losses of the SC-ML driver are equal to those of the NPC-ML driver in (30). Although conduction loss in the blocking diode Dybis added to keep the voltage across the capacitors Cy1 and Cy2 in practical conditions, the conduction loss is negligibly small.The current injection mode (CIM) driver is, as shown in Fig. 6, driven in such a similar way as boost converters to utilize the inductive energy, by modifying the switching operations with the same topology as the Weber-type driver [9,13]. As shown in Fig. 7, this driver builds up the inductive energy as the initial current in the resonant inductor, Iaux(up) and Iaux(down) of Fig. 6 during the current injection period δT, before starting the LC resonance with the panel capacitor, for the charging and discharging periods, respectively. Following the boosted inductor current, the resonant circuit can be activated by the capacitive voltage source in addition to the inductive current source. The augmented inductive energy can compensate for the system losses and fully swing the panel voltage between Vsand −Vs, with over-excitations controlled by the current injection period δT. The inductor current is expressed as(36)iLy(t)=VS2Lt,if0⩽t⩽δTVSδT2Lcost-δT2LCPDP+1Zsint-δT2LCPDP,ifδT⩽t⩽2Tcomm+δTSince the CIM driver utilizes both the LC resonance and the initial inductive energy, the commutation period Tcommbecomes a nonlinear function of the duration of current injection δT, the sustain voltage, the resonance inductor L, and the panel capacitor CPDPas [9](37)Tcomm=LCPDP2cos-1-11+Z(δT)2L2-tan-1Z(δT)2LwhereZ=2L/CPDP. The clamping diodes in the CIM driver, Dy1 and Dy2, are also essential components, as the quarter-wave type driver. The mean switch currents of the CIM driver are derived as(38)ImeanYr(Yf)=ImeanDyr(Dyf)=Vsfsus2L2LCPDPδTsin2Tcomm2LCPDP-2LZcos2Tcomm2LCPDP-1+2(δT)2(39)ImeanYg(Ys)=VSfsus2L(δT)2The rms switch currents are also derived as(40)IrmsYr(Yf)=IrmsDyr(Dyf)=fsus2VS2Tcomm18L2δT2+12Z2-2LCPDP4M+VS212L2δT3whereM=sin4TcommLCPDP-VS2ZLδT-1sin22TcommLCPDP(41)IrmsYs(Yg)=VSL(δT)312fsusThe peak switch currents can be calculated by(42)IpeakYr(Yf)==IpeakDyr(Dyf)=VSδT2LcosTcomm2LCPDP+1ZsinTcomm2LCPDP(43)IpeakYs(Yg)=VS2LδTIt should be noted that the switch current ratings of the CIM driver increase depending on the duration of the current injection δT. As a result, it is desirable to operate the CIM driver with small δT, from standpoint of current ratings.The total conduction loss of the switching devices in the CIM driver, using Fig. 8, and (36), can be derived as(44)PTotal_condCIM=fsus4CPDPVS(VCEO+VFO)Z(δT)2Lsin2Tcomm2LCPDP-cos2Tcomm2LCPDP+(δT)2L1CPDP+1+1+(RK+RD)VS2TcommδTL2+4Z2-2LCPDPM+VS2(δT)3L2whereM=sin4TcommLCPDP-VS2ZLδT-1sin22TcommLCPDP.The total conduction loss of the CIM driver is influenced by the current injection period δT in addition to the resonance parameters (L, CPDP), the panel voltage waveform (fsus, VS), and the devices characteristics. This is due to the fact that the current injection period δT changes the conducting interval of the devices. Besides to the conduction loss, the CIM driver generates the switching loss due to the current injection period. The sustain IGBTs (Ysand Xs) and the ground IGBTs (Ygand Xg) turn off once per sustain period with non-zero currents built up during the current injection period. On the other hand, the CIM driver generates no turn-off losses generated by the diodes, as obvious in Fig. 8. Thus, the total switching losses of the CIM driver are(45)PTotal_SWCIM=4fsusξSWoff1Vs2LδT+ξSWoff2[mW]Note that the switching loss of the CIM driver is a function of δT and is independent of the panel capacitance, since the inductor current does not flow through the panel capacitor during δT. Since the interval δT increases both the conduction loss and the switching loss as shown in (44) and (45), it is desirable to operate the CIM driver with small δT enough to compensate for the system losses, from standpoint of efficiency. The total loss of the CIM driver can be obtained from the total conduction loss in (44) and the total switching loss in (45).Differently from the decoupled type based topologies with respective resonant circuit at the X and Y electrode sides, the coupled-type driver in Fig. 8(a) places the resonant circuit across the X and Y electrodes to develop low-cost PDP drivers with reduced switching and circuit components [10,11]. The reactive energy stored in the panel capacitor itself is exchanged between the X and the Y electrodes according to activated resonant switch. The reactive energy recovered from one electrode is injected into the other electrode, as shown in Fig. 8(b). However, this coupled structure has not been favored for large-sized commercial PDPs with the X and Y electrodes split far away from each other, since connecting the resonant circuit across large-sized panels leads to appreciable leakage inductance which can exceed required resonant inductance. As a result, the coupled type driver can be exposed to a practical manufacturing difficulty, although it can be considered as the simplest structure based on the voltage fed types. The inductor current is given by(46)iLy(t)=VSCPDPLsintLCPDP,if0⩽t⩽2TcommAs seen from Fig. 8(b), the commutation period Tcomm, corresponds to the one fourth of the resonance period Tres, just as the quarter-wave type driver. The mean switch currents are related with Vs, fsus, and CPDPas(47)ImeanS1(S2)=ImeanDs1(Ds2)=2CPDPVsfsusThe rms switch currents are expressed as(48)IrmsS1(S2)=IrmsDs1(Ds2)=VSπ2CPDPfsusCPDPLDue to the quarter-wave resonance during Tcomm, the peak switch current is equal to the quarter-wave type driver in (17).The conduction loss of the IGBT, S1 or S2, can be expressed by(49)PSWcondCoupled(S1)=2CPDPVSfsusVCEO+π4VSRKCPDPLSince the conduction loss of the diode can be expressed in the similar form, it can be seen from (7), (8) and (49) that the conduction losses of single IGBT and single diode of the resonant network in the coupled type driver are about two times those of single IGBT and single diode of the resonant network in the Weber driver. The total loss of the coupled type driver is, taking the number of the switching devices of account, calculated by(50)PTotalCoupled=4CPDPVSfsus(VCEO+VFO)+π4VS(RK+RD)CPDPLThe current-fed drive shown in Fig. 9utilizes continuous inductive currents as the resonant energy source to charge and discharge the panel capacitor, instead of the capacitive voltage in the voltage-fed type topologies [11]. This driver is based on a current-fed, decoupled structure with separate inductors at the X/Y sides and augmented assistant diodes. The current-fed driver can be considered as a switch-minimized structure, because it only requires four additional diodes and two resonant inductors for the LC resonance. The external diodes are used to clamp the panel voltage with Vsor zero as well as continuously flow the inductor current during gas-discharge period Tclamp. Thus, it is expected that the switch current ratings are high due to the continuous current conduction through the switching devices.The inductor current can be expressed as(51)iLy(t)=VSLtif-LCPDP⩽t⩽0VSCPDPLsintLCPDPif0⩽t⩽TcommVSCPDPLifTcomm⩽t⩽Tclamp+Tcomm-LCPDPThe commutation period Tcomm, is equal to the one fourth of the resonance period Tres. The mean switch currents are derived by(52)ImeanYs=CPDPVSfsusTclampLCPDP-13(53)ImeanYg=CPDPVSfsusTclamp+2TzeroLCPDP+π-13(54)ImeanDys=CPDPVSfsusTclampLCPDP-12(55)ImeanDyg=CPDPVSfsusTclamp+2TzeroLCPDP+π-12The rms switch currents are also calculated by(56)IrmsYs=CPDPVSfsus12+VSCPDPLTclampLCPDP+π4-1(57)IrmsYg=CPDPVSfsus12+VSCPDPLTclamp+2TzeroLCPDP+5π4-1(58)IrmsDys=VSCPDPLfsusTclamp(59)IrmsDyg=VSCPDPLfsusTclamp+2Tzero+πLCPDPSince this driver is based on the quarter-wave resonance during Tcomm, the peak current is given by (17).The conduction loss of the sustain switch, Ysor Xs, can be derived as(60)PSWcondSW-min(Ys)=CPDPVSfsusVCEOTclampLCPDP+RKVSCPDPLTclampLCPDP+π4In addition, the ground switch, Ygor Xg, generate the conduction loss calculated by(61)PSWcondSW-min(Yg)=2CPDPVSfsusVCEOLCPDPTclamp+Tzero+π2+RKVSCPDPLTclamp+TzeroLCPDP+5π8The diode conduction loss resulted from Dysor Dxsis written by(62)PDcondSW-min(Dys)=CPDPVSfsusVFOTclampLCPDP-12+RDVSCPDPLTclampLCPDP-23The conduction loss of Dygor Dxgis expressed by(63)PDcondSW-min(Dyg)=2CPDPVSfsusVFOTclamp+TzeroLCPDP-14+π2+RDVSCPDPLTclamp+TzeroLCPDP-13+π2Furthermore, the conduction loss of the freewheeling diode, Ys, Yg, Xs, or Xg, can be expressed as(64)PDcondSW-min(Ys(FD))=CPDPVSfsusVFO2+RDVS3CPDPLThe total conduction loss of the current-fed driver is(65)PTotal_condSW-min=2CPDPVSfsus(VCEO+VFO)LCPDP(3Tclamp+2Tzero)+πVCEO+πVFOLCPDP+(RK+RD)CPDPVSLCPDP3Tclamp+2TzeroLCPDP+3π2RK+π-23RDAs shown in (65), the conduction loss of the current-fed driver, unlike all the voltage-fed drivers, depends on the parameters of the panel voltage waveform, such as Tclampand Tzero, due to the continuous inductor current. In addition to the conduction loss, the sustain IGBTs (Ysand Xs) and the ground IGBTs (Ygand Xg) generate the switching losses, because they turn off once per sustain period at the instants of the peak inductor current. Thus, the total switching losses of the current-fed driver are(66)PTotal_SWSW-min=4fsusξSWoff1VsCPDPL+ξSWoff2The switching loss of the current-fed driver is influenced by the same parameters as the quarter-wave driver. The total loss of this driver can be obtained with adding (65) and (67).As obvious from the quantitative analysis of the drivers, the mean and the rms switch currents of the resonant circuit based sustain drivers depend on the sustain voltage Vs, the sustain frequency fsus, the panel capacitance CPDP, the resonant inductance L, and the durations Tcomm, Tclamp, and Tzero. Therefore, the effects of those parameters on the switch current ratings are investigated and compared to assess the reviewed sustain drivers. For reasonable rating comparisons, all the drivers are assumed with Tzero=0, since the CIM driver and the coupled-type driver generate the panel voltage waveform without Tzero. Furthermore, the same commutation period Tcommis assigned, with given CPDP, for all the drivers, by adjusting the resonant inductances on the basis of the inductance of the Weber-type driver as(67)Lweber=Lquarter-wave4=Lcurrent-fed4=Lcoupled4=4LNPC-ML=4LSC-MLThe inductance of the CIM driver is also adjusted for equal Tcommby (37).With those conditions, the total mean switch current ratings, accounting for all the switching devices in the respective sustain driver, are illustrated in Fig. 10. Fig. 10(a) shows the total mean switch currents as a function of Vs, with CPDP=100 nF, Lweber=250 nH, Tcomm=0.5 μsec, Tclamp=1.5 μsec, and fsus=200kHz. It is seen that the mean current ratings increase in proportion to the increasing Vs. In particular, the rating of the current-fed driver is highest influenced by the increase of Vs. Fig. 10(b) shows the total mean switch currents as a function of Tcomm, with CPDP=100 nF, Tclamp=1.5 μsec, and Vs=200 V. The current injection period δT of the CIM driver is set to 15 percent of Tclamp. Since increasing Tcommresults in the decreased fsuswith the fixed Tclampas well as the increased L with the fixed CPDP, the mean switch currents reduce with the increasing Tcomm. Especially, the current-fed driver is more sensitive to the increase of Tcommthan the other structures. Fig. 10(c) shows the total mean switch currents as a function of Tclamp, with CPDP=100 nF, Lweber=250 nH, Tcomm=0.5 μsec, and Vs=200 V. Because increasing Tclampleads to the decreasing sustain frequency fsusdue to the fixed Tcomm, the mean switch currents of all the drivers except the current-fed type driver reduce with the increasing Tclamp. Note that, as obvious from 52–55, the current-fed driver increases the mean current ratings with the increasing Tclampdue to the continuous inductor currents flowing during Tclamp. Fig. 10(d) shows the total mean switch currents as a function of fsus, with CPDP=100 nF and Vs=200 V. The durations, Tcommand Tclamp, are set to 0.1Tsusand 0.3Tsus, respectively. The mean current ratings are proportional to the increasing fsus. As same as Fig. 10(a), the rating of the current-fed type driver is more sensitive to the increase of fsusthan all the other structures. Fig. 10(e) shows the total mean switch currents as a function of CPDP, with Tclamp=1.5 μsec and Vs=200 V. Increasing the panel capacitance increases the mean switch current ratings. It can be concluded from Fig. 10(a)–(e) that the current-fed driver is, in most cases, exposed to higher mean switch current rating than all the voltage-fed type drivers. As expected, this is due to the fact that the switches of the current-fed driver continuously flow the inductor currents, while the switches of the voltage-fed type drivers conduct only during panel voltage commutation. Among the drivers based upon the voltage-fed types, the coupled-type driver has the smallest mean switch current rating, because it is the simplest structure based on the voltage fed types. In addition, the Weber-type driver shows the best performance in terms of the mean switch current ratings, among the decoupled type structures. The SC-ML type and NPC-ML type drivers exhibit the same mean switch current ratings, as expected from (24), (25), (32) and (33).Fig. 11illustrates the comparison results of the total rms switch current ratings in the sustain drivers, with all the parameters used in Fig. 10. It is seen that the current-fed and the NPC-ML type drivers show relatively high rms switch current ratings. As same as the mean switch current ratings, the coupled-type driver has the best performance from the rms switch current rating point of view. Furthermore, the Weber-type driver exhibits good performances for the rms switch current ratings, in addition to the mean switch current ratings. It should be noted that the SC-ML type driver shows better performances in the rms current ratings than the NPC-ML type drivers.The comparison results of the total peak switch currents are demonstrated in Fig. 12with all the parameters used in Fig. 10. Note that the peak currents are independent of the duration Tclamp. It is seen that the NPC-ML type drivers show the worst performance of the peak current ratings, because it has more switching devices of high peak current ratings than other drivers. The quarter-wave type driver also shows high peak switch current ratings, due to its operating principle utilizing the over-excited resonant energy sources. On the other hand, the coupled-type driver has the best performance of the peak current ratings. The SC-ML driver shows the superior peak current ratings to the NPC-ML driver, due to the reduced number of switching devices.The coefficients for the on-state and the switching energy characteristics of the switching devices are obtained from the manufacturer’s data sheet. The data for the IGBT and the diode are chosen from a Fairchild IGBT for PDP applications (FGPF4633) with 330 V and 300 A ratings as well as a freewheeling diode of International Rectifier IGBT (IRGP4072DPbF) with 300 V and 120 A ratings, respectively. A constant junction temperature of Tj=125°C is used for the loss performance calculation. Based on the curve fitting methods, the constants with relation to the conduction loss are set to VCEO=0.82 V, RK=18m for the IGBTs and VFO=0.75 V, RD=6.1m for the diodes. Besides, the coefficients in regard of the switching energies are determined by ξSWon1=0.0031, ξSWon2=0.0306, ξSWoff1=0.0182, ξSWoff2=0.0424 for the IGBT, and ξDoff1=0.4410, ξDoff2=0.7656 for the diode. The on-state resistances of the switching devices in the NPC-ML and the SC-ML drivers are assumed to be half on-state resistances of the other drivers, to account for their reduced voltage ratings.The loss performances under the nominal conditions, dependency on the loss performances of parameter changes is examined and compared from Figs. 13–17. The parameters influencing the semiconductor losses are varied below and above 50% of the nominal values. Fig. 13 shows the plot of the losses as a function of VS, with CPDP=100 nF, LWeber=253 nH, Tcomm=0.5 μsec, Tclamp=1.5 μsec, and fsus=200kHz. The curves show that the semiconductor losses of all the drivers increase in proportion to the increasing VSbecause increasing the sustain voltage leads to higher inductor currents, yielding increased conduction and switching losses. The losses of the drivers as a function of the sustain frequency are shown in Fig. 14, with CPDP=100 nF and VS=200 V. The durations, Tcommand Tclamp, are adjusted to maintain 0.1Tsusand 0.3Tsus, respectively, in accordance with the varying sustain frequency. Different inductances of the drivers are used to obtain equal Tcomm. As shown in Fig. 14, the losses increase proportionally to the increasing fsus, because increasing the sustain frequency leads to both the increasing conduction and the increasing switching losses. It is particularly seen that the total losses of the quarter-wave driver are greatly influenced by the increase of the sustain voltage and frequency due to the high switching loss. In addition, the current-fed driver shows considerably strong dependency on the increasing VSand fsus, due to its rectangular inductor current waveform.In order to explore the dependency on the losses of the commutation speed, the losses versus Tcommare depicted in Fig. 15, where Tclampis fixed to 1.5 μsec, CPDP=100 nF, and VS=200 V. Inductances of the drivers are changed according to the varying Tcomm. The losses of all the drivers reduce with the increasing Tcomm, which implies a slower commutation operation. This is due to the fact that the slow commutation speed of the drivers results in lower inductor currents, which reduces the conduction and the switching losses. Similar to those shown in Figs. 13 and 14, the losses of the quarter-wave and the current-fed driver are more sensitive to the increase of Tcommthan the other drivers. Fig. 16 shows the losses as a function of the clamping duration Tclampwith Tcomm=0.5 μsec, CPDP=100 nF, LWeber=250 nH, and VS=200 V. Since the interval Tclampis assigned for the gas-discharge current to flow through the panel, decreasing Tclampmeans fast gas-discharge operation. Because increasing Tclampleads to the decreasing sustain frequency fsusdue to the fixed Tcomm, the losses of all the drivers are reduced with the increasing Tclamp. The loss performances versus CPDPis illustrated in Fig. 17, with Tclamp=1.5 μsec and VS=200 V. Increasing the panel capacitance increases the losses.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
