@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
PARP-S: A secure piggybacking-based ARP for IEEE 802.11s-based Smart Grid AMI networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We identify ARP broadcast problem in 802.11s.We propose a secure piggybacking-based ARP for 802.11s-based Smart Grid networks.We propose several modifications to Hybrid Wireless Mesh Protocol (HWMP).Piggybacking-based ARP reduces the end to end delay significantly.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Smart Grid AMI,IEEE 802.11s-based Neighborhood Area Network,Secure address resolution protocol,ARP piggybacking,Elliptic curve digital signature algorithm,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The Smart Grid is expected to utilize a wireless infrastructure for power data collection in its Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI) applications. One of the options to implement such a network infrastructure is to use a wireless mesh network based on IEEE 802.11s mesh standard. However, IEEE 802.11s standard relies on MAC-based routing and thus requires the availability of MAC addresses of destinations. Due to large size of AMI networks, this creates a broadcast storm problem when such information is to be obtained via Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) broadcast packets. In this paper, we propose a mechanism to significantly alleviate such broadcast storm problem in order to improve the scalability of 802.11s and thus make it better suited for Smart Grid AMI applications. Our contribution is adapting 802.11s standard for addressing ARP broadcast storm problem in a secure and efficient manner. Specifically, we utilize the proactive Path Request (PREQ) packet and Path Reply (PREP) of layer-2 path discovery protocol of 802.11s, namely HWMP, for piggybacking ARP information. In this way, the MAC address resolution is handled during routing tree creation/maintenance and hence the broadcasting of ARP requests by the smart meters (SMs) to learn the MAC address of the data collector (i.e., the gateway/root node) is completely eliminated. Furthermore, since piggybacking the ARP via PREQ may pose vulnerabilities for possible ARP cache poisoning attacks, the data collector also authenticates the messages it sends to SMs by using Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm (ECDSA). We have extensively analyzed the behavior and overhead of the proposed mechanism using implementation of IEEE 802.11s in ns-3 simulator. The evaluations for both UDP and TCP show that compared to the original ARP broadcast operations, our approach reduces the end-to-end delay significantly without negatively impacting the packet delivery ratio and throughput.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The upcoming Smart Grid is envisioned to use communication networks for two-way flow of data that will be generated from several new applications [1]. Some of these applications include Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI), Demand Response (DR), Wide Area Situational Awareness, Distributed Generation, etc. These applications will run on different components of Smart Grid communication network including Neighborhood Area Networks, Home Area Network and Wide Area Networks [2]. For each of these network components, various underlying infrastructure alternatives and standards based on wireless, fiber, powerlines, etc. are being considered for development [2].IEEE 802.11s-based Wireless Mesh Networks is one of the underlying data communication networks touted for Neighborhood Area Network applications [1]. One of the components of the upcoming Smart Grid is the AMI which is envisioned to be run on a Neighborhood Area Network. Specifically, each SM will be equipped with a 802.11 radio device and use the Neighborhood Area Network to send their power readings to a gateway node which can further relay them to the utility company for billing and analysis. In this way, the customer power network will be divided into clusters each is headed by a gateway node. Obviously, there may be advantages and disadvantages of this solution compared to other options such as using 4G, WiMax or powerline communications. We would like to note that the goal of this paper is not to compare these communication options as such works already exist [3]. We only mention that using a Wireless Mesh Network based solution has its advantages and there are a lot of utility companies adopting this solution so far [4].Creation of Smart Grid AMI Wireless Mesh Networks pose some challenges since such networks will be far larger than the traditional small-scale Wireless Mesh Networks and expected to carry a heavier traffic and two-way traffic (e.g., due to DR and control messages from the utility [5]). Since large-scale real-life deployment of Wireless Mesh Networks and performance issues with increased network diameter has not been well investigated [6], more research is needed to adapt IEEE 802.11s protocol for Smart Grid Neighborhood Area Networks applications given that the standard has just been released and its real-life deployments are limited.One of such issues that need attention is the overhead of Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) broadcasts in large scale networks. The IEEE 802.11s standard operates at the Media Access Control (MAC) layer and uses Hybrid Wireless Routing Protocol (HWMP) as its default routing protocol to find a multi-hop path towards the destination. HWMP uses MAC addresses in all of its operations. However, the applications running on the Smart Grid are all based on Internet Protocol (IP) [7]. This means each node only knows the destination IP address if a communication is to be established. However, when the data packets reach the 802.11s-based Neighborhood Area Networks from outside (e.g., from the utility company), the gateway node needs to know the MAC address of the destination for routing. As a result, each time, the corresponding MAC address of the destination IP address needs to be searched in the ARP table at the gateway [8]. If the IP address is not found in the ARP table, an ARP request packet will be broadcast in a multi-hop fashion within the mesh network. Note that this is not a one-time overhead. Similar ARP requests will be sent periodically when the ARP alive time-out parameter of the gateway in the ARP table expires. The problem is compounded if TCP protocol is used. In that case, the gateway node needs to acknowledge the receipt of the packets from all the SMs and thus it will need to know the MAC address of each SM which requires additional ARP broadcasts.This paper addresses this ARP flooding problem and proposes an efficient and secure ARP that is based on piggybacking idea when routes are searched in the network. We name it Piggybacked-ARP (PARP) thereafter. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work which deals with this ARP flooding problem in the context of Smart Grid AMI application. The main motivation is to eliminate these broadcasts by utilizing the already existing proactive PREQ packets of HWMP to carry the MAC address information. To this end, we modify the HWMP protocol and include the MAC address of the gateway node in each proactive PREQ packet. Note that this approach works for Universal Datagram Protocol (UDP). In the case of Transmission Control Protocol (TCP), since a three-way handshake is required (i.e., SYN–SYN/ACK–ACK) for establishing a communication, more things needs to be done. Hence, PREP packets from each SM are also extended to include the MAC address of each SM so that the gateway node will have the mappings between the MAC and IP addresses of each SM.While PARP eliminates the ARP broadcast storm problem, it becomes vulnerable to ARP cache poisoning attack since it involves broadcasting of ARP as part of PREQ packet. ARP cache poisoning involves broadcasts of unsolicited and fake ARP replies to change the ARP tables at the nodes. One possible solution to this problem in the literature is the rejection of unsolicited ARP replies [9]. However, since this approach cannot be applied to our extended proactive PREQ packet, we propose to add authentication for the extended proactive PREQ and PREP packets. In this way, no fake extended PREQ and PREP can be sent since they will not be authenticated. This secure version of PARP is referred to as PARP-Secure (PARP-S) in the rest of the paper.We conducted an extensive performance evaluation of PARP and its secure version PARP-S by implementing them under ns-3 simulator which has a built-in draft implementation of IEEE 802.11s. We observed that the proposed PARP and PARP-S can significantly reduce the end-to-end delay while maintaining the same packet delivery and throughput performance when compared to the existing solution. Furthermore, we showed that the security protection on the extended PREQ/PREP packets does not have a major impact on the performance.This paper has many components that are important contributions from the perspective of IEEE 802.11s which is a relatively new standard that has not been explored much. First of all, we change the way HWMP works by modifying the packet structure as well as the algorithm. Secondly, we study the problem of ARP broadcasts in the context of 802.11s: (1) to optimize the several parameters that are vital to the operation of 802.11s; (2) to compare with several other baselines and assess the performance in a variety of conditions.This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides background on 802.11s, HWMP, ARP and the problem motivation and definition. Section 3 describes the proposed PARP and PARP-S approaches. Section 4 presents the performance evaluation of our proposed approaches. Section 5 discusses the related works. Section 6 summarizes our results and concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
