@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Characteristics of polycrystalline Si TFTs fabricated on glass substrates by excimer laser annealing with nickel-sputtered amorphous Si films

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Poly-Si TFTs were fabricated by ELA process using Ni-sputtered a-Si films.The content of Ni was a key parameter for the performance of poly-Si TFTs.Relationship between the characteristics of TFTs and grain was obtained.We present the Ni-content needed for the optimized performance of poly-Si TFT.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Thin film transistors (TFTs),Excimer Laser Annealing (ELA),Poly-Si TFTs,Amorphous Si crystallization,Large sized displays,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We have fabricated two kinds of thin film transistors (TFTs) on the glass substrates using polycrystalline silicon (poly-Si) thin films with small and large grain sizes processed by Excimer Laser Annealing (ELA) and carried out a comparative analysis. The grain size was controlled by nickel atom content in amorphous silicon (a-Si) thin films. With increasing grain size of poly-Si thin films, the carrier mobility increased from 40.8 to 54.4cm2/Vs and the absolute value of threshold voltage reduced from 2.1 to 1.5V. The observed improvements in the electrical characteristics of poly-Si TFTs are attributed mainly to the reduction of defect density rendered by large grain size. These observations indicate that the sputtered nickel atom content in a-Si layer is a key parameter in determining the characteristics of ELA processed TFTs fabricated on the glass substrates.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Poly-Si TFTs have been attracting an increasing interest due to their potential application in large-area display electronics. Typically, poly-Si thin films can be obtained either via direct deposition of poly-Si thin films using chemical vapor deposition (CVD) or crystallization of a-Si thin film by thermal or laser annealing. Among these various methods to crystallize a-Si, ELA process has attracted much research interest as an alternative fabrication method because of its advantageous characteristics such as low temperature process above all and also its simplicity. Moreover, it has been reported that the ELA process produces highly-qualified poly-Si thin films, resulting in a significant improvement in the electrical characteristics of TFTs [1–4].In this work, we sputtered nickel atoms on the a-Si layer and have studied the correlation between the grain size of poly-Si layer which was controllable by nickel atom density and electrical characteristics of TFTs fabricated by ELA process. Contrary to the previous reports which used conventional heat treatment methods to crystallize nickel sputtered a-Si [5–8], ELA process was employed in this study to utilize its advantages, explained above. The reaction of nickel-silicide on Si(100) substrate [9] and simultaneous nickel silicidation and silicon crystallization [10] on plastic substrate by ELA procedure have been reported. At here, we used glass as a substrate of which demand is increasing consistently for large sized display electronics. The grain size of the poly-Si thin films, synthesized by laser induced crystallization (LIC), was controlled by the content of nickel atoms which were sputtered on a-Si thin films by nickel DC sputtering. With increasing grain size, the electrical characteristics of the poly-Si TFTs are enhanced even with a roughened surface of the poly-Si channels during the ELA process. The observed improvement of the poly-Si TFTs are attributed to the lowered defect density, originates from the increased grain size of the poly-Si channels by an appropriate nickel sputtering. These results demonstrate that the grain size of the poly-Si channels is controllable by the content of nickel atoms in a-Si layer and plays an important role in determining the electrical characteristics of poly-Si TFTs.To fabricate TFTs, we used Corning 1737 glasses with an area of 370×400mm as substrates. The overall fabrication procedure of the poly-Si TFTs has been reported in detail in previous [9]. In particular, in this study, an extremely small amount of nickel atoms were sputter deposited on the 500Å thick a-Si film followed by LIC procedure. As shown in Fig. 1, nickel layer with a thickness of sub-angstrom was uniformly deposited at the power of 100W by using nickel DC sputtering system equipped with a nonmagnetic cathode and target scanner (the nickel target with a width of 40mm is scanned in a speed of 5m/min). The working pressure of the deposition chamber and flow rate of Ar gas were 5.5×10−1Torr and 10sccm (sccm denotes cubic centimeter per minute at standard temperature and pressure), respectively.At here, the nickel concentration in the LIC processed poly-Si thin films is categorized into two groups. For the first, nickel target was scanned 0.5 time during the deposition of nickel layer on the a-Si thin film whereas the repetition of the scan was changed to 3 times for the second; 0.5 time scanned means a single scan of nickel target only in a single direction since 1 time scan signifies the target movement to the forward direction accompanied by a return to the original position. Throughout this paper, we call the poly-Si thin films associated in first and second groups as 0.5-scanned and 3-scanned, respectively. For 0.5-scanned, the resultant nickel content in a-Si film is ∼1.6×1012 for an area of 1cm×1cm while that for 3-scanned is ∼1013. We also added the data of surface morphology and current–voltage characteristics of the poly-Si TFT fabricated without nickel sputtering process (0-scanned) for comparison purpose.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study, we have studied the correlation between the nickel atoms content and electrical characteristics of TFTs fabricated by ELA process from nickel sputtered a-Si. It has been found that the density of nickel atoms scattered on a-Si determines the grain size of poly-Si after ELA process. For the 0.5-scanned poly-Si TFT with relatively large grain sized poly-Si channel, the carrier mobility enhanced from 40.8 to 54.4cm2/Vs compared to the 3-scanned poly-Si TFT of small grain sized poly-Si channel while the absolute value of threshold voltage (sub-threshold swing) were decreased from 2.1 to 1.5V (from 0.44 to 0.38V/dec). These observed improvements in the electrical characteristics are attributed mainly to the decrease in the absolute number of grain boundaries (or the absolute number of grain-boundary trap states) due to the increased grain size.