@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Reading performance and visual fatigue when using electronic paper displays in long-duration reading tasks under various lighting conditions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Electronic paper displays with large screen have faster reading speed.Both sun light and fluorescent light are proper for reading on E-paper display.Ambient illuminances 1000lx and 1500lx have better visual performance.Ambient illuminances 200lx have more visual fatigue.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Electronic paper display,Visual performance,Visual fatigue,Ambient illuminance,Light source,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this study, the effects of ambient illuminance and light source on participants’ reading performance and visual fatigue during a long reading task were investigated using three electronic paper displays. Reading on electronic paper displays was also compared with reading on paper. In Experiment 1, 100 participants performed a reading task where the display area for the text was equated for the displays. The results indicated that participants’ visual performance and visual fatigue did not differ significantly among different electronic paper displays, ambient illuminance conditions, or light sources. In Experiment 2, another 60 participants performed the same reading task where the full screen of each electronic paper display was used to present the text. The results showed that reading speed differed significantly across different electronic paper displays and ambient illuminance levels. The reading speed was slower for displays with smaller screens and increased as the ambient illuminance increased. Changes in the critical flicker fusion frequency significantly differed across ambient illuminance levels. Implications of the results for the use of electronic paper displays are discussed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The electronic paper display is now the most popular of the new types of visual displays, owing to the enormous success of Amazon Kindle, which uses a reflective-type display that differs markedly from the conventional transmissive-type liquid–crystal display (LCD). Unlike a transmissive-type LCD, which uses a backlight as its pixel light source, a reflective-type display reflects ambient light as does ordinary paper and can display text and images indefinitely without additional power. The available commercial electronic paper devices include Amazon Kindle, Sony PRS-700, and iRex Reader. Although these electronic paper displays have been in the market for a number of years, ergonomics studies of such devices are limited. Isono et al. [1] conducted an experiment in which 13 college students read with an electronic paper display and with conventional paper for 90min. The results showed no significant differences in the level of visual fatigue between electronic reading and conventional reading. Jeng et al. [2] reported that the legibility of text on electronic paper displays depends on the illuminance intensity but not on the light source, and that conventional paper had a higher visual comfort rating than electronic paper although both supported similar performance in a letter-search task.Many factors influence visual performance and visual fatigue when using displays, e.g., the display medium, light source, ambient illuminance, polarity, and target-to-background luminance contrast. Ambient illuminance is an important factor in video display terminal (VDT) design. Many recommendations exist regarding the level of ambient illuminance. For cathode ray tube (CRT) workstations, an ambient lighting of 200–500lx is generally suggested. The choice of illuminance level greatly depends on the task [3]. Ostberg [4] reported that a lower ambient illuminance might be more appropriate for CRT work. Xu and Zhu [5] studied the effect of ambient illuminance and found that performance deteriorated as ambient illuminance increased.Regarding the effect of illuminance on visual performance and fatigue when using an electronic paper display, Lin et al. [6] found that illuminance had no significant effect on accuracy of visual tasks on electronic paper. Lee et al. [7] found that ambient illuminance had no significant effect on accuracy performance but had a significant effect on search speed. Shieh and Lee [8] found that different illuminances (200, 700, and 2000lx) resulted in significantly different preferred viewing distances and screen angles. Higher illuminances (700 and 2000lx) resulted in longer preferred viewing distances and smaller screen angles. They suggested that reflective-type displays may require higher illuminance (700lx or higher). Wang et al. [9] and Wang et al. [10] pointed out that participants’ visual performance with electronic paper displays was significantly different under various ambient illuminances. In general, the abovementioned studies have found that the required ambient illuminance for electronic displays is higher than that for CRT or LCD displays and that the proper range may be about 500–1000lx. The above suggestion was based on short-duration experiments using simple word identification tasks. However, an electronic paper display is typically used for reading text, and the reading time can last for hours. Furthermore, visual fatigue occurs mostly after long periods of reading. Thus, a short-duration word identification task may be inappropriate for evaluating the visual performance and visual fatigue when using an electronic paper display. Moreover, these studies evaluated an old-type Kolin electronic (Ch–LC) display and Sony e-book, which were not mainstream in the market. Consequently, there is a need to explore the visual performance and visual fatigue experienced when using popular electronic paper displays (e.g., Sony Reader, Amazon Kindle, and iRex Reader) in a long-duration reading task and how they compare with those when performing the same task on ordinary paper.In recent years, a number of studies on electronic paper displays [2,8,7] have reported that the effect of the light source is limited; for example, a sunlight lamp (D65) was similar to a fluorescent lamp (TL84) but better than a tungsten lamp (F). However, these studies also focused on word identification tasks. Whether the results are similar for a long-duration reading task is unclear.Many studies have compared reading on displays with reading on paper [11,12]. Slower reading speed, lower accuracy, greater fatigue, and less subjective preference were found when reading on displays [13,14]. Regarding the effect of the display medium on higher cognitive ability such as text comprehension, some studies [11] concluded that comprehension was not different for material presented on paper or displays. However, Cushman [15] found that reading speed and comprehension have an inverse relationship; for example, slower readers show better comprehension. Thus, although the display medium appears to have little effect on comprehension of reading material, it may affect reading speed and indirectly influence comprehension. However, most of the above studies focused on CRT or LCD displays and did not compare paper and electronic displays. Consequently, there is a need to explore the effects of electronic paper display media, ambient illuminance, and light source on reading performance and visual fatigue during long periods of reading.In summary, electronic paper displays may replace conventional paper, books, and magazines in the future. Studies on electronic paper displays are very limited, and existing studies have used visual search or identification tasks and employed search speed or accuracy as dependent measures. Studies that measure higher cognitive performance and visual fatigue in long-duration reading tasks are required. In this study, we investigated the effects of ambient illuminance (200, 500, and 1000lx, with 1500lx added in Experiment 2) and light source (TL84 and D65) on participants’ reading comprehension and visual fatigue using three electronic paper displays (Amazon Kindle DX, Sony Reader PRS-505-SC, and iRex 1000S). A comparison was also made between reading on electronic paper displays and on ordinary paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study, users’ visual performance and visual fatigue were investigated when reading using different electronic paper displays under different ambient illuminances and light sources. The findings and suggestions are as follows:(1)When the text display areas are identical, the three electronic paper displays are similar and comparable to paper in terms of visual performance and visual fatigue.With the full screen used for text presentation in each individual display, the three electronic paper displays are different, and displays with larger screens and hence fewer text pages support faster reading speeds.Both sunlight (D65) and fluorescent light (TL84) are proper light sources for reading on electronic paper displays.Ambient illuminances of 1000 and 1500lx support better visual performance, and those of 500 and 1000lx cause less visual fatigue than an illuminance of 200lx when reading on electronic paper displays.