@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Visualizing complex processes on large screen displays: Design principles based on the Information Rich Design concept

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Large screen displays should be designed from the ground up.We have built an approach that we call Information Rich Design.Use of pattern recognition and animation of new alarms tested well.Grey colour layering was difficult through video projectors.We propose design principles for large screen displays for complex processes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Large screen display,Complex processes,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Large screen display technology has in recent years become available to industrial control rooms as a supplement to smaller displays. Due to the greater complexity and scale, measured in meters, not inches, it is now a challenge to design for readability and Situation Awareness. Information Rich Design is a design concept for large displays used in many real-life complex processes for almost a decade. The concept simplifies the understanding of large data sets through alignment and Gestalt grouping of process data through a few generic process objects.This paper describes recent design modifications where new functionality is integrated into existing graphical objects, keeping the original simplicity. This paper proposes design principles for large screen displays based on theoretical discussions of Situation Awareness and a user test using crews of certified operators. The user test shows positive results on pattern recognition of process data and a newly developed animation of unacknowledged alarms; however, the concept still suffers from colour and readability issues.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Industry control rooms are in a process of change; large hardwired panels displaying information through analogue indicators are being phased out in favour of computerized interfaces. Even in conservative domains such as nuclear power plants, old analogue technology is being replaced with desk mounted operator stations offering great flexibility and low-cost system upgrade potential.Vicente et al. [1] found however several difficulties by this approach. In a field study of older nuclear power plant control rooms, they pointed particularly to the unfortunate keyhole effect: “there are not enough CRTs to comprehensively monitor all of the control systems status displays”. This view is supported by a more recent study on conventional and nuclear power plant by Salo et al. [2]. They concluded that it has become more difficult to get the instantaneous process state overview on desktop workstations than through large panels.More recently, control rooms have begun to take advantage of large screen display (LSD) technology as a supplement to smaller operator stations, having the potential to increase situation awareness (SA) through the big-picture and to reduce keyhole-related problems. Several studies suggest that the use of LSDs is beneficial. Ball et al. [3] found that users prefer physical navigation in visualizing tasks; and that LSDs also improved user performance. Recent work by Endert et al. [4], suggested however that the choice of visual encodings in large displays directly affected users’ performance. Andrews et al. [5] found that it is not just a matter of scaling up existing visualizations intended for smaller displays.The Norwegian Institute for Energy (IFE) in Halden has developed several LSDs for research purposes. The old Halden Boiling Water Reactor (HAMBO) LSD [6] in Fig. 1is used on a large-scale nuclear reactor simulator. It represents a traditional graphical design approach using a mimic layout with flow-lines, colour layering as described by van Laar [7], and digital numbers representing process values. It has however in addition some more advanced features such as small trends and integrated bar graphs.As an alternative to digital numbers, Burns and Hajdukiewicz [8] suggested using easy perceivable qualitative indicators for Ecological Interface Design. More recently, the ASM Consortium by Reising and Bullemer [9] has taken an innovative approach on smaller desk-mounted overview displays, using such qualitative direct-perception indicators. On display layout, they suggested using a functional grouping of indicators instead of the traditional mimic type with flow-lines. Tharanathan et al. [10] showed promising results were these overview displays contributed positively on operator’s SA.More advanced than the old HAMBO display is the Information Rich Design (IRD) concept. IRD was developed at IFE for more than a decade as a scientifically from the ground-up LSD concept for complex processes. It’s main objective is to address human capabilities visualizing the big picture, while presenting process information seen at-a-glance. Where the more recent ASM Consortium approach is more comprehensive, combining several graphical elements (dials, horizontal and vertical bars, etc.), the focus of IRD is to simplify larger data-sets through only a few, generic design patented elements visualizing pressure, temperature, liquid levels, etc. The concept combines this with traditional process symbols on valves, compressors etc.IRD graphical objects simplify larger data sets through alignment and Gestalt grouping. This is enabled through part-wise mathematical normalization of the process variables measuring scale, see Fig. 2.The IRD approach has proved to work in real-life applications across several domains; it is used in more than 13 LSD applications in Norwegian petroleum industry and later in mining. The concept is realized in two research applications in the nuclear domain, the first generation Loviisa LSD, and second generation HAMBO LSD.Unfortunately, so far the IRD concept has not formalized design principles usable for others. Since most other concepts for real-life complex processes are developed for smaller displays, we recognize that there is a need to formalize design principles for larger displays:•Which type of process display objects is suitable?How to visualize alarm information?What type of display layout is suitable?This paper first discusses LSDs in context of SA, looking at related work by others, next how the original IRD graphical objects were modified for the second-generation HAMBO LSD. Then a user-test is performed on this LSD to see if modifications were successfully on: Colours, pattern recognition of process data and alarm visualization. Based on this, we propose design principles for large displays and outline some further research topics.Early IRD publications [11,12] discussed the need for a design concept that supports rapid visual perception through Rasmussen’s Skills-Rules-Knowledge taxonomy, Tufte on high data/ink ratio and colour layering. More recent publications [13,14] focused on how the IRD concept were realized on LSDs. Laarni et al. [15] provided a user-test of a first generation IRD display.Endsley et al. [16], described Situation Awareness (SA) as: “being aware of what is happening around you and understanding what that information means to you now and in the future”. The potential for difficulties in maintaining SA is well established in relation to complex large-scale processes. Durso et al. [17] found problems with SA to be a factor in both aviation and industrial accidents. Reising and Bullemer [9] used the SA concept in relation to overview displays for hydrocarbon processing industry. In the following, we discuss IRD large displays in context of Endsley’s description of SA.Endsley et al. described the first SA level as: “perception of the elements in the environment”. For LSDs this suggests that sufficient information should be presented in a way that is easily readable and understandable for the operator, understanding the plant situation. We find Tufte’s [18] goal of creating data-rich illustrations to be valuable in this. He advocated the use of a high data-ink ratio, focusing on data, not ornaments or chart-junk. Tufte’s work is, however, mostly concerned with data on printed-paper. Gillan and Sorensen [19] applied however Tufte’s concepts to computer displays. Their results suggested that indicators and backgrounds should be given distinct different visual features.Endsley et al. referred to challenges in complex domains due to information that competes for the operator attention. We find this particularly appropriate in context of complex larger scaled displays. To avoid masking primary data, a colour layering technique as described by van Laar [7] can be applied. van Laar and Deshe [20] demonstrated faster search times with these displays than with monochrome or non-layered colour displays.Make the display information-rich, present many cues describing the plant-state. Colour layering is suitable to avoid masking primary data. Visual salience should match the importance of process plant information.Endsley et al. described the second SA level as: “comprehension of the current situation”. This can be understood as to integrate the level one SA elements in relation to goals and objectives. For LSDs, this suggests that information such as target values, alarm limits, should be put in an intuitive context, making the operator aware of possible deviations and abnormal situations.Wickens and Hollands [21] suggested that the operatoŕs mental model of the process is analogue and continuous, rather than discrete and symbolic. From this we find that an analogue presentation of process data is suitable. Tufte [22] suggested the use of small trends, which he calls “sparklines”, to display data in computer graphics.Endsley et al. as described the level 3 SA: “projection of future status”. For process data this can be to indicate in which direction are process values “drifting”, toward alarm limits or stabilizing on target values? Yin et al. [23] showed in an empirical study that explicit rate-of-change cues in process control operations improve operator performance. The study does however not conclude on what is best, a trended line or explicit digital information showing the direction of change.Analogue indicators is more in-line with human cognition than digital numbers, small trends are suitable. Visualize process plant goals and objectives explicitly to the operator. Provide rate-of-change cues.We agree with Reising and Bullemer [9] in their discussion on smaller overview displays that inaccurate mental model, cognitive tunnel vision and data overload are problematic and should be addressed. Due to their size and screen real estate, we find, however, LSDs to have an even greater risk of data overload. For this reason, we find it relevant to simplify visual appearance through Gestalt concepts such as: Closure, good-continuation, Law of prägnanz, proximity, see Lidwell et al. [24].In addition to the above SA “demons”, we find it also relevant to address the “requisite memory trap” in LSDs. In this we find Norman’s concept of making data externally available to the process operator interesting, the opposite is described as memory challenging in-the-head information. Display hierarchies are necessary in smaller operator displays, but it can challenge the operator’s memory (in-the-head). For this reason we suggest a flat externalized in-the-world layout in larger displaysA flat, externalized in-the-world display layout is suitable. Simplify process data by applying Gestalt concepts.Endsley et al. stated that: “Alternating between bottom-up data-driven and top-down goal-directed processing of information is one of the vital mechanisms supporting SA”. LSDs can display thousands of process variables in displays measuring meters, not inches. For this reason we suspect that there is a need to support top-down search for information in these displays. Search in traditional industrial mimic layouts is aided by visualizing process flow-lines and larger objects such as vessels. We agree however with Reising and Bullemer [9] using a more abstract functional tabular layout, that such static information takes away valuable space for dynamic process information. In larger displays, we suggest however that some sort of aids for top-down search should be included.Other means that is suitable aiding top-down search is the use of negative-space, that is open areas in the display, avoiding a too information dense display. Hornof and Halverson [25] found that people effectively ignore negative space searching in computer displays, suggesting that it is not harmful.Means to be properly alerted on bottom-up data driven situations such as alarms and process deviations must included in design through sufficient pop-out effects.Display design should aid in top-down search for information, consider using visual landmarks, lines and negative space. Apply strong pop-out effects supporting data-driven situations such as, key-alarms, new unacknowledged alarms and process deviations.In this section, we first look at issues reported from a user test of the first generation Loviisa LSD. Based on these findings, we describe how the IRD concept was modified for the follow-up second generation HAMBO LSD.The user test of the Loviisa LSD by Laarni et al. [15] reported several problem areas, in the following we look at three major issues and how we have modified the original design concept to overcome these:•The value of pattern recognition through part-wise normalization of set-point and alarm limits was questioned.Poor alarm visualization.Too glary and tiring display, difficult to differentiate between grey and green. The LSD looked crowded and too abstract.Fig. 3shows the three original generic indicators developed for IRD, the mini-trend, bar type and polar diagram. All three objects use part-wise mathematical normalization of the measuring range to create visual bands of values and alarm limits. In this approach, the measuring range is divided into several segments; each segment is compressed or stretched. The result is that all process variables regardless of type or measuring range fit into the same graphical elements. In normal plant state, the process value should be positioned in the middle of the object; alarms are always at the same position. It should however be noted that using such unphysical scale can lead to inaccurate mental models.For the new HAMBO LSD, it was decided not to abandon the concept of part-wise mathematical normalization of the measuring scale, as we suspected it could result in a complex and difficult to read display, illustrated in Fig. 2.The narrower bar-type object in Fig. 3 saves valuable space but is less information rich, as it carries no time-information. The polar diagram excels however by grouping many variables into a more condensed package. In the example in Fig. 3 and 16 variables form a circle in the middle of the light grey area, each spoke representing a process variable. If values are at their target point, they form a circle. The inner thicker spokes are controller output and ticks represent valve (controller organ) position. The diagram is suited for integrating functional related variables, but carry no time-information. It is also quite abstract and not particularly well suited in mimic type layouts. For the HAMBO LSD, we chose the two left process objects in Fig. 3, suitable for a more familiar mimic-layout.In the following we show examples through the mini-trend, but the same principles apply for the narrower bar type. A weakness in the Loviisa display, and by the original IRD objects was that they lacked intuitive information related to controller and controller organ position. This is valuable, as it can alert the operator of potential problems such as “no more regulation margin” or “stuck valve”.For the HAMBO LSD we increased information richness by integrating intuitive visualization of controller and controller organ (valve) on the right side of the IRD-mini-trend, keeping the operator “in-the-loop” on plant-automation, see Fig. 4.Ideally the controller output (square) and valve position (line) should be aligned on top of each other. If not, it can indicate automation abnormalities. The range from closed (bottom) to fully open (top) supports natural use of metaphors.Traditionally, alarms are displayed as alarm-lists providing alarm identification, description and time stamp. However, this challenges human cognition in faster-paced situations, as alarms must be read and understood line by line. LSDs can serve as a useful supplement to lists in displaying key-alarms through easy to spot pop-out effects.Unfortunately, the alarm frames used in the Loviisa LSD did not have enough pop-out effect; they were also inconsistent in size, as the alarm frame follows the size of the process object. Neither did the Loviisa alarm visualization inform on which alarm was active, or whether it was a high or low alarm. In addition to this, some operators suggested that the qualitative indicator did not offer sufficient reading accuracy.To increase pop-out and improve consistency, alarm frames were replaced with filled squares, having the same size and shape for all process objects. In addition, we integrated explicit alarm information, and rate-of-change cues, see Fig. 5. The position of the alarm square is also in-line with common use of metaphors, on top (high alarm), at bottom (low-alarm). For increased accuracy, the digital value was added on key components, and always popping up in alarm condition. In Fig. 5, the H3 alarm limit is violated, moving toward H4, the process value is 48.It was noted as a weakness that the Loviisa display did not distinguish new incoming alarms from old standing alarms. In smaller displays, it is quite common to use blinking/flashing to notify the operator on such events. This can be intrusive and tiring to look at over longer time periods of time, particularly on larger displays.For the HAMBO display we developed an alternative: the dynamic alarm-spot. It works as a gentler animation on top of the new alarm, creating a strong pop-out effect. Fig. 6shows how it is implemented on a red alarm on green open valve. The dynamic alarm-spot works consistently for all alarms on all display process objects.The general concept of a flat, in-the-world display for monitoring (not interaction) was kept for the HAMBO LSD. However, more negative space was added to reduce the crowded and dense look of the Loviisa display. To reduce the feeling of a too abstract and unfamiliar display and to improve top-down search, we added some mimic-type features (flow-lines) and visual landmarks (large vessels), see Fig. 8.A darker flat grey background was used avoiding a garish and tiring display, the downside is a loss of contrast, (see Fig. 7). For improved readability of grey–green, a more saturated green colour was chosen to indicate active states (running, open, etc.).It could also be possible to increase readability in the display by introducing other colours instead of the extensive use of grey-scale. This could, however, result in masking signal colours reserved for abnormal plant conditions.The analysis in this section is based on: (i) Rated data collected from a larger study [26]. (ii) Operator statements from the larger study. Kaarstad and Strand [26] at IFE Halden studied three large screen displays, only one of these, the second generation HAMBO display is discussed in this paper, see Fig. 8:Four projectors provided a seamless display measuring 6m×1.5m, with a typical seated viewing distance of 3.5–4.0m. The display was divided (zoned) into a right hand turbine side, and a left hand reactor side. The display was implemented with ProcSee [27]. Colours were adjusted for projectors not for printed-paper. The display was 4200×1050 pixel resolution and contained about 560 complex dynamic objects, 120 dynamic pipeline pieces and 330 static objects and texts.Key-data for the larger study is:•Seven crews from five different Nordic power plants participated in this study.The mean age across all operators was 43, 1 (ranging from 29 to 56).The operators generally rated their amount of experience with large screen displays as intermediate, mean value of 2, 4 on a 5-point rating scale where 1 represents little experience and 5 represents much experience.The crews were introduced to the large screen displays and the digital screen based control room before the test scenarios. The operators were provided a couple of hours’ training before the test.Test-scenarios were performed on the HAMBO large-scale nuclear simulator [6].The requirements for the test-scenarios were that they should cover a diverse set of situations that the large screen display was intended for: normal operation with tasks (like periodical tests and shifting equipment), load-changes, disturbances and emergency operation.The goal was that the crews could use as many of the specific features of the displays as possible, and that information was collected for both the crews overall impression of the display in different situations, and on specific graphical elements.The purpose of the user test in this paper was to see if issues reported on the first-generation Loviisa LSD were solved on the second-generation HAMBO LSD. “Are colours, the concept of pattern-recognition and the new dynamic alarm-spot working satisfactorily?”Data were collected from written operator statements from the larger study. Four research scientists at the Institute for Energy Technology (IFE) assigned data with positive or negative affect on the following three categories:•The colour layering conceptPattern recognition through normalization of variablesThe dynamic alarm-spotThe rating was done according to a set of written rules. All four participants had knowledge of the IRD concept, and participated in a short briefing before rating data. Each participant did the rating independently.Table 1shows the collected data, positive (+) and negative (−) affect.Persons 1 and 2 reported approximately twice as many entries (303 and 300) as persons 3 and 4 (139 and 159). This indicates that persons 1 and 2 have set the bar significantly lower when applying the selection criteria. The largest difference in distribution is that person 3 reported more positive feedback for the dynamic alarm spot, and person 4 reported more positive feedbacks for the colour scheme than the others. The distributions are however quite similar, indicating that the studied categories and selection criteria were well defined:•The colour concept: consistently more negative than positive.Pattern recognition through normalization of variables: consistently more positive than negative.The dynamic alarm-spot: consistently more positive than negative.From this we suggest that the mean result is valid. Fig. 9shows the average percentage distribution all data (901):The colour concept has more negative than positive statements, approximately 3 to 1 ratio. This is consistent with operator statements that colours and contrast are too diffuse, and do not provide sufficient readability. The result suggests that colour modifications for the HAMBO display were not successful. Operators were however generally positive to the background colour, and that they found the display calm enough: “Pleasant background colour, but the contrast generally toolow”, and “Thebackground colour is comfortable to watch”. This suggests that the HAMBO display has better background colour than the Loviisa display.A problem from the Loviisa display - how to distinguish between grey (not running) and green (running) – does not seem to be solved: “The green valve symbols are tooanonymous”. In sum, this suggests that the contrast and readability of dynamic entries in the display must be further improved. It should be noted that the use of front projectors and ambient lighting in the room might also cause problems on colour readability, affecting contrast ratio and saturation. Both adjustments to the colour concept, calibration of projectors and ambient lighting should be further investigated.Pattern recognition through normalization of variables is given more positive than negative feedback, approximately 5 to 1 ratio. This suggest that this concept is well understood, and appreciated by the operators. Operator statements are backing up with positive feedback: “Like the straight lines throughout thedisplay. It is easy to see when something differs”. The results are therefore not supporting the more negative attitude on this from the evaluation of the first Loviisa display. Several operators stated however that the “bar-type” normalized IRD object without trended information has less value, see Fig. 3.However, some statements on pattern recognition are also negative: “The mini trends are not always easy tosee, as they have noframes”. Again the problem might be traced back to the colour/contrast readability issues. The results are however in general encouraging, suggesting that this concept is suitable for process monitoring on LSDs.The results for the dynamic alarm-spot shows a positive result, approximately 3 to 1 ratio. This indicates that the problems from the Loviisa display with poor readability of alarms, and difficulty in differentiating between acknowledged/unacknowledged alarms are solved more satisfactorily in the HAMBO display. Statements given in the user test are backing this up: “The dynamic alarm spot was very good in displaying what is wrong”.Some operators are, however, pointing out problems during larger upsets with alarm flooding: “Wouldbe more useful during disturbances if alarms were suppressed”. This indicates that the dynamic alarm-spot would benefit from alarm suppression and in general a well-managed alarm system. The concept is however promising for LSDs, this suggest that the dynamic alarm-spot should be kept and used as a part of the IRD concept.There are limitations in this study. It is difficult to draw definitive conclusions on the three studied categories, since they are extracted from the source material from the larger study [26]. It has also to be emphasized that the operator crews were not familiar with the HAMBO process. Their lack of familiarity with the details of the process and system numbers might have influenced their perceptions and evaluations. IRD is in addition more features rich and abstract compared with what they are used to, and might therefore require more training to acquire a comparable level of skills than other designs.It can also be argued that the three studied categories are not independent variables. As an example, the dynamic alarm-spot uses the concept of colour layering to display a new unacknowledged alarm.The poor readability of IRD larger displays using a grey colour scheme has been a surprise to us. During design phase, prototypes seemed to have sufficient readability on smaller LCD displays, but as the user test shows, they look either: garish and too bright, or washed out and too dark, and they generally have poor readability. Extensive use of grey-scale colour layering seems to be difficult on larger displays using front mounted video projector technology in well-lit rooms.In visualization of process alarms, it is quite common to use coloured frames surrounding process objects, also in modern approaches [9]. We have, however, struggled with readability of frames. Our work suggests that filled objects work better on LSDs. They create stronger pop-out effects on key-alarms, and they improve consistency. We cannot see problems with this approach, as it supports the underlying principles on alarm-colours, prioritizing, consistency, etc. The most recent addition, the design-patented animation to visualize unacknowledged alarm is, however, particular to our IRD concept, and the user-test suggest that this is an attractive alternative to blinking/flashing in larger displays.In our opinion, the use of graphical objects supporting pattern recognition is in line with general principles on information presentation. Well-known guidelines for nuclear domain, NUREG-0700 [28] Section 6: Group-view display system states: “An overview display should provide a characterization of the situation as a whole in a concise form that can be recognized at a glance”. Others [9] also use qualitative direct-perception indicators as an alternative to traditional process data visualization in real-life applications, combining dial-gauges, horizontal and vertical bars etc.There are many ways to design direct-perception indicators supporting human cognition, our work suggests however to design for simplification than accurate reading in larger more complex displays. For this reason, our recent design-modifications as described in this paper, are integrated within the context of these objects, keeping the original simplicity, avoiding extra add-on graphical objects. The user test suggests that this is a promising way of visualizing process information in larger displays. IRDs simplicity has also made it possible to be used in many real-life processes in several domains through industrial vendors tools by, ABB, Siemens and Kongsberg Offshore.We propose the following design principles:•Display graphics should be information rich, describing the plant situation through many cues. Visual salience should match data importance. Colour layering is suitable, but extensive use of grey-scale has given readability problems in well-lit rooms using front-projected technology.Qualitative direct perception indicators are suitable in displaying process data. Rather trended information than not. Integrate, target values, rate-of-change cues and automation keeping the operator “in-the-loop”. Reduce visual complexity through a limited number of display objects, support Gestalt simplification of data and alignment.Visualize key-alarms through strong pop-out effects; equally sized filled objects are better than alarm-frames. Integrate alarm information within a natural context of graphical objects. Highlight new unacknowledged alarms, a gentle animation is an alternative to protrusive flashing/blinking.An externalized explicit flat in-the-world layout is suitable. Improve top-down search through visual landmarks and negative space. We suspect that a physical recognizable mimic layout including some process flow-lines helps in top-down search.In our opinion, the principles on general display layout are in-line with others; NUREG-0700 refers to the advantages of long shot view, perceptual landmarks, and spatial representation in retrieval of information in the total display space. Even if design principles are developed for IRD displays, we suggest that they are of interest for others in designing for complex large-scale processes. We find them not in conflict with existing guidelines, but are modified and extend on what others have found for smaller displays.More work must be done with the colour-layering concept, the use of front mounted projectors and with ambient light conditions. As our theory foundation mostly is influenced by information visualization theory for a static state, such as printed-paper, there is also a need to expand the theoretical foundation of the IRD concept, creating a stronger relation to dynamic process plant behavior.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
