@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Transmission and reflection dual operational mode MEMS display device

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new type of MEMS display that is operable at very low voltage is introduced.Its internal back light is directed to exit grooves and controlled by MEMS shutters.A large surface area for building MEMS devices and for electrostatic interaction.True black background, high contrast ratio and high light utilization efficiency.It is also operable in reflective mode using external light, e.g., bright sunlight.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
MEMS displays,Transflective display,Flat panel displays,Light modulator,MEMS shutter,Display system,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A novel MEMS display device comprising a light separator and MEMS light shutters is introduced. This device is operable both in transmissive mode using internal light source and in reflective mode using external sun light. In transmissive mode, the light separator directs internal backlight illuminated on its incident surface into a plural of small openings (grooves) on the viewing surface. The MEMS light shutters are used to control the color and intensity of light at individual pixels. Internal light utilization efficiency of this display is the greatest compared to any other transmissive displays. The device is capable of having true black background, hence a very high contrast ratio. In reflective mode, MEMS shutters direct part of the sun light for image display. MEMS shutters have fast response time, making the new device suitable for vivid motion picture display, and operable at very low voltages, suitable for mobile device applications.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Liquid crystal display (LCD) and plasma display (PD) have rapidly replaced cathode-ray-tube (CRT) display largely due to its substantially reduced panel thickness compared to CRT. However, both LCD and PD are relatively inefficient in energy use. For example, LCD uses polarizer film that by itself reduces light intensity by fifty percent. Liquid crystals also have relatively slow response speed (typically in milliseconds), generally cannot be used in field sequential display, meaning different colors (typically red, green, and blue) have to be displayed at the same time in different sub-pixels within each pixel instead of displaying one color at a time in all pixels. This further substantially reduces the light utilization efficiency in LCD. On the other hand, plasma display consumes even more power per lumen than LCD due to its light emission mechanism. If light utilization efficiency of a display device is substantially improved over that of LCD, the number of backlight lamps or the light intensity of backlight lamps maybe reduced, lowering power consumption.Thus there is a need for flat panel displays that substantially reduce power consumption while at the same time produce equivalent or better image quality compared to that of LCD. This is especially true in mobile device applications where energy consumption is often the most critical factor that limits the overall performance of the devices. Intense efforts have recently been placed on developing OLED as a substitute for LCD and PD. This is evidenced by the large volume of papers published in this field recently. But OLED has its disadvantages and difficulties that need to be resolved. For example, production cost for OLED is high. Its reliability is also still a serious concern.There have been several proposals on using micro-electro-mechanical-system (MEMS) devices for display applications. One well-known example is DLP (digital light processing) technology developed by Texas Instruments [1–5]. DLP is an excellent technology for projection display, but is difficult to be used for flat panel display. Another example is scanning mirror laser display, which uses only one MEMS device scanning in two directions. A displayed image is formed using a MEMS mirror with angular motion that scans a modulated laser light beam [6–12]. But similar to DLP, scanning laser display is also only suitable for projection display. Still another example is grating light valve (GLV) display [13–16] which is also essentially a projection display device.Extensive research and development efforts have been placed in developing flat panel displays using other MEMS techniques. The relatively recent and most notable examples include TMOS (time-multiplexed optical shutter) [17–20] introduced by Unipixel based on FTIR (frustrated total internal reflection) [21,22]; iMOD (Interferometric modulator display, first developed by Iridigm and re-branded under the name of Mirasol by Qualcomm) [23–26]; and DMS (digital micro-shutter, first developed by Pixtronix) [27–29]. There are still many other proposed methods of using MEMS devices for image displays. Those methods are less explored, likely due to more challenges associated with their realization compared to the ones just mentioned. A brief review of some of the MEMS displays can be found in some recent publications [30,31].Significant progress has been made in flat panel MEMS displays. Some of the examples listed above already demonstrated certain promising and competitive aspects of flat panel MEMS displays. But, in general, this is the field that is still in its early stage of development. Some of the MEMS techniques, especially the ones that were less explored, may have the difficulties that are due to the associated fundamental physics principles of the techniques. As always, good optical image quality is one of the top requirements for any types of new display technologies to be useful and competitive against LCD and PD. But in addition to this basic requirement, there are some additional requirements that MEMS displays or any other new display technologies must also meet to be more competitive than the existing display technologies such as LCD. These additional requirements include (1) high light utilization efficiency; (2) low voltage operation; and (3) low cost of production. In order to be energy efficient, light utilization efficiency needs to be much better than that of LCD. Low voltage operation is essential for mobile application and for low power consumption applications in general. The voltages needed for driving the electronic circuits and for driving MEMS shutters both must be low in order for the new display technology to maintain an overall performance advantage over LCD. But this may be difficult to achieve in certain proposed MEMS display methods. For example, in certain devices, interfacial adhesion between dynamic and stationary MEMS components is often a very difficult issue to overcome. Generally speaking, increasing the mechanical stiffness of certain dynamic MEMS components can help to overcome interfacial adhesion. However, doing so will in turn lead to the requirement of an increased electric voltage to drive the corresponding dynamic MEMS components. This will in turn lead to the increase in energy consumption and potentially make the devices less competitive and/or not useful in mobile device applications. Certain other MEMS devices do not have issue directly associated with interfacial adhesion. However, their MEMS structure may have only a small surface area for electrostatic interaction while their optical shutter travelling distance is relatively large. Such MEMS structure is generally not very effective in generating electrostatic interaction force to control the motion of MEMS shutters. This is simply due to the fact that electrostatic force is proportional to the surface area of electrostatic interaction and inversely proportional to the square of the shutter travel distance. As a result, a relatively high voltage may also be needed to generate sufficient electrostatic interaction force to control the motion of MEMS shutters. Clearly a system level consideration is generally necessary to ensure that not only MEMS devices can function properly and reliably to produce excellent image quality, but they can also maintain substantial performance advantages in areas such as energy conservation over existing devices such as LCD.A novel MEMS display device is introduced in this paper. This display is estimated to have at least the following advantages over the existing display technologies such as LCD: (1) substantially improved light utilization efficiency; (2) greatly reduced energy consumption; and (3) reduced total manufacturing cost. At the heart of the new device are a light separator and a plurality of MEMS light shutters [32]. First, in order to make efficient utilization of internal light source (backlight), the new device consists of a backlight distributor which directs the light illuminated on its incident surface into small exit grooves on its viewing surface (exit surface). Light is directed to exit only through the small exit grooves of the viewing surface of the light distributor. Second, light switches (MEMS shutters) are placed on the viewing surface of the light distributor to control the final path of light at each display pixel (or sub-pixels). The MEMS shutters do not permanently block the path of light. When the shutters are moved to their ON position, all light in the corresponding pixels can freely exit from light exit grooves to viewer. When the shutters are moved to their OFF position, light in the corresponding pixels is blocked by the shutters. The timing and duration of the shutters in their either ON or OFF positions determine the intensity and coloration of light at the corresponding pixels. More detailed description follows.To better understand the fundamental principle governing the operation of the new MEMS display device, some of the associated optics is explained in this section. First, referring to Fig. 1, a parallel block represents an optical medium with reflective index nm. When rays of light (ray “1”, “2”, or “3”) from air strikes the medium on its incident surface at an incident angle θai, the light enters the medium at an angle θmi. Angles θaiand θmisatisfy Snell’s law of refraction:sinθai=nmsinθmiAfter traveling through the medium, the light will leave the medium at its exit surface. If the incident and exit surfaces are parallel to each other, and the light does not encounter other boundaries inside the medium, the light will follow the path similar to that of ray “2” and will exit the medium with an exit angle θao2. It can be shown that θao2=θai.If the medium has vertical grooves (left side of Fig. 1) and the light encounters such a groove in the medium, and assuming the incident light enters the medium at an angle such that the following relation holds: nm*sin(90−θmi)>1, where (90−θmi) is the incident angle of the light at the surface of the vertical groove, the light will experience a total internal reflection at the groove surface and its path will be similar to that of ray “1”. Its exit angle θao1 will be the same in magnitude as its incident angle when first entering into the medium, θai, but opposite in horizontal direction, |θao1|=|θai|.If the groove is not vertical but has a tilted surface such as the one shown in the right side of Fig. 1, the light will follow a different path. If the tilt angle γ of the groove surface is large enough, the light will not experience a total internal reflection at the groove surface but will instead pass through the groove and exit the medium as ray “3” shown in the figure, with an exit angle θao3.It is relatively easy to calculate the relationship between incident angle θaiand groove surface tilt angle γ for this to happen. For a groove with a surface tilt angle γ, the incident angle of light (ray “3”) at the groove surface is now (90−θmi−γ). If nm*sin(90−θmi−γ)<1, the light will pass through the groove and exit the medium as shown in the figure.At certain combinations of groove surface tilt angle γ and incident angle θai, the light will leave the medium at a small angle θao3. This is more clearly illustrated in Fig. 2. Angle θao3 can be calculated according to the following equations:(1)θmi=Asin(sinθai/nm)(2)θmo=90-γ-θmi(3)θao′=Asin(nmsinθmo)(4)θao3=90-γ-θao′Substituting Eqs. (1)–(3) into Eq. (4), we have(5)θao3=90-γ-Asin(nmsin(90-γ-Asin(sinθai/nm)))At certain groove angle γ, when nmsin(90−γ−Asin(sinθai/nm))<1, there is a range of incident angle θaiat which the light will exit from the surface of the tilted groove. For example, for a typical optical glass with reflective index of 1.46 (nm=1.46), when γ equals 10° and incident angle θaiis larger than 62° (between 62° and 90°), the corresponding light will exit from the surface of the tilted grooves with exit angle in the range between −8° and 20°.There is now an interesting new outcome. As shown in Fig. 3, when two light beams separated by a distance Sidon incident surface, their separation on the exit surface is different between three scenarios “a”, “b”, and “c”. Under scenarios “a” and “b”, the separation of the corresponding light beams on exit surface is Sed1 and Sed2, both Sed1 and Sed2 equal to Sid. But under scenario “c”, the separation of light beam on exit surface is Sed3. Sed3 is substantially smaller than Sidas illustrated in this figure.Therefore if exit surface of the medium consist of a plurality of grooves with tilted groove surface as shown in Fig. 4, with groove surface tilt angle γ, groove depth d, groove width w, and pixel length L satisfy certain conditions, light that is uniformly illuminated on the incident surface of the medium with incident angles θ will exit from the medium only through the grooves. In other words, uniform incident light is re-distributed through the medium to exit only from the grooves. Thus the grooves are referred as light exit grooves. For easy discussion, the medium having light exit grooves is referred as light distributor. Details governing the conditions of groove surface tilt angle γ, groove depth d, groove width w, and pixel length L are not described in this paper but can easily be derived based on calculation of geometric optics. Here it is sufficient to note that light with a range of incident angles larger than a certain minimum angle will exit from the medium through the grooves, to be further discussed later (under section 3.1 “Angle of Incident Light”).As light exits from light separator only from its grooves, a large area on the exit surface of the light separator has no light to pass through. It is therefore possible to build MEMS devices in those areas, away from the grooves, without blocking the path of light, and to use the MEMS devices to control the final path of light coming out of the grooves: either to let the light to pass through or block off the light as shown in Fig. 5, where the shaded regions schematically represent MEMS light shutters in the MEMS device. Details of the MEMS device and the light shutter are not illustrated in this figure.In practice, it is not a trivial task to produce grooves precisely with certain non-zero degree surface tilt angle (angle γ,Figs. 1, 2, 4 and 6). It may even be easier to make nearly vertical grooves or grooves with virtually zero degree of tilt angle (γ∼0) than to produce grooves with a specific non-zero degree tilt angle. To take this into consideration and for the purpose of making the manufacturing process of light separator less demanding, the incident surface of light separator can be modified to have a saw-tooth like structure as shown in Fig. 6, with a certain saw tooth angle α. With such modified incident surface and when the saw tooth angle α is sufficiently large, light with incident angle θ relative to a flat incident surface that would otherwise exit from a groove with a non-zero degree surface tilt angle γ will still exit the groove even if now the groove surface is made perpendicular to the exit surface (angle γ∼0). In other words, with saw-tooth shaped incident surface (Fig. 6), requirement on groove surface tilt angle γ is relaxed. That is, grooves can be made vertical instead of having a minimum tilt angle (Fig. 4). This makes the grooves much easier to manufacture. The saw-tooth structure on the incident surface can be more easily produced than to make grooves with precisely certain surface tilt angle γ.A new type of display device (or more generally referred as light modulator) can be produced based on the concept described above, as schematically shown in Figs. 5 and 7. This new display device comprises of two basic components: a light separator and a plural of MEMS shutters. The light separator directs light illuminated on its incident surface into individual small grooves on its exit surface. MEMS shutters (details not shown in these figures) control the final path of light at each of the small grooves, either let the light to pass through or block off the light. In flat panel display applications, each individual groove corresponds to a pixel or a sub-pixel. For example, in Fig. 7 each shaded region represents a groove where light exits from the medium. Each pixel consists of three sub-pixels represented by three different shades. Sub-pixels can be for displaying different colors within a pixel, but can also simply be for the purpose of dividing a large pixel into several smaller pixels. For example, for large panel displays (screen size>50 inches), pixel size can be relatively large (∼0.5mm) for a 1080P resolution display (1920 columns by 1080 rows high resolution display). It is useful to divide each pixel into several smaller pixels so that the corresponding MEMS shutters will be smaller and have faster response speed than that of undivided large pixels. This also implies that this device is intrinsically capable of much higher display resolution, making it easily adaptable for ultra-high-definition television display application. Our calculation indicates that photographic quality images (>300 DPI resolution) can easily be achieved in this new display device.Previous discussion is on a general condition that light strikes on the incident surface of a light separator at an incident angle θ. There is normally a range of angles for incident light. It is thus necessary to consider the range of angles of incident light within which the light can exit from light exit grooves. Obviously, whether the light can exit from light exit grooves depends on not only the incident angle but also saw-tooth angle α and groove surface tilt angle γ. Fig. 8is the plot of light exit angle as a function of incident angle under two saw-tooth angle conditions (α=1°, and α=10°) and with groove surface tilt angle γ of 10°, where light exit angle is the angle of exit light with respect to the normal of light exit surface of light separator (θao3 in Figs. 1 and 2). It is clear from this figure that, light with a relatively large range of incident angles can exit from light exit grooves. Hence incident light does not need to be collimated. Light exit angle decreases as incident angle decreases. (In Fig. 8, negative exit angle means that exit light goes towards the same side as incident light with respect to the normal of light distributor at exit point. For example, in Figs. 2–6, light enters the medium from left side of the normal at incident point, a negative exit angle means that exit light also goes towards the left side of the normal at exit point).The function of MEMS device is to control the final path of light at each light exit groove (or to control the color and brightness at each display pixel), either to let light to pass through or to block off the light coming out of light exit grooves. A variety of designs may be used for the MEMS device to accomplish this application. We designed a MEMS device with its MEMS shutter primarily displaces laterally on the viewing surface. The shutters can be brought to their OFF positions to cover the light exit grooves and hence to block off light, or to their ON positions to allow light to pass through by moving the shutters away from the grooves. This is schematically illustrated in Fig. 5. Due to its complexities, detail of the MEMS device and MEMS shutters is not shown and will not be described in this paper. But the function principle of these shutters in the new display device can be understood without much explanation. As also illustrated in Fig. 5, the MEMS shutter is capable of having a slight rotation in addition to horizontal displacement when moved to its ON position. The purpose of such rotation will be described in a later section. It is worth of noting that, since the MEMS device is built on a large surface area of the light modulator (without permanently blocking internal backlight), the area of electrostatic interaction within the MEMS device can be made large, making it possible to control the MEMS shutters (to switch between their ON and OFF positions) using very low voltages.It is also worth of noting that, although not optimal, torsional shutters that rotate around their hinges can also be used in this new display device. Torsional shutters may not be idea for this application but can be used to provide some basic understanding on the performance characteristics of the new display devices. Variations of torsional shutters are already in wide use in projection displays, namely in DLP [1–6] by Texas Instruments and can serve as a useful reference for later discussion. The manufacturability and device reliability associated with torsional shutter have been widely tested. Fig. 9illustrates the function principle of the new display device using torsional shutters. In this example, three shutters on the left side are in their ON positions. Light passing through the corresponding grooves can exit the grooves freely. The two shutters on the right side of this figure are in their OFF positions. Light passing through those corresponding grooves are blocked off by the shutters and cannot reach to viewer.As in LCD, a backlight source is required for the new display. Since light only needs to enter the medium (light distributor) at large incident angles, uniform backlight illumination can be easier to produce for this display than for LCD. There can be many ways of designing a backlight system for the display. It is not the main scope of this paper to discuss the backlight system. Therefore simply for the purpose of illustrating the concept of the new display device, a schematic of a backlight system is presented in Fig. 10(A). In this figure, LS is a light source, such as an array of LEDs arranged along one side of the light distributor; CL is a cylindrical optical lens; RF is a reflector that allows light to only escape from one side. LS is placed in the focal line of the cylindrical lens. A parallel light beam comes out from the lens and is illuminated onto the backside of a light distributor at large incident angle.To reduce the panel thickness of the device, a light distributor can be used, Fig. 10(B). The light distributor has two surfaces: a partially reflective/partially transparent (PR/PT) surface (with graded reflectance) and totally reflective (TR) surface. Transmission coefficient of the PR/PT surface increases from left (near the light source) to right (farther away from light source), and its reflectance decreases from left to right. When light incident onto the PR/PT surface, some light passes through the surface and goes into the medium (light separator), the remaining light is reflected onto the totally reflective surface (TR), which directs the light back to the PR/PT surface further away from light source. This process is repeated until all light enters the medium at the other side (farthest away from light source) of the light distributor. It is possible to design the PR/PT surface such that the transmitted light intensity along the light distributor is uniform, as described below.At a given point on the PR/PT surface, the sum of transmission coefficient (T) and reflectivity (R) is 1, (T+R=1). Assuming light is reflected total of N times by the PR/PT surface when traveling from left side (near the light source) to right side along the light distributor, if the transmission coefficient at the first reflection point is made to be T(1)=1/N, (reflectivity R(1)=1–1/N), and at subsequent reflection point n, T(n) satisfies the relationship of T(n)={T(n−1)/[1−T(n−1)]}, or R(n) satisfies the relationship of R(n)=[2R(n−1)−1]/R(n−1), (where n goes from 2 to N,) the intensity of transmitted light at each incident point on PR/PT surface along the length of the light distributor will be the same. As an example, assuming N=5, T(1)=0.2 and R(1)=0.8. This means 20% of the incident light passes through the PR/PT surface at the first incident point and 80% of the light is reflected. The reflected light (80% of initial light intensity) will be reflected by the totally reflective surface (TR) and re-directed onto the PR/PT surface at the second incident point. At the second incident point of PR/PT surface, if T(2)=T(1)/[1−T(1)], which will be 0.2/(1–0.2)=0.25, the fraction amount of transmitted light will be 0.8*0.25=0.2, or 20%, which is the same as at the first incident point. Similar calculation can be completed for subsequent 3 incident points. The transmitted light intensity is 20% at all 5 incident points if the transmission and reflection coefficients at each incident points satisfy the relationship described above. This can be achieved in various ways, for example, coating an optical film with reflective material with its thickness changes gradually along the direction from left to right.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
