@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Screen-printing fabrication of electrowetting displays based on poly(imide siloxane) and polyimide

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Poly(imide siloxane) film demonstrated good electrowetting performance.Polyimide-based hydrophobic material (poly(imide siloxane)) and hydrophilic polyimide showed good compatibility.Hydrophilic polyimide grids could be directly built on the hydrophobic poly(imide siloxane) film by screen-printing.Cheaper materials and simpler fabrication method have been demonstrated for electrowetting displays.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Electrowetting display,Printable fabrication,Screen-printing,Polyimide,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We report a screen-printing fabrication process for large area electrowetting display (EWD) devices using polyimide-based materials. The poly(imide siloxane) was selected as hydrophobic insulator layer, and relatively hydrophilic polyimide as grids material. EWD devices that use poly(imide siloxane) as hydrophobic insulator fabricated with conventional methods showed good and reversible electrowetting performance on both single droplet level and device level, which showed its potential application in EWDs. The compatibility of polyimide-based materials (hydrophobic poly(imide siloxane) and hydrophilic polyimide) guarantee the good adhesion between two layers and the capability of printable fabrication. To this end, the hydrophilic grids have been successfully built on hydrophobic layer by screen-printing directly. The resulting EWD devices showed good switch performance and relatively high yield. Compared to conventional method, the polyimide-based materials and method offer the advantages of simple, cheap and fast fabrication, and are especially suitable for large area display fabrication.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Many experimental and theoretical activities have recently been taken in the field of electrowetting, driven by applications in lab-on-a-chip [1,2], adaptive lens and prisms [3–5], and high-speed reflective displays [6,7]. The electrowetting concept for display application was first recognized by Beni and co-workers more than three decades ago [8–11]. The reflective display technology based on electrowetting was first realized and published in 2003 by Hayes and Feenstra at Philips Research Labs [6]. EWD has shown its potential for high quality information displays: (1) reflective mode for using ambient light and energy-saving; (2) quick response (<2ms switching speed has been reached) for video display [12]; (3) good optical performance (>50% white state reflectance [13] and full color [14]); and (4) fluidic and soft display materials for flexible displays in the future.Based on the classical theory of electrowetting, an electrostatically induced reduction of contact angle on the hydrophobic surface occurs when a voltage is applied between the conductive fluid and electrode underneath [15]. In the case of a sessile aqueous droplet on a hydrophobic insulating surface, the so-called electrowetting on dielectric occurs, as shown in Fig. 1a and b. It is considered that the voltage V only induces a change in the solid–liquid interfacial tension γsl; the interfacial tensions of solid–gas γsgand liquid–gas γlgare assumed to be unperturbed. The solid–liquid interfacial tension is reduced by an amount equal to the electrostatic energy CV2/2, where C is the capacitance. As the electrode is covered by a hydrophobic insulating layer with thickness d and dielectric constant εr, this can be described by:(1)cosθv=γsg-γslγlg+12CV2γlg=cosθ0+ε0εr2γlgdV2where θvand θ0 are the contact angles of the liquid droplet with the applied voltage of V and 0, respectively. This equation has been successfully employed by many investigators in correlating experimental results with theory for a significant change of the contact angle.The display principle is shown in Fig. 1c and d, utilizing a colored oil and transparent water dual fluidic system. In the absence of a voltage, the oil forms a continuous film in a pixel between the hydrophobic insulator-covered electrode and water due to the dominance of interfacial tensions: γow+γoi<γwi, where γow,γoi and γwi are the oil/water, oil/insulator and water/insulator interfacial tensions, respectively. When a voltage is applied between the top and bottom electrodes, the stacked state is no longer energetically favorable since an electrostatic force is added. Water moves towards the insulator, pushing the oil film aside or break. In this way, the optical properties of the stack, when viewed from the top, are tuned between a colored off-state (dyed oil) and a white on-state (color of bottom substrate). Thus a simple and highly reversible optical switch is obtained, driven by electrowetting.As shown in Fig. 1c and d, the standard configuration of an EWD device consists of the bottom substrate with electrodes, a hydrophobic insulator layer, hydrophilic grids, colored oil and conductive liquid, and electrodes on the top substrate. The response of electrowetting effect highly depends on the properties of these materials. Particularly, the properties of the hydrophobic insulating layer are known to play a key role in EWD devices [2]. To obtain a wide contact angle change with low voltage, the high initial contact angle of the conductive liquid is preferred. To obtain both insulating and hydrophobic functions, multilayers have also been studied. Inorganic insulating materials like SiO2[2], Si3N4[16], SiOC [16], or ONO (oxide-nitride-oxide) [17] have been investigated, combined with a hydrophobic coating layer. This offers a larger contact angle change at the same applied voltage due to their higher values of dielectric constant.The most commonly used hydrophobic insulator coatings for EWD devices are amorphous fluoropolymers such as AF1600 from DuPont [6,18], FluoroPel 1601V from Cytonix [19,20] and Cytop CTL-809M from Asahi Glass [21]. The low surface tension and viscosity makes it possible to fabricate a homogeneous film by screen printing. We have successfully screen-printed commercial fluoropolymers as the EWD hydrophobic insulator layer (not published). However, these materials are relatively expensive, and not compatible with commonly hydrophilic grids. Therefore, sophisticated surface treatment has to be done: low power plasma treatment [20,22,23] or chemical etching [24]. The typical EWD fabrication process is shown in Fig. 2where the surface plasma treatment and high-temperature recovery steps are critical and time-consuming. This also limits its applications in cheap and quick fabrication for industrialization. Currently, the hydrophilic grids are still fabricated using photolithography which again includes several steps: coating, pre-baking, exposing, post-baking and developing. Cheaper materials and simpler fabrication procedure are highly required for the technology development and industrialization.Polyimide has the advantages of high thermal stability, good chemical resistance, good optical property and ease of processing, therefore has been widely applied in many high performance applications [25–28]. Among them, in poly(imide siloxane) the polysiloxane component imparts a number of beneficial properties to the polymeric system, including high hydrophobicity, low surface energy, high flexibility, enhanced solubility, reduced water sorption and gas permeability, good thermal and ultraviolet stability [29–31]. These particular advantages render polysiloxane-modified polyimides an excellent candidate for hydrophobic insulator materials as part of EWD devices. Furthermore, the polyimide–polyimide adhesion mechanism has been investigated and proven previously [32,33]. Therefore, the hydrophilic polyimide with good adhesion to hydrophobic poly(imide siloxane) surface, can be directly built up as the pixel wall material in EWD devices without surface treatment.Screen-printing is one of the versatile, simple, fast, cost-effective coating techniques, and it has been successfully used in solar cell [34] and PCB [35] fabrication. It does not require expensive vacuum technology, and can be applied to any surface shape and size. Screen-printing is suitable for deposition of thin films greater than 0.5μm thickness [36]. Zhou [23] has demonstrated to print sealing agent onto the top sealing substrate for EWD display coupling. However, by now, nobody else has applied this technology in other steps of EWD fabrication.In this article, we report a simple EWD device fabrication method based on new materials for which the hydrophilic polyimide grids can be directly built onto the hydrophobic insulator layer by screen printing. Because the compatibility of hydrophobic poly(imide siloxane) and hydrophilic polyimide, they have good self-adhesion property in nature. These two layers can stick together steadily just by screen-printing. The test results of the EWD devices showed good electrowetting performance. Compared to the traditional method, the new method simplifies the fabrication process and lowers the cost. Such principle can also be used in a variety of other fields, for example fabrication of flexible displays or quick formation of microstructures.The hydrophobic insulator material used is poly(imide siloxane) block copolymers based on diphenylthioether dianhydride isomer mixtures [31] and the pixel wall (grid) material is a hydrophilic transparent polyimide [37], both materials were designed and synthesized in Ningbo Institute of Material Technology and Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China. Indium Tin Oxide (ITO) coated glass (0.7mm thick) with resistance of 100Ω/□ (purchased from Shenzhen Laibao Hi-Tech Co. Ltd, China) was used as bottom and top substrates. Deionized water (DI water) was obtained from the water purification system (Ultra pure UV, Shanghai Hitech Instruments Co., Ltd, China). The basic cleaning detergent RM11-07 was purchased from Runmon (Shenzhen, China). Isopropanol, N,N-dimethylacetamide (DMAC) and propylene glycol methyl ether acetate (PGMEA) was purchased from Aladdin, with analytical grade and used without treatment. SU-8 3005 photoresist was purchased from Microchem Corp. (Newton, MA).The screen printer equipment was purchase from a local company (Model 3050, Dongguan, China), and its screen (the mask for screen printing) was designed by ourselves and made in a company (Kunhong, Dongguan, China). The spin coater KW-5 (Institute of Microelectronics, Chinese Academy of Science) was used to coat thin films on 3″ substrate. Hot plate (EH20B Lab Tech, China) was used for baking processes. Exposure system (URE-2000/35, Institute of Optics and Electronics, Chinese Academy of Science, China) was used for lithography. The reactive ion etching (RIE) equipment (ME-6A, Institute of Microelectronics, Chinese Academy of Science, China) was used for surface plasma treatment.Film thickness was measured by the Dektak (Dektak XT, BRUKER, Germany). An impedance analyzer (WAYNE KERR 6500B, UK) was used to drive and measure the electrical properties (loss factor, capacitance). Both manual and automated testing were employed. The automatic process was driven by a personal computer and LABVIEW software. The electrical circuit was completed by placing a drop of 10μL of 0.1M NaCl on the insulator beneath the platinum needle electrode. Changes in the wetting behavior as a function of applied voltage were monitored optically with a goniometer (JC2000C from POWEREACH, China). The fluidic movement driven by electrowetting was visualized and captured by using a high speed camera (Phantom MiRO M110, Vision Research, USA) integrated with a microscope (CKX41, Olympus, Japan).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
