@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
How homepage aesthetic design influences users’ satisfaction: Evidence from China

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Effect of homepage’ aesthetics on users’ satisfaction is studied, based on S-O-R.The effects of key design elements on homepage aesthetics are studied.The evidence is from China.Aesthetic formality has a positive impact on aesthetic appeal.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Aesthetic design,Stimulus-Organism-Response theory,Emotion,Perceived ease of use,Satisfaction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In the product emotional design era, the website homepage design, especially the aesthetic design, has become a key factor that influences users’ first impressions, attitudes and behaviors. Based on the Stimulus-Organism-Response (S-O-R) theory, the current study examines the mechanism through which the aesthetic design of a comprehensive job-hunting website homepage affects users’ satisfaction. Emotion and perceived ease of use were used to describe users’ internal evaluation to the homepage (i.e. organism). The Structural Equation Modeling method was used to test the proposed hypotheses. The empirical evidence shows that aesthetic formality does not have a significant impact on positive arousal, but it has positively influences on energetic arousal through its impact on aesthetic appeal. The other hypotheses proposed in this study are all been supported. The additional results, i.e. the effects of three key design elements on homepage aesthetics, are found. The aim of this study was to provide practical recommendation in the establishment of a pattern of webpage aesthetics that influences users’ satisfaction.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The Internet, as one of the greatest human inventions in twentieth century, has been applied widely in people’s lives since its invention, and has influenced people’s life styles deeply. And many websites with different types appeared, such as news websites, social networking websites, shopping websites and government websites. Since the functions of websites in the same category are highly homogenous. In the context of Emotional Design and User-Centered Design about product development, users’ non-functional requirements (e.g. technical, content-related and form-related) of a website have received considerable attention from scholars and designers. As the form-related the visual appearance of the webpage interface is taken as one of the most important non-functional requirements, and it can affect users’ overall impression, emotions and behavior intention [1–3]. If the visual appearance design of the webpage is good, users’ overall impression will be good, positive emotion will be aroused and subsequent approach behavior towards a website may come into being.At present, job-hunting websites have become an important approach for job seekers to search recruitment information. As of March 9, 2015, according to a comprehensive ranking of job-hunting websites conducted by a Chinese website (top.chinaz.com), www.yjbys.com, www.51job.com, and www.zhaopin.com, are the top three, respectively. Compared to local or industrial job-hunting websites, comprehensive websites have attracted a larger amount of job seekers due to their massive advertising campaigns and their rich content in terms of positions, industries, and locations. As user experience has received more attention, in addition to the content richness of a comprehensive job-hunting website, the aesthetics of the webpages used to reflect the quality of webpages’ visual appearance [2,3] may be another key influential factor of users’ experience and satisfaction to a website, which in turn may improve the websites’ market competitiveness. However, less research has ever investigated the issue in-depth. For many users who surf around the Internet without any particular aim for their search, they may easily move to another website if the website does not prove to be satisfactory [3]. Therefore, this study was conducted to examine how the visual appearance of a comprehensive job-hunting website can influence users’ satisfaction from the perspective of webpage aesthetics. Because the content/information design of a webpages is also important [4,5], to eliminate the influence of content/information design to this study, we will design webpage prototypes used to collect data for analysis.Usually, a website may have lots of webpages. It’s important to note that the homepage is the first webpage users see when they open the website. Singh and Dalal [6] have provided empirical evidence in support of the argument that a homepage is like an advertisement. And a websites’ first impression produced by the homepage can affect users’ first visceral ‘gut feeling’ that helps to decide users’ attitudes toward the entire website, which in turn may affect whether the users are going to stay at this place or continue surfing to other sites [3]. Given that the aesthetic design of a homepage plays a vital role in influencing users’ perceptions about the quality of its visual appearance, this study explores how the homepage with different levels of aesthetics affects users’ internal evaluation, and how their internal evaluation affects their satisfaction subsequently. The Stimuli-Organism-Response (S-O-R) theory, based on the assumption that environmental cues influence people’s cognitive or emotion, which subsequently influence their behaviors [7], has been widely applied to examine how environmental factors influence users’ responses [1,2,4,5]. Thus, the S-O-R theory is adopted in this study. Emotion and perceived ease of use are used to describe users’ internal evaluation (organism). An organic mode, regarding the influence of homepage aesthetics on users’ emotion and perceived ease of use, was constructed to obtain a deeper understanding of users’ satisfaction.The rest of this article is structured as follows: First, a review of the relevant theoretical background and literatures, i.e. S-O-R theory, webpage aesthetics and PAD theory, is presented. Second, the research model and hypotheses are introduced, followed by the methodology, analysis and results. Finally, the empirical results are discussed and the conclusions and limitations are presented.The classical S-R theory in behaviorism refers to human behaviors as a learned response to stimuli, which treats human mind as a black box. Mehrabian and Russell [7] proposed the S-O-R environmental psychology model, which extended the S-R theory by integrating organism to account for internal cognitive and affective processes of people in response to external stimulus. They maintained that stimulating cues perceived from the environment triggers one’s internal evaluation, which subsequently result in positive or negative behaviors or intentions toward the stimuli.Since Donovan and Rossiter [8] introduced the S-O-R theory to the retail context, it has become one of the most important theories in this filed. Since then, this theory has been widely used in the marketing research, especially to explain how features of the retail environment influence consumer behaviors through the mediating effects of induced emotional responses in the traditional offline retailing context [9–12]. Under the context of e-commerce, consumers prefer online shopping. Thus, many researchers have extended the S-O-R theory to the online shopping content, and examined the effects of webpage/website design features on consumers’ organism and their subsequent behaviors [13–16]. Table 1shows several important studies in the past five years [1,2,4,5,17–21]. The stimulus is the set of characteristics of the environment that affect the internal states of the individuals, such as graphics, colors, links, menus, background music tempo, entertainment and webpage visual complexity. Organism refers to the intervening internal process, such as users’ arousal, pleasure, trust and impulsiveness. The response includes users’ satisfaction or dissatisfaction with the experience and the approach-avoidance behavior toward the website, such as store search, purchase intention and re-visit.The visual appearance of a webpage is very important, because it is one of the key factors that influence users’ first impressions and subjective experience [22,23]. Dickie [24] defined the notion of aesthetics as a “philosophy of beauty”. In terms of webpage, the aesthetics represents a beautiful impression created by the combination of various elements and attributes [2].In the related researches of webpage aesthetics, several scholars have studied the stability of user’ perceived webpage aesthetics. Lindgaard et al. [22] found that the exposure time and the perceived visual appeals (denoting what many would call webpage “aesthetics”) are highly correlated. They concluded that users’ first impression toward a website can be formed quickly and will remain consistent regardless of the exposure time (500ms vs. 50ms). In line with Lindgaard et al., Tractinsky et al. [25] also provided direct evidence on the premise that aesthetic impressions of a webpages are formed quickly. In a study on the critical factors that influence the perceived aesthetic fidelity of a webpage, Park et al. [26] found that the aesthetic fidelity increases when webpage designers use more appropriate visual design elements that are more relevant to the target impression in their webpage development, and decreases when the users perceive the same webpage more diversely. Some other researchers applied the S-O-R theory to study the effect of webpage aesthetics on users’ emotion, cognitive and behaviors [2,18].For the webpage aesthetics’ construct, Schenkman and Jonsson [3] noted that visual aesthetics of webpages comprise of two dimensions, i.e. aesthetic formality and aesthetic appeal. Later, Lavie and Tractinsky [27] conducted four studies to develop a measurement instrument of perceived website aesthetics, and two main dimensions i.e. classical aesthetics and expressive aesthetics were founded. The classical aesthetics dimension in Lavie and Tractinsky’s study [27] was considered to be aligned closely with the notions of aesthetics that presided from antiquity until the 18th century. These notions emphasize orderly, clean, clear and symmetrical design of the website, and are closely related to many of the design rules advocated by usability experts, which is aligned with the concept of aesthetic formality in Schenkman and Jonsson’s study [3]. Both of classical aesthetics and aesthetic formality all emphasize a good webpage design should be economic, useful and practical [2,3,18,27]. Expressive aesthetics dimension in Lavie and Tractinsky’s study [27] is manifested by designers’ creativity and originality and by the ability to break design conventions, which is also in line with the concept of aesthetic appeal emphasizing the significance of beauty and importance of the overall impression about the webpage in Schenkman and Jonsson’s study [3]. Both of expressive aesthetics and aesthetic appeal all reflect the degree of pleasure, attraction and entertaining that users obtain from the webpage, which are closely tied to the hedonic quality of the webpage [2,3,18,27].There are two dominant views on emotion’ structure, i.e. the discrete approach and the continuous approach [28]. Discrete emotion theorists suggest the existence of six or more basic emotions (e.g. happiness, sadness, anger, fear, disgust, and surprise), which are universally displayed and recognized [29,30]. Continuous emotion theorists suggest the existence of two or more dimensions that can be used to describe and distinguish between different emotions [7,31]. Compared with the discrete approach, the continuous approach can describe more emotions quantifiably. PAD emotion model proposed by Mehrabian and Russell is one of the continuous approaches and has been applied widely [1,2,7,17,18]. It uses three bipolar dimensions of pleasure-displeasure, excited-calm, and dominance-submissiveness to describe emotions.In the most of the previous studies, the three dimensions in PAD model were assumed to be independent of each other across individuals. Only several were about the study of the relationship between the three. For example, Ward and Barnes [32] demonstrated that dominance has a positive direct impact on arousal and pleasure under the retail context. Kuppens [33] found arousal is closely related to pleasure. According to Thayer’s study [34], the arousal was divided into two different types, i.e. energetic arousal and tense arousal. Drawing on Thayer’s study [34], Koo and Lee [35] examined the inter-relationships among the three dimensions in different contexts (online vs. offline). The results showed that while dominance has a significant impact on both energetic and tense arousal, but no significant relationship has been found between dominance and pleasure. The effect of dominance on tense arousal is not statistically supported in an online shopping context, and both energetic and tense arousal has a positive and/or negative impact on pleasure. In line with Koo and Lee’s study [35], Chang et al. [2] revealed the mediating effects of energetic arousal and tense arousal on the control-pleasure linkage.In the empirical researches based on the theory of the S-O-R, emotion has been used as one important factor that explains how users’ personal response and evaluation of the surroundings occurs [1,2,17,18]. So in our current study, emotion described by PAD model was also used to represent individual’s organism through which environmental cues (i.e. webpage aesthetics) are connected with users’ satisfaction.In the technology acceptance model, perceived ease of use refers to “the degree to which a person believes that using a particular system would be free of effort” [36]. We presume that the concept is particularly suitable to apply to the context of human-computer interfaces, which in our case, is the homepage interface. A homepage with better aesthetic formality will be more helpful for users to understand the arrangement of structure and content. In the study of improving the web survey respondent experience through socially-present and aesthetically-pleasing user interfaces [37], the significant positive influence between aesthetic formality and perceived ease of use has been verified. For the homepage with content more diversified, whether the same relationship between the two is really existed, and whether the relationship can be enhanced, are still not known. Thus, we proposed the following hypothesis:H1Aesthetic formality has a significant and positive influence on perceived ease of use.Generally speaking, if a homepage with better aesthetic formality can add some hedonics and innovation, the aesthetic appeal will be improved. If a homepage is with worse formality aesthetics, the value of aesthetic appeal will not be high. In other words, aesthetic formality may be the basis of user’s aesthetic impression, and aesthetic appeal may be the content at a deeper level. Whether the logical relationship between the two dimensions of homepage aesthetics really exists has not been studied. We therefore proposed that:H2Aesthetic formality has a significant and positive influence on aesthetic appeal.Russell and Mehrabian [38], and Russell et al. [39], have found that both arousal and pleasure can explain most of the variances of emotions and the dominance can be seen as redundant in a sense. Thus, the dominance was not considered in this study. Based on the results of relationship between arousal and pleasure [2,34], under the context of comprehensive job-hunting website, we proposed the same hypotheses:H3aEnergetic arousal has a significant and positive influence on pleasure.Tense arousal has a significant and negative influence on pleasure.Chang et al.’s study [2] shows that aesthetic formality and aesthetic appeal of the online shopping website is positively related to dominance, and dominance is positively related to energetic arousal and negatively related to tense arousal. Regardless of dominance, whether aesthetic formality and aesthetic appeal can directly have relations with energetic arousal and tense arousal were not examined. In addition, though scholars [27,40] have suggested that aesthetics of computer interfaces is a strong determinant of users’ pleasure, Chang et al. didn’t find the directly significant relationship between webpage aesthetics and pleasure, while Casey and Poropat [37] found that classical aesthetics of the web survey interface has a significant and negative influence on negative emotion, expressive aesthetics has a significant and positive influence on positive emotion, and, interestingly, additional post hoc analyses indicated that expressive aesthetics was also positively related to negative emotion. In Casey and Poropat’s study [37], the International Positive and Negative Affect Schedule Short Form (I-PANAS-SF) was used to measure users’ emotion state. Though they didn’t distinguish the emotion from the perspective of pleasure and arousal, from the scales, we can found that the positive emotion state is exactly the same with high pleasure and high energetic arousal, and negative emotion state is exactly the same with low pleasure and high tense arousal. Thus, through comparing the studies of Chang et al. [2] and Casey and Poropat [37], it can be seen that the influences of aesthetic design on emotion states are still controversial. The reason may be associated with the difference of research objects. Casey and Poropat [37] pointed out that the non-significant relationship between the quality of classical aesthetics of the web survey interface and positive emotion suggests that effective use of classical aesthetics principles seems to be expected by users and does not necessarily contribute to the positivity of uses’ evaluations. And for a design with higher expressive aesthetics, compared with the online shopping webpage, the web survey interface design within the task domain of web survey participation (which is cognitively demanding and influenced by interface usability) could elicit negative evaluations.At present, no aesthetic formality and aesthetic appeal principles for comprehensive job-hunting website homepage have been put forward. And the quality of aesthetic formality and aesthetic appeal of these homepages now is varied, which in turn may elicit users’ different emotions. Based on the studies of Lavie and Tractinsky [27], Chang et al. [2] and Casey and Poropat [37], we proposed the following hypotheses to check the direct relations between homepage aesthetics and emotions.H4aAesthetic formality has a significant and positive influence on energetic arousal.Aesthetic formality has a significant and positive influence on pleasure.Aesthetic formality has a significant and negative influence on tense arousal.Aesthetic appeal has a significant and positive influence on energetic arousal.Aesthetic appeal has a significant and positive influence on pleasure.Aesthetic appeal has a significant and negative influence on tense arousal.Lastly, satisfaction as a measure of the users’ overall attitude about aesthetic perception of a homepage, whether it can be affected by users’ emotion and perceived ease of use, and whether there are different contributions of perceived ease of use, pleasure, energetic arousal and tense arousal to it, accordingly:H6aPerceived ease of use has a significant and positive influence on satisfaction.Pleasure has a significant and positive influence on satisfaction.Energetic arousal has a significant and positive influence on satisfaction.Tense arousal has a significant and negative influence on satisfaction.The research model proposed in the current study is shown in Fig. 1. And the hypotheses are necessary supplements to the studies of Wang et al. [18] and Chang et al. [2], to some extent.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
