@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Novel voltage programming n-channel TFT pixel circuit for low power and high performance AMOLED displays

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel 7T1C pixel circuit is proposed for high resolution, high frame rate, and low power AMOLED displays.The whole line time is in use only for charging the data voltage.The current non-uniformity is reduced to 2.5% at a 240Hz full-HD AMOLED display.The average compensated voltage error is reduced to 0.18V, compared to 0.75V of 5T2C.The initialization power consumptions are 98mW and the dynamic power saving is 98.7% over 5T2C.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
High resolution,High frame rate,Low power,Voltage programming,n-Channel TFT,AMOLED pixel circuit,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper proposes a novel pixel circuit for high resolution, high frame rate, and low power AMOLED displays that is implemented with one driving n-channel TFT, six switching n-channel poly-Si TFTs, and a storage capacitor. The proposed pixel circuit adopts the voltage programming scheme for threshold voltage compensation. Because the whole line time is in use only for charging the data voltage, this pixel circuit is applicable to high resolution and frame rate displays. In addition, it compensates voltage variation of OLEDs and voltage drop of supply lines at lower power consumption. On the average, the non-uniformity of a proposed circuit is reduced to 2.5%, compared to 7.1% of the previous one at a 240Hz full-HD display. On the other hand, the compensation voltage error, which is caused by feed-through and charge injection noises from falling control signals of switching TFTs, is much less in the proposed scheme than in the previous 5T2C structure. The average error of the proposed circuit is reduced to 0.18V, compared to 0.75V of the previous one. The initialization power consumption of the 7T1C circuit is reduced to 98mW, compared to 530mW of the 5T2C circuit and the average dynamic power saving ratio of data drivers is estimated in the 7T1C pixel as 98.7% over the 5T2C one for 24 test images.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Active matrix organic light emitting diode (AMOLED) displays have been designed in portable devices such as mobile phones and tablet PCs on the back of fast response time, wide color gamut, wide viewing angle, high contrast ratio, slim and light module, and low material cost [1]. Even though AMOLED TVs have been mass-produced in 2013, there exist several issues in AMOLED displays, such as non-uniformity, the voltage drop on the supply line, and power consumption.A basic AMOLED pixel circuit consists of one driving transistor and one switching transistor at the backplane of poly silicon (poly-Si) thin film transistors (TFTs) which have much higher mobility than amorphous silicon (a-Si). However, because a poly-Si TFT suffers from the threshold voltage variation over the area, the luminance non-uniformity problem is observed on the screen without any additional compensation circuitries [2]. This non-uniformity issue has improved by voltage programming, current programming, digital driving, and external programming schemes [3–6].Whereas p-channel poly-Si TFTs have been widely employed due to the hot carrier issue of n-channel TFTs and the OLED implementation issue [7], some previous papers have proposed an AMOLED pixel circuit with n-channel poly-Si TFTs. Unlike the liquid crystal pixels consume no current after charging pixel electrodes, AMOLED pixels continue to flow the current from the supply line. As a consequence, AMOLED pixels experience the different supply voltages according to the position, which in turn, lead to the non-uniform luminance issue in a p-channel TFT circuit [8]. An n-channel TFT circuit can cope with supply voltage drop without additional circuitries because the supply is connected to a drain terminal in a saturation region. Also, the n-channel TFT pixel circuits can reduce the supply voltage of data drivers, which leads to lower power consumption [9], since the current is programmed by the voltage difference between data and low supply whereas the p-channel TFT circuits make use of the difference between data and high supply voltages. However, the n-channel circuits have to connect the anode of an OLED to the source of a driving TFT. In that the current is affected by the voltage across an OLED, the n-channel pixel structure and programming scheme can be more complicated, compared to p-channel TFT circuit. Tai introduced a voltage programming pixel circuit which utilized one n-channel driving TFT, three n-channel switching TFTs, one p-channel switching TFT, and one storage capacitor [10]. Although the gate voltage of a driving TFT can be directly programmed by data voltage with only two control signals, the additional initialization period within each line time hinders the pixel circuit from increasing its operating frequency. Furthermore, the voltage variation across an OLED cannot be compensated and the fabrication cost increases due to CMOS process. Lee proposed an n-channel a-Si:H TFT pixel circuit which consists of six TFTs and one storage capacitor with two control signals [11]. It has the same frequency issue due to the initialization period employed within a line time. It is hard to execute the initialization in the other period of time since the data line voltage level is changed by the connection to VDD and VSS through TFTs. On top of that, because the negative data voltage is required to program the current, the negative voltage should be supplied to power-consuming data drivers. Jung introduced the threshold voltage compensation scheme for both driving TFT and OLED with five TFTs and one capacitor [12]. This structure must discharge capacitor and OLED with very low current through a driving TFT in one line time. Therefore, the sufficient compensation cannot be achieved in high resolution and frame rate displays. Moreover, there is another problem that the initial gate voltage may be too low to turn on a driving TFT in the compensation period according to the image sequences. Wu proposed an AMOLED pixel circuit of five n-channel TFTs and two capacitors (5T2C), where C1 and C2 are 0.2pF and 0.4pF, as illustrated in Fig. 1(a) and (b) [13]. Since the 5T2C circuit operates at three sub-periods during one line time, the high speed line driving requiring for high resolution and frame rate displays is not realized by the resultant short charging time of the data voltage.On the other hand, three previous pixel circuits excluding Jung’s structure experience the high short current during the initialization period, which causes high power consumption [10,11,13]. When the internal node voltages are initialized, high and low supply voltages are connected to each other through turned-on switching TFTs where the high short current path is brought out. Notably, each sub-period of Fig. 1(b) in Wu’s pixel circuit [13] needs different level from the target data voltage which brings about additional voltage swings on the data line of high capacitance even at the one-gray-level image and considerably increases the power consumption of data drivers.As mentioned above, because the anode of an OLED is connected to the source of a driving TFT in an n-channel TFT pixel circuit, the most structures adjust both gate and source voltages during the compensation period. Then, the following period has to keep the voltage difference between gate and source of a driving TFT. However, the coupling via overlap capacitors and charge injection in the switching TFTs cause the compensation voltage deviation.This paper presents the high speed voltage programming pixel circuit of n-channel poly-Si TFTs which is allowed to use the full line time as a compensation period. In addition, the power consumption of data drivers is dramatically reduced by removing the requirement of intermediate data voltage for compensation. Finally, the deviation of the gate-source voltage in a driving TFT is ameliorated. In particular, the proposed architecture is compared to Wu’s 5T2C circuit of Fig. 1[13].A proposed AMOLED pixel circuit contains seven n-channel TFTs and one storage capacitor (7T1C) as shown in Fig. 2(a) where T3 is a driving TFT. VDD and VSS refer to a power supply line and a ground line. VSCAN1[n], VSCAN2[n], VSCAN3[n], and VEM[n] are control signal lines and VDATA is a data signal line. Particularly, VSCAN3[n] and VEM[n] are the inverted signals of VSCAN2[n] and VSCAN1[n], respectively. As a timing diagram depicted in Fig. 2(b), the operation of a proposed circuit consists of initialization period, compensation period, and emission period.Each operation is explained in more detail as follows.(1) Initialization period: In this period, VSCAN2[n] and VEM[n] are high which sets T1, T2, T6, and T7 to be on, while VSCAN1[n] turns off T4 to initialize the voltage across a storage capacitor (CST) up to VDD as depicted in Fig. 3(a). Therefore, T3 is guaranteed to be on for any data voltage levels because the gate voltage of T3 (VG) is programmed at the highest voltage level as explained in (1).In addition, no current flows take place through an OLED from VDD due to T5 of an off state, which guarantees that there would be no degradation on an OLED and no power consumption during this period. Since this initialization process can be conducted at the compensation period of a previous line, this period does not require any sub-periods within the line time, which helps increasing the line frequency.(2) Compensation period: VEM[n] becomes low so that T1 and T6 are turned off to stop initializing. VSCAN1[n] and VSCAN2[n] turns on T2, T4, and T7. T4 charges the source of T3 (VS) with VDATA while T3 is configured as a diode connected TFT by T2. Then, the gate voltage is decreased to VDATA+VTH3 where VTH3 is the threshold voltage of T3 as shown in Fig. 3(b). Since one terminal of CST, an A-node, is connected to VSS via T7, the voltage across CST (VCST) is settled at VDATA+VTH3 as described in (2). In this period, no current is consumed from VDD to VSS due to T5.(3) Emission period: Whereas VEM[n] and VSCAN3[n] set the current path from VDD to VSS via the OLED emitting the light output and connects CST to the anode of an OLED, the other control signals turn TFTs off as depicted in Fig. 3(c). Because the gate of T3 becomes floating, the voltage increase across an OLED (VOLED) affects both terminals of CST at the same amount and VG is settled at the voltage presented in (3).As a consequence, the gate-source voltage of T3 (VCST) is maintained at VDATA+VTH3 independently of the variation of the voltage across an OLED (VOLED) during one frame time. Finally, the resultant OLED current (IOLED) is programmed as (4) which is independent of VTH3 and VOLED.(4)IOLED=β(VG-VS-VTH3)2=β(VG-VOLED-VTH3)2=β(VCST+VOLED-VOLED-VTH3)2=β(VDATA+VTH3-VTH3)2=β(VDATA)2,where β is (1/2)μnCox(W/L).As explained above, the proposed pixel circuit programs the uniform OLED current independently of the threshold voltage variation. Also, this circuit maintains the gate-source voltage of a driving TFT at VDATA+VTH3 during the emission period which allows for compensating the variation of VOLED at the OLED. The voltage drop at VDD lines can be resolved because VDD is connected to the drain terminal of a driving TFT and the drain current is independent of a drain voltage at the saturation region. Especially, this circuit facilitates the implementation of higher resolution and frame rate displays because the data voltage can be charged during the whole line time, compared to the previous 5T2C circuit. In addition, the 7T1C pixel circuit takes much smaller area than 5T2C since one large area capacitor is removed with two small area switching TFTs, compared to 5T2C.Also, our pixel circuit does not require different voltage levels from the target data voltage to compensate the threshold voltage variation, which achieves low power consumption. Because there is no current path from VDD to VSS during initialization, the proposed circuit structure contributes to further power reduction, compared to previous pixel circuits. Whereas the 5T2C circuit sets the gate voltage of a driving TFT to the smaller value than the data voltage through two capacitors, the proposed 7T1C transfers the data voltage to the gate of a driving TFT directly. Therefore, the equivalent current can be programmed for the same data voltage with the smaller driving TFT in 7T1C than 5T2C.On the other hand, while the 5T2C circuit of Fig. 1(a) connects the storage capacitor (C2) to the anode of an OLED directly, the 7T1C one embodies a TFT of T6 between them. After the compensation period, the following emission period should maintain the voltage across the storage capacitor. However, the feed-through and charge injection noises from falling control signals of switching TFTs (VSCAN1[n] for 5T2C and VSCAN2[n] for 7T1C) cause some voltage deviation. In the case of 5T2C, since the voltage change of an A-node (ΔVA1) is lessened from that of a G-node (ΔVG1) by C2/(C2+CA1)<1/2 due to the large capacitance of an OLED as described in Fig. 4(a), the feed-through and charge injection from VSCAN1[n] of T2 and T4 bring the bigger variation out at the G-node than that at the A-node, which results in some errors of the voltage across the storage capacitor. 7T1C has smaller capacitance at the A-node than CST as shown in Fig. 4(b), because the A-node is disconnected to an OLED by T6. As the voltage change of an A-node (ΔVA2) becomes CST/(CST+CA2)×ΔVG2≈ΔVG2, the compensated gate-source voltage of 7T1C is maintained in an emission period with much smaller errors than 5T2C.The proposed 7T1C AMOLED pixel circuit has been simulated by using SMART-SPICE with the modified RPI model (LEVEL=36). Table 1shows simulation parameter values which are extracted from a fabricated n-channel poly-Si coplanar top-gate TFT. The device structure and transfer curve of an n-channel poly-Si TFT are depicted in Fig. 5(a) and (b), respectively.Fig. 6presents the voltage waveforms of each node in Fig. 2(a) for three periods when VDATA is 2V and the frame frequency is 240Hz at the full-HD (1920×1080) resolution. In the initialization period, VG is initialized by VDD which is 15V. In the following compensation period, VS is charged with VDATA and VG is programmed at VDATA+VTH3 as explained above during the whole line time. Then, the emission period emits the output light from an OLED according to the current described in (4).The compensated current curves of a proposed circuit are depicted with regard to the data voltage at threshold voltage variation of a driving TFT (ΔVTH3=−0.3, 0, and +0.3V) and OLED turn-on voltage variation (ΔVOLED=0 and +0.3V) in Fig. 7, compared to that of 5T2C designed at the same parameter values of Table 1 without any variation on TFT threshold voltage and OLED turn-on voltage. The OLED current of a proposed circuit is almost nine times larger than that of a 5T2C circuit at the given data voltage. Thus, for a 5T2C circuit to make the equivalent current, the width of a driving TFT should be increased substantially, which generates the increase in the pixel size.Fig. 8compares the non-uniformity of OLED current, which is defined as ΔIOLED/IOLED, at a 240Hz full-HD AMOLED display with regard to the data voltage for the proposed 7T1C and previous 5T2C pixel circuits when there are the TFT threshold voltage variation of ±0.3V and the OLED turn-on voltage variation of +0.3V. The non-uniformity of a 7T1C circuit is less than that of a 5T2C circuit over all the data voltages because the 7T1C circuit is permitted to charge the data voltage during the whole line time. At the full-HD 240Hz display which has the line time of 4μs, the average values of OLED current non-uniformity are about 2.5% for the proposed circuit whereas the 5T2C circuit shows the non-uniformity of 7.1%. Fig. 9compares the voltage errors across storage capacitors over the data voltage for compensation and emission periods with the OLED capacitor model of 2pF. While the previous 5T2C circuit shows the increasing voltage errors for the data voltage, the proposed 7T1C circuit maintains the voltage errors at the constant value which is lower than that of the previous one. The average error of the proposed circuit is reduced to 0.18V, compared to 0.75V of the previous one.Table 2compares the total estimated area of TFTs and capacitors for 5T2C and 7T1C structures where the unit area capacitance is supposed to be 50nF/cm2[13]. The area of a TFT is obtained by multiplying the product of channel length and width with three, considering the source and drain regions. The resultant 7T1C circuit area is smaller than 5T2C by 16%.The power consumptions of initialization period and data drivers are evaluated for proposed 7T1C and previous 5T2C circuits. The power dissipated by the initialization is estimated by SMART-SPICE simulation for a 240Hz full-HD display. In the case of 5T2C, the initialization period is set to 0.5μs. The resultant power consumptions are 530mW and 98mW for 5T2C and 7T1C, respectively. 7T1C consumes much smaller power than 5T2C by 80%.The dynamic power consumption of data drivers is evaluated over 24 test images as described in Fig. 10[9]. It is assumed that the size of a driving TFT in 5T2C is designed to support the equivalent current level to that of 7T1C for the given data line voltage. That is, 5T2C requires higher data voltage to drive the same OLED current by a=(C1+C2)/C1. For the 5T2C scheme, each pixel has two transitions from VSS to aVDATA and from aVDATA to VSS as shown in Fig. 1(b). Consequently, the dynamic power (DP5T2C) can be obtained as (5).(5)DP5T2C=k·2∑i=13N∑j=1M(aVDATA(i,j)-VSS)2where k is the coefficient, 3N is the total number of column lines, M is the total number of row lines and VDATA(i,j) is the target data voltage of an i-th column and j-th row sub-pixel.For the 7T1C circuit, there is only one transition of the data voltage from a previous line to a current line in each pixel. Therefore, the dynamic power consumption (DP7T1C) can be calculated by (6).(6)DP7T1C=k∑i=13N∑j=1M(VDATA(i,j)-VDATA(i,j-1))2Fig. 11presents the normalized power saving ratios of a 7T1C structure over a 5T2C one, which is expressed in (7), representing that the proposed scheme establishes the tremendous power reduction of 98.7% for data driver circuitries, on the average.(7)Power Saving Ratio(%)=DP5T2C-DP7T1CDP5T2C×100

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We demonstrated a high speed pixel circuit for high resolution and frame rate AMOLED displays where the voltage programming method is consolidated to compensate the threshold voltage variation. The proposed 7T1C pixel circuit outperforms the previous 5T2C circuit in the points of view of uniformity, pixel area, and power consumption. Especially, the SMART-SPICE simulation ensures that the uniformity and compensation voltage error of a proposed 7T1C circuit is reduced to 2.5% and 0.18V, on the average, compared to 7.1% and 0.75V of the previous 5T2C circuit at the full-HD 240Hz display. In addition, the power consumption of the initialization and the dynamic power consumption of data drivers are reduced by 80% and 98.7% in the 7T1C scheme from that of the 5T2C one. As a consequence, the proposed 7T1C circuit can pave the way for the high resolution, high frame rate and low power AMOLED displays.