@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Visual accessibility in graphic design: A client–designer communication failure

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We conducted a survey of 122 graphic designers and clients.We investigated the consideration given to visual accessibility in graphic design.Designers and clients do not communicate effectively about visual accessibility.We need to develop tools to assist designers with visual accessibility.We need to investigate the development of ethical design codes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
graphic design,communication,design processes,user centred design,visual accessibility,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
It is essential that graphic design is visually clear and accessible. However, evidence suggests that a lack of consideration is given to visual accessibility in print-based graphic design. Furthermore, effective client–designer communication is a vital component in this. This paper investigates current graphic design practice, with regard to visual accessibility, specifically focussing on client–designer communication. A survey of 122 graphic designers and clients identified that these two groups may not be communicating with each other effectively with regard to visual accessibility, and that there is a need to develop inclusive design tools to assist them with this. This paper adds a novel contribution to our limited understanding of visual accessibility in the UK's graphic design industry.Inaccessible graphic design is commonplace. From drug packaging (Swayne, 2005) to software interfaces (Keates, Clarkson, & Robinson, 2002) it makes daily tasks difficult or even dangerous. Due in part to an ageing population, it now is estimated that two million people in the UK have some form of sight loss (Access Economics, 2009) with many more being affected by milder age-related visual problems. Furthermore, the introduction of the Disability Discrimination Act (DDA, 1995), and the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA, 1990), result in strong legal, social responsibility and business drivers (Waller, Bradley, Hosking, & Clarkson, 2015) to ensure that graphic design is visually accessible. However, designers report that a lack of client requests for visual accessibility limits the consideration they can give to it (Dong, Keates, & Clarkson, 2004). Clients also hold the misconception that designers will take visual accessibility into account even if it is not in the brief (Cornish, Goodman-Deane, & Clarkson, 2015). This suggests that designers and clients may not be communicating effectively. A widespread study of the graphic design industry is vital in determining what happens with regard to visual accessibility in practice.This paper presents the results of a survey of the graphic design industry. It investigated the factors that influence how important graphic designers and clients deem visual accessibility to be, the extent to which it is considered in practice, and the extent to which clients and designers communicate regarding visual accessibility. Inclusive design tools that aid client–designer communication could provide an important supplement to existing tools, and result in a greater uptake of inclusive design in industry. This paper provides valuable insight into graphic design practice with regard to visual accessibility. It is hoped that this work, and subsequent research, will help to develop new procedures, processes and tools, to improve client–designer communication and assist graphic designers in creating visually accessible designs.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The main findings presented in this paper are as follows:Poor client–designer communication may be preventing visual accessibility from being considered in the graphic design industry. We need to develop tools that aid client–designer communication surrounding visual accessibility in graphic design. This could include adapting existing tools such as visual capability loss simulator tools (Goodman-Deane, Langdon, Clarkson, Caldwell, & Sarhan, 2007), or developing new ones. Client–designer communication could also be improved through the development of ethical codes of practice, highlighting the responsibility of both groups in driving this issue.There is a need to investigate more appropriate avenues for visual accessibility tool dissemination and promotion, to overcome the lack of awareness of these tools in industry. For example, these tools should be included in graphic design education, but could also be promoted through design websites, blogs and social media platforms such as YouTube tutorials.Further research is required to investigate the causes of the clients' importance of visual accessibility decreasing with experience. This paper presents some possible explanations, but these are supposition and require further investigation. This paper also highlights the importance of the client's influence in considering visual accessibility, which is an area that lacks existing research.We need to reconcile, not the perception of the importance of visual accessibility, but the communication of the need for it, between graphic designers and clients. Acknowledging these issues, and taking steps to improve the situation will help improve the visual accessibility of graphic design for everyone.