@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Using Software Defined Networking to enhance the delivery of Video-on-Demand

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
High quality video streaming has become an essential part of many consumers’ lives.We designed OpenCache; an OpenFlow-assisted in-network caching service.OpenCache benefits last mile environments by improving network utilisation.OpenCache increases the Quality of Experience for the end-user.OpenCache was evaluated on a large pan-European OpenFlow testbed with clear benefits.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Video-on-Demand (VoD),Caching,Quality of Experience (QoE),Software Defined Networking (SDN),OpenCache,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
High quality online video streaming, both live and on-demand, has become an essential part of many consumers’ lives. The popularity of video streaming, however, places a burden on the underlying network infrastructure. This is because it needs to be capable of delivering significant amounts of data in a time-critical manner to users. The Video-on-Demand (VoD) distribution paradigm uses a unicast independent flow for each user request. This results in multiple duplicate flows carrying the same video assets that only serve to exacerbate the burden placed upon the network. In this paper we present OpenCache: a highly configurable, efficient and transparent in-network caching service that aims to improve the VoD distribution efficiency by caching video assets as close to the end-user as possible. OpenCache leverages Software Defined Networking technology to benefit last mile environments by improving network utilisation and increasing the Quality of Experience for the end-user. Our evaluation on a pan-European OpenFlow testbed uses adaptive bitrate video to demonstrate that with the use of OpenCache, streaming applications play back higher quality video and experience increased throughput, higher bitrate, and shorter start up and buffering times.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Online video streaming has seen a huge growth in popularity during recent years. This includes the consumption of both live and on-demand content. In 2013, Internet video traffic represented 66% of all global Internet traffic, and is predicted to increase to 79% by 2018 [2]. At the same time, the popularity of Video-on-Demand (VoD) traffic also continues to increase, with consumer VoD traffic expected to double by 2018: transporting the equivalent of 6 billion DVDs per month [2]. High Definition (HD) video traffic has already surpassed that of Standard Definition (SD) [3], and with the introduction of Ultra-High Definition (UHD) content providers will continue to push expectations in the availability of higher video quality and bitrates. Undoubtedly, high quality online video streaming has become an essential part of many consumers’ lives.In a Video-on-Demand scenario, individuals are able to retrieve content for playback after the initial broadcast. The growth in VoD traffic, coupled with the trend towards content of higher resolution and quality, such as HD and UHD, presents significant challenges. In particular, the evolution in video quality requires networks that are capable of transferring significant amounts of data, in the order of tens or hundreds of Mbps for a single video stream, in a time-sensitive manner. This increase, together with the general growth in traffic, places an additional burden on the underlying network and distribution infrastructure.Currently, VoD requests are handled individually, leading to an independent flow in the distribution network serving each user’s request. Using such a unicast content delivery paradigm naively ignores that much of the content is identical to transmissions minutes, hours or days earlier. Hence, a very large amount of identical media objects, in the order of gigabytes for a typical HD film, are delivered over the same network segment repeatedly. In order to efficiently support such VoD streaming, the end-to-end capacity of the network must continuously match the increasing number of Internet video users and the growing popularity of higher resolution content. Mechanisms are therefore sought to improve the efficiency of VoD distribution.In this paper we introduce OpenCache: a transparent, flexible and highly configurable in-network caching service for VoD streaming. OpenCache’s contribution is to provide a programmable service that allows any caching strategy, e.g. [4–8], to be easily deployed within the network infrastructure. To achieve this goal, OpenCache uses Software Defined Networking (SDN) to provide cache as a service for media content in an efficient and transparent fashion. This is achieved through powerful interfaces, designed to directly benefit last mile environments. By leveraging SDN, and OpenFlow in particular [9], we provide a control plane that orchestrates the caching and distribution functionalities, and transparently pushes the content as close to the user as possible without requiring any changes in the delivery methods or the end-hosts.Our approach, building an SDN-based in-network caching service, has three important contributions. Firstly, it improves network utilisation and minimises the external link usage on the last mile. Secondly, OpenCache reduces the distribution load from the VoD content provider and all the transient networks along the path of the VoD server to the end-user. Thirdly, by transparently caching the content closer to the user, OpenCache minimises the distance between the VoD streaming server and the user. This provides significant improvements to the Quality of Experience (QoE) of the end-user, as the streaming application observes higher throughput, higher minimum and average streaming bitrate, and smaller start up and buffering times; key QoE differentiators [10–12].The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. Section 2 provides the background of this work, whilst related work is presented in Section 3. Section 4 introduces the main components and functionality of OpenCache, whereas Section 5 describes the benefits achieved with using SDN. Evaluation is described in Section 6 and finally, Section 7 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
