@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The Spectral Radiance Piecewise Partition Model for characterizing Liquid Crystal Displays

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The SRPPM presents a three piecewise partition characterization model for LCD with the display spectral radiance.The characterization is simplified by the cubic polynomial algorithm.The number of color samples for display characterization is reduced by using SRPPM.The experimental results show the good performance of the SRPPM.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
LCD,Display characterization,Spectral radiance,Piecewise partition model,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The Spectral Radiance Piecewise Partition Model (SRPPM) is a new model for characterizing Liquid Crystal Displays (LCD). According to the additive property of the spectral radiances of the primary displayed color, the SRPPM model can be divided into three subspace partitions to calculate the transfer coefficient matrixes with cubic polynomial, which based on the relationship between the digital input of the LCD and the spectral radiance of displayed color. The color difference was used to evaluate the accuracy of this model. Comparing with other characterization models for LCD, the experimental results show that the average color difference of SRPPM is 0.82ΔE76, and 80% of the color differences between color samples are less than 1ΔE76.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Liquid–Crystal Displays (LCD) are gaining recognition in terms of high luminance, large contrast ratio, sharpness, spatial uniformity and low power consumption. It replaced the Cathode Ray Tube (CRT) monitor as in color graphic reproduction the LCD has better and smoother color reproduction, such as the softproofing technology. Comparing with CRT displays, the LCD has strong channel interaction and non-constancy of channel chromaticity.The displays characterization aims to model the relationship between digital input of the display and the displayed color (in a device independent color space based on Commission Internationale de L’Eclairage (CIE) chromaticity, such as CIEXYZ or CIELAB, or the spectral radiance).Gain-offset-gamma (GOG) model [1,7,9] is a well-known colorimetric characterization. The GOG model uses the gain-offset-gamma or gain-offset gamma-offset models. It characterizes the electro-optical transfer function by using exponential curve. However, the GOG model cannot be used to characterize an LCD accurately.The CRT display has a physics basis, whereas an LCD depends on the specific cell construction. Therefore, the operating mode and usual remapping were generally via a voltage ladder or look-up table to compensate a suboptimal relationship between voltage and perceived lightness to mimic CRTs. Here, the S-curve and S-shape model, polynomial model and masking models are proposed as colorimetric characterization of LCD.The chromaticity of LCD technology varies with the input voltage and the relationship between digital input of the LCD and the displayed color is fitted well with S-shaped curve [2,6]. Therefore, the S-curve and S-shape model characterizes the electro-optical transfer function by using an S-shaped curve.Because of the nonlinear relationship between digital input of the LCD and the chromaticity of displayed color, the polynomial model characterizes the electro-optical transfer function by using the polynomial function.Masking model considered the channel interaction and non-constancy of channel chromaticity when characterized the LCD. Masking model based on the theory of UCR (Under Color Removal) in printing technology, measured the secondary and tertiary color to approximate the channel interaction and the primary color vector. This model is calculated by using Principal Component Analysis (PCA) to minimize the error that caused by the variation in the channel chromaticity [3].Because of the channel scalability and independence of LCD are not met, all those colorimetry models have the prediction error and require a large number of measurements to characterize LCD.There are many researches about spectral characterization. Senfar Wen used the spectral radiance of displayed color to analyze the crosstalk of two primary channels. In this study, two primary crosstalk spectra were defined as the two-primary spectra subtracted the sum of the two-primary spectra and black spectra [4,11]. The computation effectiveness was evaluated by using the spectral radiance of displayed color to compensate the two-primary crosstalk.Haoxue Liu presented a model that based on the relationship between the digital input of LCD and the wavelength of spectral radiance of displayed color, and the computation accuracy of it was higher than other colorimetric characterizations [5]. However, his model did not implement well when the digital input of LCD was small, especially less than 85.This paper presents a Spectral Radiance Piecewise Partition Model (SRPPM) for characterizing LCD based on the spectral radiance of the displayed color in the center of LCD screen. The SRPPM includes three subspace partitions for calculating the transfer coefficient matrixes with cubic polynomial, which based on the varying relationship between the digital input of LCD and the spectral radiance of displayed color. The SRPPM applies well whether the digital input of LCD is small or large, and is more effective than the other models.Measure Instrument: Konic-minolta CS-2000 Spectroradiometer (0.1/50cm distance, aperture of 0.1°, resolution 1nm).Display: NEC MultiSync EA191M (19in., PVA, best resolution 1280×1024, screen percentage 5:4, dot distance 0.294mm, luminance 250cd/m2, response time 25ms, angle of view 176/176°).Graphics board: NVIDIA GeForce 310.Calibration condition: D65 illumination pre-heated 2h.The colorimetric characterization was performed in the ProfileMaker 5.10 software environment. MeasureTool was used to display color samples and interact with the measurement instruments. MeasureTool is software for color measurement, monitor calibration and characterization. Different from others, it does not re-render the display profile.Lighting: Measurements were taken place in a dark room. The white point of the display was calibrated into D65.Three sets of RGB values were created for this test. The first set was three 17-step ramps from 0 to 255 of the red, green, and blue channels, individually. The second set was three 17-step ramps in digital counts from 0 to 255 of the equal amount of red adding green, green adding blue, and blue adding red channels, individually. The third set was created as one 17-step ramp from 0 to 255 of the sum of equal amount of red, green and blue. The total number of the color sample was 884.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
