@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
“Secondary doping” methods to significantly enhance the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS for its application as transparent electrode of optoelectronic devices

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
PEDOT:PSS is promising to be the next-generation transparent electrode.This article reviews the “secondary doping” methods for conductivity enhancement of PEDOT:PSS.The conductivity of PEDOT:PSS can be comparable to ITO.Highly conductive PEDOT:PSS films were used for polymer light-emitting diodes and polymer solar cells.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
PEDOT:PSS,Conducting polymer,Transparent electrode,ITO,Polymer light-emitting diode,Polymer solar cell,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) is the most successful conducting polymer in terms of the practical application. It can be dispersed in water and some polar organic solvents, and high-quality PEDOT:PSS films can be readily prepared through solution processing. In addition, PEDOT:PSS is highly transparent in the visible range and has excellent thermal stability. Nevertheless, PEDOT:PSS has a problem of low conductivity. The as-prepared PEDOT:PSS films from its aqueous solution have a conductivity of lower than 1Scm−1, which severely impedes the application of PEDOT:PSS in various aspects. It has been discovered that the conductivity of as-prepared PEDOT:PSS from its aqueous solution can be significantly enhanced by adding organic compounds like high-boiling point polar organic solvents, ionic liquids and surfactants or through a post-treatment of PEDOT:PSS films with organic compounds, including high-boiling point polar solvents, salts, zwitterions, cosolvents, organic and inorganic acids. Conductivity of more than 3000Scm−1 was recently observed on PEDOT:PSS films after treated with sulfuric acid. This conductivity is comparable to that of indium tin oxide (ITO), the conventional transparent electrode material of optoelectronic devices. In addition, PEDOT:PSS has high mechanical flexibility while ITO is a brittle material. Thus, PEDOT:PSS is very promising to be the next-generation transparent electrode material. This article reviews the methods to enhance the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS, the mechanisms for the conductivity enhancements and the application of the highly conductive PEDOT:PSS films in polymer light-emitting diodes and polymer solar cells.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Optoelectronic devices, including liquid crystal displays (LCDs), light-emitting diodes (LEDs), solar cells, touch panel displays, lasers and detectors, have important application in many areas and indispensible in our life. Their market has been huge and has been continuously growing. An optoelectronic device requires at least one transparent electrode in order to emit or harvest light. Although indium tin oxide (ITO) is currently the most popular material as the transparent electrode of optoelectronic devices, it has problems of scarce indium on earth which has caused the skyrocketing of the price, high mechanical brittleness that makes it unsuitable for flexible electronic devices, and poor adhesion to organic and polymeric materials [1,2]. Therefore, it is urgently demanded for developing new transparent conductive materials to replace ITO. Many materials, including conducting polymers [3–16], carbon nanotubes [16–21], graphene [22–24] and metal nanowires [25,26], has been investigated as the transparent electrode.Conducting polymers have attracted considerable interests since the discovery of conductive polyacetylene in 1978 [27–29]. Numerous important applications were expected for conducting polymers, because they combine the properties of metals and polymers. However, many of the applications cannot be realized mainly due to the poor processability of the conducting polymers. Most of the conducting polymers in the conductive state are insoluble in any solvent and intractable. Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene): poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS, chemical structure shown in Scheme 1) can be dispersed in water and some polar organic solvents, and high-quality PEDOT:PSS films can be readily prepared on substrates through the conventional solution processing techniques [30,31]. In addition, PEDOT:PSS films have high transparency in the visible range, high mechanical flexibility, and excellent thermal stability. However, an as-prepared PEDOT:PSS film from its aqueous solution usually has a conductivity below 1Scm−1, which is remarkably lower than ITO.To significantly improve the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS is very important for its application as the transparent electrode of optoelectronic devices. In 2002, Kim et al. reported the conductivity enhancement of PEDOT:PSS by adding dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) or dimethylformamide (DMF) into PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution [32]. Since then, many methods have been reported to enhance the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS [33–54]. It was recently observed that the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS can be enhanced to more than 3000Scm−1, comparable to that of ITO [55]. PEDOT:PSS has high mechanical flexibility, while ITO is a brittle material. Therefore, PEDOT:PSS is very promising to the next-generation transparent electrode material.PEDOT in the undoped state have an optical bandgap of 1.5eV, and its maximum absorption is at 2.0eV [56]. The absorption maximum shifts to 0.5eV after doping, so that the conductive PEDOT films are highly transparent in the visible range. Conductive PEDOTs with various counter ions are usually prepared through the polymerization of its monomer, 3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene (EDOT). The EDOT polymerization can be carried out by electrochemical oxidation or chemical oxidation with an oxidant. Electrochemical polymerization can produce PEDOT films on substrates. The PEDOT films can have a conductivity of up to 200Scm−1. They are insoluble in any solvent.Ha et al. carried out a comprehensive investigation on the chemical polymerization of EDOT [57]. Iron (III) tosylate was used as the oxidant. By optimizing experimental conditions, they attained a conductivity of 750Scm−1 for PEDOT doped with toluenesulfonate and a conductivity of 900Scm−1 when methanol-substituted EDOT was used. PEDOTs doped with small counter anions are insoluble in any solvent. The polymer films can be prepared by spin coating a solution of the monomer and an oxidant prior to the polymerization. In order to get the conductive PEDOT films with relatively good quality, the experimental conditions should be precisely controlled.A modification for the chemical polymerization of EDOT in solution is the vapor phase polymerization (VPP) [58–62]. An oxidant, typically iron(III) tosylate, is coated onto a substrate. It forms a solid thin film on substrate after drying. Exposure this substrate to EDOT vapor produces a PEDOT:TsO film on substrate. The conductivity PEDOT:TsO films can be as high as 1500Scm−1 by this method. Recently, Evans et al. modified the VPP method by blending the oxidant with a tri-block polymer, poly(ethylene glycol–propylene glycol–ethylene glycol) (PEG–PPG–PEG). They observed a conductivity of about 2500Scm−1[63].When excess PSS is used as the counter anions of PEDOT, PEDOT:PSS by the chemical polymerization can be dispersed in water and some polymer organic solvents [64,65]. PSS serves as not only the counter anions for the charge balance of the conducting polymer but also the surfactant to stabilize PEDOT in solvents. PEDOT:PSS aqueous solutions are commercially available from both Heraeus and Agfa.The PEDOT chains are stabilized by PSS in solvents for PEDOT:PSS solutions. PEDOT has a molecular weight of about 1000–2500gmol−1, while the molecular weight of PSS is approximately 400,000gmol−1[66]. The PEDOT chains are much shorter than the PSS chains. The short PEDOT chains attach to the long PSS chains due to the Coulombic attraction among them. PEDOT:PSS is a polyelectrolyte with the hydrophobic PEDOT and hydrophilic PSS, so that it has a necklace structure in water. There are principally two types of conformations for the PSS segments because of the different Coulombic interactions and the polymer/water interactions. The Coulombic repulsions among the PSS anions for the PSS segments attached with PEDOT are screened by the positive charges on PEDOT, leading to a coiled conformation for the PSS segments together with attached PEDOT chains (Scheme 2). The PSS segments form blobs to prevent the contact of PEDOT from water, in order to reduce the interactions between PEDOT and water. The blobs have a core/shell structure with PEDOT in the core and PSS in the shell. On the other hand, the PSSH segments without PEDOT attached (excess PSS segment) dissociate into PSS anions and protons. These PSS segments adopt a linear conformation to minimize the Coulombic repulsions among the PSS anions. They act as the strings between the blobs. Moreover, the PSS anions in the shell of each blob try to repulse it away from other blobs. Hence, the blobs try to have separations as far as possible. This necklace structure is conserved in the as-prepared PEDOT:PSS films (Scheme 3). The shell rich of the insulating PSS forms a energy barrier for the charge transport across the PEDOT chains. The coil PEDOT conformation also leads to the location of the charge carriers on the PEDOT chains. Both are blamed as the reasons for the low conductivity of as-prepared PEDOT:PSS films from aqueous solution.A couple of grades of PEDOT:PSS aqueous solutions are commercially available from Heraeus. They are synthesized by the similar procedure [64]. Clevios™ P VP Al 4083 has a low conductivity of 10−3–10−4Scm−1 because of the presence of highly excess PSS in the solution. The conductivity is lower than 10Scm−1 even after a conductivity-enhancement treatment [48]. Thus, this polymer is usually used as the buffer layer rather than as the conductive electrode of electronic devices. It is not the main subject in this article.There are several grades of PEDOT:PSS solutions for highly conductive polymer films, Clevios™ P, Clevios™ PH500, Clevios™ PH750 and Clevios™ PH1000. The weight ratio of PSS to PEDOT is 2.5, that is, the molar ratio of the repeating unit of PEDOT to PSS is 1.8 in these solutions. The as-prepared PEDOT:PSS films from these PEDOT:PSS aqueous solutions have almost the same conductivity of 0.2–1Scm−1. But their conductivities are quite different after a conductivity enhancement treatment. For example, the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS prepared from the Clevios™ P aqueous solution is about 200Scm−1 after a treatment with ethylene glycol (EG), whereas it is 600–700Scm−1 for PEDOT:PSS prepared from the Clevios™ PH1000 solution.In order to understand the different conductivities of the PEDOT:PSS films after a conductivity-enhancement treatment, Xia et al. investigated the gel particle sizes in the Clevios™ P and Clevios™ PH1000 solutions by dynamic light scattering (Fig. 1) [50]. Both Clevios™ PH1000 and Clevios™ P aqueous solutions were diluted to 0.013wt%. The Clevios™ P solution has a size distribution from 170 to 520nm with the maximum at 289nm. The average size is 285nm. But there are two size distribtion peaks for the Clevios™ PH1000 solution. The majority (90%) has a size distribution of 160–940nm with the maximum at 463nm, and the average size is 486nm. The minority (10%) has a size distribution of 16–51nm, and the average size is 30nm.The sizes are related to the globular gel particle structure formed by PEDOT and PSS in water. The PSS segments or chains form globular particles to accormodate the rigid PEDOT chains. Longer PEDOT chains will give rise to larger globular particles in water. The dynamic light scattering results suggest that the particles are larger in Clevios™ PH1000 solution than in Clevios™ P solution. Hence, the PEDOT chains in Clevios™ PH1000 have an higher average molecular weight than in Clevios™ P.The different molecular weights for PEDOTs of Clevios™ P and Clevios™ PH1000 are also revealed by AFM (Fig. 2). The surface morphologies of as-prepared PEDOT:PSS films from the two solutions are different (Figs. 2a and b). The Clevios™ P film is very smooth, while there are grains for the Clevios™ PH1000 film. The rms roughnesses are 1.20nm and 1.06nm for the Clevios™ PH1000 film and the Clevios™ P film, respectively.The different surface morphologies of the PEDOT:PSS films become more significant after the removal of some PSS chain through a treatment with hexafluoroacetone (HFA) [47]. As shown in Fig. 2c and d, the HFA-treated Clevios™ P film has elliptical grains, while fibrous structures appear for the HFA-treated Clevios™ PH1000 film. The different grain shapes can be attributed to the different lengths of the rigid PEDOT chains. Long rigid polymer chains favor the formation of the fibrous structure.In 2002, Kim et al. reported the conductivity enhancement of PEDOT:PSS by adding a polar organic solvent, such as DMSO, DMF or tetrahydrofuran (THF) into Clevios™ P PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution [32]. As shown in Fig. 3. The conductivity at room temperature was enhanced by about two orders when DMSO was added. The conductivity is less remarkable if DMF or THF was added. The temperature dependences of the resistances of the pristine and treated PEDPOT:PSS films indicate that the conduction mechanism does not change after the conductivity enhancement. The charges transport across the PEDOT chains by hopping. Ouyang et al. also reported the addition of a nonionic surfactant, polyoxyethylene(12) tridecyl ether, into PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution in 2002 [67]. But their purpose was to improve the coating of PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution on plastic substrate, and they did not report the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS after the surfactant addition. In fact, the nonionic surfactant can also enhance the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS by a factor of about 20 [37].Since the report by Kim et al., many methods were reported to enhance the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS. Besides DMSO, DMF and THF, many other organic solvents or organic solids can significantly enhance the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS. It is found that polar organic solvents with high boiling point, such as EG, nitromethanol, glycerol and other organic solvents with multiple hydroxyl groups, can significantly enhance the conductivity to about 200Scm−1 for PEDOT:PSS prepared from Clevios™ P aqueous solution. Organic solids like D-sorbitol were also investigated. They can have similar effect on the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS. The conductivity can be enhanced to 600–700Scm−1 for PEDOT:PSS prepared from the Clevios™ PH1000 aqueous solution after the addition of EG or DMSO [47].Ionic liquids were also added into PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution for the conductivity enhancement. As shown in Fig. 4, the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS depends on the structure and concentration of the ionic liquids [36]. The optimal conductivity was more than 100Scm−1 when 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate tetrafluoroborate [(BMIm)BF4] or 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium bromide [(BMIm)Br] was added into Clevios™ P aqueous solution. The optimal concentration of the ionic liquids is 40–70% by weight. Recently, Badre et al. investigated the addition of ionic liquids into Clevios™ PH1000 aqueous solution [68]. As shown in Fig. 5, the conductivity is as high as 2084Scm−1 when 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium tetracyanoborate (EMIM TCB) is added. The highly conductive PEDOT:PSS films with a thickness of about 96nm has a transmittance of 96%.Surfactants were also added into PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution to enhance the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS. Ouyang et al. added the nonionic surfactant, polyoxyethylene(12) tridecyl ether, into PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution in 2002 [67]. This nonionic surfactant can enhance the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS by a factor of 20 [37]. The surfactant effect is related to the chemical structure of the surfactants. The conductivity of PEDOT:PSS can be enhanced by more than two orders in magnitude when an anionic surfactant is used (Fig. 6). But the conductivity hardly changes when a cationic surfactant is used. Anionic surfactants, particularly fluoro-surfactants, were used to improve the conductivity of Clevios™ PH1000 as well [69–71]. Bao et al. reported that the PEDOT:PSS films prepared from the Clevios™ PH1000 aqueous solution added with Zonyl could be used as the stretchable electrode [69,70] (Fig. 7).Apart from adding compounds into the PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution, Ouyang et al. observed significant conductivity enhancement when the PEDOT:PSS films were treated with EG or DMSO [33]. The conductivity enhancement is similar for that by adding compounds into PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution when polar organic solvents with high boiling point, such as EG and DMSO, are used. But the conductivity enhancement is quite different for some other compounds, such as salts, cosolvents and acids. These compounds can also significantly enhance the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS films through a post-coating treatment [41–45]. But the effect on the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS is negligible, when they are added into the PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution. Another merit for the post-coating treat is the easy removal of the compounds from the final PEDOT:PSS films.The conductivity of PEDOT:PSS films can be significantly improved through a treatment with organic solvents having multiple hydroxyl groups, such as EG or glycerol. It is surmised that geminal diols, which have two hydroxyl groups on one carbon atom, can also enhance the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS. HFA can hydrolyze into a geminal diol (Scheme 4). It was used to treat PEDOT:PSS films prepared from Clevios™ PH1000 aqueous solution [47]. As shown in Fig. 8, the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS was significantly improved after the treatment. The conductivity of the PEDOT:PSS films was 1164Scm−1 after treated with HFA·3H2O. It could be further improved to be more than 1300Scm−1 when the treatment was repeated for three times.Other geminal diols, such as formaldehyde and acetone, were also investigated to treat PEDOT:PSS films prepared from Clevios™ PH1000 aqueous solution. The geminal diol formation constants are 106, 103 and 10−3 for HFA, formaldehyde and acetone, respectively. As presented in Table 1, the conductivity enhancement of the PEDOT:PSS films is consistent with the geminal diol formation constant. The compound with a higher geminal diol formation constant can give rise to a higher conductivity.Chu et al. found that the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS films prepared from Clevios™ PH1000 aqueous solution can be significantly improved through a post-treatment with alcohols (Fig. 9) [51]. The conductivity enhancement is quite sensitive to the chemical structure of alcohols. It is 1015Scm−1 after the PEDOT:PSS films are treated with methanol, while it is only 286Scm−1 after treated with i-butanol. In addition, the alcohol-treated PEDOT:PSS films have a better stability in the conductivity than EG-treated and pristine PEDOT:PSS films (Fig. 10).Na et al. discovered the post-treatment could be carried out with polar solvent vapor (Fig. 11) [72]. The temperature during the vapor treatment is 150°C. The conductivity of PEDOT:PSS films increases with the increasing vapor treating time. It is more than 1000Scm−1 after treated for 120min.Kim et al. combined the solvent addition and post-treatment for the conductivity enhancement of PEDOT:PSS (Fig. 12) [46]. The conductivity of PEDOT:PSS is improved to more than 600Scm−1 after the addition of an appropriate amount of EG into Clevios™ PH1000 aqueous solution. The PEDOT:PSS films are then treated with EG vapor. The conductivity is further enhanced to more than 1400Scm−1.Salts were also investigated to enhance the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS films [42,45]. Fig. 13presents the variation of the conductivity of the PEDOT:PSS films with the concentration of the CuCl2 aqueous solution. The conductivity of PEDOT:PSS could be enhanced by more than two orders in magnitude by treating PEDOT:PSS films with aqueous solution of CuCl2 or InCl3.The conductivity enhancement is related to the softness parameter of the cation of the salts (Table 2). Significant conductivity enhancement was observed for InI3, InBr3, InCl3, CuCl2, Cu(ClO4)2 and CuBr2 (Fig. 14a). The cations of these salts have positive softness parameters. However, the conductivity enhancement is negligible when NaCl, MgCl2 or NaiCl2 was used. The cations of these salts have negative softness parameters. The softness parameter of an ion is related to the binding energy of this ion to other species [73]. A cation with a negative (or positive) softness parameter is a hard (or soft) Lewis acid. Thus, the values for the softness parameters of cations are related to the binding strength between the cations and PSS. Hence, the conductivity enhancement of the PEDOT:PSS films treated by a salt solution is related to the binding of the metal ions to the PSS anions of PEDOT:PSS.The conductivity enhancement is also affected by the anion of the salts. For example, the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS was enhanced by only about one order in magnitude when CuSO4 was used, and it hardly changed when Cu(CH3COO)2 was used for the treatment (Fig. 14a). The conductivity of PEDOT:PSS is not so systematic with the softness paremeter of the anions but the association constant of the anions with proton (Fig. 14b). The association constant is related to the acid association constant (Ka) in the reversal process. The dependence of the conductivity enhancement on the cation and anion of the salts suggests that the conductivity enhancement of PEDOT:PSS is related to the association of the cations with PSS and the association of the cations with PEDOT. The associations of the cations and anions with PEDOT:PSS leads to the reduction of the Coulombic attraction between the PEDOT and PSS chains.One concern for the treatment with salts is the residue of small amount of ions in PEDOT:PSS films after the treatment. The ions can diffuse under electric field into other parts of electronic devices. This can deteriorate the performance of the electronic devices. Because the conductivity enhancement is related to the associations of the cations and anions with PEDOT and PSS, similar conductivity should be observed when zwitterions which have both positive and negative charges in the same molecules are used for the treatment.Xia et al. investigated the treatment of PEDOT:PSS films prepared from Clevios™ PH1000 aqueous solution with aqueous solutions of three zwitterions [43]. The chemical structures of the zwitterions are shown in Scheme 5. The conductivity of PEDOT:PSS can be significant enhanced after a treatment with DNSPN or DMCSP aqueous solution, and the conductivity increases with the increase of the zwitterions concentration, similar to that treated with CuCl2 solution (Fig. 15).The two components, PEDOT and PSS, of PEDOT:PSS have different hydrophilicities. They can have different interactions with solvents of different polarities. Xia et al. treated PEDOT:PSS prepared from Clevios™ P solution with cosolvents of water with several organic solvents, including methanol, ethanol, iso-propyl alcohol (IPA), actonitrile (ACN), acetone and THF (Fig. 16) [44]. The conductivity of PEDOT:PSS was enhanced to almost 100Scm−1, and the optimal concentration of the organic solvent about 80% by volume. The conductivity enhancement is attributed to the preferential salvations of PEDOT and PSS with the organic solvent and water.Cosolvents of polar and nonpolar organic solvents were also exploited to treat PEDOT:PSS films. A treatment of PEDOT:PSS films prepared from Clevios™ P with cosolvent of methanol and 1,2-dichlorobenzene hardly affects the conductivity. However, a similar treatment can give rise to a significant conductivity enhancement for PEDOT:PSS films prepared from Clevios™ P VP Al 4083 (Fig. 17) [48]. The conductivity was enhanced from 10−3Scm−1 to close to 10Scm−1 at the optimal ratio of methanol to 1,2-dichlorobenzene. The preferential solvations of PEDOT and PSS are related to the compositions of PEDOT:PSS.The conductivity enhancement of PEDOT:PSS is related to the phase segregation between PEDOT and PSS during the treatment. When the Coulombic attraction between PEDOT and PSS is reduced, phase segregation can occur because PEDOT and PSS have different hydrophilicities. The Coulombic attraction can be screened by various compounds as discussed above. Another strategy to induce the phase segregation is through the protonation of PSS, PSS−+H+→PSSH. The absence of Coulombic attraction between the positively charged PEDOT chains and neutral PSSH chains can lead to the phase segregation between PEDOT and PSS. This suggests that the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS can be enhanced through a treatment with acids. Fig. 18presents the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS films prepared from Clevios™ P aqueous solution after the treatment with various organic and inorganic acids [41]. The conductivity of the PEDOT:PSS films is enhanced to more than 100Scm−1. It is more than 200Scm−1 when oxalic acid or sulfurous acid is used. Howden et al. also observed conductivity enhancement of PEDOT prepared by vapor deposition after a treatment with acids [74].If the conductivity enhancement is a result of the protonation of PSS, the conductivity enhancement should be related to the pKa value of the acids. An acid with a low pKa value should give rise to a higher conductivity. However, the conductivity of the PEDOT:PSS films treated with hydrochloric acid is similar to those treated with weak organic or inorganic acids (Fig. 18). This is probably due to the easy vaporization of HCl.The conductivity becomes very significant when PEDOT:PSS films are treated with sulfuric acid (Fig. 19). The conductivity of PEDOT:PSS films prepared from Clevios™ PH1000 aqueous solution is about 2400Scm−1 after a treatment with 1.5M H2SO4. The conductivity further increases to 3065Scm−1 when the PEDOT:PSS films were treated with 1M H2SO4 solution at 160°C for three times. This conductivity is higher than that (∼2000Scm−1) of ITO on plastic and comparable to that (3000–6000Scm−1) of ITO on glass.Moreover, the H2SO4 treatment changes the conduction mechanism of the PEDOT:PSS films. As illustrated in Fig. 20, the resistance of the H2SO4-treated PEDOT:PSS films is almost constant from 320K down to 240K. It then increases with the lowering temperature. This is saliently different from the temperature dependence of the untreated PEDOT:PSS films, whose resistance continuously increases with the lowering temperature. The temperature-dependence of the untreated PEDOT:PSS films can be analyzed by one-dimensional variable range hopping (VRH) model [75],R(T)=R0expT0T1/2The temperature dependence of the H2SO4-treated PEDOT:PSS films conforms with the hopping model only at the low temperature range. The H2SO4-treatment PEDOT:PSS becomes metallic or semi-metallic at room temperature. Metallic behavior has been rarely observed on solution-processed conducting polymers.The treatments did not affect the transmittance of the PEDOT:PSS films in the visible range. Fig. 21presents the transmittance spectra in the visible range of three H2SO4-treated PEDOT:PSS films with different thicknesses. The transmittance of the 66nm-thick PEDOT:PSS film, which has a sheet resistance of 67Ω□−1, is 87% at 550nm. The transmittance is higher than 90% in the wavelength below 500nm, and decreases a little but still higher than 80% at the wavelength above 550nm. The transmittance of the 109nm-thick PEDOT:PSS film, which has a sheet resistance of 39Ω□−1, is more than 80% at 550nm. The thickness of the ITO layer on ITO/PET is about 100nm, quite close of the thickness of the thickest PEDOT:PSS film .Though the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS can be significantly enhancement by a couple of methods, it takes a long time to under the mechanisms for the conductivity enhancements. This is due to the difficulty in understanding the effect of the treatments on the structure of PEDOT:PSS. The UV–visible absorption of PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution and film in the visible and infrared range is hardly affected by the treatments. In addition, differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA) cannot provide any useful information about the structural change induced by the treatments. Though different mechanisms were proposed for the conductivity enhancement, it is widely believed that the conductivity enhancement is due to the phase segregation between PEDOT and PSS. The phase segregation leads to the partial removal of PSS from the PEDOT:PSS films and the conformational change of the PEDOT chains from a coil structure to an extended-coil or linear structure.Jönsson et al. studied the effect of sorbitol and 1-methyl-2-pyrrolidinone (NMP) on PEDOT:PSS by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) [39]. They suggested that the conductivity is enhanced as a result of the wash-away of some PSS chains from the surface region of the PEDOT:PSS film. Crispin et al. studied the conductivity enhancement by adding EG into PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution with XPS, and their results confirmed the removal of PSS from PEDOT:PSS [76]. The XPS spectra of the PEDOT:PSS films prepared from PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution with and without EG are presented in Fig. 22. The S2p bands in the range of 163–167eV are due to the sulfur atoms on PEDOT. Their intensities with respect to the S2p XPS bands of PSS increases after the addition of EG. This increase indicates the removal of some PSS from the PEDOT:PSS chains after the EG treatment.The removal of some PSS chains from the PEDOT:PSS films is also evidenced by the UV–visible absorption spectroscopy. As shown in Fig. 23, although the treatment of PEDOT:PSS with CuCl2 does not affect the absorption in infrared and visible range, the absorption intensities of the two bands in the UV range drops [42]. The two absorption bands in the UV range originate from the benzene rings on PSS. The intensity drop confirms the removal of some PSS from PEDOT:PSS after the CuCl2 treatment.The conformation of the PEDOT chains also changes after conductivity-enhancement treatments. But conformational change was not observed by DSC and UV–visible absorption spectroscopy. No XRD pattern was observed on pristine and treated PEDOT:PSS films in early reports. Recently, Takano et al. observed nanocrystal structure on EG-treated PEDOT:PSS by wide-angle X-ray scattering (Fig. 24) [77]. Only broad bands were observed for pristine PEDOT:PSS films. But a relatively sharp band appeared at q=18.5nm for the EG- treated PEDOT:PSS films.Ouyang et al. investigated the conformation of PEDOT by Raman spectroscopy [33]. The Raman band between 1400 and 1500cm−1 corresponds to the stretching vibration of Cα Cβ on the five-member ring of PEDOT (Fig. 25). It shifts to red and becomes narrow after the EG treatment. This change suggests that the resonant structure of PEDOT chain turns from a benzoid to a quinoid structure (Scheme 6).The benzoid structure may be the favorite structure for a coil conformation, while the quinoid structure may be the favorite structure for a linear or expanded-coil structure. Therefore, some PEDOT:PSS chains change from the coil conformation into linear or expanded-coil conformation after a treatment (Scheme 7).The conformational change is also supported by the electron spin resonance (ESR) study of PEDOT:PSS. As shown in Fig. 26, the integrated ESR intensity of PEDOT:PSS decreases by about 50% after the EG treatment. Since a polaron has a spin of 1/2 while a bipolaron is spinless [78], the ESR results imply that roughly half of the polarons in the PEDOT:PSS film pair to bipolarons. The transition from polarons to bipolarons is due to the conformational change from coil to linear or expanded-coil structure, which cause the charges on the PEDOT chains become more delocalized.As discussed above, PEDOT:PSS can have high conductivity and high transparency in the visible range after a treatment. The work function of PEDOT:PSS is about 5.0eV, and it is hardly affected by the treatments. Only Na et al. observed the increase of the work function of PEDOT:PSS to 5.35eV after the treatment with polar solvent vapor [72]. That is attributed to the effect of the treatment on the vertical structure of PEDOT:PSS films. Highly conductive PEDOT:PSS films have been investigated to replace ITO as the transparent electrode of polymer light-emitting diodes (PLEDs) and polymer solar cells (PSCs) [3–15,79–83].Ouyang et al. investigated the application of EG-treated PEDOT:PSS films prepared from Clevios™ P aqueous solution as the transparent anode of PLEDs [13]. Fig. 27presents the current–voltage curves of PLEDs with poly[2-methoxy-5-(2-ethylhexyloxy)-1,4-phenylenevinylene] (MEH-PPV) as the active materials. The device with EG-treated PEDOT:PSS film as the anode exhibits a current density very close to that using ITO/PEDOT:PSS as the anode. This current is almost three orders of magnitude higher than the devices using untreated PEDOT:PSS as the anode.The PLEDs with EG-treated PEDOT:PSS films emit light homogeneously under external electric field. The luminance-voltage curves of the PLEDs are presented in Fig. 28. The luminance of the PLED with EG-treated PEDOT:PSS film of 300nm thick as the anode is almost half as that of the device with ITO/PEDOT:PSS as the anode. This is attributed to the low transmission of the 300nm-thick PEDOT:PSS film. The thickness of the PEDOT:PSS layer can be reduced by using treated Clevios™ PH1000 films.Recently, Cai et al. observed that the organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) with EG-treated PEDOT:PSS films as the transparent electrode could have higher luminous efficiency and power efficiency than those with ITO [83]. It is attributed to the advantageous optical properties of PEDOT:PSS films in comparison with ITO.Highly conductive PEDOT:PSS films were also investigated as the transparent electrode of PSCs [46,51,55,80–82]. Scheme 8presents the architecture of a PSC with a H2SO4-treated PEDOT:PSS film replacing ITO as the transparent electrode and the chemical structure of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM). The H2SO4-treated PEDOT:PSS film has a thickness of 70nm. The current density (J)–voltage (V) curves of the PSC is presented in Fig. 29. The device with the H2SO4-treated PEDOT:PSS film anode exhibited high photovoltaic performance: short-circuit current (Jsc) of 9.29mAcm−2, open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.59V, fill factor (FF) of 0.65, and power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 3.56%. The photovoltaic performance is comparable to that of the control devices using ITO anode.Highly conductive PEDOT:PSS films were also used as the top electrode of PSCs. The active film of PSCs is hydrophobic, while PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution is hydrophilic [84,85]. Thus, there is a wetting problem for PEDOT:PSS on the active film of PSCs. Two approaches were adopted to coat PEDOT:PSS on the active organic film of PSCs [86,80,87]. One is the addition of surfactant, and another is to spray coat PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution. Colsmann et al. spray-coated Clevios™ PH1000 aqueous solution on P3HT:PCBM films for inverted PSCs (Fig. 30) [87]. The inverted PSCs are semitransparent and exhibit photovoltaic effect when they are illuminated from either side of the devices. The power conversion efficiency is about 2% when the devices are illuminated from the front side.In addition, PEDOT:PSS with D-sorbitol can be used as a transparent electric glue. D-sorbitol is solid at room temperature and is adhesive after melt [14]. D-sorbitol can be deposited on PEDOT:PSS films by solution coating or thermal deposition. It can glue the PEDOT:PSS film to other polymer films, such as conjugated polymers or plastic sheets by heating. In addition, the heating process can lead to the significant enhancement in the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS films as well. The transparent electric glue is crucial for the roll-to-roll fabrication of polymer optoelectronic devices. PEDOT:PSS/D-sorbitol was used as the transparent electric glue to fabricate PLEDs and PSCs by lamination [14,82].PEDOT:PSS have many advantages for its application as the transparent electrode of optoelectronic devices. The key issue for this application is to improve the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS. The conductivity of PEDOT:PSS can be enhanced to more than 200Scm−1 for Clevios™ P and 600–700Scm−1 for Clevios™ PH1000 by adding polar organic solvents with high boiling point into the aqueous solutions. The conductivity can be further enhanced to more than 2000Scm−1 by adding ionic liquids into the Clevios™ PH1000 aqueous solution. Significant conductivity enhancement have been observed on the post-treatment of PEDOT:PSS films. Some compounds, such as salts, zwitterions, cosolvent and acids, can give rise to the significant conductivity enhancement by the post-treatment, while they hardly affect the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS if they are added into a PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution. In particular, the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS films prepared from Clevios™ PH1000 can be enhanced to more than 3000Scm−1 after a treatment with H2SO4. This conductivity is higher than ITO on plastic and comparable to ITO on glass.It is expected that the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS can be further improved when PEDOT:PSS with higher PEDOT molecular weight can be synthesized. As revealed by the comparative study on the two PEDOT:PSS grades, Clevios™ P and Clevios™ PH1000, the conductivity of the treated PEDOT:PSS films is related to the PEDOT molecular weight. The conductivity of the H2SO4-treated PEDOT:PSS films is even significantly higher than PEDOT polymers doped with small anions. This also suggests the potential in developing highly conductive PEDOT:PSS. Furthermore, the knowledge in enhancing the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS is helpful for the development of other transparent conducting polymers. Many low-bandgap conjugated polymers have been synthesized and investigated as the donor materials of PSCs [81,82]. These conjugated polymers can have high transparency in the visible range when in the oxidized state. They have the potential to be transparent electrode as well.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
