@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Generating Chinese characters based on stroke splitting and feature extraction

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present a decomposition database to generate new style Chinese characters.Stroke segmentation rules are discussed.A stroke feature searching algorithm is proposed.The evaluation and experiments show a high fidelity of 96.4%.Recombination database can be applied for other stroke constructed characters.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Chinese character,Decomposition database,Font generating,Stroke splitting,Feature extraction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
There is a large demand for more fashionable style Chinese characters in advertising, art designing and publishing markets. However, it becomes challenging to create a new font style for so many Chinese characters (over 10,000). To solve this problem, a comprehensive Chinese fonts generating scheme is proposed in this paper. Firstly, a decomposition database for stroke splitting and feature extraction is proposed. Secondly, stroke segmentation rules are defined based on splitting, merging and structural model, location definition and minimum feature extraction. Thirdly, a radical searching algorithm based on stroke splitting is presented. Finally, it is realized that the generated characters can be zoomed, rotated and moved. Experimental result shows that Chinese characters with a new style can be generated rapidly with the proposed scheme. The created characters fit the real ones well with a high fidelity of 96.4%. The usability tests are run and participants’ subjective report show that the performance from the generated characters is similar to the original characters in both recognizability test and style-consistency test. The fonts generating method is also reliable for the other stroke constructed block characters such as Japanese and Korean characters.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Chinese characters have a long history and are regarded as one of the most complicated characters in the world. Due to demands from advertising, art, publishing, printing, designing industries, a variety of Chinese style fonts, e.g. Sung typeface, cursive script, regular script, have been generated. With the advancement in computer science, Chinese characters with more fashionable styles, like cartoon, handwriting, are created in recent years, whereas the demand for new and creative Chinese character typeface keeps on increasing. However, there are statistically more 10,000 Chinese characters if peculiar words are included [1], making it a difficult and time consuming work to create characters with a new font style. The curve-based character skeleton description can be a candidate to solve this problem. Based on this description, the geometrical features of an input pattern, including stroke ends, junctions, crosses and segments, can be extracted easily. However, for handwritten Chinese characters, the geometrical features of different handwriting styles are not usually consistent. This makes the matching processing of recombination more difficult and unstable. This is why Hung-Hsin Chang and Hong Yan used the stroke structure instead of geometrical features in [2]. Additionally, most blockwise-constructed Chinese characters are rather complicated because the structure is composed of strokes. Therefore, we prefer integrating the geometrical features with the character structure which is described and stored in a decomposition database to generate new Chinese character fonts in this paper.The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 reviews previous attempts to solve the recombination problem of Chinese characters. The problem description is discussed in Section 3, where structure description, stroke splitting and feature extraction are presented in order to provide basic reference and criteria to the recombination methods. The fonts generating solution is provided in Section 4, in which the structure designing of the decomposition database is discussed in detail. Based on the proposed solution, new fonts are generated, which are consistent with the existing sample set in terms of the original shape and style. A fidelity evaluation of the experimental results is conducted in Section 5. In Section 6 the conclusions are drawn and the future work is listed.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A Chinese character decomposition database is presented and the feature searching algorithm is proposed in this paper. With the structured character decomposition and stroke splitting, automatic component searching and matching is balanced and the new style of Chinese characters are generated. The construction of a large number of Chinese characters with specific style becomes easier with the proposed fonts generating system. The experiments show that the new generated Chinese fonts fit the real ones well. The proposed decomposition database and searching algorithm can cover a variety of Chinese characters, such as round hand and cursive characters. However, experience shows that sometimes the constructed characters need manually tuning, which is caused by the inaccuracy of location or loss of features. Fidelity evaluation on the basis of profile coincidence of character is presented and it proves that 6–10% of sample characters can recreate high fidelity ones in the fonts generating system. It is also verified that the layer of stroke may have influence on fitness of generated characters to real one. The usability tests are run in recognizability test and style-consistency test. The participants’ subjective report indicates that the performance of the generated characters is similar to the original characters in both tests. The collected human data show that the generating algorithm creates fonts is with good usability. For future work, efforts should be focused on location accuracy and feature identification to reduce the manual interaction. Although producing high-quality digital specific Chinese fonts remains a difficult task, Chinese character recombination research makes great achievements.