@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
SACRM: Social Aware Crowdsourcing with Reputation Management in mobile sensing

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We investigate the social impacts in participant selection of mobile sensing.We propose a social-aware participant selection to select well-suited mobile users.We propose a reputation management and reward allocation scheme for mobile sensing.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Mobile sensing,Crowdsensing,Social impact,Reputation,Participant selection,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Mobile sensing has become a promising paradigm for mobile users to obtain information by task crowdsourcing. However, due to the social preferences of mobile users, the quality of sensing reports may be impacted by the underlying social attributes and selfishness of individuals. Therefore, it is crucial to consider the social impacts and trustworthiness of mobile users when selecting task participants in mobile sensing. In this paper, we propose aSocialAwareCrowdsourcing withReputationManagement (SACRM) scheme to select the well-suited participants and allocate the task rewards in mobile sensing. Specifically, we consider the social attributes, task delay and reputation in crowdsourcing and propose a participant selection scheme to choose the well-suited participants for the sensing task under a fixed task budget. A report assessment and rewarding scheme is also introduced to measure the quality of the sensing reports and allocate the task rewards based the assessed report quality. In addition, we develop a reputation management scheme to evaluate the trustworthiness and cost performance ratio of mobile users for participant selection. Theoretical analysis and extensive simulations demonstrate that SACRM can efficiently improve the crowdsourcing utility and effectively stimulate the participants to improve the quality of their sensing reports.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
We have witnessed recently the dramatic proliferation of mobile computing devices such as smartphones and tablet computers [1]. Since these devices are generally equipped with a set of versatile sensors, mobile sensing (also known as participatory sensing or urban sensing) has emerged as a new horizon for ubiquitous sensing [2]. In a typical mobile sensing application [3,4], a data requester first publishes a sensing task to crowdsource, and then selects a number of mobile users interested in the task to collect the desired data. Once the participants finish the sensing task, they submit their sensing reports to the data requester and earn their task rewards. Such a new paradigm of information collection brings great benefits (e.g., efficiency and low cost) and also challenging issues by task crowdsourcing [5].One of the challenging issues in mobile sensing is to select participants for crowdsourced sensing tasks. A few of research efforts have been invested to address the participant selection problem. Reddy et al. [6] develop a recruitment framework to select well-suited participants for sensing tasks based on the spatio-temporal availability and personal reputation. They highlight participant selection should highly depend on the location and time availability and trustworthiness of the participants. However, little attention has been paid to the underlying social attributes of mobile users (e.g. interests, living area), which are critical for task crowdsourcing [7–9], especially for participant selection. For a specific sensing task, it generally has a set of interested social attributes, and a large social attribute overlap between the task and mobile user indicates a potential matching and high task quality. For instance, if the published task is “Find the cheapest Coca Cola in the Waterloo city”, the mobile users whose social attributes include “Shopping” and “Waterloo” might be preferred to be recruited in the task. While the published task changes to “Find an unoccupied basketball court in the University of Toronto”, the mobile users whose social attributes include “Sporting” and “Toronto” should be preferred. Therefore, it is of great significance to consider the impact of social attributes on crowdsourcing, especially on the participant selection.Another challenge in mobile sensing is to evaluate the trustworthiness of sensing reports and participants, and fairly allocate task rewards. In the presence of malicious participants, mobile crowdsensing is vulnerable to various types of attacks, e.g., denial-of-service attack [10,35] and data pollution attack [11,3], etc. Reputation system is a promising technique and has been widely used in trustworthiness evaluation for mobile sensing [12,13]. Wang et al. [3] propose a reputation framework to evaluate the trustworthiness of sensing reports and participants. Huang et al. [11] employ the Gompertz function to compute the device reputation score and evaluate the trustworthiness of contributed data. However, most of the exiting works only focus on trustworthiness evaluation for participants, without adjusting their task rewards based on the quality of their sensing reports. Such that, the malicious users can still earn enough task rewards before their reputation goes to a low value. Therefore, in order to defend this attack and economically stimulate participants’ contributions, it is crucial to adaptively allocate the task rewards to the participants according to their sensing report quality.In this paper, we propose aSocialAwareCrowdsourcing withReputationManagement (SACRM) scheme to select the well-suited participants and allocate task rewards in mobile sensing. Compared with the existing works, we synthetically consider the social attributes, task delay and personal reputation in mobile sensing and define a utility function to quantify the effect of the three factors on crowdsourcing. The major contributions of our work are four folds.•We propose a participant selection scheme to choose the well-suited participants for sensing tasks and maximize the crowdsourcing utility under a fixed task budget. The proposed scheme consists of two participant selection algorithms, a dynamic programming algorithm to achieve the optimal solution and a fully polynomial time approximation algorithm to achieve the (1-∊)-approximate solution.We propose a report assessment and rewarding scheme to measure the quality of sensing reports and allocate task rewards. Both of the report veracity and report delay are considered as two quality metrics for report assessment. And the task rewards are allocated according to the assessment results.We develop a reputation management scheme to evaluate the trustworthiness and cost performance ratio of mobile users for participant selection, which can stimulate participants to improve their report quality.We theoretically analyze the performance of the proposed participant selection algorithms. Extensive simulations demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of the SACRM scheme.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
