@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Twitter volume spikes and stock options pricing

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We show how Twitter volume spikes relate to stock options pricing.After a Twitter volume spike, the volatility of a stock drops significantly.Implied volatility rises sharply before Twitter volume spikes and drops fast later.Right after a Twitter volume spike, options may still be overpriced, especial puts.We propose successful stock options trading strategies based on the findings above.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Twitter,Stock,Option,Twitter volume spikes,Stock options trading,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The stock market is a popular topic in Twitter. The number of tweets concerning a stock varies over days, and sometimes exhibits a significant spike. In this paper, we investigate the relationship between Twitter volume spikes and stock options pricing. We start with the underlying assumption of the Black–Scholes model, the most widely used model for stock options pricing, and investigate when this assumption holds for stocks that have Twitter volume spikes. We find that the assumption is less likely to hold in the time period before a Twitter volume spike, and is more likely to hold afterwards. In addition, the volatility of a stock is significantly lower after a Twitter volume spike than that before the spike. We also find that implied volatility increases sharply before a Twitter volume spike and decreases quickly afterwards. In addition, put options tend to be priced higher than call options. Last, we find that right after a Twitter volume spike, options may still be overpriced. Based on the above findings, we propose a put spread selling strategy for stock options trading. Realistic simulation of a portfolio using one year stock market data demonstrates that, even in a conservative setting, this strategy achieves a 34.3% gain when taking account of commissions and ask-bid spread, while S&P 500 only increases 12.8% in the same period.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Twitter has rapidly gained popularity since its creation in March 2006. As of July 2014, it has more than 500 million users, with more than 271 million being active users [1]. The stock market is a popular topic in Twitter. Many traders, investors, financial analysts and news agencies post tweets about the stock market in Twitter, which may be further retweeted. As a result, there can be thousands of tweets each day related to certain stocks. In general, the number of tweets concerning a stock varies over days, and sometimes exhibits a significant spike, indicating a sudden increase of interests in the stock. Since a collection of tweets reflect the collective wisdom of the users who post the tweets, a Twitter volume spike about a stock may contain important information regarding the stock. In this paper, we investigate the relationship of Twitter volume spikes and stock options pricing. The reason for focusing on stock options is because they are valuable investment vehicles but are very difficult to understand [23]. Our goal is to investigate whether Twitter volume spikes can shed light on the behavior of stock options pricing, and whether the insights thus obtained can help to assist stock options trading.A stock option is a financial contract that gives the owner the right, but not the obligation, to buy or sell an underlying asset (stock) at a specified strike price on or before a specified date. Specifically, call option gives the owner the right to buy a stock; put options give the owner the right to sell a stock. The Black–Scholes model is the most widely used model for stock options pricing. It has led to a boom in options trading ever since it was introduced in 1970s. We start from the underlying assumption of the Black–Scholes model, i.e., stock price follows a geometric Brownian motion and hence stock return follows a lognormal distribution, and investigate when this assumption holds for stocks that have Twitter volume spikes. We then proceed to investigate implied volatility (derived from the Black–Scholes model) as well as the actual volatility around a Twitter volume spike. Our results demonstrate that Twitter volume spikes can be very helpful in understanding stock options pricing. In addition, using Twitter volume spikes, one can design highly profitable options trading strategies. Our main contributions are:•We find that in a time period with a Twitter volume spike, stock return is less likely to follow a lognormal distribution, indicating that Twitter volume spikes are correlated with extreme changes in stock prices. On the other hand, for a short time period after a Twitter volume spike, the lognormal assumption is likely to hold. In addition, the volatility of a stock is significantly lower after a Twitter volume spike than that before the spike. We further investigate stock price model selection, and find that a three-parameter model that uses the same drift and different volatilities before and after a Twitter volume spike provides the highest gain in the likelihood value.We find a clear pattern in implied volatility (IV) around a Twitter volume spike. Specifically, IV increases sharply before a Twitter volume spike and decreases quickly afterwards. Furthermore, IV of put options tends to be larger than IV of call options. We also find that the volatility around a Twitter volume spike is particularly high. In addition, options may still be overpriced right after a Twitter volume spike. This is particularly true for put options, which confirms that people tend to strongly prefer avoiding losses to acquiring gains [14].Based on our findings, we propose a put spread selling strategy for stock options trading. Realistic simulation of a portfolio using one year stock market data demonstrates that, even in a conservative setting, this strategy achieves a 34.3% gain when taking account of commissions and ask-bid spread, while S&P 500 only increases 12.8% in the same period.While several studies relate social media and the financial market (e.g., [8,18,19,21,29], see more details in Section 2), to the best of our knowledge, our study is the first that analyzes the relationship between Twitter volume spikes and stock options pricing. Our results indicate that social media can be a powerful tool to help understand the behavior of stock options, and further assist the trading of stock options.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly reviews related work. Section 3 describes how we collect data and identify Twitter volume spikes. Section 4 briefly describes the lognormal stock price model and the Black–Scholes model. Section 5 analyzes the relationship between Twitter volume spikes and stock price model. Section 6 analyzes the relationship between Twitter volume spikes and stock options pricing. Section 7 presents a stock options trading strategy and evaluates its performance. Section 8 briefly discusses the choice of threshold for identifying Twitter volume spikes. Last, Section 9 concludes the paper and presents future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
