@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Equally moved and not really sick from viewing 2D and 3D motion stimuli on a TV screen

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Effect of 2D and 3D viewing on visually induced motion sickness (VIMS) and postural sway was studied.Viewing 2D and 3D stimuli both caused significant, but equal increases in postural sway.Viewing 3D stimuli did not clearly induce more VIMS symptoms compared to viewing 2D.Quarantining is proposed to underlie the observation that 3D did not induce more sickness than 2D.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Visually induced motion sickness,Stereoscopic 3D,Postural control,Field of view,Quarantining,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectiveVisually induced motion sickness (VIMS) and increased postural sway are two adverse side effects that may occur when viewing motion stimuli. However, whether these effects are elevated to a greater extent when viewing stereoscopic 3D motion stimuli, compared to 2D stimuli on a TV screen, has not been investigated under controlled circumstances. Therefore this study aimed at investigating VIMS and postural sway before, during, and directly after viewing 2D and 3D motion stimuli, on a commonly available TV screen.Method16 Participants were exposed to an aviation documentary shown in 2D and in 3D on separate occasions. Before, during, and after exposure, VIMS and postural sway were measured. VIMS was quantified by a rating scale giving a single number, and by a multi-symptom questionnaire that assessed multiple VIMS symptoms separately. Sway path length, standard deviations and short-range and long-range scaling components of the center of pressure were calculated as measures of postural sway.ResultsVIMS symptom severity, as obtained with the single rating scale, did not show a significant increase to either 2D or 3D exposure. The multi-symptom questionnaire did reveal significant increases in VIMS symptom severity to both 2D and 3D exposure. However, VIMS was not significantly more increased in case of 3D exposure compared to 2D exposure. All postural sway measures (sway path length, standard deviation in mediolateral and anteroposterior direction, as well as the short-range scaling components) increased significantly as a result of exposure. None of the postural sway measures was differentially affected to 3D as compared to 2D exposure.ConclusionViewing 3D motion stimuli did not cause more serious VIMS symptoms, compared to viewing motion stimuli in 2D. We attribute this lack of difference to the fact that the 3D effects in this documentary were optimized for viewing in a cinema, the projection on the TV-screen thus causing quarantining of the visual input. The increase in postural sway, irrespective of image type, may reflect exploratory behavior, allowing the participant to gain more information about self-orientation with respect to the virtual environment.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Nowadays, thanks to spectacular technological improvements, 3D stereoscopic technology is implemented on a regular basis, and has entered the living room with the introduction of commercially available 3D TVs. However, with these developments the concern over possible adverse effects due to prolonged exposure to 3D motion stimuli has increased. This study aims at jointly investigating two possible adverse effects of viewing 3D, compared to viewing 2D, on a common TV screen.Exposure to motion stimuli, either in 2D or 3D, can cause symptoms similar to those associated with motion sickness, also called visually induced motion sickness (VIMS) [1–6]. VIMS is a condition in which viewers experience oculomotor, disorienting and especially nauseating symptoms due to exposure to certain visual patterns, while being physically stationary [1–4]. In addition to VIMS symptoms, viewing motion stimuli can also affect postural control, defined as “the act of maintaining, achieving or restoring a state of balance during any posture or activity” [7]. In particular it has been shown that postural sway increases due to viewing 2D [8–11] and 3D motion stimuli [12].An influential theory explaining the origin of VIMS is the sensory conflict theory [13–15]. According to this theory, VIMS symptoms arise when there is a mismatch between sensory signals from the visual, vestibular and somatosensory senses and the expected sensory signals [13–15]. In daily life the signals from these senses correspond with each other, and are also congruent with the expected sensory signals based on an internal model. However, when viewing 2D or 3D motion stimuli whilst sitting or standing still, the visual cues do not coincide with the vestibular cues and are also not in line with the expected sensory signals. This conflict between the sensory signals and expected sensory signals is proposed to cause VIMS. It has been suggested already that especially visual motion indicating a change in the Earth-vertical is necessary to cause VIMS [15–17]. Next to such visual motion, in this paper we propose that viewing 3D motion stimuli exacerbates VIMS compared to viewing visual motion stimuli in 2D.3D motion stimuli contain, compared to 2D motion stimuli, stereoscopic information which is proposed to be the additional provocative factor with respect to VIMS symptoms (see e.g. [18–20]). The stereoscopic information is known to add to the naturalness of the 3D motion stimuli [21,22]. Because 3D motion stimuli appear more natural, a larger conflict between the sensed and expected sensory signals is suggested (see also [23]), therefore causing more severe VIMS symptoms as compared to 2D. Several earlier studies have investigated the effect of viewing stereoscopic 3D stimuli, compared to viewing 2D stimuli. In these studies participants were exposed to computer generated stimuli or a movie, that was shown in 2D and 3D on either a projection screen, at the cinema or on a TV-screen [2,24–27]. Despite the large differences in stimuli and displaying techniques, in all studies participants experienced significantly more severe VIMS symptoms after viewing 3D motion stimuli compared to 2D motion stimuli [2,24–27].VIMS and postural sway have been jointly studied, mainly using 2D stimuli. The majority of these studies reported a significant rise in VIMS symptoms as well as increased postural sway (e.g. [8–11]). To the best of our knowledge only Bos et al. [12] studied VIMS and postural sway characteristics prior to, and after viewing 3D motion stimuli. They found that, after viewing a 3D documentary in a cinema, VIMS and postural sway were significantly increased compared to before viewing. Unfortunately, Bos et al. [12] were not able to make a comparison with 2D presentation, impeding a direct comparison of potential adverse effects of 3D viewing to 2D viewing on both VIMS and postural sway.In summary, exposure to both 2D and 3D motion stimuli are able to cause VIMS symptoms and increase postural sway. However, an experiment comparing VIMS, as well as postural sway induced by viewing 2D and 3D motion stimuli is still lacking. To address this gap in the literature, in this paper we investigate subjective reports of VIMS symptoms and postural sway in one group of participants, who are exposed to the same motion stimuli shown in 2D and 3D on a commonly available TV-screen. Based on the existing literature, we hypothesize that prolonged exposure to both 2D and 3D motion stimuli will increase symptoms of VIMS, and we predict 3D to cause more VIMS related symptoms in comparison to 2D exposure. We also expect postural sway to significantly increase when viewing both 2D and 3D. However, whether postural sway will also increase more when viewing 3D compared to viewing 2D remains to be seen.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
