@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Human factors in computer simulations of urban environment. Differences between architects and non-architects’ assessments

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We identify the human factors of computer visualisation of urban environment.Digital images were classified into 3 categories based on their degree of realism.104 architects and 113 non-architects assessed 48 digital visualisations.The success of a digital image is associated to the innovation and well-being.The results show that more realistic images are given better assessments.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Digital visualisation of environment,Human factors,Subjective evaluation,Presentation of information,Semantic Differential method,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Computer visualisations are widely used to evaluate future urban environments in international competitions. Rapid technological progress in graphics computer software has enabled architects and landscape planners to produce sophisticated images that are not only capable of transmitting the characteristics of the future environment, they also manage to evoke in observers the sort of feelings and emotions which can only be aroused by experiencing the space. This present paper attempts to identify the affective responses that influence the evaluation of urban environment proposal, analysing the model of architects and non-architects’s preferences. A sample of 104 architects and 113 non-architects expressed their opinions on 48 urban computer simulations. The results show that for both groups the success of a digital visualisation is associated to the feelings of innovation and wellbeing. However, their assessments differ significantly because each group associates these feelings with different aspects. In general, architects are more critical in their assessments.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Computer visualisations are a powerful tool for communicating and evaluating urban design proposals. These tools offer many advantages for architects and landscape planners as they enable evaluation of the future environment at the preliminary planning and design stage. Thus assessment of the primary audience (policy makers, future users, architects, etc.) can be included in the design before it is defined more precisely, or before the project is executed. Environments can therefore be designed more proactively, permitting each interested party to participate in the design process.Currently, rapid technological progress in digital architecture software has enabled highly sophisticated computer visualisations. These high impact images not only transmit the formal and functional characteristics of the future proposal, they also manage to evoke in observers the sort of feelings and emotions that can only be aroused by experiencing the space. In fact, international urban planning competitions often feature computer images that attempt to seduce evaluators to ensure that their proposals are chosen, focusing on that emotional part. These images are not intended to be a faithful representation of future reality and include certain design elements in the rendering that are able to provoke certain universal sensations in the observer, generating a more or less favourable predisposition towards the architectural space that the image represents. But, what affective response do these digital images generate in observers?. Bearing in mind that in such planning competitions, evaluators may be architects or non-architects, are there significant differences between the evaluations from the two groups?.As early as 1956, Brunswik [1] suggested that the relational process between the stimulus and the opinion or judgment emitted by the subject was an indirect one. Applied to the sphere of urban design, this approach assumes that subjects respond to the particular characteristics of the image, integrate these reactions into affective impressions and transfer those affective impressions to an aesthetic evaluation of the digital image as a whole. The determination of affective impressions of the built environment has been the object of numerous studies [2]. However, in most of these works the symbolic meanings are defined a priori by researchers or experts. The most commonly followed theoretical framework is the one defined by Mehrabian and Russell [3]. These authors describe affective response as having three basic underlying dimensions: pleasure, arousal and dominance. The risk in using dimensions that have been defined elsewhere, at other moments of time and with other stimuli is that the concepts may not be appropriate for representing the conceptual structure of the observer being studied. Thus, to appropriately evaluate a situation, the assessment variables must be adapted to the observer’s mental scheme. This conceptual structure must be designed before any relationship can be established between each perceived symbolic or physical attribute and the global evaluation of the product.Furthermore, another aspect to consider in the evaluation process is the observer’s profile. Juries in architectural competitions comprise architects and non-architects. The differences between these two groups have been analysed many times [4–12] and the conclusion is that they perceive the urban environment differently. Thus in the case of architectural competitions Nasar and Kang [4] identified significant differences of perception between architects and laypersons. These authors made a post-jury evaluation collecting the public’s responses to five competition entries and they observed completely different evaluations. The jury’s first choice was among the least liked by the public. Hershberger [5] observed that the two collectives perceive the physical characteristics of buildings differently, attributing the differences basically to the architects’ training and experience. Groat [6] determined the categories that architects and economists use to interpret buildings; economists tend to classify buildings according to type, whereas architects use design quality, form, style and historical significance. Architects can also distinguish clearly between modern and post-modern designs, whereas economists cannot. Gans [7] observed that architects preferred “high” style and rejected the “popular” style preferred by the public. Devlin and Nasar [8] subsequently confirmed that finding, observing that non-architects evaluated the “popular” style as being consistent, pleasurable and clean, whereas architects attributed these values to the “high” style. Nasar [9] studied architects and non-architects’ evaluations of six different styles of single family homes, based on the sensations of “desirable”, “cosy” and “status”. The results showed that not only did architects not coincide with the emotional evaluations of non-architects, but that they were also ignorant of the public’s preferences. Devlin [10] compared users, observers and architects’ perceptions of two office blocks in Chicago. The non-architects tended to give descriptive evaluations based on affection, whereas the architects provided conceptual, more abstract evaluations. Gifford et al. [11] analysed the relationship between the physical characteristics of office buildings, the perceptions “attractive” and “pleasurable,” and the subject’s overall assessment, using the conceptual framework of Brunswik’s [1] lens model. The results showed that architects and non-architects based their emotional assessments on totally different features of the buildings. Fawcett et al. [12] also detected differences in the preferences of architects and users of suburban office buildings. The two groups attributed differing degrees of importance to design attributes.In the field of perception of the environment through virtual reality, two lines of work can be differentiated. One line analyses the validity of virtual representation as a tool for representing the environment and the other uses virtual representations as an ideal tool for producing stimuli with full control over conditions. Westerdahl et al. [13] studied spatial comprehension in different individuals using the virtual simulation of a building and concluded that the virtual reality model was useful for helping users decide over a future project. Conniff et al. [14] compared passive observations of walkthroughs of a desktop computer modelled environment with user-controlled navigation of the same model and concluded that passive observation may be better when the purpose of the evaluation is to compare design alternatives in architectural competitions. Lange [15] studied realism in virtual landscapes and its effectiveness in the process of evaluating environment, differentiating between expert, non-expert, local and non-local observers. Liu and Bai [16] used architectural renderings in an urban project to study visual impact analysis and assessment, differentiating between professional designers and non-experienced city inhabitants. Bishop and Rohrmann [17] compared the computer model and the real project in an urban park environment. They found that although responses to the two stimuli were not identical, computer simulations can provide valid outcomes for the main aspects of environmental perception. In a previous study, the same authors [18] analysed the degree of reliability of digital simulations of urban environments, with the aim of validating them as a tool for representing the environment. Their results show that simulations are generally acceptable, but their validity varies in relation to acoustics and light in the study area. Thus in these works and many others [19–22], virtual representation is a tool that provides a high degree of realism. This advantage, together with flexibility and ability to control the conditions of the product to be evaluated has led to another line of works where the object is to analyse the architectural space and where virtual images are used as an ideal tool for producing stimuli. In this line of study, Franz et al. [23] used the technique to study the relationship between the experience of indoor spaces and their physical properties.As a consequence of the importance of virtual images as a fundamental tool for validating future spaces, some theoretical studies have attempted to define frameworks or systems that serve to confirm whether the image is faithful to the space it represents. Appleyard [24], argued for the following criteria to evaluate the quality of a simulation and guarantee equivalence in the observer’s response: Realism, Accuracy, Comprehensibility, Evaluability and Engagement. Subsequently, Sheppard [25,26] developed and perfected those criteria, proposing five criteria to improve understanding and the credibility of simulations: Accuracy, Representativeness, Visual clarity, Interest and Legitimacy. Later on Radford et al. [27] added the concept of Abstraction, as a criterion to validate digital images in large scale urban environments, referring to the degree of detail the image contains. At experimental level, numerous studies have examined differences in the perception of space, in relation to their degree of realism. Hayek [28] tested the effectiveness of abstract and realistic visualisation types in participatory planning processes, concluding that both are efficient for the different phases of the evaluation process. In another study [21] about observations of simulations of the same landscape with different degrees of realism-abstraction the response when judging the beauty of a landscape is very different in the different types of images. This aspect of representation should therefore be taken into account when using virtual simulations to validate future landscapes. Bates-Brkljac [29] showed that computer-generated images communicate the project better than a hand-drawn perspective, and also found perception differences between architects and non-architects.However, although these works analyse the validity of spaces created by virtual representations, they do not provide an in-depth analysis of the structure of observers’ affective responses and how that relates to their overall assessment. Analysing this affective structure requires techniques which enable measurement of human perceptions of products and the words people use to communicate their perceptions.Semantic differential is the most powerful quantitative technique currently available for measuring the affective meaning of concepts [30]. This technique, developed by Osgood et al. [31], analyses semantic structures and the affective meaning of things. It is a standard procedure that assumes an underlying structure in the semantic evaluation of products which it analyses using factor analysis. The technique analyses the correlation matrixes for the scores for terms over a set of products. If it can be demonstrated that a limited number of dimensions or factors is sufficient to differentiate between the meanings of the entire set of concepts, then these dimensions define a semantic basis for expressing any product. This semantic basis is known as semantic space and each concept is a semantic axis. This technique has been used in recent years for measuring user perception of a product in the context of Kansei Engineering [32–35], an ergonomic consumer-oriented technology for new product development [36]. Kansei Engineering is a technology that unites kansei (feelings and emotions in Japanese) with the engineering discipline. This methodology attempts to identify and quantify users’ perceptions of a product in their own language and to find quantitative relationships between these subjective responses and design features [36,37]. Thus, Kansei Engineering establishes a suitable framework for working with symbolic attributes and users’ perceptions, expressed in their own language. This methodology considers that an individual’s judgment is not only influenced by the stimuli (a combination of objective and subjective parameters) but also by the scheme of concepts of a specific group of users (semantic space). Therefore Kansei Engineering can be applied after obtaining users’ “semantic space” or “conceptual structure” and this is where Semantic Differential applies. Although most applications of this methodology come from the industrial sphere, there are some examples in the field of architecture and urban development. Kansei Engineering has been applied to house design [34,38–40], façade design [41], urban design [35,42,43] and even to identify perception differences between architects and non-architects [44,45].This study aims to answer the following questions: in the assessments of computer visualisations that represent urban design proposals (a) is it possible to identify the sort of affective responses they provoke in evaluators? If so, and bearing in mind that the evaluators may be architects or non-architects (b) are there any differences in their assessments? (c) can the affective response be linked to the overall assessment? Will the relationship be similar for architects and non-architects? And finally, bearing in mind the very different techniques used to represent urban environments (d) is it possible to describe the responses evoked by different types of computer visualisations? To answer these questions we use Semantic Differential in the context of Kansei Engineering.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The Semantic Differential method can be used to identify the affective factors behind evaluators’ evaluation of an image or product, in this case, computer visualisations representing urban design proposals. This technique (in the context of Kansei Engineering) enables the definition of subjective evaluation scales adapted to the evaluators, because the symbolic attributes are expressed in their own language. In this study the technique has been used to obtain the response of architects and non-architects and to identify the differences in perception between these two groups.The definition of these perceptions or independent symbolic attributes is the first phase of Kansei Engineering. In a subsequent phase this methodology permits identification of design elements that a digital image needs to provoke an affective response.