@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Retweeting beyond expectation: Inferring interestingness in Twitter

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Twitter information streams present a lot of unfiltered noisy information.The cognitive burden on users viewing these streams is increased.We propose a method for identifying and ranking interesting information.We implement the method by applying it to Twitter timelines.Our crowdsourced validations give confidence that the approach is effective.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Twitter,Interestingness,Retweet,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Online social networks such as Twitter have emerged as an important mechanism for individuals to share information and post user generated content. However, filtering interesting content from the large volume of messages received through Twitter places a significant cognitive burden on users. Motivated by this problem, we develop a new automated mechanism to detect personalised interestingness, and investigate this for Twitter. Instead of undertaking semantic content analysis and matching of tweets, our approach considers the human response to content, in terms of whether the content is sufficiently stimulating to get repeatedly chosen by users for forwarding (retweeting). This approach involves machine learning against features that are relevant to a particular user and their network, to obtain an expected level of retweeting for a user and a tweet. Tweets observed to be above this expected level are classified as interesting. We implement the approach in Twitter and evaluate it using comparative human tweet assessment in two forms: through aggregated assessment using Mechanical Turk, and through a web-based experiment for Twitter users. The results provide confidence that the approach is effective in identifying the more interesting tweets from a user’s timeline. This has important implications for reduction of cognitive burden: the results show that timelines can be considerably shortened while maintaining a high degree of confidence that more interesting tweets will be retained. In conclusion we discuss how the technique could be applied to mitigate possible filter bubble effects.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Microblogging services, with Twitter as a prime example, have facilitated a massive interconnection of the world over the past few years [1]. Twitter’s support of quick, short, and ‘real-time’ live content sharing amongst its millions of users allow vast amounts of information to be sent and received very quickly [2]. This has been helped by its growth into the mobile domain, allowing users to share text, photos, or videos directly from a news source or geographic location [3]. It has been especially useful in emergency situations worldwide, such as during the 2010 Haiti earthquake [4] and the 2011 Egyptian protests [5].Unlike many other media, microblogging services such as Twitter are characterised by convenience and informality - messages are size-limited, making them easy to consume, and may contain pictures and pointers to other web content. The streamed nature of tweets provides channels defined by other Twitter users, where users opt-in to receive content. These subscription relationships provide a social network structure through which content is mediated, with users being able to republish or “retweet” received messages as they wish. However the ease with which content can be published results in a huge volume of potential content, much of this having limited relevance other than to a few users. A user’s ability to choose whose content they receive counters to some degree the “long-tail” problem of social media content [6]. However this can introduce noise, where the likelihood of generally uninteresting and mundane content begins to outweigh interesting content [7].These issues mean that approaches to distinguishing interesting tweets from surrounding noise are valuable in reducing the cognitive burden for users. Identifying interesting tweets represents a form of recommendation system and there are a range of well-known strategies that can be adopted. However, the real-time nature of micro-blogging combined with limited text from which knowledge can be extracted, means that it is appropriate to look for new and efficient alternative approaches.In this paper we introduce, formally define and explore a new strategy to quantify the perceived “interestingness” of individual tweets. A brief initial exploration of the underlying approach was presented in [8] as a proof of concept. In comparison, this paper provides a complete specification of the model and necessary implementation details, formally validates the approach against collective and individual assessments of interestingness provided by human participants in a web experiment, and analyses the results to draw conclusions on potential applications.Our conceptual model interprets the human users of Twitter as collective cognitive agents, who effectively process the semantic content of tweets and respond to cognitive stimulation [9] and cues [10]. When this stimulation is perceived as suitably significant, the agent forwards the message to its neighbours and the process is repeated. The networked nature of Twitter means that message forwarding (or retweeting), when considered in context of the agents and the network structure, holds potentially valuable accumulated perceptions about the quality, relevance and interest of the content. This represents an implicit form of crowdsourcing [11].A significant benefit of this approach is its efficiency. The human performs sophisticated computation and artificial intelligence can be applied to their subsequent retweeting behaviour, rather than being applied directly to analysis of tweet content. By applying suitable thresholds, a deterministic measure of “interestingness” can be applied both to filter content streams from individuals and to discover content from outside of the immediate social network.The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: in Section 2 we identify the key related work; Section 3 introduces the measure of interestingness, as a general metric to capture the notion of interest, beyond expectation, to a significant sub-group of Twitter users; Section 3.2 describes the application of machine learning techniques to characterise retweet behaviour based on selected features; Section 4 involves validating the interestingness metric as a technique and benchmarking it against human selection of interesting content.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper we have introduced a method for scoring tweet interestingness using non-semantic methods, and we have demonstrated its ability to infer interesting tweets from the volume and noise within a user’s timeline. This has been accomplished by using comparative human tweet assessment in two forms: through aggregated assessment of interestingness using Mechanical Turk, and through a web-based experiment for individual Twitter users. The results provide confidence that the approach is effective in selecting interesting tweets from a user’s timeline. This has important implications for reduction of cognitive burden: the results show that timelines can be considerably shortened while maintaining a high degree of confidence that interesting tweets will be retained. The mean length of assessed timelines was 14, yet the vast majority of participants selected only one or two tweets from each as interesting, indicating that a user’s own experience of interestingness on Twitter seems less than that that might be achievable through an interestingness-based prioritisation scheme.The resultant work, as a concept, could be employed in various ways. Implementing such a scheme in Twitter, for example, where “interesting” tweets are given prominence above those less interesting would inevitably lead to the unavailability of non-retweeted tweets which still may be of interest to users. Instead, the research is aimed to help address the “filter bubble” problem [39] by helping to support the notion of the identification of interesting content from beyond the scope of a user’s natural social circle. As such, the work would be more useful not for filtering data, but for augmenting the perceived social network structure itself.For example, TweetBot (and later the official Twitter clients themselves) introduced the “mute” future, in which a user could specify friends to ignore tweets from. However, in terms of usability, this achieves the same effect as temporarily unfollowing the friend, and could therefore be improved by specifying rules that adopt the research we present; ‘mute all tweets from user X unless a tweet has interestingness score greater than threshold Sthresh’. As such, the network has been augmented to simulate a conditional arc through which only a subset of tweets are transmitted.As a concrete example, consider media sources on Twitter as a potential filter bubble. After classifying news accounts on Twitter as left-wing, centre or right-wing, [40] found that 50% of users followed only sources with a single political leaning. Due to the volume of tweets from each, it could be considered unlikely that these individuals would commit to the cognitive burden of following multiple sources across the political spectrum. However, by filtering these accounts as above, the reader would see the most interesting subset of their content, producing possibly negative, but affective reactions (e.g., anger).We suggest that our approach is less susceptible to the filter bubble effect than alternative approaches based only on content rather than the author (for example [19]). Firstly, these approaches inherently lead to a focus around certain popular keywords, whereas our approach allows any tweet from any author to emerge. Secondly, our approach is more resilient to gaming and spam. Since interesting tweets are only identified based on their retweet behaviour, an author, for example, cannot simply add popular features (emoticons, URLs and hashtags) in order to raise the profile of their tweet.The approach is novel in using the implicit intelligence and behaviour of the human, as an agent that responds to interesting received tweets by retweeting them. For an individual user and timeline, the approach determines an expected level of retweeting, using machine learning to take into account tweet and network specific characteristics from a user’s perspective. This achieves personalisation, determining whether the actual level of retweeting is significant for an individual, given their network neighbourhood, as well as features concerning the tweet itself. This is a particular strength of the method, making it widely applicable to the diversity of activity found on Twitter, because it addresses the significance of retweeting volume, rather than considering retweeting volume in isolation. Consequently the method is effective in distinguishing between tweet popularity and tweet interestingness.The machine learning approach also offers some interesting characteristics to the overall method. Since the model for expected retweeting is trained on tweets with many features, and across a large variety of retweet counts, there is no need to continually update the model in real time, allowing the method to be used for ‘on-demand’ inferences with little overhead. Moreover, all tweets from a single user can be evaluated for interestingness using the same predictive scale. These points make the approach flexible and convenient for potential applications. Additionally we observe that the method has generality, with applicability to similar functions found on other social network services, such as ‘shares’ on Facebook and ‘reblogs’ on Tumblr. Both of these services provide interesting avenues for further research in this area.