@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Interleaved step-up converter with a single-capacitor snubber for PV energy conversion applications

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper presents an interleaved soft-switching step-up converter for PV arrays applications.The perturbation-and-observation method is adopted to extract the maximum power of PV arrays.The proposed circuit structure uses a lossless single-capacitor turn-off snubber to increase efficiency.The proposed power system is suitable for renewable energy conversion applications.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Soft-switching,PV,Coupled-inductor,Single-capacitor,Perturbation-and-observation,Maximum power point tracking (MPPT),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, an interleaved step-up converter with a single-capacitor snubber for PV energy conversion applications is proposed. The step-up converter adopts two sets of boost converters with an interleaved fashion and coupled-inductor technology to reduce output ripple current and increase output power level. To achieve higher conversion efficiency and reduce switching losses of the proposed converter, a lossless single-capacitor turn-off snubber is introduced. Therefore, the conversion efficiency can be increased significantly. In order to draw the maximum power from the PV arrays, a perturbation-and-observation method and a microcontroller are associated to implement maximum power point tracking (MPPT) algorithm and power regulating scheme. Finally, a prototype of a soft-switching interleaved soft-switching boost converter with coupled inductors has been built and implemented. Experimental results have obtained to verify the performance and feasibility of the proposed converter for PV arrays applications.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Using the photovoltaic (PV) power system as an alternative energy resource has been widely discussed during the last decade due to the rapid growth of power electronics techniques [1,2]. It is also more effective, harmless and less environmental pollution effect in renewable energy sources. Its energy can be converted into electrical energy through PV arrays. Recently, PV power systems are well recognized and widely used in electric power system, such as PV power generation for grid connection, PV vehicle constriction, battery charger, water pumping, and satellite power system. However, due to the instability and intermittent characteristics of PV arrays, it cannot provide a constant or stable power output. Thus, a power converter (dc/dc converter or dc/ac converter) and MPPT algorithm are required to regulate its output power.When a power converter is used in PV arrays power system, it is designed to obtain the maximum power from PV arrays for increasing utility rate of PV arrays. In order to extract the maximum power of PV arrays, switching mode converter must be operated at the maximum power point (MPP) of PV arrays, resulting in its output voltage without keeping in the desired dc constant voltage. Therefore, a switching-mode one with battery source in parallel for keeping the output voltage in the desired dc constant voltage, as shown in Fig. 1. In Fig. 1, dc bus voltage can supply power to dc/ac inverter for grid-connected power system [3–7], dc/dc converter for dc load [8–12], and so on. The dc/ac inverter and dc/dc converter are regarded as dc loads. When the proposed PV power system is used in the dc/dc converter for dc load, the battery source of switching-mode converter is substituted by the AC source, such as utility line and generator, as shown in Fig. 1. In this paper, the proposed power system includes a switching-mode converter for the maximum power point tracking (MPPT) of PV arrays and a switching-mode one for the voltage regulation of dc load. In the MPP algorithm research, several MPPT algorithms have been proposed [13–21]. Some of the popular MPPT algorithms are constant voltage method [13], hill climbing method [14], fuzzy control [15,16], ripple correlation method [17], β method [18], incremental conductance method [16] and perturbation-and-observation method [19–21]. Due to simplicity and easy implementation, the perturbation-and-observation method is adopted to implement the MPPT algorithm.In the PV array applications, a soft-switching interleaved boost converter with coupled-inductor is usually used to increase its output voltage and conversion efficiency [22,23]. However, since the energy trapped in the leakage inductor of coupled inductor, it will not only increase voltage stresses but also induce significantly switching losses of switches in the converter. In order to solve these problems, several methods have been proposed [24–26]. In [24], a resistor–capacitor-diode (R–C-D) snubber is used to alleviate voltage stresses of switches, but the energy trapped in the leakage inductor is dissipated by resistor, resulting in a lower conversion efficiency of the converter. Therefore, a passive lossless circuit [25] is adopted to reduce voltage spike across switches, as shown in Fig. 2, but active switches are still operated in hard switching at turn-on transition. In [26], an active clamp circuit is introduced into the converter for recovering the energy of leakage inductor and limiting voltage spike across switches at turn-on transition. Moreover, the one can also achieve zero-voltage switching (ZVS) in switches to increase its conversion efficiency. Therefore, the boost converter with coupled inductor can use a passive lossless turn-off snubber to reduce turn-off switching lossless and an active clamp circuit to decrease turn-on switching losses, as shown in Fig. 2. In this paper, the one with a lossless turn-off snubber is applied to the proposed PV power system to improve turn-off switching losses.In order to reduce output ripple current and increase powering capability, two sets of boost converters operated with an interleaved fashion, as shown in Fig. 3, are usually adopted [27,28], which can also achieve a fast dynamic response and a small output current ripple. Although the interleaved boost converter can achieve a soft-switching feature, their component counts and cost are increased significantly. In order to solve this problem, the interleaved boost converter with the proposed single-capacitor snubber, as shown in Fig. 4. The single-capacitor snubber can be derived from two sets of the conventional two lossless turn-off snubbers, as shown in Fig. 3. Its derivation is addressed in Section 3. From Fig. 4, it can be seen that the proposed converter requires only a resonant capacitor CS, which is associated with coupled inductor (Lm11, Lm12) or (Lm21, Lm22) to function as a lossless turn-off snubber, for dc load applications.When the PV arrays adopts a switching-mode dc/dc converter as its power processor for dc load applications, it must generate a desired dc voltage for supplying power to load. Therefore, the PV power system must have a proper power management system. In order to achieve a proper power management, circuit topology of power system and power management are described as follows.The proposed PV power system uses PV arrays as its power source. Its output voltage variations depend on the working point of PV arrays. Since the PV arrays is operated at its MPP, it has a maximum utility rate. For the dc load applications, two switching-mode converters are operated to achieve MPPT for the PV arrays and to sustain a desired dc voltage for dc loads, respectively. In order to implement the previous requirements, the proposed PV power system is composed of three parts, which are a switching-mode converter with PV arrays source, a switching-mode one with battery source and a controller, as shown in Fig. 5. Two converters use an interleaved coupled-inductor boost converter with the single-capacitor snubber as their power processors, as shown in Fig. 4. The one with PV arrays source adopts MPPT control algorithm to extract the maximum power from PV arrays. Due to simplicity and easy implementation, the perturbation-and-observation method is adopted. Its detail operation and control are described [19–21]. The other one with battery uses voltage regulation control method to regulate a constant output voltage for dc loads. In the controller, the one with PV arrays source is controlled by two control units: MPPT unit and power management unit. The MPPT one can be used to determine the MPP of PV arrays. The power management one can be operated to generate control signals M1 and SP, which separately regulate output powers of two switching-mode converters with MPPT control algorithm and with voltage regulation according to the relationships between the maximum power PPV(max) of PV arrays and load power PL. Moreover, the PWM IC unit is adopted to control the switching-mode converter with voltage regulation control method for obtaining the constant output voltage. In addition, the PWM IC one is controlled by control signal SPto regulate powers of PV arrays and load. All of protections are implemented by micro-controller. The protections include over-current, -voltage and -temperature protections of two converters and undercharge of battery. Therefore, the proposed PV power system can achieve the optimal utility rate of PV arrays.The PV arrays energy can supply power to load by the proposed interleaved boost converter. In order to regulate powers of PV arrays and output power, power management of the proposed power system is required by a microcontroller. According to relationships among PPV, PVBand PL, its operational modes can be divided into 8 modes. Note that PPVis output power of switching-mode converter with PV arrays as its power source, PVBis that of switching-mode one with battery as its power source and PLis load power. Moreover, “1” represents the power which is generated by switching-mode converter or is required by load, while “0” is the power which is not generated by switching-mode converter or is not required. According to operational modes illustrated in Table 1, all operational modes are shutdown except that operational modes IV, VI and VIII. The operational modes IV, VI and VIII are described as follows.In mode IV, the switching-mode converter with battery is used to generate power to load. Its power curve is shown in Fig. 6. When PL>PVB(max), the proposed converter is shutdown. When PL⩽PVB(max), power curve of battery follows that of load until energy stored in battery is completely discharged. The proposed PV power system is shutdown.When the operational mode is in the mode VI, the switching-mode converter with PV arrays as its power source is working to supply power to load, as shown in Fig. 7. From Fig. 7, it can be been that when PPV(max) of PV arrays is equal to or greater than PL, power curve of PV arrays follows that of load. If PPV(max)<PL, the proposed converter is shutdown.When PV arrays are operated at mode VIII, the interleaved boost converter is adopted to supply power to load, as shown in Fig. 8. Within this operational mode, (PPV(max)+PVB(max)) must be equal to or greater than PL. If (PPV(max)+PVB(max))<PL, the proposed PV power system is shutdown. When (PPV(max)+PVB(max))⩾PL, the operational condition can be divided into two cases: PPV(max)⩾PLand PPV(max)<PL. In the following, each operational case is briefly described.When PPV(max)⩾PL, switching-mode converter with battery source is shutdown. Therefore, output power PPVof PV arrays is equal to PL, as shown in Fig. 8a. During this operational mode, the switching-mode converter with PV arrays as its power source is operated in voltage regulation mode to supply the desired dc voltage to load.When PPV(max)<PL, the proposed converter is operated at the MPP of PV arrays to extract the maximum power from PV arrays. Moreover, the one with battery source is used to sustain the desired dc voltage. Their power curve is shown in Fig. 8b. From Fig. 8b, it can be seen that PLis sum of PPVand PVB.Since output voltages of PV arrays and battery belong to a low voltage level system and that of the PV power system requires a high level voltage, the switching-mode converter needs a high step-up voltage ratio. According to different operational conditions of the proposed PV power system, the switching-mode one with PV arrays source can be operated in a current regulation mode to achieve MPPT of PV arrays or be operated in a voltage regulation mode to supply a desired dc voltage to load. Moreover, one with battery source is adopted to regulate powers between output power of PV arrays and load power and to sustain the desired dc voltage. Since two switching-mode converters require the same features of the high step-up voltage ratio and their input voltages have an approximately value, their circuit structure can adopt the same circuit topology. In the following, topology derivation and operational principle of the converter with the proposed snubber are briefly described.In order to reduce switching losses, a lossless turn-off snubber is inserted in a conventional converter, as shown in Fig. 3. Although the converter can achieve soft-switching features, its output current ripple is relatively large for the high current and the low output power level applications. Therefore, to reduce output current ripple, an interleaved scheme is usually adopted. In the following, the proposed interleaved coupled-inductor boost converter with the proposed turn-off snubber is derived to simplify circuit structure of the proposed PV power system.Two sets of lossless turn-off snubbers are used in an interleaved boost converter with coupled-inductor to reduce switching losses, as shown in Fig. 3. In Fig. 3, the voltages across capacitors CS11and CS21 can be replaced with two dc voltages VCS11 and VCS21, respectively. When voltages across capacitors CS11 and CS21 are replaced with dc voltages, the energies stored in capacitors CS11 and CS21 do not need to discharge their charges. Therefore, diodes DS13 and DS23 can be removed, as shown in Fig. 9a. If voltage VCS11 or VCS21 is equal to (VO−VPV), nodes B, D and G have the same potential. Therefore, they can be merged as the same node G, as shown in Fig. 9b. Based on the operational principle of an interleaved coupled-inductor boost converter and turn-off snubber, operational states of diode D11(or D21) are the same as diode DS21(or DS11) during one switching period except that the operational duration of turn-off snubber is operated within the resonant mode. Since the resonant mode duration of turn-off snubber is much shorter than a period of switch M1 or M2 in the proposed converter, nodes F and A can be combined as the same node F. Similarly, nodes E and C can be merged as node E, as shown in Fig. 9c. In Fig. 9c, capacitors CS12 and CS22 are connected in parallel, they can be respectively merged and replaced by capacitor CS. Similarly, since two pairs of diodes (D11, DS21) and (D21, DS11) are separately connected in parallel, they can be respectively replaced by diodes D1 and D2, as shown in Fig. 9d. From Fig. 9d, it can be seen that the branch of inductor LS21 and diode DS22 connected in series forms a current source and its current direction is reversed. Moreover, branches of inductors L11 and L12 are respectively regarded as a reverse current source. Three current branches form a close loop. Therefore, the branch, which is formed by inductor LS21 and diode DS22 connected in series, can be merged into inductors L11 and L12. Its degenerated circuit is shown in Fig. 9e. Similarly, the other three branches, which are separately inductor L21, inductor L22 and inductor LS11 connected in diode DS12, are also degenerated by inductors L21 and L22. From Fig. 9e, it can be observed that the derived boost converter requires only a resonant capacitor CS, which is associated with coupled inductor (L11, L12) and (L21, L22) to function as a lossless turn-off snubber, reducing switching losses and component counts significantly.The proposed PV power system uses an interleaved coupled-inductor boost converter and a single-capacitor turn-off snubber as its dc/dc converter, as shown in Fig. 4. In this circuit structure, the coupled inductor is used to increase step-up ratio and the single-capacitor turn-off snubber is adopted to reduce switching loss. According to operational principle of the proposed converter, operational mode of the proposed one is divided into 10 modes, as shown in Fig. 10, and their key waveforms illustrated in Fig. 11. Since operational modes between t0∼t5 are similar to those modes between t5∼t10 except that the operation of switch changes from M1 to M2. Therefore, each operational mode within a half of one switching cycle is briefly described as follows.Before t0, diodes D1 and D2 are in freewheeling through inductors L11∼L22, respectively. At the moment, current I11 (=I12) is equal to diode current ID1. Similarly, I21 (=I22) equals current ID2. When t=t0, switch M1 is turned on. Switch current IDS1 is equal to (I11−I12). Within this time interval, switch current IDS1 abruptly increases, while diode currents ID1 and ID2 quickly decrease to 0.At t1, switch current IDS1 is the sum of current I11 and diode current ID2 at t0. As a result, diodes D1 and D2 are reversely biased. During this time interval, snubber capacitor CSand inductors L21 and L22 form a resonant network and they start to resonate. Current IDS1 is sum of current I11 and current (−ICS). Moreover, the energy stored in output capacitor COis released to load for sustaining a constant output voltage VO. Voltage VCSacross capacitor CSis form 0 to −(VO+NVi).When t=t2, voltage VCSreached −(VO+NVi). At the moment, diode D2 is forwardly biased. As a result, voltage VCSis clamped at −(VO+NVi). Within this time interval, inductors Lm11 and Lm12 are respectively in the stored energy state, while inductors Lm21 and Lm22 are separately in the released energy state. Therefore, current ILm11 increases linearly, while currents ILm21 and ILm22 decrease linearly.When t=t3, switch M1 is turned off. Since inductor currents ILm11 and ILm12 must be kept in a continuous state, the energies stored in inductors Lm11 and Lm12 are released to load through diode D2 and capacitor CS. As a result, voltage VCSis changed from −(VO+NVi) to 0 and voltage VDS1 across switch M1 is varied from 0 to (VO+NVi)/(N+1). Moreover, inductors Lm21 and Lm22 are kept in freewheeling through diode D2. Therefore, currents ILm21 and ILm22 decrease linearly.At t4, the energy stored in capacitor CSis completely released. That is, voltage CCSreaches 0. At the same time, diode D1 is forwardly biased. Inductors Lm11 and Lm12 are in freewheeling. Currents ILm11, ILm12, ILm21 and ILm22 decrease, respectively. When switch M2 is turned on at end of mode 5, the other half of one switching cycle will start.The proposed PV power system adopts two dc/dc converters, in which their power sources are separately PV arrays and battery, to supply power to load. In practical design considerations, the proposed one must meet operational conditions of MPPT for PV arrays. Moreover, it regulates powers between PV arrays and load by battery. In the following, control and design of the proposed PV arrays system are described.The proposed PV power system is composed of two sets of the interleaved boost converters. In order to manage power flows from PV arrays to load, a controller is adopted. The controller consists of microcontroller, and PWM IC. Control diagram of the proposed converter for PV arrays applications is shown in Fig. 12. In Fig. 12, control block of microcontroller is divided into two units: MPPT and power management units. In MPPT unit, the perturbation-and-observation method is adopted to track MPPT of PV arrays. The maximum power PPof PV arrays can be decided.In power management unit, the maximum discharging current IB(max) of battery is set to obtain the maximum battery discharging power PB(max), which is equal to VBIB(max). Output voltage VOand current IOis obtained in power management unit to attain load power PL. PB(max) and PLare separately calculate by multiplier inside microcontroller. Three powers PP, PB(max) and PLare received in comparator # 1 to judge the relationship of (PP+PB(max)) and PL. According to the relationship of (PP+PB(max)) and PL, they can be divided into two cases. In the following, each case is described briefly.When (PP+PB(max))⩾PL, output signal SP1 of comparator #1 becomes a low level. PWM generators of PV arrays and battery are operated in a normal operational mode to supply driving signals G1A, G2A, G1Band G2Bfor driving switches M1A, M2A, M1Band M2B. As a result, the proposed boost converter with PV arrays can extract the maximum power of PV arrays to load, while the one with battery can regulate powers between PV arrays and load, and sustain a desired constant voltage across load. The signal SP1 is used to control comparator #2. When PP⩾PL, output signal S1 is at a low level. In this operational condition, power selector is set that Pset=PL. If PP<PL, output signal S1 becomes a high level. Psetis set to equal PP. Next procedure is to decide current reference IC, which is equal to (Pset/Vref). Current signals ICand IOPare sent to current error amplifier after ICis decided to obtain current error value ΔIC. When ΔICis obtained and sent to PWM generator of PV arrays, PWM signals G1Aand G2Acan be generated by comparison of ΔICand triangle wave, which is generated in PWM generator of PV arrays, inside PWM generator of PV arrays. The signals G1Aand G2Aare used to drive switches M1Aand M2Afor regulating power flows from PV arrays to load. The PWM generator of PV arrays can be shut down by signals SP1 and SP2 when SP1 or SP2 is kept at a high level where signal SP2 is output signal of protection controller. The protection controller has six input signals VO(max), VO(min), IO(max), VB(max), IO, VOand VBwhere VOis output voltage of the proposed converter, VO(max) and VO(min) are respectively its maximum and minimum values, IOrepresents output current of the proposed one, IO(max) is its maximum value, VBis voltage of battery and VB(min) is its minimum voltage. When VO⩾VO(max), the proposed one is operated in over-voltage condition. Therefore, two PWM generators must be shutdown. Moreover, when IO⩾IO(max) (over-current condition), VO⩽VO(min) (under-voltage condition) and VB⩽VB(min) (undercharge condition), signal SP2 becomes a high level and two PWM generators must be shutdown. As mentioned above, protections of the proposed PV power system includes over-voltage, over-current, under-voltage and undercharge protections.The proposed boost converter with battery source uses lead-acid battery as its power source. In order to implement power balance among PV arrays, battery and load, and sustain a constant output voltage, a PWM IC is adopted. Its control unit includes voltage error amplifier and PWM generator of battery. The voltage error amplifier receives VOand Vref, which is determined by the requirement voltage of load, to obtain voltage error value ΔVC, which is equal to (Vref−VO). The ΔVCis sent to PWM generator of battery and is compared with triangle wave, which is generated by PWM IC, to attain PWM signals G1Band G2B. Signals G1Band G2Bcan control switches M1Band M2Bto regulate powers between PV arrays and load. Moreover, PWM IC can be shut down by signals Sp1 and Sp2.When (PP+PB(max))<PL, signals SP1 becomes a high level. Two PWM generators are shut down. That is, the proposed PV power system is also shut down.The proposed PV power system adopts two sets of the interleaved boost converters as its power processor, as shown in Fig. 12. When (PP+PB(max))⩾PLand PP<PL, the proposed boost converter with PV arrays is operated in constant current mode to achieve MPPT of PV arrays. In this operational mode, the proposed boost converter with battery is used to clamp output voltage VOto the desired voltage, which is a constant dc voltage. Therefore, component stresses of two boost ones approximately have the same voltage and current stress values. Their design can be the same as each other. Furthermore, when (PP+PB(max))⩾PLand PP⩾PL, the proposed one with PV arrays is regarded as a voltage regulator, while the other one with battery is shut down. Therefore, designs of two proposed boost converters can be also the same as each other. As mentioned above, deign of proposed boost converter with battery can be derived in this paper.Since switches in two interleaved boost converters with turn-off snubber are integrated by a single-capacitor snubber, duty ratios of the ones are limited within 0.5. In design of the interleaved coupled-inductor boost converter with single-capacitor snubber, determination of duty ratio D, coupled inductances (Lm11 and Lm12) and (Lm21 and Lm22), snubber capacitor CSand output filter are important. In the following, their designs are analyzed briefly.To determine duty ratio D, we must first attain input to output voltage transfer ratio M. Since the single-capacitor snubber helps switches M1 and M2 to achieve soft-switching features, transfer ratio M of the proposed one is the same as that of the conventional boost converter. According to volt-second balance principle of coupled inductor Lm11, the following equation can be obtained:(1)VPVDTS+-(VO-VPV)N+1(1-D)TS=0,where N is turns ratio of coupled inductor (Lm11 and Lm12) or (Lm21 and Lm22), and TSis period of switch M1. From (1), transfer ratio M can be expressed by(2)M=VOVPV=(1+ND)(1-D).Moreover, duty ratio D can be determined as(3)D=(VO-VPV)(VO+NVPV).Based on the operational principle of the proposed boost converter with single-capacitor snubber, duty ratio D of switches M1 or M2 is limited within 0.5 and they are operated in the interleaved manner. According to (2), a larger duty ratio D corresponds to a smaller turns ratio N of coupled inductor, which results in a lower current stresses imposed on switches M1 and M2, as well as voltage stresses on diodes D1 and D2. However, in order to accommodate variation of load, line voltage and component values, it is better to select an operating ranges as D=0.35–0.4.Due to the proposed converter operated in continuous conduction mode (CCM), the coupled inductors Lm11∼Lm22 must be respectively greater than the boundary inductors Lm11A∼Lm22B, which are the proposed converter operated at the boundary of CCM and discontinuous conduction mode (DCM). When the proposed converter is operated at the boundary condition, its current waveforms are shown in Fig. 13.From Fig. 13, it can be observed that peak value of inductor current I11(1) can expressed as(4)I11(1)=2VPVLm11BDTS.While, inductor current I11(2) can also be determined by(5)I11(2)=I12(1)=I11(1)N+1=2VPV(N+1)Lm11BDTS.In (5), it can be derived the average current I12(av) as follows:(6)I12(av)=(1-D)VPV(N+1)Lm11BDTS.Since the proposed converter is operated in an interleaved fashion, its output current IOis equal to twice of inductor current I12(av). Therefore, the boundary inductor Lm11B(=Lm21B) can be determined by(7)Lm11B=2D(1-D)VPV(N+1)IOTS.Additionally, the boundary inductor Lm12B(=Lm22B) can be also expressed as(8)Lm12B=2D(1-D)N2VPV(N+1)IOTS.From (7) and (8), it can be seen that the inductances Lm11 and Lm12 must be greater than the boundary inductor Lm11Band Lm12B, respectively. Similarly, inductances Lm21 and Lm22 are also greater than boundary inductances Lm21Band Lm22B.In the proposed converter, snubber capacitor CSresonates with inductors Lm11 and Lm12, or Lm21 and Lm22 to smooth out switch voltage at turn-off transition. The energy stored in CScan be expressed by(9)WCS=12CO(VO+NVPV)2.To completely eliminate turn-off losses of switch, the energy stored in CSmust be at least equal to turn-off loss Wsoff. According to analysis principle of switching losses, turn-off loss Wsoffcan be determined as(10)Wsoff=tsoff2NVPV-VON+1IDP,where tsoffis the time interval of switch M1 or M2 at turn-off transition and IDPis its peak current value. From (9) and (10), it can be found that snubber capacitor CScan be rewritten as(11)CS⩾tsoff(NVPV-VO)(N+1)(VO+NVPV)2IDP.In (11), tsoffis chosen with 500ns in practical design considerations.The output capacitor COis primarily designed to reduce ripple voltage. The ripple voltage ΔVrcoacross output capacitor COis determined as(12)ΔVrco=ΔQCO2CO=12CO(IO(max)DTS),where IO(max) is the maximum output current.The proposed PV power system is shown in Fig. 12. The specification of each PV arrays is listed in Table 2. The proposed PV power system adopts 8 sets of PV arrays connected in parallel to supply power to load. Its photograph is shown in Fig. 14. To verify performances of the proposed PV power system, two dc/dc converters using the interleaved coupled-inductor boost converter with the single-capacitor snubber to generate dc voltage of 400V for dc load applications with the following specifications was implemented.A.The proposed boost converter with PV arrays:•Input voltage VPV: 34 ∼ 44V(PV arrays),Output voltage VO: 400Vdc,Output maximum current IOP(max): 3A andOutput maximum power PPV(max): 1.2kW.The proposed boost converter with battery:•Input voltage VB: 44 ∼ 54Vdc(4 sets of 12V battery connected in series),Output voltage VO: 400Vdc,Output maximum current IOB(max): 3A andOutput maximum power PB(max): 1.2kW.According to designs and specifications of the proposed boost converters, components of power stages in the proposed ones are determined as follows:•Switches M1A, M2A, M1B, M2B: IRFP260N,Diodes D1A, D2A, D1B, D2B: DSSK60-02A,Coupled inductors Lm11, Lm21: 30uH,Leakage inductors of coupled inductors (Lm11, Lm12) and (Lm21, Lm22): 1.1uH,Cores of coupled inductors (Lm11, Lm12) and (Lm21, Lm22): EE-55, andturns ratio N: 20.Hardware photograph of the proposed PV power system is shown in Fig. 15. Fig. 15a depicts that of the completely PV power system, while Fig. 15b shows that of a single converter with voltage regulation control method. In order to verify the feasibility of the proposed interleaved active clamp boost converter with voltage regulation. Measured voltage VDS and current IDSwaveforms of switch M1 in the interleaved boost converter with two lossless turn-off snubbers, as shown in Fig. 3, under 80% of full load is shown in Fig. 16. Those waveforms of switches M1 and M2 in the interleaved boost converter with the single-capacitor snubber, as shown in Fig. 4, under 80% of full load is illustrated in Fig. 17. From Figs. 16 and 17, it can be seen that the interleaved boost converter with two lossless turn-off snubbers and the single-capacitor snubber can be operated with ZVT at turn-off transition, respectively. Their differences are current IDSat turn-on transition. When switches of the converter with the single-capacitor snubber are turned on, capacitor snubber will induce a current from the other boost converter to the boost one in the interleaved converter through switch M1 and M2. It results in a larger current through switch M1 or M2 at turn-on transition. Comparison conversion efficiency between the interleaved boost converter with hard-switching circuit and the proposed one is shown in Fig. 18, illustrating that efficiency of the proposed one is higher than that of hard-switching one. Its efficiency is about 86% under full load. Fig. 19illustrates the step-load change between 0% and 100% of full load, from which it can be observed that voltage regulation of output voltage VOhas been limited within ±1% to prove a good dynamic response.In the proposed interleaved active clamp boost converter with MPPT, its MPPT waveforms are shown in Fig. 20. Fig. 20a shows those waveforms under the maximum PV arrays power of 500W, while Fig. 20b illustrates those waveforms under the maximum power of 750W. From Fig. 20, it and be found that the tracking time of MPPT is about 80ms from 0 to the maximum power of PV arrays. In power management of the proposed PV power system, when the operational mode is within mode IV and PVB(max)⩾PL, its measured output voltage VOand currents IOBand IOis shown in Fig. 21. Fig. 21a depicts those waveforms under PL=350W, waveforms while Fig. 21b shows those waveforms under PL=800W. From Fig. 21, it can be seen that output VOis sustained at 400V and current IOBis equal to IO. When operational mode of the proposed PV power system is during mode VI and PPV(max)⩾PL, its measured output voltage VOand currents IOPand IOwaveforms under PPV(max)=700W and PL=600W is shows in Fig. 22, illustrating that output voltage Vo is clamped at 400V, current IOPis equal to IOand PPV=600W. As mentioned above, operational modes of the proposed PV power system are respectively in the mode IV and VI states, the proposed one can regulate powers among PV arrays, battery and load.When operational mode of the proposed converter is located in mode VIII as (PPV(max)+PVB(max))⩾PL, its operational condition is divided into two conditions. One is PPV(max)⩾PLand the other is PPV(max)<PL. When PPV(max)⩾PL, its measured waveforms of output voltage VO, currents IOP, IOBand IOunder PPV(max)=700W and PL=500W are shown in Fig. 23. In this operational condition, current IOPis equal to IOand IOBis equal to 0. That is, the proposed boost converter with MPPT is used to supply power to load and PV arrays is not operated at MPP, while the proposed boost one with voltage regulation is shutdown. When PPV(max)<PL, its measured output voltage VO, and currents IOP, IOBand IOunder PPV(max)=400W and PL=750W is shown in Fig. 24, illustrating that output voltage VOis still clamped at 400V and IO=IOP+IOB, from which it can be seen that the proposed PV power system can be used by power management circuit to achieve power balances among PV arrays, battery and load.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
