@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Ramp driver circuit for improving the stability of ramp slope in a flat panel display driver

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Ramp slope variation by image load and temperature is analyzed.Slope variation caused by image load is compensated for by redesigning feedback current path in the driver circuit.Slope variation caused by VTshift is compensated for by adjusting the gate voltage.A new and cost effective ramp driver circuit for an AC-PDP is proposed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Ramp pulse,Gate driver,Capacitive load,Flat panel display,Plasma display panel,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In a plasma display panel (PDP), ramp pulse is used for the reset operation. In this case, the stability of ramp slope is very important because the variation of ramp slope leads to the reset failure. However, the ramp slope is affected by the image load and operation temperature. In this paper, the variation of ramp slope is analyzed and a new ramp driver circuit is proposed. In the proposed driver circuit, the effect of image load is compensated for by redesigning the current path of the feedback capacitor. The slope variation caused by temperature variation is reduced by compensating for the threshold voltage shift of a MOSFET. The proposed ramp driver circuit provides multiple ramp slopes by adjusting the control signal and guarantees the stability of ramp slope against the changes of image load and temperature. The variation of ramp slope in the proposed method is reduced by 82.7% compared with the previous switched ramp driver circuit. Moreover, the additional hardware cost of the proposed driver circuit is minimal.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In a flat panel display, the price as well as image quality is very important to enlarge the market share. To do this in a plasma display panel (PDP), many efforts have been made to reduce cost and improve productivity, which can be achieved by optimizing the panel and the driver circuit. In order to improve the production yield of PDPs, most of PDPs use a ramp reset which changes the voltage of an electrode linearly. Ramp reset compensates for the difference of firing voltage of each cell on a panel by controlling the wall voltage [1–3]. Slow ramp slope can compensate for the deviation of firing voltage on a panel more precisely, but the driving time for reset period increases by the slow ramp slope. Therefore, ramp drivers that can generate multiple ramp slopes were proposed [4–6]. When wall voltage has to be controlled precisely, slow ramp slope is used; otherwise, ramp slope is set to steep slope which does not cause strong discharge. Multiple ramp slopes are used for other reasons such as contrast and image representation [7,8].Conventional ramp driver circuit consists of a MOSFET and its gate driver that includes a gate resistor and a capacitor (CDG). CDGis connected to the gate and the drain of the MOSFET. This MOSFET is located between a voltage source, VF, and the panel of which the voltage is increased or decreased to VFlinearly by the ramp driver. In this circuit, the voltage variation of a panel is the same as that of CDG. Since constant gate current flows through CDG, the voltage of CDGchanges linearly and thus the panel voltage changes linearly as well. The slope of this ramp pulse is determined by the gate resistance and CDG. Since the gate resistance and CDGcannot be adjusted during operation, the gate control signal is adjusted for generating multiple ramp slopes by using a single driver circuit. In this method, the MOSFET is turned on and off repeatedly many times for a ramp pulse of which the slope is determined by the period and duty ratios of the gate signal.The ramp slope must be controlled accurately. When the ramp slope is slower than the target slope, the electrode voltage cannot reach the final reset voltage. When the ramp slope is steeper than the target value, the time interval between the end of ramp reset and the next pulse, such as the addressing pulse, increases and the driving voltage margin is reduced. Unfortunately, the ramp driver cannot maintain the target slope because it is affected by the temperature and the image load that is the number of turned-on pixels on a panel. The threshold voltage (VT) of the MOSFET in a ramp driver is affected by temperature, which results in the variation of ramp slope. Discharge current in a panel is affected by the image load. When the MOSFET of the ramp driver is turned off, the voltage of CDGis changed by the remaining discharge current and thus the panel voltage is affected by the image load.In some commercial PDPs, the control signal of a ramp driver is adjusted according to the temperature in order to maintain the target slope. However, this method cannot provide accurate ramp slope because the variation of ramp slope caused by the image load and temperature is different for each PDP set due to the characteristic deviation of electrical parts and panels.In this paper, a new ramp driver circuit for stable ramp slope is proposed. In order to compensate for the effect of the image load, the current path of the CDGis redesigned. The effect of threshold voltage shift by temperature is compensated for by adjusting the voltage of gate driver. The performance of the proposed method was evaluated by simulations and experiments.This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 explains previous ramp driver circuits and the variation of ramp slope in these methods. Section 3 presents the proposed ramp driver and Section 4 shows the experiment and simulation. Section 5 gives results and discussion and Section 6 concludes this paper.Fig. 1shows a driving waveform of Y electrode in a 42-in. PDP. In this figure, RRN and FRN denote the Nth rising reset pulse and falling reset pulse, respectively. In this figure, ramp slopes of FR1, RR1 and FR2 are very slow to control the wall voltage precisely. From FR3 and RR2, the ramp slope is steep for reducing reset period. These various slope can be generated by a single ramp driver circuit. There are many cost effective ramp driver circuits [9,10].Fig. 2shows a conventional ramp driver circuit for the falling ramp pulse. The panel is modeled as a capacitor, CP, and the final voltage of falling ramp reset is denoted by VF. The difference between the ramp driver in Fig. 2 and a general MOSFET driver is that the gate resistance of RONis high and CDGis added between gate and drain of the MOSFET. Thus, input gate current is low and M1 is turned on slowly. On the contrary, the resistance of ROFFis so low that M1 is turned off fast. Let VCCdenote the voltage of control signal (VS) for turning on M1. When VSis VCC, the panel voltage decreases linearly and falling ramp pulse is generated as shown in Fig. 1. In the conventional ramp driver, the ramp slope can be adjusted by changing RON, VCCand CDG. The adjustment of these factors during operation is not easy.In order to obtain multiple ramp slopes from a single ramp driver circuit, the conventional ramp driver circuit in Fig. 2 is used but the control signal is modified. Fig. 3shows the modified control signal for generating multiple ramp slopes. When gate signal becomes VCC, M1 is turned on and VPdecreases by ΔVON. When gate signal becomes 0V, M1 is turned off. If the period of one switching cycle is TPRD, the ramp slope is ΔVON/TPRDin this method. Therefore, the slope can be controlled by the period TPRDand ΔVON. In this paper, the method shown in Fig. 3 is referred to as a switched ramp driver.The ramp pulse reset has to control the wall charge precisely because wall voltage setup by the ramp reset determines the performance of address operation. Therefore, accurate ramp slope is very important. However, the ramp slope is affected by the image load and temperature. In the following subsections, the analysis of the ramp slope variation in the conventional ramp driver and the switched ramp driver is presented.The voltage variation and the current flow of the conventional ramp driver are shown in Figs. 4 and 5. VGS, VDGand VPthat is the panel voltage are presented in Fig. 4. Fig. 5 represents the current flow of the conventional ramp driver.Initial phase: VGSare 0V and VPis assumed to be VP0. Thus, VDGis VP0−VF.T0period: In this period, VSbecomes VCC, and thus, gate current flows as shown in Fig. 5a. The gate current (IG) is given by the following equation:(1)IG=VCC-VGSRONSince current flows through CDGand CGS, VDGand VGSchange as shown in Fig. 4.T1period: When VGSreaches VTthat is the threshold voltage of M1, M1 is turned on and current flows from CPthrough M1 to VFvoltage source. This current is represented by dotted line in Fig. 5b. Since current flows from CP, VPdecreases, and thus, the voltage difference between drain and source of M1 decrease as well. Therefore, VDGdecreases as much as VPvariation. In T1, all gate current flows to CDGin order to change VDGin accordance with VPvariation. Consider the change rate of VDG. Let ΔQDGdenote the variation of charge of CDGfor Δt. Assuming that VGSis fixed to VT, the ΔVDGis expressed as:(2)ΔVDG=ΔQDG/CDG=IG·Δt/CDG=VCC-VTRONCDGΔtSince ΔVDGis identical to ΔVP, the ramp slope that is ΔVP/Δt is given by the following equation:(3)slopeconv=dVPdt=VCC-VTRONCDGThe slope of VPis constant because VCC, VT, CDGand RONare constant. Therefore, falling ramp pulse is generated.T2period: When VPbecomes VF, current does not flow from CPand VPis fixed to VF. In this period, gate current flows to CDGand CGSuntil VGSbecomes VCCand VDGbecomes −VCC.T3period: VGSreaches VCCand gate current does not flow.Eq. (3) shows that the ramp slope is a function of VT. Recall that VTof a MOSFET varies with temperature. Therefore, ramp slope in (3) is changed by the temperature variation.As shown in Fig. 1, the multiple ramp slopes are needed for reducing reset period and maintaining the reset performance. In order to generate multiple ramp slopes, the control signal in Fig. 3 is used in the switched ramp driver in which the driver circuit is the same as that in Fig. 2. The output waveform of this method is shown in Fig. 3 in which the voltage variation during TONcan be obtained by multiplying TONand slopeconvin (3). Therefore, the slope of a switched ramp driver is given by the following equation:(4)SlopeSW=ΔVON/TPRD=VCC-VTRONCGD·TONTPRDThe slope of a switched ramp driver can be controlled by adjusting TONand/or TPRDwhich can be changed easily during operation. Therefore, a switched ramp driver can generate multiple ramp slopes without additional hardware cost. However, the ramp slope is changed depending on the image load and temperature, which results in the failure in reset operation.Image load effect: In order to obtain a stable ramp slope, VPand VDGshould not be changed during TOFFas shown in Fig. 3. However, VPand VDGcan be changed during TOFF. Although M1 is turned off and a ramp driver does not change VPduring TOFF, the remaining discharge current that flows between electrodes on a panel can cause VPto change. Since the electrodes are floated in TOFF, the voltage of a panel is raised by the remaining discharge current that is proportional to the number of cells which are turned on in the previous sub-field. Therefore, the voltage variation during TOFFis affected by the image load. As the image load increases, VPis raised higher during TOFF. Note that VDGis raised as much as VP. In this paper, the increased voltage during TOFFis denoted by ΔVOFF. The voltage variation in a switching cycle is (ΔVON−ΔVOFF) and the ramp slope of the switched ramp driver is given by the following equation:(5)SlopeSW_LOAD=ΔVON-ΔVOFFTPRDIn (5), ΔVONand TPRDcan be controlled but ΔVOFFis not controllable because it is determined by the input image. The variation of ramp slope caused by the image load may lead to the failure of reset operation.Temperature effect: Threshold voltage, VT, of a MOSFET is changed depending on the temperature. In a conventional ramp driver, the ramp slope is varied with the temperature because the slope in (3) is affected by VT. In the switched ramp driver, VTand TONin (4) are changed by temperature variation. Assuming that the rising slope of VGSdoes not vary with temperature in Fig. 3, TONdecreases as VTincreases. Therefore, the ramp slope variation in the switched ramp driver is more serious than in the conventional ramp driver.Fig. 6shows the proposed ramp driver circuit in which the ramp slope variation caused by the image load and temperature is reduced. The control signal of the proposed driver circuit is the same as that in Fig. 3 and the slope can be controlled by adjusting TONand TPRD. The proposed ramp driver in Fig. 6 is different from the conventional ramp driver in blocks A and B. Block A is added to compensate for the effect of the image load and block B to compensate for the effect of temperature.The reason of image load effect is that VPand VDGare changed by the remaining discharge current during TOFF. In the proposed method, VPchanges during TOFFbut VDGdoes not change, which can be achieved by adding a zener diode between CDGand drain of M1. For simplicity, Fig. 7shows an equivalent circuit to the proposed ramp driver during TOFFto explain the compensation for image load effect. In Fig. 7, block B in Fig. 6 is removed.During TOFF, remaining discharge current flows through CPbut it cannot flow through CDGbecause of ZD. Thus, the effective voltage variation of VPfor a switching cycle is reduced to (ΔVON−ΔVOFF) but that of VDGmaintains ΔVON. At the beginning of TON, (VDG+VGS+VF) is higher than VP. Since VPtends to be the same as (VDG+VGS+VF), VPdecreases more than ΔVDGby ΔVOFF, and thus, the voltage drop of VPis (ΔVON+ΔVOFF) during TON. Since VPincreases ΔVOFFin TOFF, the effective voltage variation during a TPRDis as follows:(6)ΔVP=(ΔVON+ΔVOFF)-ΔVOFF=ΔVONIt means that the term of ΔVOFFin (5) is eliminated and the image load effect is compensated for by ZD.In order to reduce the ramp slope variation caused by the temperature, (VCC−VT) and TONin (3) and (4) should not be changed by temperature. In the proposed method, VTterm in the numerator of (3) and (4) is removed and the variation of TONis reduced by adjusting the gate driving voltage. Fig. 8shows the equivalent ramp driver circuit to the proposed ramp driver in Fig. 6. In Fig. 8, MCOMPin Fig. 6 is replaced with an equivalent circuit to explain the compensation for the temperature effect.The basic concept for compensating for the effect of VTvariation is that VTvalue is measured and stored in CCOMPin Fig. 8. If the voltage of CCOMP(VCOMP) maintains just below VT, the gate driving voltage is (VCC+VT) for turning on M1. In this case, VCCterm in (3) and (4) is replaced with (VCC+VT) and thus the numerator of (3) and (4) becomes (VCC+VT−VT)=VCC. Therefore, the ramp slope is not affected by VT. If the VCOMPis just below VT, VGSis set to the value of just below VTduring TOFF. In this case, the difference of VGSbetween TOFFand TONis very small, which results in the stable ramp slope against temperature variation. Recall that the effective TONin (4) varies depending on the voltage difference between the VGSof TOFFand VTas shown in Fig. 3. The followings explain the way of storing VTin CCOMP.In the initial state of falling ramp reset, VPis higher than VF. VGSand VCOMPare 0V. In this circuit, (VF+5V) is supplied to a terminal of RDDin Fig. 8. When the VSbecomes VCC, VGSbecomes VTand VPdecreases linearly. Since VGSis VTand VCOMPis 0V, Q1 and Q2 are turned on. Then, current flows from the voltage source of (VF+5V) to CCOMPand VCOMPincreases. When VCOMPbecomes (VT−VBE), Q1 is turned off because the base current of Q1 does not flow from the gate of M1. Once VCOMPreaches (VT−VBE) in the beginning stage of falling ramp reset, VCOMPmaintains (VT−VBE) during the falling ramp period.When VSis 0V, VGSbecomes (VT−VBE) and M1 is turned off. In this case, TONvariation shown in Fig. 3 can be negligible because the voltage difference between the VGSduring TOFFand VTis always VBEregardless of VTvalue. Therefore, TONin (4) is not changed by VTvariation. When VSbecomes VCC, the gate driving voltage becomes (VCC+VT−VBE). Therefore, the VCCin (3) and (4) is replaced with VCC+VT−VBEin this method. Let ΔVON_Pdenote the voltage variation of a single switching cycle in the proposed method. Then ΔVON_Pis given by the following equation:(7)ΔVON_P=VCC-VBERONCGDTONIn (7), the term of VTis eliminated, which means that ΔVON_Pis not affected by the VT. Then, the ramp slope of the proposed method is expressed as:(8)slopePROP=VCC-VBERONCGD·TONTPRDIn (8), the variation of VBEcaused by temperature is much smaller than that of VTin a MOSFET. Therefore, the ramp slope variation can be reduced by the proposed method.When falling ramp reset is completed, VGSshould be set to 0V for turning off M1. In the proposed ramp driver in Fig. 6, MCOMPis added for turning off M1. The CCOMPand D1 in Fig. 8 can be replaced with the parasitic capacitance and body-diode of the MCOMPin Fig. 6. When MCOMPis turned off, the proposed circuit can generate a ramp pulse. When MCOMPis turned on and VSis 0V, VGSof the M1 is set to 0V and M1 is turned off. The maximum drain-source voltage of MCOMPis 5V so additional cost for MCOMPis small. The maximum voltage of transistors Q1 and Q2 is VCC. The voltage source of VF+5V is implemented in almost commercial PDPs for the scan driver IC. Thus, additional hardware cost is minimal.The stability of ramp slope of the proposed method in Fig. 6 is evaluated by simulations and experiments. The compensation for the image load effect is evaluated by simulations for the switched ramp driver and the proposed ramp driver. Remaining discharge current in the ramp reset operation is modeled as a current source IPas shown in Fig. 9. In this simulation, IPis set to 150mA during TOFFfor the case when the image load is high. When the image load is low, IPis set to 0A. In this simulation, panel is modeled as 100nF capacitor and panel voltage decreases from 200V to −170V linearly by the ramp driver.The compensation for the temperature effect is evaluated by simulations and experiments. The temperature effect on the ramp slope is simulated for the conventional ramp driver, the switched ramp driver and the proposed ramp driver. In these simulations, a 100nF capacitor is used for a panel. This capacitor load is different from a panel in that there is no discharge current. However, the panel voltage variation in (2) and (7) during TONis not affected by the discharge current, but by the gate current and the feedback capacitor, CDG. The discharge current effect on the panel voltage during TOFFis eliminated by the compensation method for the image load effect. Therefore, the results with the 100nF capacitor are the same as those with a panel. In this simulation, panel voltage decreases from 200V to −170V. The temperatures in the simulation are −55°C and 125°C and VTof a MOSFET is set to 3.657V and 2.4V, respectively, according to the datasheet of the MOSFET used for this experiment.In the experiment for evaluating compensation for temperature effect, each ramp driver circuit is implemented and the slope variation caused by the temperature is measured at −55°C and room temperature. In these experiments, a 100nF capacitor is used for a panel of which the voltage varies from 400V to 0V by the ramp driver.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper proposed a new ramp driver circuit which is used for a reset operation in a PDP. The variation of the ramp slope was analyzed and the method for reducing the slope variation caused by the image load and temperature was proposed. The stability of ramp slope is improved by the proposed method compared with the conventional ramp driver and switched ramp driver. The additional cost of the proposed method is very small compared with its performance improvement.