@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Flexible, stretchable, transparent and electrically conductive polymer films via a hybrid electrospinning and solution casting process: In-plane anisotropic conductivity for electro-optical applications

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Roll-to-roll line to produce transparent flexible stretchable electrodes is developed.Nanofibers are embedded in the dielectric and conductive phases as embedded structure suppress delamination under flexing and stretching.Any soluble substrate can be made conductive while maintaining its transparency.With elastomeric substrates stretchable electrode are produced.The thermoplastic electrodes can be thermoformable into parts with complex curvatures.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Transparent conductive films,Flexible conductive films,Electrospinning,Solution casting,Laser ablation,Patterning,Roll-to-roll manufacturing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A new method is developed for the preparation of a transparent electrically conductive hybrid polymer films which maintain their electrical conductivity when subjected to deformation in two and three dimensions including bending, stretching and twisting. These films are made by a hybrid roll to roll (R2R) process where electrically conductive nanofibers are partially embedded in solution cast dielectric polymer films such as poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA), polyimide (PI) or polyurethanes (PU). Nanofibers partially embedded in films can be laser ablated to obtain in-plane anisotropic electrical conductivity created in the form of parallel conductive lines separated by non-conductive spaces on the film surface. The patterned films can be used for high resolution pixel addressable liquid crystal displays. There are several situations, such as wearable sensors, curved displays and advanced flexible OLED lightings, where elastic extensibility and/or permanent deformability are desired without significant loss of electrical conductivity. To satisfy this demand, the multifunctional films can be made elastic, thermally deformable with the judicious choice of materials comprising the nanofibers and the matrix they are embedded in. The multifunctional transparent conductive films are easily manufactured through a low-cost continuous hybrid roll to roll process. Furthermore, they can be used in future displays, solar cells, wearable electronics and skin attached sensors requiring flexibility as well as stretchability and more desirably subsequent recovery after cessation of stress and strains without any loss of electrical conductivity.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Transparent conductive films are essential components primarily used as electrodes for various electro optical devices such as liquid crystal displays (LCDs), plasma displays (PDs), touch panels, organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) and photovoltaics. They also find use in electrostatic discharge (ESD) applications, though the required range of surface resistivity is much higher, 109–1012ohm/sq, compared to that required for the display industry, usually lower than 103ohm/sq [1]. Indium Tin oxide (ITO) is currently the material of choice for such films as it exhibits very unique properties combining optical transparency (∼90%) and low electrical resistivity (100ohm/sq). However, ITO poses several problems when flexibility of the final device is required. Thin ITO layers on flexible substrates, such as polyester films, are brittle and easily shattered when bent and rolled repeatedly, which makes it lose its conductivity at very small strains [2,3]. The problem becomes even more severe when stretchability to large strains alongside with bendability and rollability is required. There are several situations where stretchability is desired alongside with flexibility in electronic materials including displays. In a continuous R2R process of display manufacturing, it is possible that the substrate will be exposed to high levels of strain, especially during thermoforming. In addition, future displays, solar cells, wearable electronics and skin attached sensors require stretchability and more desirably subsequent recovery after cessation of stress while maintaining electrical conductivity.A number of recent studies described the preparation of transparent electrically conductive flexible films where ITO is completely eliminated. Carbon nanotubes [4], graphenes [5,6], nano metal materials [7–9] and intrinsically conducting and solution processable polymers [10–16], such as poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) [17–19] have been the most commonly employed materials. Films based on both carbon nanotube and graphene rely on the formation of a continuous thin carbon film layer on top of a flexible substrate. For the preparation of these films, although roll-to-roll manufacturing is achievable [20,21], the process is costly and has other limitations at this moment. Sputtering, reactive evaporation, chemical vapor deposition, the sol–gel processes and spray coating are other processes used to coat a thin continuous layer of electrically conducting layer on flexible substrates. Although such organic thin layers of electrically conductive carbon based materials deposited on flexible polymer substrates can tolerate repeated bending and flexing as demonstrated recently, the tolerance of such thin coating layers to high levels of stretching while maintaining conductivity is more challenging.Patterning is one of the most important steps to manufacture semiconductor devices. Many technologies such as semiconductor circuitry [22], sensors [23], printing plates [24], tissue engineering [25] and micromechanical devices [26] use patterning on constituent materials of the final design. The patterned films can be used as substrate in liquid crystal displays and in touch panel with capability to track multiple fingers. Although, there is an ample patterning and printing techniques available for the production of high resolution patterns, they are generally variations of lithography processes which include many steps of wet chemistry such as coating, drying, developing, masking, etching, mask removal and washing. These patterning processes, in general, are costly and not very environmentally friendly. There is a need for a scalable, environment friendly, inexpensive continuous method for patterning substrates.Laser ablation is a very powerful, fast and flexible technique for patterning very small features. Organic polymer surface can be patterned using pulsed UV excimer laser irradiation leading in ablative photodecomposition (APD) or photo ablation [27]. The polymer surface is etched and the decomposition products are ejected very fast as a result of APD which eliminates the need for photo-masks. The ablation should not form any debris, and the created cavities must have high dimensional fidelity with sharp edges and low surface roughness to be defined as successful. Pfleging et al. studied laser micromachining using laser radiation with a wavelength of 248nm for applications in thin films with thicknesses varying from 100nm to 2μm. The effects of film material, thickness and laser parameters such as laser fluence (energy) and number of pulses is investigated in this study [28].We report the preparation of a highly stretchable, flexible and transparent electrically conductive hybrid polymer films comprising electrically conductive electrospun nanofibers partially embedded in the surface of solution cast dielectric polymer films such as PMMA, PI and PU. Laser ablation of electrically conductive nanofibers embedded PMMA films are also reported here for proof of concept that patterning can be easily achieved and integrated into the continuous R2R process.The platform technology used to prepare the hybrid polymer films in this study comprises the combination of two process technologies, a thin film solution casting process and electrospinning process, and described in detail in Ref. [29,30]. The hybrid film-manufacturing platform that combines a multi-nozzle electrospinning platform integrated seamlessly onto a solution casting line is shown in Fig. 1.The platform consists of several stages with individually controlled spinnerets. Each spinneret has a dedicated Teflon container, pressure/vacuum line, high voltage power supply, disposable needles and valves. Each spinneret is held by a holder that has the X–Y position adjustment capability and hence can be set at desired position. This, along with dedicated pressure/vacuum line and high voltage power capability allows different materials to be spun simultaneously leading to production complex composite nanostructures with compositional gradients if desired.Each group of spinnerets is held by a linear actuator that rasterizes the platform holding spinnerets in the transverse direction to the casting direction. This ensures that nanofiber deposition to the cast film is uniform as individual nanofiber spinners are known to deliver uneven deposition about the spinning cone. A closer look at the multi-nozzle electrospinning section along with a spinneret is shown in Fig. 2.There are two different approaches to hybrid film preparation using this platform technology. In one approach, the base polymer layer is cast onto a moving endless belt and nanofibers are directly spun onto the liquid layer moving under the spinnerets. The fibers penetrate partially or completely into the liquid layer depending on the electric potential between the nozzle tip and the conductive carrier. Several factors influence the successful incorporation of the nanofibers into the cast liquid layer. The level of electrical forces, wetting characteristics of the fibers by the liquid layer, density of the fibers and surface tension play a major role. The subsequent solvent evaporation is facilitated in the heating chambers of the casting line.In the second approach, the nanomat is first deposited onto a belt carrier by the multi-nozzle electrospinning section and subsequently the polymer solution is cast on top of it to form a thin layer by a doctor blade or a vertical slot die. The solution-impregnated nanomat finally goes through the heating sections where the solvents are evaporated to form the hybrid film. In this study, we primarily used the second approach as it maintains the nanofibers closer to film surface and lead to smoother final film surface.Transparent, conductive and flexible films produced by hybrid casting electrospinning process were patterned using a one-step laser ablation to produce films exhibiting high conductivity ratios by creating parallel conductive lines separated by nonconductive lines. As mentioned earlier, this high in-plane anisotropic conductivity ratio in substrates allows the building of higher resolution and pixel addressable displays.Lasers with wavelengths of 193nm and 248nm (LPXpro 305K) are used by Coherent GmbH Company in Excimer Laser Application Lab, Germany. The thickness of electrospun conductive fiber layer was first determined by microscopic measurement carried out on the cross section of the film created by microtoming of an epoxy-encapsulated film. The laser beam energy and pulse amount will be set according to these thicknesses for creating 10–50μm ablation strips. The beam delivery used was a 5× demagnified high-resolution mask imaging with homogeneously irradiated mask and the fluence was 1000mJ/cm2. The selected field size was 0.05×0.7mm2 at 193nm and 0.05×4mm2 at 248nm.The ablated patterns were investigated for ablation precision using the confocal microscope that has Z-stacking and 2.5D profile generation capabilities. The ablated sample conductivity is measured in two directions as defined in Fig. 3. Anisotropic conductivity ratios were calculated by dividing the resistivity at the perpendicular direction to the parallel one on conductive pattern strips.A polymer dispersed liquid crystal light switch prototype was prepared to showcase the utility of the flexible transparent conductive films. Conductive polyimide films with electrospun PEDOT:PSS/PEO nanofibers embedded were used as the electrodes of PDLC display. The flexible conductive polyimide films had a surface resistivity of 1500ohm/sq and a light transmittance of 76% at 550nm. Norland optical adhesive 65 (NOA 65) was used as the polymer matrix. The liquid crystal was 4-pentyl-4′-cyanobiphenyl (5CB). Detailed preparation process can be found in the reference [29].One of the key elements of the study is the method used to prepare the spinning dope (electrically conductive materials+solvent+additive for processability) that maximizes the electrically conductive ingredients while facilitating reliable spinnability through the addition of very high molecular weight polymer at minimal concentrations [29,31]. The key in this study is if we use very high molecular weight polymer that aids in spinnability, we can significantly reduce its content in the dope. This then translates to increased electrical conductivity. Therefore, the electrospinning solution consists of a high MW (Weight average Mw 4,000,000) poly (ethylene oxide) (PEO) dissolved in an aqueous solution of intrinsically conductive polymer, PEDOT: PSS. To be exact, 0.07g of PEO (MW=4,000,000) from Scientific Polymers Inc. was added into 10g Orgacon™ S203 (water dispersion of PEDOT:PSS @ 1.1wt%) from Agfa. The concentration of PEO in the electrospinning solution is 0.7wt% and the final concentration of PEDOT: PSS in the dry nanofiber is around 60wt%. The solution was prepared by stirring at room temperature until a homogenous solution was achieved.Soluble colorless grade polyimide (Akron Polymer Systems) was dissolved in NMP (Sigma Aldrich) at 5wt% concentration. PMMA and polyurethane solution was prepared by dissolving at 10wt% in DMF & NMP respectively.Electrospinning process was carried out at 5KV and 15cm tip to target distance. The PMMA, PI and PU solutions were cast onto the electrically conducting nanomat and the solvent was evaporated from the hybrid film using a heated laminar flow of air cleaned by hepa filters before introducing into the chamber above the substrate and electric underbelt heaters. In the case of PI and PU, the solution was evaporated at 60°C in 12h whereas for PMMA solution in DMF, the solvent removal duration was 2h. Further heat treatment was carried out at 120°C for 1h under vacuum.Optical microscopy pictures were taken with a Micro Publisher 5.0 RTV camera from Qimaging Inc. attached to a Laborlux 12 Pol S Microscope from Leitz Wetzlar Germany.Confocal microscopy pictures were using a Zeiss Microscope LSM800 from by Z-stacking technique under laser for 2.5D images.Scanning electron microscope pictures were obtained using JEOL JSM-7401F field emission scanning electron microscope with an accelerating voltage of 5kV and a current of 20μA. Before SEM test, the sample was sputter coated with Platinum at a current of 40mA for 40s.UV–Visible spectrum was carried out by directly measuring the film in ambient atmosphere using HP 8453 spectrometer from wavelength of 190nm to 1000nm. Normalized transmittance was obtained by using a non-fiber containing film as the background in UV–VIS spectrometer before measuring the conductive fiber embedded films.Fiber loading was calculated based on the flow rate of the electrospinning process, concentration of the electrospinning solution, deposition time and the weight of final fiber embedded film product.To measure the surface resistivity (ohm/sq) of the films, the following geometry (Fig. 4) with a two point probe was used in accordance with ASTM D4496-04. The surface resistance R (ohm) was measured by a Keithley SourceMeter (Model 6430 Sub-Femtoamp). The electrodes were prepared by a conductive silver epoxy paint Tra-duct 2902 from Emerson & Cuming.(1)Rs=V/I=Surface resistance(ohm)(2)ρs=Rs×(W/L)=surface resistivity(ohm/sq)whereW: Width of the specimen and electrode.L: Length of the specimen between electrodes.In order to measure the surface resistivity of the films during stretching and bending, a special uniaxial stretching machine developed in our lab was used. The uniaxial stretching system shown in Fig. 5allows the real time determination of true stress, strain, birefringence and surface resistivity simultaneously during stretching [29].Surface resistivity during stretching was measured using the two-point probe method shown in Fig. 4. The middle and the right photos in Fig. 6show the sample with silver paints and wire connects before and after inserting in the clamp, respectively. The left photo in Fig. 6 shows the clamp for the bending test. For the case of bending experiments, birefringence and mechanical data was not collected.For measuring the in-plane anisotropic conductivity, a digital multimeter is used. As shown previously in Fig. 3, the resistivity on y-plane (along direction 1) non-conductive ablated ends is measured and recorded, followed by the same step for conductive x-plane (along direction 2) stripes.The calculation for the in-plane anisotropic conductivity ratio is given below.Anisotropic conductivity ratio=r1/r2r1: y-plane ablated region end-to-end resistivity.r2: x-plane conductive strip end-to-end resistivity.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
