@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
RTAD: A real-time adaptive dissemination system for VANETs

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We implemented and assessed RTAD, our real-time adaptive dissemination system.Our approach uses the number of neighbors to estimate the vehicle density.We tested RTAD under four different urban scenarios.We compared our proposal against two static schemes and three adaptive systems.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Vehicular ad hoc networks,Warning message dissemination,Adaptive systems,VANETs,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Efficient message dissemination is of utmost importance to propel the development of useful services and applications in Vehicular ad hoc Networks (VANETs). In this paper, we propose a novel adaptive system that allows each vehicle to automatically adopt the most suitable dissemination scheme in order to fit the warning message delivery policy to each specific situation. Our mechanism uses as input parameters the vehicular density and the topological characteristics of the environment where the vehicles are located, in order to decide which dissemination scheme to use. We compare our proposal with respect to two static dissemination schemes (eMDR and NJL), and three adaptive dissemination systems (UV-CAST, FDPD, and DV-CAST). Simulation results demonstrate that our approach significantly improves upon these solutions, being able to support more efficient warning message dissemination in all situations ranging from low densities with complex maps, to high densities in simple scenarios. In particular, RTAD improves existing approaches in terms of percentage of vehicles informed, while significantly reducing the number of messages sent, thus mitigating broadcast storms.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Modern Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) are being propelled by the development and adoption of wireless telecommunications and computing technologies, which allow our roads and highways to be both safer and more efficient transportation platforms. Vehicular ad hoc Networks (VANETs) are wireless communication networks which support cooperative driving among vehicles on the road. In such networks, vehicles act as communication nodes and relays, establishing dynamic vehicular networks together with other nearby vehicles [2].The specific characteristics of VANETs favor the development of attractive and challenging services and applications, including road safety [7,4], traffic flow management [25,36], road status monitoring [14], environmental protection [21], and mobile infotainment [24]. In this work we focus on traffic safety and efficient warning message dissemination, where the main goal is to reduce the latency and to increase the accuracy of the information received by nearby vehicles when a dangerous situation occurs [41].In a VANET, any vehicle detecting an abnormal situation (i.e., accident, slippery road, etc.) rapidly starts notifying the anomaly to nearby vehicles to spread the alert information in a short period of time [13]. Thus, broadcasting warning messages can be useful to alert nearby vehicles. However, this dissemination is strongly affected by: (i) the signal attenuation due to the distance between the sender and receiver (especially in low vehicular density areas), (ii) the effect of obstacles in signal transmission (very usual in urban areas, e.g., due to buildings), and (iii) a reduced message delivery effectiveness due to serious redundancy, contention, and massive packet collisions provoked by simultaneous forwarding, usually known as broadcast storm (prone to occur in highly congested areas) [37]. Therefore, knowing the density of vehicles and the characteristics of the area where the vehicles are moving (e.g., in terms of topological complexity) can offer better opportunities for message delivery.We consider that new adaptive proposals for warning message dissemination in urban environments are needed, offering efficient broadcasting techniques around the affected area, taking into account the current vehicular density, as well as the topology of the scenario where vehicles are located. This can be beneficial in order to increase the efficiency of the warning message dissemination process, and also to reduce broadcast storm related problems. The objective is to increase the probability of correctly alert surrounding vehicles, thereby preventing new dangerous situations.In this paper we propose RTAD, a real-time adaptive dissemination system that allows each vehicle to automatically adopt the most suitable dissemination scheme to adapt the warning message delivery policy to each specific situation. Our mechanism uses as input parameters the estimated vehicular density (according to a neighbor-based density estimation scheme) and the topological characteristics of the environment where the vehicles are located, using them to decide which dissemination scheme to use, maximizing the message delivery effectiveness, and avoiding or mitigating broadcast storms. In addition, we also propose the Nearest Junction Located (NJL), our novel warning message dissemination scheme specially designed for being used in highly congested urban areas.This work is an extended version of a preliminary contribution presented in Sanguesa et al. [27]. In particular, we have implemented and assessed the feasibility of RTAD. Additionally, since the RTAD system needs to estimate the vehicle density to select the most appropriate broadcast scheme, our approach uses the number of neighbors, instead of the number of beacons received, to estimate the vehicle density. In order to assess RTAD’s performance, we tested it under four different scenarios: two of them previously used to calibrate the algorithm (Amsterdam and Los Angeles), and two new scenarios (Sydney and Santiago de Chile) characterized by larger map areas, as well as having one (Sydney) or two (Santiago de Chile) different downtown areas. Finally, we have included a comparison between our proposal and two static broadcast schemes (eMDR and NJL), as well as three adaptive systems (UV-CAST, FPDP and DV-CAST).The paper is organized as follows: in Section 2 we present the simulation environment used to validate our proposal and some previous concepts. In Section 3 we make a preliminary analysis of different broadcast schemes, and we present the Most Suitable Broadcast Selection Algorithm proposed. Section 4 introduces RTAD, our real-time adaptive warning dissemination system. Section 5 presents and discusses the obtained results. In Section 6 we review previous works closely related to our proposal, highlighting the main similarities and differences. Finally, Section 7 concludes this paper.Simulation results presented in this paper were obtained using the ns-2 simulator [3], modified to consider the IEEE 802.11p standard.1All these improvements and modifications are available at http://www.grc.upv.es/software/.1In terms of the physical layer, the data rate used for packet broadcasting is 6Mbit/s, as this is the maximum rate for broadcasting in 802.11p [8]. The MAC layer was also extended to include four different channel access priorities. Therefore, application messages are categorized into four different Access Categories (ACs), where AC0 has the lowest and AC3 the highest priority. The purpose of the 802.11p standard is to provide the minimum set of specifications required to ensure interoperability between wireless devices when attempting to communicate in potentially fast-changing communication environments. For our simulations, we chose the IEEE 802.11p because it is expected to be widely adopted by the industry.The simulator was also modified to make use of our Real Attenuation and Visibility (RAV) scheme [18], which proved to increase the level of realism in VANET simulations using real urban roadmaps in the presence of obstacles. The RAV propagation model is presented in detail in Section 2.1. As for vehicular mobility, it has been obtained with CityMob for Roadmaps (C4R) [5], a mobility generator based on the SUMO traffic simulator [10], able to import maps directly from OpenStreetMap [22], and make them available for being used by the ns-2 simulator. C4R has microscopic traffic capabilities such as: collision-free vehicle movement and overtaking, multi-lane streets with lane changing, junction-based right-of-way rules, and traffic lights.To generate the movements for the simulated vehicles, we used the Krauss mobility model [12,11] available in SUMO with some modifications to allow multi-lane behavior. This model is based on collision avoidance among vehicles by adjusting the speed of a vehicle to the speed of its predecessor using the following formula:(1)v(t+1)=v1(t)+g(t)-v1(t)ττ+1-η(t),where v represents the speed of the vehicle in m/s, t represents the current simulation time in seconds,v1is the speed of the leading vehicle in m/s, g is the gap to the leading vehicle in meters,τis the driver’s reaction time (set to 1s in our simulations), andηis a random variable uniformly distributed over the interval [0, 1] m/s.Our mobility simulations also account for areas with different vehicle densities. In a real town, traffic is not uniformly distributed; there are downtowns or points of interest that may attract vehicles. Hence, we include the ideas presented in the Downtown Model[16] to add points of attraction in realistic roadmaps.With regard to data traffic, vehicles operate in two modes: (a) warning mode and (b) normal mode. Warning mode vehicles inform other vehicles about their status by sending warning messages periodically with the highest priority at the MAC layer; each vehicle is only allowed to propagate them once for each sequence number. Normal mode vehicles enable the diffusion of these warning messages and, periodically, they also send beacons with information such as their positions and speed. These periodic messages have lower priority than warning messages, and they are only useful in the vicinity of the vehicles, hence not being broadcasted by other vehicles.The roadmaps used in the simulations were selected in order to have different profile scenarios (i.e., with different topology characteristics). Table 1and Fig. 1show the topology and the main features of the cities simulated, respectively. Note that we included a column labeled as SJ Ratio, which represents the result of dividing the number of streets between the number of junctions. As shown, the first four cities (Rome, Valencia, Sydney, and Amsterdam) present an SJ ratio greater than 1, which indicates that they have a complex topology, while the rest of the cities (Los Angeles, San Francisco, and Madrid) present a lower SJ value, which indicates that they have a simple topology. In Section 2.2 we detail how we account for the number of streets.We are interested in the following performance metrics: (i) percentage of informed vehicles and (ii) number of messages received per vehicle. The percentage of informed vehicles is the percentage of vehicles that do receive the warning messages sent by warning mode vehicles. The number of messages received per vehicle (including beacons and warning messages) gives an estimation of channel contention and the overhead of the selected approach. In particular, we measure this metric during 30s. Additionally, we are also interested in the warning notification time, which is the time required by normal vehicles to receive a warning message sent by a warning mode vehicle. This time allows us estimate the delivery delay.In this work we performed more than 28,000 experiments, since we made 50 repetitions for each scenario while also varying the city roadmaps, the density of vehicles, and the broadcast scheme used. Due to space limitations, it is not possible to present the results of all of the cities simulated, so in some cases we only included the results obtained for San Francisco and Valencia since, according to our previous work [26], the simulation results obtained in these roadmaps are closer to the average ones. Tables 2 and 3show the parameters used for the simulations.In the next subsections we present some important concepts useful for our work. In particular, we first detail the Realistic Attenuation and Visibility (RAV), our proposed Radio Propagation Model (RPM) used in simulations; we also introduce both the concept of street and neighbor in our system, which are key factors to estimate the vehicle density at any time instant by using vehicular networks; and finally, we show the vehicle density estimation function used in our approach.A wireless signal propagation model can be characterized by: (a) attenuation schemes (signal power loss due to distance) and (b) visibility schemes (presence of obstacles interfering with signal propagation). The combination of these schemes makes up our radio propagation model, namely RAV.Regarding attenuation, the RAV model implements signal attenuation due to the distance between vehicles as closely to reality as possible. In general, ns-2 offers deterministic RPMs, i.e., the selected function determines the maximum distance a message could reach. If the receiver is within this range, the message will be successfully received; on the contrary, if the distance is greater, it will be lost. In order to increase realism, RAV uses a probabilistic approach to model packet losses due to channel noise and other situations. It uses a probability density function to determine the probability of a packet being successfully received at any given distance. With respect to other attenuation schemes, such as Two-Ray Ground and Nakagami, our scheme, instead of being theoretical, is obtained directly from experimental data [18].As for visibility, the main objective that a realistic visibility scheme should accomplish is to determine if there are obstacles between the sender and the receiver which interfere with the radio signal. In most cases, when using the 5.9GHz frequency band (used by the 802.11p standard), buildings absorb radio waves, and so communication is not possible. Hence, the RAV model allows vehicles communicating if one the following conditions are fulfilled:•Sender and receiver are within the maximum transmission range and they are in line-of-sight, for example, if the two vehicles are located in the same street, or if they are located in different streets but there are no buildings blocking the radio signal.Sender and receiver are not in line-of-sight, but the receiver is close enough to a junction (i.e., nearer than 20m according to empirical results [18]), thereby increasing the probability of successful reception due to the reflection and diffraction of the wireless signal on the nearby buildings, as shown in Fig. 2.Fig. 3shows an example of our visibility scheme, where vehicle (A) is trying to disseminate a message. In that case, and assuming that any vehicle receiving a message will rebroadcast it the first time, the result will be vehicles B, C, D, and E receiving the message while the others (F, G, H, and I) will not receive it. The visibility scheme considers that radio signal can be propagated through streets and clear areas whereas the signal is mostly inhibited from passing through solid buildings.As presented earlier, we consider the SJ Ratio as the result of dividing the number of streets between the number of junctions. Regarding junctions, we consider a junction as a join between two road segments. As for the number of streets, we realized that different alternatives could be selected to obtain the number of streets of a given roadmap. Basically, there are three alternatives: (i) the number of streets obtained in SUMO, where each segment between two junctions is considered a street, (ii) the number of streets obtained in OpenStreetMap (OSM), where each street has a different “name”, and (iii) the number of streets according to the Real Attenuation and Visibility (RAV) radio propagation model, where vehicles can only exchange information if they are in line-of-sight (i.e., visibility means that there are no obstacles blocking the wireless signal between the vehicles).Fig. 4shows a small portion of New York City to depict the different criteria when counting the number of streets. For example, Thames Street is considered only one street in OSM, whereas the SUMO and RAV models consider that there are two different streets instead. However, if we observe Cedar Street, the RAV visibility model and the OSM approaches consider a single street (as expected), whereas it is represented by three different streets according to SUMO, since it has three different segments. Finally, according to both the OSM and SUMO approaches, Trinity Place and Church Street are represented as two different streets, whereas the RAV model considers that only one street exists.By analyzing experimental results, we realized that the RAV approach better correlated with the real features of cities. In fact, a street must not be considered as a graph lane between two junctions (SUMO) or different lanes with the same name (OSM), since this consideration does not take into account the visibility between vehicles. In terms of communication links, we cannot consider that two vehicles are circulating in the same street if there is no wireless communication between them.In this work, we call neighbors those vehicles that are reachable by one-hop messages, without requiring any additional rebroadcast, i.e., they are within the communication range of the sender vehicle and the signal transmission is not blocked by any obstacle such as buildings. In our system, all the vehicles considered maintain a neighbor list that is built by using the beacons exchanged periodically (each second) among the vehicles, avoiding any additional channel overhead. Whenever a new beacon is received, each vehicle checks its neighbor list to determine if the sender is a new neighbor, thereby adding this vehicle to the list. The neighbors’ list is also updated when new beacons are not received from a former neighbor after 2s. In that case, the neighbor is removed from the list.Our proposed Real-time Adaptive Dissemination (RTAD) system relies on the Most Suitable Broadcast Selection Algorithm to adapt the dissemination process to the specific characteristics at a given time. However, the Most Suitable Broadcast Selection Algorithm needs to estimate the vehicle density to select the most appropriate broadcast scheme. In particular, vehicle density estimation is a determinant step when determining which is the best dissemination scheme to use.In Sanguesa et al. [26], we proposed a method to calculate the density according to the number of beacons received by each vehicle. In this work, we have modified it to increase its accuracy. Specifically, the RTAD system uses the number of neighbors, instead of the number of beacons received, to accurately estimate the vehicle density.In particular, we made a total of 4000 experiments to propose a method able to estimate the density of vehicles. These experiments involved the simulation of controlled scenarios (i.e., scenarios where the actual density is known). According to the results obtained, we propose a density estimation function capable of estimating the vehicular density in every urban environment, at any instant of time. To this purpose, we performed a regression analysis [42] that allowed us to find the polynomial equation offering the best fit to the data obtained through simulation.Eq. (2) shows the density estimation function, which is able to estimate the number of vehicles per km2 in urban scenarios, according to the number of neighbors, and the SJ ratio (i.e., streets/junctions).(2)f(ρ,s)=a1+a2ρ+a3s+a4ρ2+a5s2+a6ρ3+a7s3+a8ρs+a9ρ2s+a10ρs2In this equation,ρis the number of neighbors of each vehicle, and s is the SJ ratio obtained from the roadmap. The values of the polynomial coefficients (a1,a2,a3,a4,a5,a6,a7,a8,a9, anda10) are listed in Table 4.Our new density estimation approach, based on the number of neighbors, yields more accurate results, presenting a lower mean of the relative error (approximately 0.415%, whereas the beacon-based approach resulted in 1.023% [26]).Fig. 5shows the density data obtained in the simulation for the roadmaps of San Francisco and Valencia, as well as the values estimated according the SJ Ratio (roadmap complexity) and the number of neighbors. As shown, we achieve a good fit for the values obtained in the simulations, especially in San Francisco.One of the main characteristics of VANETs is the great variability of the conditions affecting each vehicle. Thus, broadcasting decisions taken should not remain immovable. Instead, the dissemination system should dynamically adapt its broadcasting policy to the specific characteristics and situations, thereby improving the whole dissemination process. In this work we propose RTAD, a real-time adaptive dissemination system specially designed for VANETs, in which each vehicle individually adopts a specific dissemination scheme according to each situation. In our proposed system, each vehicle is able to obtain and analyze the characteristics of the environment, thereby choosing the most suitable diffusion policy in each situation. To select the most suitable broadcast scheme for a specific scenario, RTAD accounts for two different scenario features (i.e., the vehicle density and the roadmap topology), that allow it to determine which dissemination scheme to use at any time. The aim is to increase the probability of correctly alert surrounding vehicles, thereby preventing new dangerous situations and increasing traffic safety.In order to determine which is the most suitable broadcast scheme that our RTAD can use for each particular scenario, in this section we first review the different broadcast schemes actually used by our adaptive system; then we present in detail the main metrics we use to measure the broadcast schemes’ goodness, and finally, we introduce the most suitable broadcast selection algorithm.So far, several authors have proposed different dissemination schemes to mitigate broadcast storms [37,39,34,1,29]. However, all of these schemes consider free space environments where no blocking obstacles are considered at all. They have not addressed the impact of buildings and other urban obstacles on the wireless signal propagation in realistic urban scenarios. The consequences derived from those incomplete analyses can be observed when their performance is tested in realistic urban topologies, showing that they are unable to choose suitable relaying vehicles, or proving to be too restrictive to achieve an efficient dissemination [17]. Some of the most representative broadcast schemes are presented below.•The Counter-based scheme[37]. Initially proposed for Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (MANETs), this scheme aims at mitigating broadcast storms by using a threshold C and a counter c to keep track of the number of times a broadcast message is received. Wheneverc⩾C, rebroadcast is inhibited.The Distance-based scheme[37]. This scheme accounts for the relative distance d between vehicles to decide whether to rebroadcast or not. When the distance d between two vehicles is short, the additional coverage (AC) area of the new rebroadcast is lower, and so rebroadcasting the warning message is not recommended. Forwarding is only beneficial when the additional coverage is nearly maximum.The enhanced Street Broadcast Reduction (eSBR) [17]. This scheme is specially designed to be used in VANETs, taking advantage of the information provided by maps and built-in positioning systems, such as the GPS. Vehicles are only allowed to rebroadcast messages if they are located far from their source (>dmin), or if the vehicles are located in different streets, giving access to new areas of the scenario. The eSBR scheme uses information about the roadmap to avoid blind areas due the presence of urban structures blocking the radio signal.The enhanced Message Dissemination for Roadmaps (eMDR) [6]. As an improvement to the eSBR scheme, eMDR increases the efficiency of the system by avoiding to forward the same message multiple times if nearby vehicles are located in different streets. Specifically, vehicles use the information about the junctions of the roadmap, and only the vehicle closest to the geographic center of the junction, according to the geopositioning system, is allowed to forward the messages received. This strategy aims at reducing the number of broadcasted messages while maintaining a high percentage of vehicles informed.The eMDR and eSBR schemes proved to be especially effective in sparse urban environments. However, the number of messages produced may become excessive in scenarios with a high vehicle density. To cope with this deficiency, in this paper we also propose a novel dissemination scheme called Nearest Junction Located (NJL) that is completely based on the topology of the roadmap, allowing vehicles to rebroadcast a message only if they are the nearest vehicle to the geographical coordinates of any junction obtained from the integrated maps. This scheme follows a procedure similar to the eMDR algorithm, although ignoring the distance between sender and receiver; thus, it only focuses on the location of the receiving vehicle. As shown in the two next subsections, although the performance of this algorithm is not suitable in sparse environments, it performs quite well in high-density scenarios where the dominant factor to improve the dissemination process is the position of the vehicles, achieving results similar to those obtained by the eMDR and eSBR schemes, while requiring only a fraction of the overall number of messages.To better understand the operation of all these schemes (i.e., counter-based, distance-based, eSBR, eMDR, and NJL algorithms, we provide a formal definition of these schemes using set theory. In the mentioned formulation, the following notation is used:•V: set of vehicles present in the scenario.Ni: set of neighbor vehicles of vehiclevi∈V.M: set of warning messages disseminated by vehicles.J: set of junctions of the road layout.The definition of the algorithms requires some basic functions to express events and relationships between the components of the scenario. Specifically, the following functions are required:•recv(vr,vs,m,t): vehiclevrreceives a warning message m from vehiclevsat time t.dist(e1,e2): Euclidean distance inR2between elementse1ande2.rebroadcast(v,m,t): vehicle v broadcasts a warning message m at time t.Eq. (3) shows the formulation of the counter-based algorithm. In this scheme, after receiving a warning message from a vehiclevs, the receivervrwould only rebroadcast it if the message has been received less than a certain number of times, i.e., using a threshold C and a counter c to keep track of the number of times a broadcast message is received, wheneverc⩾C, re-broadcast is inhibited. In our experiments, a value ofC=1is used.(3)∀vr∈V∧∃m∈M,vs∈V∧recv(vr,vs,m,t)⇒(rebroadcast(vr,m,t)⇔c<C)Eq. (4) shows the formulation of the distance-based algorithm. In this scheme, after receiving a warning message from a vehiclevs, the receivervrwould only rebroadcast the message if the distance between the sender vehiclevsand the receiver vehiclevris greater than a minimum rebroadcast distancedmin. In our simulations, it was set to 200m.(4)∀vr∈V∧∃m∈M,vs∈V∧recv(vr,vs,m,t)⇒(rebroadcast(vr,m,t)⇔dist(vr,vs)>dmin)Eq. (5) shows the formulation of the eSBR algorithm. As can be observed, after receiving a warning message from a vehiclevs, each vehiclevrrebroadcasts the message if the distance between the sender vehiclevsand the receiver vehiclevris greater than a minimum rebroadcast distancedmin, set in our simulations to 200m; or ifvris located near a junction j, giving access to new streets possibly blocked by the effect of buildings on radio signal. A thresholdthjof 20m is used to determine whether the vehicle is located near a junction in the map.(5)∀vr∈V∧∃m∈M,vs∈V∧recv(vr,vs,m,t)⇒(rebroadcast(vr,m,t)⇔dist(vr,vs)>dmin∨(∃j∈J∧dist(vr,j)<thj))Eq. (6) contains the operation of the eMDR algorithm. The main difference between eSBR and eMDR lies on the number of vehicles allowed to retransmit in junctions. Whereas all the vehicles located in junctions are allowed rebroadcasting in eSBR, eMDR only allows one vehicle per junction as a forwarding node. To achieve this behavior, each vehiclevrstores a listNrcontaining its neighbors in communication range, built by means of periodic beacons sent by all vehicles. Hence, vehiclevronly rebroadcasts the message if the distance to sender is greater thandmin, or if it is located near a junction and it is the closest vehicle to the center of the junction, obtained from its geographical coordinates of GPS integrated maps.(6)∀vr∈V∧∃m∈M,vs∈V∧recv(vr,vs,m,t)⇒(rebroadcast(vr,m,t)⇔dist(vr,vs)>dmin∨(∃j∈J∧dist(vr,j)<thj∧(∄vn∈Nr∧dist(vn,j)<dist(vr,j))))Finally, Eq. (7) shows the formulation of the NJL algorithm. As shown, NJL ignores the distance between sender and receiver and only allows rebroadcasting if the receiver vehicle is the closest to the geographical center of the junction with respect to its neighbors.(7)∀vr∈V∧∃m∈M,vs∈V∧recv(vr,vs,m,t)⇒(rebroadcast(vr,m,t)⇔(∃j∈J∧dist(vr,j)<thj∧(∄vn∈Nr∧dist(vn,j)<dist(vr,j))))Fig. 6shows graphically the differences between eSBR, eMDR, and NJL schemes in a specific VANET scenario, where vehicle S broadcasts a warning message. The line labeled asdminrepresents the minimum rebroadcast distance used by eSBR and eMDR. Darker vehicles will be allowed to forward the messages received from S, and it is noticeable how eSBR is the less restrictive scheme, whereas NJL is the most restrictive one, and thus more suitable for scenarios with a high vehicle density.During the warning message dissemination process, the most important objective to accomplish consists on informing the highest number of vehicles in the shortest time possible. In particular, to better assess the most suitable dissemination scheme to be used at any time, we performed several experiments using roadmaps with different features, as well as varying the density of vehicles. Fig. 7presents the evolution of the dissemination process in terms of informed vehicles for the maps of San Francisco and Valencia under four different vehicle densities: 25, 100, 150, and 250vehicles/km2.It is noticeable how the roadmap topology and the vehicle density are determinant factors affecting the performance of the dissemination process. As vehicles move, their neighbors change and the warning messages, which are sent periodically (every second), keep spreading.In general, the dissemination process develops faster (i.e., more vehicles are informed during a same period) when the vehicle density increases, independently from the broadcast scheme used, and especially in complex roadmaps. For sparse urban scenarios, the counter-based scheme provides the best results in terms of informed vehicles, whereas for densities above 150vehicles/km2, the dissemination process presents a very similar behavior for all the selected broadcast schemes. The exception is the distance-based scheme in the map of Valencia, which proved to be very inefficient due to the high amount of obstacles interfering with the radio signal, as this roadmap presents a higher complexity (the SJ Ratio is higher than San Francisco). Overall, complex city profiles yield disconnected vehicle sets and require exploitation of vehicle mobility to achieve wide spreading of warning messages, unless vehicle density is high enough (see Fig. 7h).In addition, we corroborated that simple and regular city profiles, like San Francisco, allow an easier propagation of the radio signal, increasing the number of informed vehicles at a given time. However, the most restrictive schemes, such as NJL, require a very high density of vehicles to achieve an efficiency similar to other dissemination schemes.These results indicate that basing the broadcast policy selection only on the percentage of informed vehicles (e.g., after some minutes) could lead to wrong decisions that could seriously affect the efficiency of the system, justifying the need for additional metrics to perform the broadcast scheme selection. Additionally, to better characterize the dissemination process over time, we consider that the broadcast selection should account for the percentage of informed vehicles at different time instants (InfT). Specifically, we propose to measure the percentage of vehicles receiving warning messages after 10, 30, and 120s (i.e.,Inf10,Inf30, andInf120) since it is important to account for the first seconds from the time when the dangerous situation started being notified until the dissemination stabilizes. This provides information about both the speed and completeness of the dissemination process. The first 10s provide a good reference of the dissemination speed, the second period (30s) offers a balance between dissemination speed and the completeness, and the state of the scenario after 120s shows the stationary value, when no evolution is observed.These three values are combined according to Eq. (8), to provide a single value representing the efficiency of the dissemination process (Pinf) by each broadcast scheme (b).(8)Pinf(b)=∑t∈TInft(b)|T|The number of messages produced by a given dissemination scheme may become very important in VANETs due to the high number of messages sent and received by the vehicles involved. This could increase channel contention and the frequency of collisions. Therefore, a reduction of the number of messages received per vehicle under this situation, without reducing the percentage of informed vehicles, will improve the warning message dissemination process, allowing other applications sharing the channel to operate adequately. To this end, it is necessary to evaluate the different dissemination schemes, taking into account the number of messages received by each vehicle in order to select the most suitable scheme for each particular scenario.Fig. 8shows the number of messages received per vehicle in San Francisco and Valencia. Notice that the selected dissemination scheme presents a determinant influence over the amount of messages received; some of them show only a fraction of the messages required by other schemes. In general, the counter-based scheme produces the highest number of messages, whereas the distance-based scheme is the most restrictive one. As we might suppose, the NJL scheme produces the smallest amount of messages of all the schemes which used the information topology of the map to select the forwarding nodes. Note that NJL generates fewer messages than the distance-based algorithm in San Francisco’s high density scenarios. Again, the features of the map are determinant for the performance of the system. Simple maps allow a faster dissemination at the cost of noticeably increasing the number of messages received per vehicle, thereby increasing the probability of broadcast storms. Thus, more restrictive schemes are recommended for this kind of roadmaps.We consider that the number of messages received per vehicle (Mrecv) is an important metric to be accounted for when ensuring an efficient dissemination process. If the wireless channel is saturated with packets, the high degree of contention and the occurrence of collisions will reduce the performance of the process, producing broadcast storms. Hence, the number of messages must remain as low as possible without compromising the dissemination efficiency. In our approach,Mrecvis averaged over the simulation time and over all vehicles.The core of our RTAD system is the Most Suitable Broadcast Selection Algorithm which makes use of the two metrics presented before (PinfandMrecv) to select the broadcast scheme to be used on each particular situation. Specifically, it works following a three step process, as shown in Algorithm 1:Algorithm 1The Most Suitable Broadcast Selection.Step 1: For each considered broadcast scheme, the first metric (Pinf) is computed, and the scheme with the highest percentage of informed vehicles in the shortest time is selected. Due to the importance of this metric, only the dissemination schemes with a deviation lower than 10% with respect to the best one are considered for the second step of the algorithm, and then included in setC.Step 2: Considering only the broadcast schemes inC, the scheme producing the lowest number of messages per vehicle (Mrecv) is obtained, in order to reduce the probability of broadcast storms, and the percentage variation with respect to this value is computed for each scheme.Step 3: The most suitable scheme will be selected as the one minimizing the deviation with respect to both the maximalPinfand the minimalMrecv. Depending on the vehicle density, our proposed algorithm adapts its behavior. Hence, it is more important to reduce the number of messages received in high vehicle densities, whereas increasing the number of informed vehicles becomes more important in sparse scenarios, where the number of messages received is not a problem. Specifically, our algorithm varies the degree of importance of the two metrics (i.e.,PinfandMrecv) by using the K value, calculated as follows:(9)K=100densityofvehicles(vehicles/km2)In particular, we used the value of reference 100vehicles/km2 to compute K, since our experiments showed that the differences in terms of informed vehicles decrease noticeably for densities above 100vehicles/km2 (see Fig. 7), and, hence, a higher weight is assigned to the number of messages received when this density is exceeded. To sump up, we use K in order to promote each metric depending on the current density, promoting the percentage of informed vehicles when densities are low, and trying to reduce the number of messages when densities are higher, and the differences in terms of informed vehicles are minimal.Table 5contains an example of the performance of our broadcast scheme selection algorithm. Specifically, it shows the results obtained for Valencia when simulating 100vehicles/km2. All the values are obtained as the average of 50 repetitions for each configuration. It is noticeable how only three of the selected schemes are considered after the first step of the algorithm (i.e., the counter-based, the eSBR, and the eMDR broadcast schemes). Since the eMDR produces the lowest pondered cumulative deviation (devTot), our algorithm considers it as the best broadcast scheme for this particular scenario.After performing an offline analysis including all the studied scenarios and vehicle densities, Table 6shows the selected broadcast scheme for each of the simulated scenarios according to our proposed the Most Suitable Broadcast Selection Algorithm. Notice that the proposed NJL scheme is selected as the Most Suitable one in most cases, especially under high vehicle densities or simple maps with a small SJ ratio, where the radio signal can cover large distances and broadcast storms are prone to occur. On the contrary, eMDR and eSBR schemes offer better results in scenarios where broadcast storms are not a problem, and the main objective is informing as many vehicles as soon as possible.It is remarkable that almost all the schemes selected by our proposed algorithm rely on topology information to select the most appropriate forwarding vehicle, highlighting the importance of this factor in the warning dissemination process. In fact, broadcast schemes that only make use of the distance between the sender and the receiver, or which only focus on avoiding repeated messages, present a worse trade-off between performance and the amount of messages required.As previously commented, the main objective of this work is to propose a real-time adaptive dissemination system in which each vehicle dynamically adopts a specific dissemination scheme according to each particular scenario. Based on the conclusions drawn in Section 3, now we present RTAD, our adaptive approach to improve message dissemination in VANETs.Fig. 9shows how our proposal has been developed. First, we analyzed the different broadcast dissemination schemes in order to determine the Most Suitable scheme to each specific situation. According to this analysis, we proposed a real-time adaptive system that makes each vehicle to automatically adopt the most suitable dissemination scheme in order to fit the warning message delivery policy to each specific situation.Algorithm 2 details the RTAD operation. As shown, RTAD determines which dissemination approach to use depending on the SJ Ratio and the vehicle density estimated, accordingly to the results previously obtained in the offline analysis that we performed. The SJ Ratio is automatically calculated by each vehicles by means of its geographical coordinates of GPS and the integrated maps, whereas the vehicle density is estimated in real time. According to our RTAD algorithm, each vehicle would adopt the most suitable dissemination scheme in order to improve the dissemination process. The computational cost of this algorithm is very low, hence the overhead is almost negligible.Algorithm 2RTAD ImplementationTo assess the performance of our proposal, we have performed experiments using several cities with different characteristics. In this section we present the results obtained in four cities: in one hand, we used Amsterdam and Los Angeles which were previously used to calibrate the proposal. On other hand, we also tested Sydney but with the aim of increasing the level of realism, we also considered that vehicles are not uniformly distributed since, in a real town, traffic is not uniformly distributed; instead, there are downtowns or points of interest that may attract vehicles. Specifically, we considered a downtown of 750×750m located at the center of the map, which presents a higher density of vehicles. Finally, to better assess our proposal, we have also simulated a bigger area (i.e., 9km2) of Santiago de Chile. This roadmap presents a SJ Ratio of 0.972, so it can be considered a medium complexity map. Additionally, in these experiments we considered two different downtowns, the first one in the top right corner, and the second one in the bottom left corner.Fig. 10shows the dissemination scheme selected by each vehicle at two different instants of the simulation (1 and 60s after the simulation start), when simulating 150vehicles/km2 in Sydney. As shown, only 1s after the simulation starts, the vehicles immediately proceed to adapt their broadcast mode (in particular, they use eMDR and NJL), according to the roadmap topology and the number of neighbors detected at this moment (as previously presented in Table 6). Note that this situation evolves, and after 60s (see Fig. 10b), most of the vehicles are using the NJL scheme (a more restrictive dissemination scheme) since the warning messages can easily reach more vehicles in high density areas; however, isolated vehicles still use eMDR since they try to inform more vehicles without provoking broadcast storms.Fig. 11shows the broadcast used by each vehicle 30s after the beginning of the simulation. As expected, most of the vehicles located within a downtown use the NJL scheme, whereas the vehicles in the outskirts use a less restrictive dissemination policy; in particular, they use the eMDR scheme. Since the vehicle density is not uniformly distributed in the scenario, by using RTAD, each vehicle adapts its dissemination policy to better inform the rest of vehicles while significantly reducing the number of messages sent, thus avoiding overloading the channel.Next, in order to assess RTAD goodness, we compare our approach with respect to two static dissemination schemes (eMDR and NJL), and three adaptive dissemination systems (UV-CAST, DV-CAST, and FDPD), previously proposed in the literature.Static systems, unlike adaptive or dynamic systems, are systems that remain substantially unchanged through out time. Regarding vehicular environments, static broadcast schemes always use the same broadcast dissemination policy, without changing their mode of operation. Thus, they are not able to dynamically adapt their behavior to the specific features of the environment (e.g., different vehicle densities, or time-varying conditions).In this section we compare the performance of our adaptive proposal against existing static dissemination schemes, such as the NJL and the eMDR schemes. Table 7and Fig. 12show the average results obtained by each broadcast scheme in terms of: (i)PInf, the value that represents the efficiency of the dissemination process according the percentage of informed vehicles and (ii)Mrecv, the number of messages received by each vehicle, when varying the vehicle density and the city roadmap.As shown, under low vehicle densities (i.e., 25vehicles/km2), the performance of RTAD is close to the results obtained by the most appropriate static broadcast scheme in sparse environments, i.e., the eMDR scheme. There are no significant changes in terms of informed vehicles, whereas there is a slight reduction in the number of messages received in all the tested scenarios when comparing the two schemes. The performance of the NJL scheme is worse under low vehicle densities; this becomes especially noticeable in the map of Los Angeles.As the vehicle density increases, we see how the RTAD scheme still provides results very close to eMDR in terms of notified vehicles, although it only produces a fraction of the messages used by eMDR. The NJL scheme is the scheme that achieves the lowest value in the number of received messages; however, RTAD compensates the additional messages introduced by increasing the percentage of informed vehicles, which is clearly visible in the results obtained with the maps of Amsterdam and Sydney.Finally, for the highest densities tested, RTAD is able to combine the best features of the two static schemes: the percentage of informed vehicles is very close to eMDR, but it generates an amount of messages comparable to those generated by NJL. Note that RTAD informs more vehicles than eMDR in the Sydney scenario under the highest density (200vehicles/km2), whereas the number of messages received is reduced by half. It is remarkable how the RTAD scheme provides suitable results in all situations compared to different static schemes, ranging from low densities with complex maps, to high densities in simple scenarios. By prioritizing the percentage of vehicles notified, and by reducing the number of messages as much as possible, it is able to reduce the channel overhead and optimize the message dissemination process.Adaptive systems are able to respond to environmental changes, adapting its operation mode so as to face these changes in the best possible way. Regarding vehicular environments, adaptive schemes are able to adapt the dissemination policy to the specific conditions of the scenario, thereby improving the dissemination process, or reducing the channel contention. In this section we compare the performance of our proposal against other existing adaptive dissemination schemes: DV-CAST [35], UV-CAST [38], and FDPD [32].•Tonguz et al. [35] presented the Distributed Vehicular Broad-CAST (DV-CAST) protocol. Specifically, DV-CAST is a distributed broadcast protocol that relies only on local topology information for handling broadcast messages in VANETs. DV-CAST handles the broadcast storm and the disconnected network problems simultaneously, while incurring a small amount of additional overhead. In particular, the DV-CAST protocol relies on local topology information (i.e., a list of one-hop neighbors) as the main criterion to determine how to handle message rebroadcasting, adapting the dissemination process depending on the density of neighbor vehicles, their position, and their direction. In our simulations we used the weighted p-persistence broadcast suppression technique, as it was the technique selected by authors [35].Viriyasitavat et al. [38] proposed the Urban Vehicular broadCAST (UV-CAST) protocol to reduce the broadcast storm problem while solving disconnected network problems in urban VANETs. The UV-CAST algorithm selects different mechanisms for message dissemination in VANETs, differentiating between well-connected and disconnected network regimes. Vehicles in well-connected regimes rebroadcast incoming messages after a wait time if no redundant messages are received. Vehicles under disconnected regimes must decide if they are suitable for the Store-Carry-Forward (SCF) task, forwarding the message whenever they meet new neighbors. The SCF task is assigned to vehicles that have a small expected time before they detect new neighbors, obtained as the boundary vehicles of the neighbors within communication range.Sormani et al. [32] defined a message propagation function that encodes information about both target areas and preferred routes. Then, they showed how this function can be exploited in several routing protocols. Specifically, they proposed the Function-Driven Probabilistic Diffusion (FDPD), a probabilistic message dissemination scheme that uses a propagation function calculated by means of the distance between sender and receiver, to determine the forwarding vehicles and reduce the broadcast storm problem.Table 8and Fig. 13show the results obtained by each adaptive broadcast system in terms of informed vehicles and number of messages received by vehicle, when varying the vehicle density and the city roadmap.First of all, it is noteworthy how the UV-CAST scheme is extremely focused on the reduction of messages. It produces the lowest number of messages in all the tested scenarios, up to 90.8% fewer messages received when compared to RTAD. However, this massive reduction presents an important drawback, since it causes a very slow and inefficient dissemination process. Thus, the UV-CAST is an unsuitable scheme for warning message dissemination, where the main objective is to inform as many vehicles as soon as possible. However, this scheme could be useful to disseminate non-critical information, such as advertisements, which do not present the delay requirements associated to traffic safety applications. The DV-CAST scheme obtains results close to the proposed RTAD scheme in terms of informed vehicles. In most of the tested situations the difference between the values obtained by both algorithms is less than 3%, with situations favorable to DV-CAST, especially under low vehicle densities. However, in high vehicle densities, RTAD is able to inform almost the same number of vehicles while considerably reducing the number of messages received per vehicle. Focusing on the number of received messages, we can observe how RTAD is able to reduce the number of messages by more than half in most of the scenarios, especially when the vehicle density increases. This effect makes the RTAD algorithm more robust against broadcast storms, and thus more suitable for environments with a high density of vehicles. Such environments are more prone to increase the number of messages, thus producing channel contention and packet collisions.Finally, the FDPD scheme offers intermediate results in terms of informed nodes. It is able to outperform UV-CAST, but it does not reach the values obtained by DV-CAST and RTAD. Regarding the number of messages, there is an exponential increment as vehicle density increases. For example, when simulating 25vehicles/km2 in Los Angeles, the number of messages is similar to UV-CAST, whereas increasing the density to 200vehicles/km2, it offers values higher than RTAD.To sum up, the proposed RTAD system is able to inform more vehicles than the UV-CAST algorithm in less time, while maintaining a low number of messages produced compared to DV-CAST. Hence, RTAD achieves an adequate balance between the two metrics (i.e., informed vehicles and messages received), making it suitable for a wide variety of scenarios.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper we proposed RTAD, an adaptive warning message dissemination algorithm that selects the most suitable broadcast scheme in a VANET scenario based on two different metrics: (i) the percentage of informed vehicles, a particularly determinant factor in warning message dissemination and (ii) the number of messages received by each vehicle, an important factor which gives an estimation of the channel contention and the possibility of broadcast storms during the dissemination of alert messages.In addition, we presented a new broadcast scheme called Nearest Junction Located (NJL), which was specially designed for scenarios presenting high vehicular densities or simple topologies, where broadcast storms are prone to occur. The NJL scheme is designed to reduce the number of messages received per vehicle without noticeably affecting the percentage of informed vehicles.Experiments showed how our RTAD system is able to dynamically select the most suitable dissemination scheme in all the scenarios, thereby adapting to the specific characteristics of them. Moreover, it outperforms static dissemination schemes as well as existing adaptive dissemination systems such as UV-CAST, FDPD, and DV-CAST. Our adaptive dissemination mechanism allows each vehicle to select the most suitable broadcast scheme in real time, thus obtaining better results in terms of percentage of vehicles informed and significantly reducing the number of messages sent, while avoiding overloading the channel and improving the performance of other VANET applications. The information provided by our system is invaluable for vehicles approaching dangerous areas, allowing fast adaptation and avoidance of potential dangers, thus increasing traffic safety in crowded scenarios.