@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Selection of character/background colour combinations for onscreen searching tasks: An eye movement, subjective and performance approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Physiological, subjective and performance measures were effective for the study.Eye movement parameters play significant role in interpreting the results.Black background should be used cautiously in display design.Combination of two colours with close luminance value should be avoided.Designing with blue (either as background or as character) is always advantageous.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Character/background colour combination,Eye movement variables,Mental workload,Legibility rating,Searching time,Performance,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The aim of the study was to investigate the effect of various character and background colour combinations on cognitive performance during onscreen searching tasks and to identify the best combinations with a multimodal approach of physiological (eye movement recording), subjective and performance data collection. In the absence of proper character and background colour combination the optimum performance for a cognitive task is greatly affected which in turn affects the productivity of the individual worker or communications among the operators working under the same network through information sharing. This study was designed by selecting six colours, i.e., white, black, yellow, red, blue, and green and subsequently combining them to 16 character and background colour combinations for a searching task. Right and left headed arrows were used as the character for the searching maneuver. Forty-four (N=44) volunteers participated in the experiments. Various eye movement variables, legibility rating scale, NASA-TLX questionnaire, searching time and percentage of error were recorded. Subjects performed better wherever a good contrast was there because of a high legibility. A poorly contrasted display affected the physiological variables as well as subjective responses to negative directions. Among the combinations of dark character/light background, blue and red character on white background is highly recommended; and while that for light character/dark background, white is found to be the best character on blue and green backgrounds.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Visual search is an effective tool in everyday life to find faces, objects and information of interest. Our purpose of visual search varies as per situation. Operation in the air traffic control (ATC) panel and tacking harsh situations in the battle field demand much higher cognitive resources as per the frequently changing current need. Military workstations are high density workstations in terms of higher mental demand under various critical conditions. These critical conditions are depicted in the C4ISR loop, i.e., command, control, communication, computer, intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance. Each action of this loop is having their specific cognitive characteristics. Moreover, these operations are being performed in a digital environment where information is displayed with various character and background colour combinations. It has been shown that proper trade-off between the application of good display principles and well recognized limit of human cognitive processing offers a better situational awareness and proper decision making [1].In this context it is important to mention that physical characters like display type, character/background colour combination, shape, size of the font, speed of dynamic display, illumination level, viewing distance, etc. play a critical role in legibility and thus determining the subjects’ performance [1–5].Careful selection of colours in the designing of visuals on display is of critical importance for optimum performance [2–5]. Use of colour is always purposive, e.g., red colour is always used to display some caution messages like in traffic signal to stop the cars, and a black font printed on a white background for regular reading activities. Use of proper colour combination ensures an enhanced effectiveness of the display that may ultimately lead to faster performance rate [6,7]. On the other hand poorly chosen colour leads to decreased performance and probably increases the risk of visual fatigue [8,9]. Many researchers outlined that the overuse of colour may elicit various psychological responses which will eventually affect the performance [10,11]. However, Pastoor [12] mentioned that colour combination has no effect on the search time. Hence, colours must be chosen not only by considering the experimenters or users preference but also by considering the cognitive constraints of the users [2]. Empirical evidences showed that primary colours-red, green and blue offer a higher level of accuracy in performance than other non-primary colours. Matthews et al. [13] suggested that red and blue both can be used as stimuli either alone or in combination for better performance. Kwallek and Lewis [14], Stone [15] have recommended that red is preferable compared to blue or green during cognitive task performance. Other researchers have proposed the opposite [16,17]. In another important study Mehta and Zhu [18] conducted a series of six experiments and concluded that blue is recommended as background for any creative work and with red background some vigilant work can be performed. Greco et al. [4] found that best legibility can be achieved by displaying information on bright background with dark font (black and dark blue) on computer screen as well as on projectors. Other researchers like Legge et al. [19]; Shieh and Lin [20] reported that white/black background/text combination as the best. Greco et al. [4] stated that among the combinations of light font on the dark background, green, brown, black and blue were the best background, whereas red is the worst. On those background white was the preferred font colour.Most of studies related to the choice of proper character and background colour combinations have drawn their interpretation depending upon the subjective response by applying various questionnaire methods, rating scales, or by recording the performance and error in identifying the targets. Evidences for interpretations based on various eye movement variables are least documented till date. Recording of eye movement variables during a cognitive task performance will help to assess the cognitive demand of the respective task. Eye movement activities like changes in pupil diameter, blink frequency, fixation, fixation frequency, saccadic behaviour are known as good predictor of searching efficiency as well as imposed cognitive load. Considering the above scenario a study was designed for the selection of proper character and background colour combinations for onscreen searching task which impose least cognitive load with improved performance.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Working with different character/background colour combinations in designing visuals in the onscreen searching tasks in displays imposes critical challenges to the cognitive ergonomists. It is quite difficult to explore a finding in the same direction supported by both eye movement study and subjective responses. In the present study performance on some of the colour combinations have been supported by the eye movement variables, subjective responses and performance data. The advantage of using the multiple data collection approach has been found to be beneficial in our study. It was found that the dark backgrounds (i.e., black, blue, green, etc.) are not beneficial for use in the similar searching task as used in the present study. As dark background interferes with accommodation and retinal image formation and should be used carefully. However, either dark or light background does not confer a big issue as luminance contrast between background and object demands an upper hand in this regard. Although light backgrounds (i.e., white, yellow, etc.) are preferred by the subjects in the present study yet their role become useless when combined with light object colour as it is observed for the YW and WY combinations. Present study observed that among the combinations of light character/dark background, blue and green are the best background with white is the best character. Combination of yellow character/black background and white character/red background are also acceptable. Blue was found to be advantageous either as background or as character and is evident by excellent legibility ratings, lower cognitive load, lesser searching time, minimum error and optimum eye movement activities. Combinations like white and yellow, black and blue, black and green must be avoided as these combinations are having lower luminance contrast and consequently offer a poor legibility.The above findings will be of immense assistance for the use of onscreen searching tasks in military working environment where various complex operations are being performed through information displays with high cognitive demand.