@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The power of indirect ties

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We quantify the strength of indirect social ties by dening a metric named social strength based on various observations from sociology.We evaluate the social strength metric by framing it as a link prediction problem.Social strength metric’s usefulness is demonstrated by two applications: predicting information diffusion paths and expanding peers’ storage candidates in Friend-to-friend storage systems.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Social strength,Indirect tie,Network dynamic,Information diffusion path,Friend-to-friend storage systems,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
While direct social ties have been intensely studied in the context of computer-mediated social networks, indirect ties (e.g., friends of friends) have seen little attention. Yet in real life, we often rely on friends of our friends for recommendations (of good doctors, good schools, or good babysitters), for introduction to a new job opportunity, and for many other occasional needs. In this work we attempt to 1) quantify the strength of indirect social ties, 2) validate the quantification, and 3) empirically demonstrate its usefulness for applications on two examples. We quantify social strength of indirect ties using a measure of the strength of the direct ties that connect two people and the intuition provided by the sociology literature. We evaluate the proposed metric by framing it as a link prediction problem and experimentally demonstrate that our metric accurately (up to 87.2%) predicts link’s formation. We show via data-driven experiments that the proposed metric for social strength can be used successfully for social applications. Specifically, we show that it can be used for predicting the effects of information diffusion with an accuracy of up to 0.753. We also show that it alleviates known problems in friend-to-friend storage systems by addressing two previously documented shortcomings: reduced set of storage candidates and data availability correlations.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Mining the huge corpus of social data now available in digital format has led to significant advances of our understanding of social relationships and behavior [1] and confirmed long standing results from sociology on larger datasets. In addition, social information (mainly relating people via declared relationships on online social networks or via computer-mediated interactions) has been successfully used for a variety of applications, from spam filtering [2] to recommendations [3] and peer-to-peer backup systems [4].All these efforts, however, focused mainly on direct ties. Direct social ties (that is, who is directly connected to whom in the social graph) are natural to observe and reasonably easy to classify as strong or weak [5,6]. Indirect social ties, though, defined as a relationship between two individuals who have no direct relation but are connected through a third person in their social network [7], carry a significantly larger potential as they facilitate better information dissemination then direct ties [8] and enable significantly better opportunities [9]. Computer-mediated applications, we conjecture, have a significantly higher potential in mining and exploiting indirect ties, as the direct ties are likely to be used via the traditional channels through which were used for thousands of years.However, not all indirect ties are valuable or useful, even at short distances (i.e., 2 hops). For example, a distant acquaintance of a mere acquaintance is unlikely to have a social incentive for performing a personal favor, such as sharing available storage on his personal computer. Moreover, trust is likely diluted under such conditions. Why would a weak distant social contact trust that the data he is asked to store is not illegal or malicious? In addition, what works for a user or an application might not work for another user or another application: the indirect tieA−X−Bmay be strong enough for A to use, but not enough for B to use; or it may be strong enough to use for a backup application, but not for a social contagion. Therefore, quantifying the strength of an indirect tie is both necessary and non-trivial.In this paper, we build upon and further adapt a metric called social strength, which we introduced in [10,11], that quantitatively estimates the strength of an indirect tie. Our metric uses various observations from sociology and builds on the current opportunities of quantifying the strength of direct ties from computer or phone-recorded interactions. We rely on the sociology literature to define the requirements of such a metric (Section 2). First, since social relationships are asymmetrically reciprocal [12], the social strength of an indirect tie consequently needs to be asymmetrical as well. Second, a friend of many of one’s friends — thus connected via multiple 2-hop paths — can potentially be more socially “close” than the friend of a friend, connected via only one 2-hop path. Third, the strength of an indirect tie decreases with the length of the shortest path [13]. In Section 4 we validate the social strength metric using real datasets.We demonstrate the usefulness of our metric on two proof-of-concept applications. First, in Section 5, we show that the social strength metric can be used for inferring, and in effect, predicting information diffusion paths, which further implies the influence of indirect ties on information flow in network dynamics. Second, in Section 6, we experimentally show that two main issues identified in friend-to-friend storage systems, namely reduced candidate sets [4] and low availability due to time synchronization among friends [14], are significantly alleviated by employing our social strength metric for the recruitment of socially close indirect contacts as storage candidates. We discuss our findings and conclude in Section 8.We want to define a metric that quantifies the strength of a social connection between indirectly connected nodes in a social network. The need for such a metric is supported by many sociological studies and is also intuitively understood from daily life: friends of friends are an important resource for information and useful social contacts.In our attempt to quantify an indirect social tie, we use the following observations from sociology and from recent data-driven studies on computer-mediated social relationships:O1:The strength of a direct social relationship is related to the amount of interactions, as shown in [8,15]: the more frequently persons interact with one another, the more likely they will form strong relationships. Moreover, interactions among OSN users were shown to represent more meaningful relations than just declared relationships [16]. Consequently, in the quantification of an indirect social tie, we rely on a numerical representation of the strength of a direct social tie that can be expressed as number of interactions, number of shared interests, or other recordable outcomes, depending on the semantics of the relationship.The strength of an indirect tie decreases with the length of shortest path between the two individuals. This has been quantitatively observed by Friedkin [13], who concluded that people’s awareness of others’ performance decreases beyond 2 hops. Three degrees of influence theory, proposed by Christakis et al. [17] states that social influence does not end with people who are directly connected but also continues to 2- and 3-hop relationships, albeit with diminishing returns. This theory has held true in various social networks examined [18,19]. In accordance with these observations, the social strength metric we propose focuses on 2- and 3-hop relationships with a decreasing value as a function of distance.Multiple types of social interactions (for example, both professional collaboration and playing tennis after work) result into a stronger (direct) relationship than only one type of interaction [20]. Furthermore, sociology studies [13] observed that the relationship strength of indirectly connected individuals greatly depends on the number of different direct or indirect paths connecting them. Therefore, we consider the strength of multiple shortest paths in our definition of the strength of an indirect social tie.Typically, social ties between individuals are asymmetrically reciprocal [21]. Thus, for the directly connected users Alice and Bob, the importance of their mutual relationship may be dramatically different. We want to preserve this asymmetry in quantifying indirect ties, such that Alice and Charlie, indirectly connected via Bob, are entitled to have different views about their indirect tie.Therefore, to quantify the social strength of an indirect social tie between users i and m, we consider relationships at n social hops (n = 2 or 3), where n is the shortest path between i and m. We assume a weighted interaction graph model that connects users with edges weighted based on any type of signal (information) that can represent tie strength of their direct relationships. Assuming thatPi,mnis the set of different shortest paths of length n joining two indirectly connected users i and m andN(p)is the set of nodes on the shortest pathp,p∈Pi,mn,we define the social strength between i and m from i’s perspective over an n-hop shortest path as:(1)SSn(i,m)=1−∏p∈Pi,mn(1−minj,…,k∈N(p)[NW(i,j),…,NW(k,m)]n)This definition uses the normalized direct social weight NW(i, j) between two directly connected users i and j, defined as follows:(2)NW(i,j)=∑∀λ∈Λi,jω(i,j,λ)∑∀k∈Ni∑∀λ∈Λi,kω(i,k,λ)NW(i, j) calculates the strength of a direct relationship by considering all types of interactions λ ∈ Λ between the users i and j such as phone calls, interactions in online games or number of co-authored papers (observation O3). These interactions are normalized to the total amount of interactions of type λ that i has with other individuals. This approach ensures the asymmetry of social weight (observation O4) in two ways: first, it captures the cases where ω(i, j, λ) ≠ ω(j, i, λ) (such as in a phone call graph). Second, by normalizing to the number of interactions within one’s own social circle, even in undirected social graphs, the relative weight of the mutual tie will be different from the perspective of each user.The observations O1, O3 and O4 were incorporated in the definition of the NW function and naturally carry over in the definition of social strength from SSn(i, m). Moreover, O3 is additionally implemented by considering the product over all shortest paths p that connect two users. O2 is implemented by considering the weakest link (minimum normalized weight of all direct ties on each path) and by dividing it with the distance n between the users. The proposed social strength measure can:•Quantify the indirect tie strength for nodes indirectly connected at any social distance.Treat indirect ties between two nodes as possibly asymmetric in strength rather than constraining the values to be equal.Be more sensitive to strength differences because it uses both edge weights and number of paths to calculate a value.Be calculated without graph’s global information.In this paper we use several datasets from different domains. Our datasets vary from fast, non-profound dynamics to slow professional networks and more traditional social networks augmented with heavy interactions.Team fortress 2 (TF2) is an objective-oriented first person shooter game released in 2007. We collected more than 10 months of gameplay interactions (from April 1, 2011 to February 3, 2012) on a TF2 server [22]. The dataset includes game-based interactions among players, timestamp information of each interaction, declared relationship in the associated gaming OSN, Steam Community [23], and the time when the declared friendship was recorded. The resulting TF2 network is thus composed of edges between players who had at least one in-game interaction while playing together on this particular server, and also have a declared friendship in Steam Community. This dataset has several advantages over the Steam declared OSN: First, it provides the number of in-game interactions that can be used to quantify the strength of a social tie. Second, it provides players’ online/offline status that we use later in the experiments in Section 6. Third, each interaction and friendship formation is annotated with a timestamp, which is helpful for examining the dynamics of links under formation. Fourth, over a pure in-game interaction network, it has the advantage of selecting the most representative social ties, as proven in [22]. In this network of 2.4k nodes and 9.7k edges, edge weights represent the number of in-game interactions.Infectious exhibition (IE) held at the Science Gallery in Dublin, Ireland, from April 17th to July 17th in 2009 was an event where participants explored the mechanisms behind contagion and its containment. Data were collected via radio-frequency identification (RFID) devices that recorded face-to-face proximity relations of individuals wearing badges [24]. Each interaction was annotated with a timestamp. We translated the number of interactions into edge weights.Co-authorship networks (CA-I and CA-II) are extracted from ArnetMiner11http://arnetminer.org/and are based on papers co-authored by Computer Science researchers [25]. Nodes in these graphs represent authors and edges between two nodes are weighted with the number of papers co-authored by the two authors. From this dataset we extracted the two largest connected components (see Table 1 for details). Co-authorship I (CA-I) is a small connected component and a relatively low density. Co-authorship II (CA-II) is the largest connected component of the ArnetMiner co-authorship network, having a density one order of magnitude higher than CA-I. Because the dataset does not include time publication information, the observation window is unspecified in Table 1.A brief characterization of the networks appears in Table 1. Fig. 1plots the degree, edge weight, and clustering coefficient distributions for each network. We note that IE is a smaller but much denser network, while TF2’s interactions frequency is much higher than the other networks’, as shown by the range of edge weights. Even though CA-I and CA-II are extracted from the same OSNs, they have different degree and clustering coefficient distributions. Since they contain timestamps of the links formed and interactions between users, we use TF2 and IE networks to validate our proposed social strength metric by studying link formation in Section 4. We use the TF2 and CA networks to study diffusion and peer expansion in Sections 5 and 6, respectively, as they are larger, sparser and based on longer lasting relationships compared to IE’s ad-hoc interactions.In sociology, the theory of homophily [26] postulates that people tend to form ties with others who have similar characteristics. Moreover, a stronger relationship implies greater similarity [8]. Therefore, a number of link prediction models that estimate tie strength from graph structure [27] or interaction frequency and users’ declared profiles similarities [28] have been proposed.To verify that social strength is in fact quantifying the strength of social ties, we frame it as a link prediction problem. Simply put, given a pair of users, the link prediction problem asks whether the strength of the tie is strong enough to form a social relationship between them. Specifically, given a snapshot of a social network, we use social strength values to infer which new relationships or interactions among users are likely to occur in the near future. Granovetter put forth the idea of the “forbidden triad” [8], i.e., a triad where there is a strong tie between say u and v as well as a strong tie between v and w, but no tie between u and w is extremely unlikely to exist. Under the theory of triadic closure, forbidden triads will quickly close because a relationship will form between u and w. Thus, if we can effectively predict edge formations based on the value of social strength, the implication is that social strength is capturing the strength of ties between distant nodes. We compare our results with three other metrics used for link prediction.We compare three well-established link prediction metrics with the social strength metric to demonstrate how effective is in link prediction. Many approaches are based on the idea that if two nodes i and j have large overlap in their neighbors, they have higher likelihood to form a link in the future. In the following definition, let Γ(i) denote the set of node i’s neighbors.Jaccard coefficient (J) is a commonly used similarity metric that was proposed by Salton and McGill [29]:J(i,j)=|Γ(i)∩Γ(j)||Γ(i)∪Γ(j)|Adamic-Adar (AA) is a metric that only counts common features by inverting log frequency of their occurrence [30]:AA(i,j)=∑z∈Γ(i)∩Γ(j)1log|Γ(z)|Katz defined a metric that sums all possible paths between two nodes [31]:Katz(i,j)=∑l=1∞βl·|Pi,jl|Pi,jlis the set of alllength−lpaths between i and j. Paths are exponentially damped by length, so that shorter paths count more heavily. β (β > 0) is a parameter that if set at a very small number, the measurement is similar to the common neighbors metric that directly counts the common friends between two nodes, since more than 2-hop path lengths contribute little to the summation. According to the experimental results in [32] (Fig. 3),β=0.0005gives better prediction performance than other values. Thus, in the following experiments we set the parameter β to 0.0005. Note that even if a weighted Katz metric is discussed in [32], it is only applicable to 1-hop social distance that is not suitable to our problem (2- and 3-hop distance), thus, in this paper, we only conduct comparisons with unweighted Katz metric as described below.All these metrics give a score that quantifies the strength of the social tie between two nodes. Jaccard and Adamic-Adar are based on node neighborhoods while Katz uses the ensemble of all paths between two nodes. Therefore, Jaccard and Adamic-Adar restrict their measurements to nodes that are 2-hops away while Katz can be applied to n-hop (n ≥ 1) social distance, which is comparable to our social strength metric on longer path lengths.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
