@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Orthogonal circular polarized transmission for interference control in femto–macro networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Cross-polarized transmission for frequency reuse in femto-macro networks.Femtocells use Right Hand Circular Polarization (RHCP).Macrocells use Left Hand Circular Polarization (LHCP).The proposed method promotes interference-free operation in both tiers.It also assures better coverage, higher spectral efficiency and enhanced throughput on both tiers.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Femtocell,Macrocell,Interference,Cross-polarization,Frequency reuse,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Multi-tier networks comprising of macro-cellular network overlaid with less power, short range, home-base station like femtocells provide an economically feasible solution for meeting the unrelenting traffic demands. However, femtocells that use co-channel allocation with macrocells result in cross-tier interference which eventually degrades the system performance. It is for this reason that, cross-polarized data transmission is proposed in this paper as a potential approach towards improving the spectral efficiency of cellular systems and at the same time permitting co-channel allocation. Here two independent information channels occupying the same frequency band can be transmitted over a single link. The paper evaluates a scenario where femtocell network makes use of right hand circular polarization (RHCP) and macrocell network makes use of left hand circular polarization (LHCP) for signal transmission. The polarizations being orthogonal to each other due to their sense of rotation ensure isolation between the networks and enable both of them to use the same spectral resources simultaneously. Analytical and simulation results prove that this opens the scope for an easily implementable, remarkable opportunity in the context of two-tier femto–macro network that can increase the system capacity. The paper closes by discussing the technical challenges involved in the implementation as well as the possible solutions to overcome the same.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Wireless communication has always proved to be a fundamental driver of modern information infrastructure while its economic growth brings about exciting developments that makes the world a global village. The continuously galloping demand for bandwidth-hungry services with better signal quality constantly encourage the researchers to develop innovative designs for better communication networks with wider frequency spectrum allocation. A survey in Femtocell Europe and a study by ABI research projected that, 30% of business and 45% of household users experience very poor indoor coverage while more than 50% of voice calls and 70% of data traffic in the future is expected to originate from indoors [1]. At the same time, the revolutionary explosion of attractive mobile internet applications along with the proliferation of seamless connectivity devices drive the global mobile data traffic usage in the indoors to double every year through 2014, leading to a global compound annual growth rate of 108% [2]. This finally confronts the wireless industry with the demand for ubiquitous indoor wireless coverage to the customers which at the same time can transform into higher revenue and reduced churn for the network operators. In order to accomplish this significant network performance leap, the heterogeneous networks have been proposed as the next big step in future personal communication systems [3]. In this context, several industrial critics have also started to discover the hidden potential in the deployment of so-called home base stations or femtocells and its aggressive utilization [4–7].Femtocell also known as Femto Access Point (FAP) is a low-power, low-cost base station, usually installed indoors to provide high speed data connection to subscribers and can be overlaid with the existing cellular network. This “plug and play device” which resembles a Wi-Fi router offers every cellular functionality to the end-user [4]. A study by Informa Telecoms and Media stated that by 2014, about 114 million mobile users will be accessing the cellular network through 50 million femtocells [5]. This increase in the number of cells demand efficient spectrum reuse in order to guarantee larger data rates. The question now is how quickly this fledgling femtocell technology can overcome significant challenges, on their way to increasing its credibility and making itself- the technology of choice for in-home wireless use.The co-existing femto–macro architecture definitely improves the coverage and ensures capacity relief by offloading the traffic from the overburdened macrocell network. However, the unplanned ad-hoc deployment of femtocells in the macrocell network render the dynamic management of system resources a challenging task for the network operators. The system resource often being limited by the scarce and expensive frequency spectrum introduces interference between the femtocell and macrocell layer in co-channel operation, which degrades each other’s performance [7]. Hence the co-existing femtocell–macrocell network demands efficient spectrum utilization backed by the need for better frequency reuse and orthogonal spectrum allocation techniques. Methods for optimizing the system capacity through intelligent frequency reuse must be figured out so as to overcome this challenge. Traditional frequency planning with higher frequency reuse patterns may result in wastage of limited available spectrum while a full frequency reuse within each sector of every cell may turn out to be an excellent solution. However, a full frequency reuse can result in co-channel interference (CCI) which may arise from concurrent inter-cell and intra-cell transmissions which can further degrade the Quality of Service (QoS) and hence the data-rate assured to the consumers. To cope-up with this cross-tier interference, several intelligent interference avoidance schemes were proposed, the most popular among them being spectrum splitting [7], limiting the number of femtocells [8] and introducing relaying techniques [9], orthogonal frequency allocation [10], power control [11], etc. Also the available literature for CCI reduction seem to be rich [11–16] too. Significant attention is given to scheduling algorithms [11–13] that is capable of organizing the total amount of interference.In this technical standpoint, wireless radio bandwidth being expensive, prompts a close examination of the data channels available using electromagnetic waves. Since wireless communication utilizes polarization-sensitive electromagnetic (EM) medium for signal transmission, polarization could be explored as an independent domain for interference management. Even though the concept of polarization diversity is not a recent one, it remained under-utilized for the past several years and hence exploiting it for improving the spectral efficiency and system capacity seems to be the next logical step to undertake. Exploring polarimetric dimension is an exciting research direction and may bring revolutionary subversion, fundamentally for wireless communication. The concept of cross-polarization allocation is already introduced in systems operating under line-of-sight (LOS) conditions as a means of isolating the interfering signal from the desired signal [14]. The concept of a heuristic scheduling along with a terminal classification procedure for interference reduction is extended in [12], with a different scheduling algorithm for odd and even sectors. In [13] the scheme is further improved with the introduction of power shaping concept. The above concepts of combined scheduling of the intra-cell and inter-cell transmissions and cross-polarization allocation method has been integrated in [15] for minimizing the interference and hence improving the quality of service. On the other hand, an alternate polarization allocation scheme for Local Multipoint Distribution Service (LMDS) operating under LOS conditions is presented in [16]. A similar scheme for systems operating under non line-of-sight (NLOS) operation is proposed in [17] which gives due importance to the channel allocation policy and thereby reduce CCI. [18] addresses the potential benefits of dual-polarized antenna systems in wireless communication scenarios whereas the measurements and modeling of polarized transmission in indoor NLOS environments is analyzed in [19] which approves that a compact antenna system with lower inter-antenna correlation can be obtained with the help of perpendicularly polarized antennas.In this paper, we propose an OFDM multiplexing transmission system that employs orthogonally polarized antennas for transmission in femto–macro systems. Most of the frequency reuse schemes available in the literature resort to spatial reuse with sub-channels used in one cell being banned in the neighboring cell. On the contrary, this paper investigates the application of cross-polarized wireless access (CPWA) to permit universal frequency reuse where all cells have the potential to access all available resources. This enables the same frequency carrier to be used for radio transmission by both networks simultaneously. Moreover, the orthogonal sense of rotation doubles the OFDM system capacity through proper interference mitigation between the femto–macro networks. Thus in co-existing femto–macro network, it provides an acceptable tradeoff and overall enhanced system performance. The paper also scrutinizes the impact that CPWA has on legacy macrocell network and concludes on the benefits that it brings along to enhance the overall system performance. Also due to the independence of the polarization states, the incorporation of polarization division multiple access (PDMA) and polarization modulation (PM), is expected to improve the spectrum efficiency too [20]. The scenario of interest for this work is explained in Fig. 1. Even though similar frequency reuse strategy is employed in satellite transmission systems, this is the first ever proposed for a femto–macro system to the best of our knowledge.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discuss the reasons behind the polarization mode chosen and Section 3 demonstrates the CPWA frequency allocation strategy adopted in two-tier femto–macro network for interference reduction. Section 4 carries out the system analysis that gives insight on the capacity improvement and increased coverage probability achieved through this method. This analysis is further used for extensive simulations carried out in Section 5 for performance evaluation. Section 6 highlights the design and implementation challenges and Section 7 finally concludes the paper.In order to ensure orthogonalization and enable frequency reuse, we make use of orthogonality in signal polarimetric dimension that can be employed in transmission schemes. Fig. 2explains the different polarization states using a Poincare-spherical surface. It establishes one-to-one mapping between the polarization states and each point on the Poincare-spherical surface resulting in infinite polarization states intuitively. Here the north pole signifies the left-hand circular polarization [LHCP], south pole signifies the right-hand circular polarization [RHCP], equator of the sphere represents linear polarization, surface of the northern hemi-sphere denotes the left-hand elliptical polarization and the surface of the southern hemi-sphere denotes the right-hand elliptical polarization [20].Based on the insights on these different types of polarization, it is quite intriguing to investigate on the type of polarization that should be adopted for the CPWA scheme. The main debate occurs in choosing between – linear (vertical and horizontal) and circular (right-hand and left-hand) polarization for the CPWA scheme. Definitely linear polarization has an edge over circular polarization in terms of expense and ease of implementation in case of fixed networks due to which it is considered as the de facto polarization standard in most of the network implementations. However, these advantages do not stand valid in mobile ad-hoc environment where the user equipment is not stationary and the orientation of the antenna cannot be a priori determined. On the other hand, the superior signal propagation characteristics and traditionally higher expenses had always limited the use of circular polarized antennas for satellite transmission. However, the recent breakthrough in antenna design and innovative scientific burst outs has made this superior technology affordable for common applications as well. The analysis of polarization effects in indoor wireless high data-rate communication scenarios establishes that appropriate use of circular polarization can assure significant reduction in channel delay spread, and hence better signal strength with improved error performance and minimal attenuation [21,22]. It also guarantees a correlation coefficient value lower than that of conventional linear polarization systems [23]. In addition to this, the variation of rms delay spread as a mobile moves over several wavelengths is also greatly reduced when circular polarized antennas are used [24]. Extensive simulation and analysis approves the use of circular polarization to mitigate multi-path fading and in reducing reflections from the wall even when it has a multi-layered structure [24–27]. Above all, the significant advantage of circular polarization is that even after multiple reflections, refractions and delay, its sense of rotation can never be altered by any naturally existing substance even though there can be a minor shift in angular orientation. This is because, rather than for any metamaterial, no naturally existing substance has negative permeability or permittivity and is hence incapable of reversing the handedness of a polarized transmission [28]. Thus sense of rotation being orthogonal to each other ensures isolation and limits interference between the tiers. This assures that the orthogonality is always maintained between two tiers of the network.Table 1clearly points out the additional reasons behind choosing circular polarized transmission over linear polarized transmission in wireless-cellular network [29,30]. Hence, it is evident from the comparison that there is a reason behind the choice been made. It is always about ensuring the highest reliability of reception due to which circular polarization is preferred over linear polarization in femto–macro wireless network.Fig. 3explains the different orthogonal polarization states of circular polarization (LHCP and RHCP) for a given frequency (Fk) on a Poincare. Two points on the surface of the Poincare-sphere are orthogonally polarized if the line joining them passes through the center of the sphere and is cross polarized if they are symmetrically placed with respect to the equator of the sphere. This property makes it possible for the same frequency (Fk) to be allocated to femtocell users and macrocell users simultaneously with orthogonal/cross polarization. Furthermore, since both the desired signal strength and SINR vary in a random fashion, a more meaningful system performance evaluation can be carried out by the measurement of SINR in the two-tier network which we make use of in the next section.The spectrum allocation employed in the CPWA strategy is intelligently designed in order to facilitate flexibility, scalability and higher efficiency. Ideally, frequency reuse through cross polarized transmission doubles the system capacity. However in practice, this is hard to achieve due to propagation impairments, antenna imperfections and cross-polarization interference. Hence frequency allocation along the femto–macro tiers needs meticulous planning along with spatial separation in order to prevent performance degradation.Firstly, the macrocell service area is divided into hexagonal cells which are further partitioned into 6 triangular sectors S1–S6. Each sector is equipped with its own directional antenna. The entire available frequency spectrum of the macrocell is divided into 6 sub-bands namely A, B, C, D, E and F which is allocated to the 6 sectors in such a way that no two adjacent sectors make use of the same frequency sub-band. On the other hand, distribution of femtocells within the macrocell network must be carried out harmoniously so that it does not affect the normal functioning of the legacy macrocell network but should aid in maximizing the performance of the network as a whole. The spectrum allocation for the randomly distributed femtocells within the macrocell is carried out as in Fig. 4. However deployment of femtocells in pre-existing macrocell network results in several problems that need to be addressed to guarantee the customer requirements. The main challenge among them is the intelligent allocation of frequency spectrum to the femtocells considering the effect of co-channel interference on the legacy macrocell network. Traditionally, there exist frequency allocation mechanisms which allocate frequency resources according to frequency reuse factors (RFs) in multi-cell environment. The most commonly used among them is the shared frequency allocation mechanism, in which frequency spectrum is shared with adjacent, or co-existing cells i.e., universal frequency reuse or frequency RF of 1. The other is the orthogonal frequency allocation mechanism which allocates frequency according to the predetermined frequency patterns among multi-cells with the frequency RF of 1 or more. Even though the former seems to be more efficient since all the frequency resources are utilized in each of the cells, it suffer from performance degradation due to co-channel interference which is very well taken care of in the later. However, combining both these schemes i.e. shared spectrum and orthogonal allocation in a smart way can bring about a significant improvement in the system performance without affecting the users’ quality of service. Thus, co-channel interference being the limiting factor in the performance of femto–macro network, cross-polarized transmission is employed as a means of reducing this interference to improve signal to interference plus noise ratio (SINR) and hence increase the system capacity. To facilitate this, circular cross-polarization is chosen as the best mode for transmission in wireless network as explained Section 2. Hence the transmission along all the sub-bands in the macrocell network is enabled through circular polarized signals say LHCP. Since RHCP and LHCP results in two loosely correlated orthogonal channels, the spectrum allocated to the randomly distributed femtocells, will make use of RHCP as explained in Fig. 4. Here, the polarization mode adopted for transmission in the cellular network precisely correspond to the antenna polarization of the base station and user equipments within the same network since a circular polarized antenna always rejects the cross-polarized incoming wave and suppresses the multi-path components. In short, co-existing femtocell and macrocell users make use of orthogonal/alternate polarization so as to maximize the isolation between their transmissions and hence increase the communication quality.As evident from Fig. 4 the system under consideration includes a two-tier femto–macro network making use of orthogonal polarization in their respective domains to exploit smart frequency-reuse and thereby increase system capacity. Polarimetric dimension allows frequency reuse to be efficiently incorporated in two-tier systems due to its property known as Cross Polarization Discrimination or XPD. It is this XPD coefficient that represent the polarization state of a wireless signal. Maximum signal strength between nodes occurs when both transmitter and receiver use identical polarization. However, due to XPD, when a given antenna receives a co-channel signal sent from a cross-polarized antenna, the effective signal strength is reduced by several dB. XPD is defined as the ratio between the temporal-average power in the emitted polarization and the value of temporal-average power that has leaked into other polarization [31]. Higher the XPD between polarized transmissions, larger will be the isolation. The two distinct polarization modes of a dual-polarized wireless channel being co-polar (represented by ‖) and cross-polar (represented by ⊥), XPD of a co-polar signal is given by:(1)XPD‖=P‖P(‖→⊥)and that of a cross-polar signal is given by:(2)XPD⊥=P⊥P(⊥→‖)Extensive measurements prove that the XPD value varies over distance as well as time [32]. Hence, the value of XPD can be calculated asXPD=XPD0d-βwhereXPD0is the XPD value at a unit distance d=1m and β is the decay factor(0⩽β⩽1). In short, unlike MIMO systems which require at least half wavelength in antenna spacing at terminal devices, there is no spacing requirement for placing the orthogonally dual-polarized antenna (ODPA), i.e., the schemes leveraging degrees of freedom provided by polarization are space and cost-efficient. To add on, the depolarization effect is found to be significantly low for carrier frequencies below 11GHz which proves to be an advantage to the LTE technology having a frequency band from 2 to 8GHz [33]. Also XPD seems to be insensitive to delay and multipath when investigated as a function of its physical propagation parameters in indoor environment [19] which further assures its suitability for femtocells. Hence the assumption of a constant XPD value is also reasonable. Above all, the effect of multi-path delay spread is assumed to be minimal due to the use of highly directional sector and terminal antennas in our scheme. Furthermore, the extensive research focused on polarization signal processing in addition to time, frequency, and space based methods suggest that the use of polarization is a promising framework for wireless communication [34].For the analysis, an OFDMA downlink cellular scenario with two tiers is taken into consideration – macrocell network being cross-polar and femtocell network being co-polar respectively. The macro-users are uniformly distributed whereas the femto-users are modeled as independent spatial Poisson Point Process (PPP). In this model, no mobility condition is assumed. Every user is static and is assumed to be served by its own femtoBS (femtocell Base Station). Let n represent the path loss exponent, M represent the number of interfering macroBSs (macrocell Base Stations which are cross-polar interferers), F represent the number of femtoBSs (co-polar interferers),σ2represent the noise power,Pfb,Pfu,PmbandPmurepresent the transmit powers of the femtoBS, femto-user, macroBS and macro-user respectively. Now a series of theoretical results are furnished to evaluate the thresholds that play a significant role in performance improvement with the adoption of CPWA scheme.In a narrowband Rayleigh-faded channel, for a two tier femto–macro network, the average received power at the femtoUE located at a distance d from the femtoBS in the downlink is given by:(3)Pavg=PfbI=Pfbd-n|h0|2where d is the distance between the femtoBS and the femto-user, I represents the interference and|h0|2is the Rayleigh distributed random variable which represent the small scale fading between any BS under consideration and the attached UE.The set of interfering BSs are assumed to use the same co-polar sub-carrier within the same tier but with orthogonal polarization in different tier. While making use of cross polarized signals for transmission in femto–macro network, letPsrcrepresent the average power received at receiver rc when transmitted from sender s which is depicted in terms of the XPD value based on the signal polarization as [17]:(4)For cross-polarized reception:1XPDPsrcFor co-polarized reception:XPD-1XPDPsrcLet P be the instantaneous received power at a distance d. The signal to interference ratio of the femtocell in the downlink is represented by:(5)SINRDL=P(d)Pint_DL+σ2wherePint_DLrepresents the total downlink interference. This interference is assumed to be from all the femtoBSs (j) and macroBSs (k) in the network which are using the same frequency carrier as that of femtoBS i. On substituting (4), (5) becomes:(6)SINRDL=P|h0|2d-n(XPD-1)∑j=1,j≠iFPfb‖(XPD-1)+∑k=1MPmb⊥+σ2wherePfb‖(=Pfb|h0|2(dfbfu)-n)is the interference at femto-user l due to the signal transmission from the femtoBS j andPmb⊥(=Pmb|h0|2(dmbfu)-n)is the interference at femto-user l due to the signal transmission from macroBS k. The Shannon–Hartley theorem is further used to calculate the achievable throughput. Eq. (6) highlights that cross-polarized transmission can be utilized as an effective measure to improve the downlink system capacity of the femto–macro network if one tier makes use of a polarization orthogonal to that of the other tier which in turn depends on the cross-polarization discrimination maintained between the two tiers. In addition to this, adoption of CPWA proves to be a promising practical solution to minimize the chances of interference to the macrocell network as well which can be demonstrated in terms of Primary Protection Ratio (PPR). Taking PPR=Cmacro+femtoCmacro_onlywhereCmacro+femtobeing the achievable downlink capacity of the macrocell users in the presence of interference from the femtocell users andCmacro_onlybeing the achievable downlink capacity of the macrocell users devoid of interference [35], CPWA seems to offer significantly higher value for PPR.In ideal case, exploiting the polarimetric dimension for cross polarized transmission ensures perfect orthogonality. However this is not the case in reality, since an imperfect antenna cross-polar isolation (XPI) and depolarization mechanism that takes place during electromagnetic wave propagation, causes the signal sent on a given polarization to leak into other. These effects can combine to result in what is known as polarization mismatch losses. The polarization mismatch loss for linear polarization is given byΓ=cos2(θ)whereθis the angle between the polarization vectors. However, in case of circular polarization, ifρtandρrrepresent the circular polarization ratio of the transmitting and receiving antenna respectively andrtandrrrepresent the axial ratio (r=ratio of major axis to minor axis or 20log[Emax/Emin]dB) of the transmitting and receiving antenna respectively, then the mismatch loss for any angular alignmentθbetween major axes of the transmitting and receiving antenna can be calculated as [36]:(7)Γ(dB)=10log1+ρt2ρr2+2ρtρrcos2θ(1+ρt2)(1+ρr2)whereρt=(rt+1)(rt-1)ρr=(rr+1)(rr-1)Also the cross polarization discrimination is related to the axial ratio (r) as:(8)XPD=20logr+1r-1dBAssuming the axial ratio of the transmitting and receiving antenna to be the same i.e.rt=rr=r, for a given value of XPD, its value can be determined. From this, the polarization mismatch losses during transmission can be calculated which helps in evaluating the actual system capacity.In a two-tier network with narrowband Rayleigh-faded channel which makes use of cross-polarized transmission, it is essential to determine the probability of successful transmission. Coverage probability analysis can project a clear picture in this respect. A node is said to be in coverage or the transmission from a femtoBS to a femto-user is considered successful if and only if the SINR is above a threshold say T. This threshold value definitely depends on the receiver’s characteristics like sensitivity, modulation, and coding scheme. Let the traffic at the interfering femtoBSs and macroBSs be modeled by a sequence of i.i.d Bernoulli random variablesΛi∈{0,1}such thatP{Λi=1}=ΛandP{Λi=0}=1-Λ.Thus the coverage probability in the downlink is expressed as:Pc=ΔP(SINRDL>T)(9)=EPint_DL[P(SINRDL>T)|Pint_DL](10)=Eexp-TPd-n(XPD-1)∑j=1,j≠iFPfb‖Λj(XPD-1)+∑k=1MPmb⊥Λk+σ2(11)=exp-Tσ2Pd-n(XPD-1)×E∏j=1,j≠iFexp-TPfb‖ΛjPd-n×E∏k=1Mexp-TPmb⊥ΛkPd-n(XPD-1)The expectation in the middle term of (11) can be expressed as:(12)Eexp-TPfb‖ΛjPd-n=P(Λj=1)×∫0∞exp-TPfbPd-nfpfb‖(pfb)dpfb+P(Λj=0)×1=1-TΛPPfbddfbfu-n+TThe expectation in the last term of (11) can be expressed as:(13)Eexp-TPmb⊥ΛkPd-n(XPD-1)=P(Λk=1)×∫0∞exp-TPmbPd-n(XPD-1)fpmb⊥(pmb)dpmb+P(Λk=0)×1=1-TΛ(XPD-1)PPmbddmbfu-n+TSubstituting (12) and (13) in (11), yields the coverage probability of femtocell in the downlink as:(14)Pc=exp-Tσ2Pd-n(XPD-1)×∏j=1,j≠iF1-TPPfbddfbfu-n+T×∏k=1M1-T(XPD-1)PPmbddmbfu-n+TCoverage probability analysis definitely provides interesting insights on the expected system performance. The first term on the right hand side of (14) is relevant only in systems where the throughput is limited by the background noise in comparison to the interference from neighboring nodes. However, in dense multi-cell, muti-tier networks where the background noise is negligible when compared to the interference, the transmission is limited by the interference and polarization terms (i.e. the second and third terms in the expression) which depends on the polarization characteristics of the interferers, traffic distribution and network topology.In a narrowband Rayleigh-faded channel for a two tier femto–macro network making use of cross-polarized transmission, the interference free femtocell exclusive region (IFFER) is a circular region whose coverage area depends on the XPD value and path-loss exponent. The determination of IFFER coverage would play a key role in the placement of femtoBS in a cellular network. This interference free coverage region is usually dependent on parameters like transmit power of the femtoBS and macroBS, distance of the femto-user from the macroBS and femtoBS, and path loss exponent. The IFFER is defined as the area within a contour where the received power levels from the femtoBS and macroBS are the same [37]. Fig. 5explains the variation in IFFER with increasing distance from the macroBS. Consider a simple scenario where the femto-user is located at the coordinates (x, y). Let the received signal strength from the cross-polarized macroBS located at(x1,y1)bePmb⊥and that received from the co-polarized femtoBS located at(x2,y2)bePfb‖. Considering the signal to interference ratio to be 0dB at the border of the IFFER, it can be written asPmb⊥=Pfb‖(15)i.e.Pmb|h0|2(dmbfu)-n=Pfb|h0|2(dfbfu)-nApplying (6)–(15), results in:(16)PmbXPD(dmbfu)n=(XPD-1)PfbXPD(dfbfu)nTaking n=2, and substituting the distance from the macroBS and femtoBS to the femto-user we get:(17)Pmb(x-x1)2+(y-y1)2=(XPD-1)Pfb(x-x2)2+(y-y2)2which can be rearranged and re-written as:x2+y2+B1Ax+B2Ay+CA=0whereA=Pmb-Pfb(XPD-1),B1=2Pfb(XPD-1)x1-2Pmbx2,B2=2Pfb(XPD-1)y1-2Pmby2,C=Pmb(x22+y22)-Pfb(XPD-1)(x12+y12). However, this denotes the equation of a circle centered at-B12A,-B22Awith radiusB124A2+B224A2-CA. Hence IFFER will have an area given byπB124A2+B224A2-CA. Thus, it becomes evident that, apart from the location and transmit power of the macroBS and femtoBS, IFFER is dependent on the XPD value too, in a cross-polarized transmission network. Higher the XPD between femto–macro transmissions, larger will be the IFFER. For n to be any arbitrary path loss exponent other than 2, the (2/n)-th root needs to be applied to both sides in (16) which becomes exactly similar to the scenario where n=2 with an entirely different value for the transmit powers [37].When the femto–macro network shares the radio spectrum, and co-channel reuse is permissible within the system, there is always a maximum active femtocell density beyond which every single addition of femtoBS increases the interference to the macrocell network. When the femtoUE reuses the frequency sub-band of the macroBS in the downlink, the received SINR highly depends on its distance from the serving femtoBS and the interfering macroBS. The interference statistics measured by a femtoUE is a representative of that experienced by all other femtoUEs. From equation (6), the interference experienced at a femtoUE l due to the downlink transmissions along the same frequency sub-band used all nearby femtoBS j is given by:(18)Ifbfu=∑j=1,j≠iFPfb|h0|2(dfbfu)-nWithλrepresenting the spatial density of the femtoUEs, the moment generating function ofIfbfuis given by [38]:(19)E[exp(-sIfbfu)]=exp-2πλ∫0∞u1+unsPfbdu=exp-λ(sPfb)2nKwhereK=2π2nsin2πnIn the CPWA system, to guarantee the outage of a femtoUE due to cross tier interference, it is positioned at the coverage boundary of its serving femtoBS with shortest distance to the interfering macroBS.We have from the previous section,(20)Pc=ΔP(SINRDL>T)=PP|h0|2d-n(XPD-1)∑j=1FPfb|h0|2(dfbfu)-n(XPD-1)+∑k=1MPmb|h0|2(dmbfu)-n+σ2>T=Eexp-TPd-n(XPD-1)σ2+∑k=1MPmb(dmbfu)-nΛk+∑j=1,j≠iFPfb(dfbfu)-nΛj(XPD-1)From Eqs. (13) and (19), Eq. (20) becomes:(21)exp-Tσ2Pd-n(XPD-1)×∏k=1M1-TΛ(XPD-1)PPmb⊥ddmbfu-n+T×exp-λT2nKΛ(XPD-1)d2whereλis the maximum permissible femtoBS density which is given by:(22)λ=-lnPc∏k=1M1-TΛ(XPD-1)PPmb⊥ddmbfu-n+T-1+-Tσ2Pd-n(XPD-1)T2nKΛ(XPD-1)d2Thus, femto–macro network employing CPWA can guarantee a reasonable QoS on both femtocell and macrocell tiers by ensuring that the maximum permissible femtoBS density is always maintained below the thresholdλ.Simulation involves an OFDMA cellular scenario with two tiers – macrocell network and femtocell network respectively having a Rayleigh faded channel. The macro-users are uniformly distributed while the femto-users are modeled as independent spatial Poisson Point Process (PPP). In short, for the given PPP, the number of points in a bounded area is uniformly distributed and is taken as a Poisson distributed random variable. A standard power loss propagation model is used in our analysis which accounts for the mobile nodes that are permissible in a homogeneous PPP [39]. The femtocell network is assumed to be co-polar and the macrocell network to be cross-polar.The simulation environment assumes the circularly shaped femtocells to be uniformly distributed within the hexagonally-shaped macrocell located centrally within a group of 7 macrocells. Each macrocell is partitioned into two non-overlapping regions namely the cell-center (inner) region and cell-edge (outer) region. The simulation studies assume a macrocell coverage area with a radius of 600m with the cell-center radius extending up to 400m. The central macrocell is taken as the reference which serves 100 macro-users with 60 in the cell-center region and 40 in the cell-edge region. 200 femtoBSs are uniformly distributed within this macrocell with 120 in the inner region and 80 in the outer region and each having a femto-user attached to it. The femtoBS–macroBS separation in the plots correspond to the distance between macroBS and the random femtoBS normalized over a series of simulation runs. In order to project the benefits in terms of orthogonal polarized transmission, we have considered the conventional method (CM) of random femto–macro distribution as a baseline for comparison, which does not use any polarization orthogonalization. For the purpose of analytical tractability, channel correlation is not taken into account since it does not affect the scaling behavior in link level performance. The rest of the parameters used for the simulation are given in Table 2.Fig. 6analyses the femtocell downlink throughput for different values of XPD. It is observed that with increase in cross-polarization discrimination between the femtocell and macrocell transmission, the interference between the two tiers reduces. This causes an improvement in SINR value finally resulting in an increased throughput for the femtocell network. This throughput enhancement is clearly evident in the cell-center region where the downlink interference from the macroBS is comparatively high. The conventional method, in which the polarization diversity is not exploited, seems to offer the lowest throughput for the femtocell network in comparison to CPWA scheme. However, it is noticed that the throughput variation is quite distinctly visible up to a distance of about 300m, whereas after 300m from the macroBS, it becomes substantially constant. This is mainly because of the linear decay of XPD value with increase in transmission range.From Fig. 7, it is evident that the phase difference between the excitation signals can cause changes in axial ratio, and hence affect the throughput of the system. The more the separation between the excitation signals from 90deg on either side, the more the axial ratio varies and hence the throughput deteriorates. It is validated from the simulation results that the maximum system throughput is always obtained when the major axes of the antennas of the femtocell and macrocell network are orthogonally aligned at an angle of 90deg with each other. Even minor misalignments from 90deg can cause the signal energy from one network to leak into the other, thereby affecting the orthogonality of the system and hence resulting in interference. Hence special attention should be given in the antenna feed alignment of both the networks so as to ensure better system performance.The benefits of incorporating polarization orthogonalization is projected by comparing it with the state-of-art frequency orthogonalization and frequency reuse methods. The significant capacity gains through frequency orthogonalization via reverse frequency allocation (RFA) [40] is already established where macrocell spectrum is reused by the femtocells by reversing the direction of transmission along with spatial separation. Here, the elimination of the dominant downlink interference from the macroBS toward the femtoUEs along with frequency orthogonalization helps the macroUEs and femtoUEs to reuse the spectrum simultaneously with effective interference alleviation. Soft frequency allocation (SFA) in femto–macro network [41] is a time honored interference mitigation strategy where the cell-center region femtoUEs are allowed to reuse the cell-edge region sub-bands of the neighboring cells within the same cluster. Fig. 8compares the potential throughput improvement with the use of cross-polarized transmission (CPWA with XPD=10dB) in femto–macro network with the conventional method of random distribution of femtocells within the macrocell environment, the soft frequency allocation method and the reverse frequency allocation method. Extensive simulation results project that the capacity achievable with CPWA scheme is well above that of all other methods due to higher transmission rate and lower inter-tier interference. It is evident from the plot that this capacity enhancement varies from 30% to 60% within the macrocell coverage area. Nevertheless, it is understandable from the results that the diversity of polarization increases the throughput due to the significant advantage in terms of interference limitation.Fig. 9compares the primary protection ratio for the macrocell users for varying XPD values to the conventional method. It is evident from the figure that the legacy macrocell network has the least impact with CPWA. Betterment of PPR is observed with increase in XPD value throughout the macrocell coverage area in case of CPWA when compared with that of conventional method. This ensures that the incorporation of CPWA scheme can only result in the betterment of the system performance as a whole with minimal impact on the macrocell network.Fig. 10demonstrates the coverage probability analysis for the femtocells with and without the use of cross-polarization. It is observed that the coverage probability is significantly higher in cross-polarized transmission mode when compared to the conventional approach without any polarization, mainly because of the spectral isolation achieved between the femto–macro network. The coverage probability of the femtocells remains at a high stable value independent of the distance from the macroBS in case of cross-polarized network. However, in the conventional approach, it seems to be low in the cell-center region and increase with distance from the macroBS mainly due to the reduced interference experienced by the femtocell toward the cell-edge.It is evident from Fig. 11that the IFFER expands in area with distance from the macroBS. This signifies that in a cross-polarized two-tier network, the IFFER is dependent not only on the transmit powers of the base stations and the path loss exponent but also on the XPD value. With larger XPD, higher is the isolation between the femto–macro network and hence larger is the IFFER. This increase in IFFER seems to be linear in case of polarization-free femto macro network, but exponential when it comes to a two-tier network where isolation is ensured by means of cross-polarization. Hence cross-polarized transmission plays a key role in increasing the coverage area of femtocells and thereby reducing the probability of outage caused due to sharing of frequency spectrum with the macrocell. Further, the operating environment and hence the corresponding value of n also proves to be a vital decision parameter, since increase in n for femtocell network decreases the IFFER whereas increase in n for macrocell network increases IFFER. Hence it becomes the choice of the network operator to have a trade-off between the throughput and coverage probability by manipulating the transmit power and the IFFER. However, the application of cross-polarization improves the system performance over these constraints and thereby guarantee the required QoS.In addition to the benefits of adopting cross-polarized transmission in two-tier mobile communication network, there arise a number of challenges which needs to be properly addressed to prevent system performance degradation. This section discusses the major challenges involved and the potential solutions to further emphasize the attractiveness of the proposed scheme.The main challenge of using orthogonally polarized transmission system for interference mitigation in wireless communication is the improper alignment of the receiver antenna with respect to the transmitter antenna. When a transmitting antenna changes its orientation in reference to the receiving antenna, the phase relationship changes which may result in polarization pattern distortion or depolarization effects. Depolarization will cause the energy from one polarization sense to be coupled into other, thereby causing interference. Hence it is inevitable that the sense of polarization of antennas at both ends of the transmission medium are the same. It is in this context, that circular polarization is preferred over linear polarization which ensures that the random positioning of the mobile terminal does not affect the polarization pattern at the base station or vice versa and hence reduces the probability of cross polarization coupling. This is demonstrated in Fig. 12. In addition, due to the insensitivity to transmitter and receiver antenna polarization alignment, circular polarization maintains the dc output voltage irrespective of the rotation angle of the receiving antenna for rectenna applications, leading to low polarization loss [24]. Further, antennas with polarization filtering helps in mitigating depolarization effects, interference suppression and signal separation. An example is the new IWxCPA antenna which produces a ‘drop-out free’ transmitter and receiver combination that is never out of phase. The inherent technology, along with the antenna’s directional attributes, guarantee the best possible RF signal link [42].A challenging bottleneck in using cross polarized transmission in femto–macro network is the need for polarization reconfigurability to prevent call drops when handover takes place from one network to another network. The polarization switching should be initiated as and when the handover takes place so that the user equipment/receiver antenna is properly aligned with respect to the transmitter antenna of the network with LHCP in macrocell network and RHCP in femtocell network.Fig. 13explains the signaling and call flow in case of handover from macrocell network to femtocell network. As demonstrated in the figure, it is the serving macroBS (MBS) that coordinates this handover based on measurement reports received. When a user (UE) in the macrocell network which carries out transmission with LHCP detects a femtoBS (FBS) signal, it notifies the same to the macroBS with its measurement reports. The macroBS provides the optimized and authorized neighboring femtoBS list and initiates the handover procedure by sending a request to the serving radio network controller (RNC) and the same request is passed on to the target femtoBS via the core network and the femto-gateway. The femtoBS checks the user’s authorization, performs the call admission control/radio resource control (CAC/RRC) and responds to the handover request based on which a new link is established between the femto gateway and the femtoBS. Now the user, detaches itself from the macroBS, synchronizes with the femtoBS and changes its polarization from LHCP to RHCP before any further transmission takes place. The previously established radio links with the RNC are deleted by the macroBS as well. The reverse happens when a handover is initiated from femtocell to macrocell network i.e. the polarization switches from LHCP to RHCP. However, in mobile communication systems, this polarization reconfigurability property required for handover, calls for the need of switchable circular polarization antenna design that can intelligently adjust its polarization based on the network to which it is connected i.e. LHCP in macrocell network and RHCP in femtocell network.Earlier, in case of using alternating polarization in multi-cell environment, the assumption was that the operator has to visit the subscriber sites in order to reorient the antenna of the subscriber so as to align it in terms of the polarization of the transmitter antenna. However this seems to be quite impractical in the current cellular network as the number of mobile subscribers is growing immeasurably on a daily basis. Hence the handovers from one network to another definitely calls for an instantaneous polarization switchable antenna circuit which does not cause any delay and hence avoid call-drops. Due to their low-cost, low profile, light weight and ease of fabrication, micro-strip patch antennas prove to be the most promising and suitable candidate for achieving reconfigurability in mobile communication user equipments. The use of a reconfigurable feeding line in order to switch the polarization of patch antenna between LHCP and RHCP is proposed in [43] whereas the design of micro-strip antenna that ensures circular polarization reconfigurability is discussed in [44,45]. Wideband E-shaped patch antennas capable of switching its polarization from LHCP to RHCP and vice versa can also be employed in CPWA since it exhibits significant performance quality in case of wireless communication systems especially in WLAN IEEE 802.11 b/g frequency band (2.4–2.5GHz) [46].Polarization reconfigurability can be further coupled with frequency reconfigurability to achieve even better performance in FDD systems [47]. Here the proposed antenna design consists of a rectangular patch with a U-slot and truncating corners. A switch turns the U-slot on/off providing frequency reconfigurability while polarization reconfigurability is achieved through three switches that turn on/off the truncated corners. A patch antenna with switchable circular polarization using a branched feed circuit can also be deployed in the user equipment for smooth switching between LHCP and RHCP [48]. The simulation results guarantee an XPD greater than 30dB with this antenna. However, if the LHCP signals suffer interference from RHCP signals or vice versa, cross-polarization interference cancellers (XPIC) can be used which can reduce the BER from about10-2to better than10-5. This technique makes it possible to transmit using both polarizations with same frequency at the same time without much interference. Also, reconfigurable patch antennas consisting of a square patch with two cross-shaped diagonal slots can be used for obtaining specific polarimetric dimensions like linear polarization, right hand circular polarization and left hand circular polarization [49]. It is the use of two pairs of switches in the design which helps in achieving reconfigurability in both frequency and polarization domains.When orthogonally polarized signals are used for frequency reuse purposes in femto–macro networks, high levels of polarization purity is expected from both the incident field and the receiving antenna. Ideally, the XPD degradation of the antenna is not allowed and hence the cross-polar transmissions (e.g. from a RHCP Tx antenna to an LHCP Rx antenna) should be equal to zero. In order to accomplish this orthogonality, the transmitting and receiving antennas should be aligned along the main lobe or beam maximum of each other. However, this is not the case in reality since the transmission medium often distorts the orthogonality of the cross-polarized waves owing to three reasons: the finite cross-polar isolation (XPI) of antennas, the array tilting and the electromagnetic channel depolarization. Hence even though the antennas are designed to capture a given polarization, they seem to be sensitive and capture the orthogonal polarization too. Ideal polarization isolation requires the incident field and the receiving antenna to have the same axial ratio and orthogonal polarization tilt angle orientations. If proper design attention is not paid to polarization purity, the cross-polar isolation undergoes significant degradation. Even though this channel depolarization can be pointed out as an immediate concern, analysis and modeling results of radio wave depolarization in urban environment seems to be positive for wireless communication [50]. Moreover, the efficiency of polarization diversity significantly depend on higher cross-polarization discrimination maintained between the antennas in use. It is typically of the order of 10–20dB which is capable of assuring isolation between co-polar and cross-polar channels [51]. Further, the investigation on practical limitations of using cross polarized antennas in wireless communication concludes that it is possible to preserve the polarization characteristics in NLOS transmissions and that high capacities are achievable with orthogonally oriented antennas [52]. In addition, typical indoor environments seem to have very small cross-polar correlation values [53].A dual-polarized antenna with high isolation (31dB) and lower cross-coupling serves the purpose of orthogonal polarized transmission in wireless communication [54]. Upon quantitatively and statistically analyzing the propagation characteristics like received signal to noise ratio and delay spread through outfield measurements in cellular environment, circular polarization proves to be efficient in establishing and maintaining stable communication links [24]. Various cross-polarization interference cancellation techniques are also available which assures that the orthogonality is maintained at the receiving end too. The design in [55] makes use of a Poincare sphere for the analysis of orthogonalizing two polarization ellipses by a differential phase shifter and a differential attenuator. It also derives the condition of minimum differential attenuation for removing a given amount of non-orthogonality and thereby extracting orthogonally polarized signals at the receiving end with minimal interference. The design of a new cross-polarization interference canceler that assures polarization recovery in cellular radio environment is proposed in [56]. It takes care of the phase variation that a polarized signal undergo during transmission. It is also capable of operating in the presence of unknown and possible time-varying random phase fluctuations, as those due to imperfect recovery at the receiver side. The technique of Adaptive Polarization Division Multiplexing (APDM) can further assure cross-polarization isolation with minimal interference between user stations while maintaining high spectrum utilization efficiency through the use of dual polarization [57].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper investigates the use of orthogonal circular polarized transmission in two tier femto–macro network as a means of efficient frequency reuse and effective interference mitigation. A theoretical framework backed with mathematical analysis, demonstrating the benefits of exploiting orthogonal circular polarized transmission to improve the downlink system throughput, coverage and IFFER is furnished. This interference-free, frequency reuse claim is supported through extensive simulation results which makes it an ideal candidate for future mobile communication systems. It has been validated with simulation studies that the co-existing femto–macro system performance can be improved by increasing the XPD value and maintaining the orthogonality of the cross polarized signals at 90deg antenna feed separation. It is also established through simulation results that an enhancement of 30–60% in femto–macro system throughput is achievable through CPWA scheme in comparison with the state-of-art frequency reuse methods. Further, it is worth mentioning that the incorporation of reverse frequency allocation [40] can add frequency diversity to the proposed scheme which may assure a better performance over all other methods. The practical challenges involved in the design and implementation has also been analyzed on a point to point basis and feasible solutions are figured out. To conclude, even with minor imperfect calibrations, the use of cross-polarization in femto–macro network assures comparably higher system capacity and allow efficient frequency reuse in comparison to the conventional methods.