@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Augmented reality in educational activities for children with disabilities

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Mobile devices with a free application were used to design teaching materials.Augmented reality techniques transform display methods to help children perform tasks independently.The experimental data shows that participants could complete tasks using AR support.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Augmented reality,Mobile,Free application,Children,Tangram,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study explores a new way to integrate advanced display technology into educational activities for children with different disabilities. A free interactive mobile augmented reality (AR) application was developed to facilitate the learning of geometry. Twenty-one elementary school children participated in an experiment. The results show that the AR system could help the school children to finish puzzle game activities independent of teacher’s assistance. With the use of AR display technology, the participants demonstrated improved ability to complete puzzle game tasks when compared to the use of traditional paper-based methods. Performance data indicated that the use of AR technology could enhance learning motivation and frustration tolerance in children with special needs.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Recent technological advances have led to products, such as smart phones and tablet devices, being used in educational programs for children with developmental disabilities [1,2]. Image overlay navigation has proven helpful for anatomical understanding of a target in a given environment [3,4]. Chang, Kang and Huang demonstrate that with augmented reality (AR), users are not required to match picture cues with reality, which is a prompting strategy used in the studies [5]. AR is used in a wide range of fields, such as medicine, manufacturing and education, and the number of applications of AR has increased [6]. New possibilities for teaching and learning provided by AR have been recognized by educational researchers [7].DePriest contends that ‘social media technology and corporate America are currently building an augmented reality dimension layered upon our everyday lives. A virtual world of augmented reality is being layered over advertisements, buildings, signs, clothes and more all over the world through the placement of indoor and outdoor tracking and the download of applications to your smart phones and tablets’ [8].Smith investigated using Aurasma to develop educational AR applications based on simple image recognition [9]. Aurasma is a freely available AR platform for iOS and Android devices. Haag argued that mobile augmented reality systems provide educational content designers and educators with new opportunities to think more deeply about the mobile learner’s context and situation [10]. AR technologies can take any situation, location, environment or experience to a new level of meaning and understanding. AR is uniquely changing the way people learn with mobile devices.The use of technologies to link the physical world with the digital world in the educational field has been investigated. In a paper describing an Aurasma application for deaf students, Parton and Hancock point out that barcode and radio frequency identification technologies [11] have been used in educational applications. Atherton, Javed, Webster and Hemington-Gorse demonstrated the use of the Aurasma platform in an AR application for smartphones and tablets and proposed a mobile device application for surgical education and poster presentations to supplement the information conventionally available through paper-based presentations [12].Smith allowed students to use AR to transform their end of semester poster presentations. Participants were invited to download the Aurasma application to view previously created ‘auras’, which is Aurasma’s term for an AR experience, and to experiment with creating their own auras. The participants were able to learn about new educational technology concepts as well as the process for creating AR experiences [9]. Lakin developed and implemented a course in computer-generated imagery at the University of Rochester’s Memorial Art Gallery. Works in the collection were integrated with student-created animations or videos. Ten individual projects were created [13].Technology can be used to mitigate shrinking school budgets by reducing the need for printed materials. Teachers can cooperate to create AR-based teaching materials and the materials can be shared via the Aurasma cloud.Tangram is an ancient Chinese puzzle game that is often used as an educational tool. The puzzle consists of seven flat shapes that are put together to form composite shapes [14]. Bohning and Althouse pointed out that the seven pieces of a geometric tangram could be arranged in many different ways to create figures of birds, animals, people and objects [15]. Many researchers have recognized that learning through play and teacher guidance from teachers can help children overcome their initial fears and even begin to enjoy learning. For example, a tangram puzzle could be used as an assistive tool to develop children’s observation skills, imagination, shape analysis, creativity and logical thinking [16,17]. Puzzle-based learning enhances learning by developing problem-solving and independent-learning skills [18]. By touching and rearranging real objects, puzzle games can also enhance hand-eye coordination. In particular, for children with disabilities, puzzle-based activities could reduce the learning burden and frustration.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Augmented reality (AR) technology is an assistive bridge system in special education. Although this technology is not new, it is still interesting and has significant potential in special education. AR supports intuitive and interesting learning processes for children with special needs by combining the real and virtual worlds. In this study, we have presented an assistive functional educational AR application with mobile learning devices to develop an activity for children with special needs. In addition, we have used flexible methods to create interactive feedback.The processes use an intuitive method; thus, instructions are easier to explain and demonstrate. Teachers can arrange an entire teaching process and learning activities using the AR system, and the AR system can present instructions in a step-by-step manner for special needs students, particularly those with attention deficit and memory disorders. Via such teaching materials, students can repeat operations independently, thereby reducing dependence on teachers. As a result, relative to group activities, teachers can design multi-level teaching strategies to help children with special needs adapt to independent learning.For teachers, it was indicated that some assistive technologies were well designed; however, they are expensive. In addition, designing teaching materials that employ assistive technologies requires the acquisition of specific computer skills. The learning curve for a teacher without adequate computer skills is steep. This barrier could be removed through the use of Aurasma-based AR.For children with special needs, the process adopts an intuitive method, and such children can use this method to practice instructions repeatedly, which can help resolve the problem of insufficient time for classroom practice.Prior to conducting the experiment, the researcher explained how to complete the games and informed the participants that they could obtain additional instructions via a mobile phone with augmented reality application if they required assistance. This experimental process enhanced security and reduced frustration for children with developmental disabilities. Use of a mobile device could support the real-time information feedback. In addition, it could enhance concentration and motivation and stimulate curiosity. For the participants in the experiments, it represented a fresh approach to learning.Students with low comprehension ability typically require more time to complete tasks. The games were designed with various levels of AR assistance, which improved confidence and increased the possibility of completing the game.Through the AR system, curiosity about digital instructions can enhance opportunities for peer interaction. Special needs students can become more interactive in homogeneous groups and develop greater opportunities to interact with normal students, which could provide great benefit to traditional learning methods. AR techniques can enhance the frequency of operation and allow the learning process to employ game models and increase motivation for special needs students. In addition, special education teachers can cooperate with researchers in specific fields to design appropriate individual educational programs to help children with different needs.