@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Investigation and modeling of visual fatigue caused by S3D content using eye-tracking

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper’s studies factors causing visual discomfort for 3D watching.The study based on eye-tracking explored eye-movements in addition to blinking.Visual fatigue accumulation depends strongly on time and content on S3D content.Features as motion activity and disparity impact visual fatigue accumulation.A model for fatigue prediction based on features and fatigue state is proposed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Visual fatigue,Visual discomfort,S3D imaging,Subjective evaluation,Eye-tracking,Statistical analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
3D has been one of the most important technologies of the last decade having an exponential progression. Nevertheless, several problems such as visual discomfort and visual fatigue have slowed its progression for homes. This factor decreases significantly the overall quality of experience from watching 3D content and reduces the level of satisfaction of a user. This study explores the accumulation of visual fatigue when watching 3D video in close to real-life conditions. In order to obtain more information about visual discomfort, an hour of eye-tracking experiments have been conducted. Investigations have been made by analyzing information provided both by users through questionnaires and visual gaze characteristics recording. Obtained results are compared to data produced when watching 2D. The deep statistical analysis showed that time and video content have an influence on video fatigue accumulation and visual functions. With respect to the obtained results, a model has been proposed based on video characteristics (motion activity, disparity range and changes) and the previous state of visual fatigue.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
3D television is seen as the next step in the telecommunication world. An important research effort has been already dedicated to the process of compression, delivery and display of 3D content. Stereoscopic 3D content delivery is possible more than ever. However, new parameters have appeared as part of the overall quality of experience (QoE) from watching 3D content, such as visual comfort and feeling of depth. Both of them influence significantly the user’s satisfaction, and their mechanisms are not explored enough. Moreover, S3D watching effects on children developing vision is not studied sufficiently. Thus, measuring the impact of 3D watching on human vision is an important issue in 3D perception research.Human visual system (HVS) is able to accomplish the task of processing visual details thanks to its organization, i.e. eyes, nervous path and brain. One of the main functions of the eyes is the analysis of images on the light-sensitive layer, retina. For the most accurate perception, the input information should get on the part of the retina, called fovea, representing central vision. Each eye has its own location in space, so the entering information varies slightly depending on the viewing position. This slightly different information coming to both retinas is transformed into electrical signals and sent to the brain to be processed. The difference between the left and right retinal images is called retinal disparity and used by the brain through a series of binocular simple and complex cells to reconstruct depth [1]. This basic principle is followed by the S3D industry to create artificial stereo vision using different technologies [2].Creating the illusion of the 3rd dimension relies entirely on the fact that we have two eyes separated by the inter-ocular distance. In order to reproduce this natural effect the idea of stereo-imaging is based on showing little different pictures to the left and right eyes, that can be achieved by field sequential or time-parallel techniques. In the field sequential approach, two views are alternated on the display device, and a blocking mechanism in glasses prevents from seeing the opposite view. Images are delivered at a sufficiently high frame-rate (120Hz for example) to avoid flickering. The time-parallel method is based on showing two views simultaneously but images are separated with the help of color or polarized filters [3].The level of viewer’s satisfaction depends on how close to natural viewing is the presentation of the stereo-images. The difference between natural watching of the real world and stereo performance can induce visual discomfort and fatigue [4]. Several factors have been identified as causing visual fatigue during or after watching stereo contents. One of the principal factors inducing visual discomfort during watching 3D content is the excessive binocular disparity. Since human eyes are horizontally separated, each obtains its own view of the surrounding world. Stereopsis gives the perception of depth reconstructed by the differences of retinal images in each eye. The brain extracts depth information by fusing images from left and right eyes. This difference until images can be fused correctly is quite limited by the structure of the retina. It is restricted by the Percival’s area of comfort and equals around 1 degree of disparity [5]. As soon as the difference between left and right images goes beyond this limit, it creates uncomfortable effects [6]. Also, visual discomfort can occur even within this limit induced by temporally changing demand of the accommodation-vergence linkage.In order to obtain a clear binocular vision, the eyes converge and accommodate by a level that depends on the distance to the viewing object. When eyes converge at the object, the accommodation changes the eye’s lens to obtain and maintain the object in the area of interest. Accommodation and vergence processes are cross-coupled in such a way that stimulation of one produces responses by both of them. The mismatch between accommodation and vergence during 3D video watching can appear due to the conflict between accommodative and vergence stimuli. The focus of lens is fixed on the screen, where the displayed image is the sharpest, but the convergent point of eyes is changing in the depth depending on the value of disparity [5]. This dissociation induces even stronger uncomfortable feeling in motion, specially stimuli moving toward the viewers [7]. The temporal effect of this mismatch plays also an important role on the accumulation of visual fatigue and fast changes induce stronger feelings [8,9]. Despite these arguments, some studies give an opposite evidence. For instance Li et al. showed that vergence-accommodation conflict does not strongly affect the visual discomfort, although relative angular disparity between foreground and background might be more significant. They have shown that an increase of planar motion can cause higher visual discomfort. A model of visual discomfort based on the relative disparity and object’s velocity has been proposed. However, the latter is lacking in terms of correlation with subjective rating. This may inform that additional video characteristics have to be taken into account [10,11].It is commonly known that even without the benefit of stereopsis, depth can be perceived by using monocular cues (perspective, interposition, occlusion and texture gradients) while the creation of depth in 3D content is based only on binocular cues. If artificial depth in 3D technology conflicts with these monocular cues, an uncomfortable feeling can appear [5,12]. To produce a stereoscopic 3D content, different views for left and right eyes are required. Depending on the technology of creation, delivery and display of 3D images, views asymmetry can appear. This disagreement can also induce uncomfortable feeling of visual fatigue and discomfort [13].Depending on the evaluation methodology of visual inconvenience, terminology for visual discomfort and fatigue varies. One of the definitions for visual fatigue was proposed by Lambooij et al. and describes visual fatigue as a decrease in the performance of the human visual system as a consequence of physiological strain or stress resulting from excessive exertion[14]. From the same work, they determined visual discomfort as the subjective counterpart of visual fatigue. It is worth noting that visual discomfort is perceived instantaneously, while fatigue is characterized by an accumulation process. Measuring such visual functions as speed of constriction/dilation of pupil diameter and accommodation response, visual acuity, eye movement velocity, critical fusion frequency and blinking was done as the first attempt to evaluate visual fatigue [15]. This section provides more information about trials for measuring and evaluating visual fatigue and discomfort.Visual fatigue is a personal sensation, and the most spread practice for measuring it, is to simply ask participants. Three subjective measurement methods can be distinguished: explorative studies, psychophysical scaling and questionnaires. Explorative studies and psychophysical scaling have not been widely used in the context of measuring effect from 3D video. The former can help to study the added effect of stereoscopic displays and define such overall feeling as visual discomfort, while the latter gives the opportunity to optimize and improve the systems based on perceptual parameters as video quality and discomfort.One of the first questionnaires was proposed by Kennedy for simulator sickness (SS) assessing [16] and has been adopted for visual fatigue purposes [17,18]. To the best of our knowledge, there is no generally accepted questionnaire for measuring viewer’s feeling during or after watching 3D. Most of the studies used questionnaires adapted to their purpose. Hence, Sheedy et al. proposed a questionnaire to measure the level of asthenopia (eye strain), but not strictly tuned for measuring from stereo content watching [19]. The questionnaire of Shibata et al. contains information regarding eye-tiredness, vision clarity, neck and back-pain, eye-strain, and headache; it was used to evaluate visual discomfort from watching 3D [20]. A more detailed questionnaire has been already used by Yang et al. [7]. These authors conducted a long duration (1h30) experiment with commercially available movies, but the questionnaire was filled out only at the beginning and at the end of watching. From another point of view, the previous experience of 3D watching has been considered by Cho et al. as an important factor, that they explored in a 3D cinema theater [21]. However, no investigation has been proposed yet for 3DTV.Accommodation response is explored as an indicator for visual fatigue measurement. The optometric devices have been used in pre- and post-experiments to measure the change in accommodation as a result of viewing stereoscopic content. One of the drawbacks of such measurements is the absence of measuring the accommodation-vergence couple simultaneously with observing the mismatch conflict between them. Following this direction, Yano et al. tried to evaluate visual fatigue and concluded that the accommodation response as a parameter to predict visual fatigue, can be taken into account as a part of a more complicated assessment method [22]. According to their findings, the accommodation response itself is not a precise enough parameter.Another study of Yano et al. evaluated visual discomfort with the help of single stimulus continuous evaluation (SSCE) and accommodation responses [23]. The relationship between results of SSCE and video characteristics were investigated. Motion and correlation between left and right views were used as characteristics of the video. Low scores, informing about stronger visual fatigue feelings, were linked to large parallax and large amount of motion in stereoscopic sequences. They concluded that accommodation response could not be approved being the index for visual fatigue evaluation as it does not clarify the accommodation-vergence mechanism.It is known that human eye can tolerate some level of dissociation without difficulty. The range of relative vergence that an individual can tolerate during a long time without having visual discomfort was named the area of comfort. This range is known also as the Percival’s area of comfort [24]. Fusional hysteresis is determined as a difference between the fusional vergence break point (point where viewer starts to experience double vision watching through prisms with increasing power) and the recovery one (point where viewer is again able to fuse images after a breakpoint). Since it reflects the fusion efforts used for perception of binocular disparity, the change of fusional hysteresis has been evaluated regarding the state of visual fatigue. Emoto et al. tried to assess and compare visual fatigue from watching conventional 2D and stereoscopic 3D video [25]. Fusional amplitude were measured after 1h of watching video and the significant decrease was revealed after watching stereo content, but not after 2D video. They also tried to evaluate visual fatigue by visual functions as viewer break point and recovery point. It was shown that discontinuous changes in parallax were one of the principal factors contributing to visual fatigue accumulation [26]. Although, fusional amplitude was proposed to be used as an index for fatigue evaluation, it can be only one of the parameters, because it does not give full explanation of the different stages of visual fatigue accumulation.Blinking is the essential function of closing and opening eyelid that is responsible for eye moistening and protecting from irritations. There are multiple muscles that control reflexes of blinking and spread all around the eye. Blinking mechanism can be affected by the accumulation of fatigue, eye injury, medication, and disease [27,28]. Hence, such blinking characteristics as frequency and eye closure duration have been used to evaluate the link with visual fatigue [29]. Kim et al. made an attempt to evaluate visual fatigue from watching 3D using this approach. They have shown that eye blinks were more frequent for stronger feeling of visual fatigue [8]. A model has been even proposed in [30] for predicting visual discomfort based on eye blinking rate. Unfortunately, the proposed model is not accurate because of its simplicity and therefore additional parameters could be integrated. From this point of view, additional characteristics of blinking should be explored when dealing with visual fatigue from stereo watching. For instance, there is no doubt about the influence generated on the blinking mechanism by the parameters of video content itself like luminance and glare, or the conditions of subject.Involuntary fixation eye movements prevent the adaptation of our neurons to an unchanging environment. The movement of the retinal images is what keeps stationary objects of interest. This stationary gaze is called eye fixation, and movements between these fixations are saccades. Being that, humans are not aware of these eye movements, they have been studied to understand the basics of visual awareness [31,32]. The activity of fixation is strongly linked to visual attention, and it is considered that points of fixation can form a zone of attention. Like this slowness in visual attention can result in a visual fatigue influence [33]. Consequently, changes in behavior of eye-movements can be used as a parameter.The link between eye-movements and visual fatigue induced by watching stereo content was also examined. To reveal this relationship eye-tracking technology was used to follow the movements of eyes. By using this method, saccades behavior was analyzed by Kim et al., who showed that saccades movement was decreasing with visual fatigue growing. In the study of Vienne et al., visual fatigue was evaluated as the vergence error, and was correlated to the used vergence efforts [34]. Moreover, works on visual attention revealed the difference in eye-movements during watching 2D and 3D content [35,36]. Taking all this into consideration, the contribution of Choi et al. aims at predicting automatically the level of visual discomfort depending on the locus of interest [37]. The model is based on spatial and temporal characteristics of the disparity, but it can be significantly affected by artifacts and distortions. Since eye-movements highly depend on content, its bias should be avoided for visual fatigue estimation.Cognitive and perception information is processed in the brain. The neuronal activity of the latter reflects visual fatigue resulting from watching S3D video. The examination of brain activity can provide a better understanding of the process running during visual activity. In visual fatigue evaluation research, Emoto et al. used electroencephalogram (EEG) to measure the visually evoked cortical potentials by sensory simulation of the visual field. Visually evoked cortical potentials reflect fatigue of the interrelated extra- and intra-ocular muscles, and central nerve of the brain. The positive component at approximately 100ms latency (P100) of the visually evoked cortical potential was used as a fatigue index [26]. This study suggested that the latency of evoked cortical potentials can reflect the state of visual fatigue. Similar experiments were conducted by Li et al. They used EEG at back scalp and event related potentials at the latencies 300 (P300) and 700ms (P700) for evaluation of visual fatigue. Their findings showed that P300 had delay for stressful situations, and P700 delay is influenced by the binocular parallax and presentation time [38]. Like this, delays in transmission of visual information measured with EEG could be a measurement of visual fatigue. The investigation of Kim et al. was dedicated to the relationship between visual fatigue and binocular disparity by means of functional magnetic resonance imaging [39]. They found strong neuronal activities in frontal eye field (FEF) if the disparities of shown stimuli were beyond the comfort zone. Making an assumption that FEF is linked to eye movement control, they concluded that it correlates with visual fatigue induced by watching stereoscopic content.Exploration of the influence of 3DTV watching on mental fatigue was done by Chen et al. [40]. They used physiological detectors in order to record EEG of 10 participants before and after watching 2D and 3D television. Using regression of five studied parameters and subjective evaluation, they proposed a model for 3DTV visual fatigue evaluation. Unfortunately, the influence of such indicators as gravity frequency and power spectral have not been explored.More and more researchers try to assess and measure changes in brain activities, however, this approach continues to be complicated and sensitive to the personal state of subjects. Furthermore, it is difficult to design an experiment with a large number of observers for the sake of generalization.So far, most of the studies aimed at finding a measurement which would accurately indicate the state of the visual system. Numerous measurable visual characteristics are used as indicators of visual fatigue. However, none of them is precise enough. Moreover, measuring at the beginning and at the end of the experiment does not give a full representation of the gradual growth of visual fatigue.Another important drawback of existing studies is linked to the use of artificial stimuli. They are either still images or very short movie clips, less than 2min in duration, that make them lacking in story telling and other main reasons to watch movies in general. Taking all these into consideration, we propose to evaluate visual fatigue with the help of measuring a few characteristics at once such as change of pupil diameter, eye-movement and blinking.In this paper, we propose to explore and confront the visual fatigue for 2D and S3D content with the help of eye-tracking methodology. One of the goals of the proposed work is to investigate whether visual fatigue is generating the same symptoms for 2D and S3D watching. Thereby, we concentrate our work on highlighting the possible impact of visual fatigue on such visual functions as eye-movement, i.e. fixations and saccades, and blinking. This choice can be justified by previous studies and findings suggesting that these characteristics can be affected by visual discomfort and have different behaviors for 2D and S3D content.The second goal of our study is to model the process of visual fatigue accumulation by using the results obtained from our experiment. Regarding the nature of 3D imaging, we consider its characterization through three dimensions, i.e. space, time and depth. In the proposed work, we suggest to investigate the impact of each dimension on visual fatigue accumulation and visual characteristics. In order to perform this examination, each dimension is characterized by its own parameters. Thereby, this work covers not only perceptual human features but also particularities of stereo 3D video.This paper is an extension of our initial investigation on this topic described in [41]. Besides its wider scope, it contains an almost exhaustive review of the literature of visual fatigue caused by S3D content. Moreover, It describes our further work on visual fatigue generated by 2D content in addition to a deep statistical comparison and analysis of the difference with S3D. Also, an objective model, relying on three different features that are essential for binocular vision, is proposed and deeply analyzed.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 is dedicated to the experimental setup and the design of the experiment (stimuli and procedure). The obtained results, the statistical analysis and associated discussions are given in Section 3. The exploration of visual fatigue and visual characteristics regarding S3D video features in Section 4. Finally, this paper ends with some concluding remarks and gives ideas about future works.Two separate experiments were conducted to evaluate and compare visual fatigue induced by watching 2D and S3D video. They took place with a sufficient time gap to avoid some uncomfortable effect. The same content was used for video evaluation in both experiments. In order to use the same video with the same characteristics only the mode (i.e. 2D and S3D) of the screen was changed. A video of different content with overall duration of 1h was displayed to several participants to evaluate their visual fatigue. The video represents a diversity of content including documentary, cartoon, action and adventure. The selected 10-min sequences have motion of different types and avoid as much as possible direct speech of actors. The presentation order of the test sequences has been randomized for each participant in each experiment to avoid position bias. Subjective evaluation was performed as a succession of questionnaire about visual fatigue and associated symptoms after every 10-min sequence. During the session, eyes characteristics are measured using an eye-tracker.Six commercially available movies with HD resolution (1920×1080) have been selected (“The Chronicles of Narnia: The Voyage of the Dawn Treader” – adventure movie, “Garfield’s Pet Force” – animation, “Clash of the Titans 3D” – action movie, “The Universe: 7 Wonders of The Solar System 3D” – documentary, “Avatar” – action, “Underwater World” – documentary) in order to evaluate visual fatigue as close as possible to conditions in real-life. A sequence of 10min was selected from each video, trying to preserve logical start and end of scenes. Conversational scenes have been avoided when possible. The same video sequences have been used both in 2D and S3D modes, and only screen mode was changed. 2D mode corresponds to showing only one view to the observer, and S3D is using a passive polarization.In the proposed experiments, we tried to reproduce conditions close to watching movies at home or in cinema theater. The same apparatus was used for experiments in 2D and S3D, except during 2D watching participants did not wear polarized glasses. The room, where experiments have been conducted, has a diffuse lighting and was noise-isolated. The averaged illumination of the room was equal to 65lx. The used monitor was a calibrated Hyundai TriDef S465D with 60Hz progressive scanning. This display has the possibility to work in 2D and S3D modes. To follow participant’s eye-movements during watching, an eye-tracker Tobii TX-120 with capability to work with 3D glasses and large freedom of head movement has been chosen. The latter allowed tracking both eyes simultaneously which offers a better robustness to head motion tracking. Therefore, tracking continues even if one eye is hidden from the field of view of the eye-tracker. Data has been collected every ∼8ms (120Hz).The distance between eye-tracker and display was 64cm, which was calculated according to the requirements of the eye-tracker’s manufacturer. The eyes of participants were located no more than 70cm from the eye-tracker, in such a way that the distance between them and monitor was of 2H, H being the height of the displayed images as described on Fig. 1. In order to achieve the same viewing conditions for all participants, an adjustable chair has been used to fit their individual characteristics.Twenty healthy subjects (18 male, 2 female) were recruited from the University of Poitiers. Before starting the experiment, they have been asked about previous eye-diseases and experienced injuries. The age of viewers ranged between 22 and 30. They have a stereo acuity better than 40s. of arc, that was checked using a RANDOT® stereo-acuity test before the experiment [42]. All subjects passed Ishihara compatible color vision test for detecting color blindness [43]. Visual acuity was checked by FrACT (Freiburg Visual Acuity Test) [44] and overall visual acuity was around 1 with or without correction.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This work presents the results obtained using eye-tracking experiment and analyzing interaction between video and human perception. In this study, we examined and analyzed visual fatigue generated by watching 2D and S3D video in as close as possible to real life conditions. Two independent eye-tracking experiments have been conducted with naive participants. The eye-movements and blinking have shown different behavior for S3D and 2D watching. Investigation on visual fatigue and its symptoms showed that the visual characteristics are different for both cases. The statistical analysis revealed that accumulation of visual fatigue depends on time and content for S3D and only the content for 2D. Thereby, the nature of S3D video plays a significant role on fatigue accumulation.The analysis of visual characteristics showed that eye-movements strongly dependent on content, but also vary depending on time for S3D video. Blinking also was impacted by the video content, and its duration was influenced by time. From another side, no effect of time was revealed for 2D watching. Comparison of eye characteristics and visual fatigue showed a significant difference in behavior during watching 2D and S3D video.Following the previous results, we proposed a model for predicting visual fatigue relying on three video features having shown an effect on visual fatigue accumulation: (1) Motion activity descriptor MPEG-7 has been used as an index to evaluate the speed of content changes, (2) semantic load is used to examine the video complexity and (3) depth range and changes are used to assess the quality of depth.The developed model opens the floor to further investigations such as the link between visual fatigue and quality of experience by exploiting the different video characteristics used in this study.