@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A study of the relationship between color-concept association and occupational background for Chinese

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The associations between ten colors and sixteen concepts were tested for four groups of Chinese with different occupations.Nine out of sixteen most-frequent color associations are the same for these groups.People with similar occupations yield similar color-concept associations.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Color-concept association,Occupational background,Color display,Chinese,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundThe use of colors in visual displays can facilitate visual search and perception, but their use may not be effective without consideration of differences in the interpretation of their connoted meanings between individuals of different occupational backgrounds.ObjectiveThis study examined color-concept associations for Hong Kong Chinese students and white-collar workers, and then compared their associations with those of two other occupational groups to assess whether occupational background is related to color-concept associations.MethodA questionnaire survey was used to examine color-concept associations among 100 university students and 100 white-collar workers in Hong Kong. The participants were presented with 16 safety-related concepts and were asked to choose one of 10 colors that best represented each concept. The associations reported by four groups with different occupations (the two groups in this study and the groups of managerial staff and steel workers examined in our previous study) were compared. A chi-square test was applied to determine whether significant color association(s) existed for each concept.ResultsOur results revealed that each concept was significantly associated with at least one color (p<0.01). The Hong Kong white-collar workers and managerial staff in mainland China both expressed the same color associations for 14 of the tested concepts, and differed only over which colors were associated with “strong,” and “radiation hazard.” These findings generally suggest that populations with similar occupations can have similar color perceptions. However, the students and the other three employee groups reported different color associations with the concepts “normal,” “off” and “potential hazard.”ConclusionsOccupational background is associated with how color is interpreted for its connoted meaning. One should consider occupational background carefully when choosing colors in product designs, especially for safety.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The effective use of colors in visual displays can facilitate visual search and perception [1–4]. However, the potential benefits of using colors cannot be realized if we fail to consider how people with different occupation backgrounds interpret the connoted meanings of colors. Previous research has shown that occupation background has a significant effect on color perceptions. For example, steel workers [5] and industrial workers [6] associated yellow with the concept of “caution,” but managerial staff working in office environments [5] interpreted red as denoting “caution.” Misunderstanding the connoted meanings of colors can be dangerous for employees, especially when they misinterpret the colors used in safety–critical visual displays and systems such as warning labels or the interfaces of industrial equipment. Nevertheless, little research and knowledge of color perception by various types of employees is available in the literature.Previous studies have shown that some color-concept associations are common among university students [7–9], but these findings cannot be applied to specific occupations. Although Courtney [10] examined individuals with various occupations concerning their color-concept associations, he did not indicate the differences in associations made by different occupational groups. Borade et al. [6] focused on color application in the manufacturing industry by enrolling a group of Indian industrial workers to test their perceptions of hazards in terms of associations between nine safety words and seven colors; however, their study examined only male workers. Or and Wang [5] examined the associations between 10 colors and 16 concepts among 139 steel workers and 74 managerial staff from a northern region of China. Their results provided some basic knowledge of the color associations for populations working in the manufacturing industry and in offices. Ergonomists and product engineers can design color displays more efficiently for people of similar or different occupations if we understand the cross-occupational patterns for color-concept associations, but no study to date has shown what the patterns are.We thus set out to examine whether populations having similar occupations have similar color-concept associations and whether the associations for students are similar to those for employees. Thus, the objectives of our study were (1) to examine color-concept associations for students and white-collar workers in Hong Kong and (2) to compare the associations among four occupational groups–the two groups surveyed in this study and the managerial staff and steel worker groups examined in our previous study [5].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Our study demonstrated that the primary colors red and green yielded the largest number of color-concept associations. More studies are needed to identify the correct level of shared association that determines the existence of a population stereotype for the meaning of a color, as none of the Chinese groups we surveyed showed agreement levels of 85% or more concerning any color-concept association. Despite having different occupations, the Hong Kong students, Hong Kong white-collar workers, mainland Chinese managerial staff and mainland Chinese steel workers agreed on nine common color-concept associations, which could be used in future designs of color displays and products for Chinese. Evidence was also found that populations with similar occupations could have similar color associations across different geographical locations. However, caution should be taken before applying the color data collected from students to employees, as differences in color perception between students and employees were revealed. In addition, using color-coding on its own could be problematic for users with deficiencies in perceiving color. Thus, it is recommended applying color-coding together with other redundant methods involving icons, locations, sizes, shapes or sounds to create the maximum effect possible.