@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Effects of discomfort glare on performance in attending peripheral visual information in displays

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Glare experiments are achievable for evaluating visual attention in display media.Discomfort glare results in reduced visual performance in all ages.Discomfort glare reduces performance in detecting peripheral information.Discomfort glare, as a distracter, shares the resource for processing information.To consider discomfort glare as a serious issue in a complex visual environment.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Large displays,Peripheral visual field,Peripheral vision,Discomfort glare,Visual attention,Complex visual information,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Large screens have become more popular in recent years. Because of the increasing size of displays, the amount of information presented in the peripheral visual field has gained importance in many tasks on visual display units. Users of displays are often exposed to some change or difference in luminance in or between different areas of a display, which in turn may produce a phenomenon known as discomfort glare. Discomfort glare is likely to affect cognitive performance. The performance in the visual periphery is more susceptible to disturbances as is the case for the performance in the central visual field.This study explored the effects of discomfort glare on detecting and processing peripheral visual information in a complex visual task. The task consisted of comparing the orientation of arrows presented in the central visual field and at 18° in the periphery. The arrows were superimposed on a background video and presented by a projection system in virtual reality. 50% of the presentations were preceded by a mild glare scene with a luminance of 25cd/m2 flashed prior to the stimulus. Experimental results of 56 participants were analyzed using the theory of signal detection. A significant difference (two-tailed t-test p=0.01) in detectability of stimuli (d′glare=1.87; d′no glare=2.11; Δd′=0.24) was obtained when comparing the performance in the two situations of glare. Results show that discomfort glare impairs peripheral visual performance in attending stimuli in a virtual reality environment. We therefore propose to consider discomfort glare as a factor affecting performance in detecting peripheral visual information. Discomfort glare should be included as a quality criterion in rating visual information, as is done in present standards of displays and lighting.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In our everyday life, many times we cannot overcome the difficulties caused by a sudden glare situation when performing visual tasks. Glare has been considered as an important factor affecting one’s visual performance. In the following introduction section, we discuss the various forms of glare, i.e. disability glare, adaptation glare, and discomfort glare. For example, discomfort glare has been shown as the cause for some dropped performance. Such a fact then brings out the research question: what are the underlying causes/factors behind discomfort glare and how is the attention mechanism being affected? We further list some examples containing potential issues of discomfort glare exposure which might be seen in everyday display-media applications. In particular, we focus on the peripheral visual performance that has resulted from the popularity of large displays.The more well-known “disability glare” [1] has been discussed and investigated frequently in many popular studies, such as examinations of safety-related research in car-driving [2–6] and the light-adaptation mechanism in physiology-concerning discipline [7,8]. Disability glare disables the visual system to some extent and causes reduced visibility and contrast sensitivity. This disabling may be caused by light scattered in the eye physiologically. A common example occurs when one drives at night and an oncoming vehicle with very bright headlights is approaching. Another more well-known form of glare is “adaptation glare” [1], which occurs when the visual system is exposed to a sudden change in luminance. Because the visual system requires some time to adjust its sensitivity to altered level of light, adaptation glare causes a temporary impaired vision.It is known that disability and adaptation glare could be severe risk factors in visual tasks. However, it is less commonly known that “discomfort glare” [1] might irritate one’s vision, in addition to disability and adaptation glare [9]. Discomfort glare, a subjective sensation of discomfort, may occur when people do not necessarily notice any effect on their work performance [10], but people might complain about certain symptoms, such as eye discomfort and headache, which reduces the efficiency and quality of the work. By means of an intervention study in Swedish mail-sorting facilities, Hemphälä and Eklund [11] were able to show a significant reduction of eye discomfort after lighting conditions were improved and sources of discomfort glare were reduced. Based on the outcome of their study [11], the authors estimated that a total of 62,000h of sorting time per year could be saved by applying the improvements of their intervention study in all Swedish mail-sorting facilities. In an office work environment, in particular with the usage of computer displays, the daylight through the windows and the lighting system indoors often cause the phenomenon of discomfort glare and have been considered a common problem [10,12] in everyday life. For example, one may perceive lower luminance on the computer display where the main task is usually located, compared with the higher illuminated surrounding of the computer display [13]. Studies have been made to investigate the preference and postural symptoms of an office worker under different illuminating conditions for improving later lighting and office designs [10,12–14]. Furthermore, suggestions have been made to evaluate a sufficient objective and quantifiable rating index/method linked to the subjective phenomena for better understanding and predicting potential discomfort glare problems which is still a challenge to be achieved [5,10].Discomfort glare causes visual distraction; on the other hand, distraction has been suggested as a cause for discomfort glare [15]. Our cognitive mechanisms decide how to proceed with our visual attention when exposed to discomfort glare, which acts as a distracter. As a result, while causing visual discomfort, discomfort glare is distracting our visual system and sharing the perception resources, which affects our visual attention in the cognitive level.Many times we are not well-prepared for the possible effects on our visual attention caused by a discomfort glare situation, which is happening even more frequently in our routine work environments. For example, when we work on our computers, a newly opened web-browser window might distract our visual attention for a short while. In the modern aviation environment, digitalized displays have been introduced and further provided the possibilities for acquiring various information. While switching between different information subcategories, the pilot might be disturbed by the changing frame on the screen. With certain visual disturbance in the aviation task, the pilot might change the overall control ability to detect some detailed information. A control-room administrator might have some difficulties in making decisions when encountering the reflection of a bright object on the screens. Moreover, in our leisure time entertainment, discomfort glare situations happen regularly as well. For example, we can easily find a bright scene from a video game such as applying a magic spell in an R.P.G. game, or a shining sky scene from a movie. This kind of discomfort glare usually stands at a low level luminance compared to light levels causing disability and adaptation glare, and this happens to us with various display media almost every day. As a result, it is important to know how a situation causing discomfort glare would distract our visual attention from the required visual information.Wickens et al. [16,17] have developed an attention model, which may help to understand effects of discomfort glare on visual performance. In Wickens’s SEEV attention model, there are four elements which may alter the probability of attending visual information. The first element is the “Salience” of visual targets. Salience is stimulus-driven, and a bottom-up attention mechanism. Stronger physical properties of the target, e.g. higher contrast, larger size, etc. would increase the probability in attending the target. “Effort” is the second element that inhibits the movement of attention in certain conditions, such as scanning across longer distances between targets. “Expectancy,” the third element, is linked to the likelihood of seeing an event, which is concept-driven and a top-down attention mechanism. Being a cognitive factor, observers may shift their attention to the location/moment when the expectancy is high. The last element, “Value,” is also a top-down attention mechanism, which refers to the importance of a task. Observers may optimally allocate their attention based on the “Expectancy” and “Value” of an event.The basic idea in Wickens’s model is the limitation of resources which are available for information processing. Discomfort glare may bind resources, thereby reducing the amount of available resources for processing visual information. As a consequence, performance in processing relevant information may be reduced in the presence of discomfort glare. Binding of resources caused by discomfort glare may happen for various reasons. One possible cause is the overlaying effect which degrades the stimulus information. A mild glare scene may introduce the veiling effect, which influences the contrast of visual targets. In such a case, the glare disturbance might degrade the steady state visibility of visual information and make the target less salient to be detected. Another possible cause is the (temporal) covering effect which masks the stimulus information. Glare may temporarily mask the visual information and require a reprocessing period of the information after it becomes unmasked. Thus, the observer might require more effort in reconstructing the visual environment for the upcoming event. As in Wickens’s SEEV model [16,17], required effort contributes negatively to the probability for attending a target. A large variety of factors contributing to masking have been investigated in the past [18,19]. As the masked visual information was usually of limited complexity, such as words [20] or simple objects, it is hard to use previous findings in order to predict effects of masking when using a complex display, which is usually presented in a simulator or in our daily lives.The display in everyday life includes both relevant information and some information that is not used in a specific task and therefore is considered to be irrelevant. Irrelevant information acts as a distractor when performing a visual task. The process of neglecting irrelevant information while attending the relevant information may use resources as well, and consequently a complex display including irrelevant information lowers performance in attending the relevant information. As a result, it is important to investigate effects of discomfort glare while observing a complex display.Nowadays, large-sized and wide-angle computer displays, LED/LCD-TV, and projection systems are accessible at work and at home. With the increasing usage of various displays which present visual information in a wide visual field in modern times, it may be necessary to rely on our peripheral vision much more than in the past. As a result, how visual tasks are performed when visual targets located in both central and peripheral visual fields has become an important issue. Normally, the tendency or habit is to focus on the visual information shown in the central visual field, especially when there is a heavy load in visual tasks. Thus, it might take more efforts from the attention mechanism to detect peripheral information under a complex visual task.Moreover, the age factor might play a role in performing visual tasks affected by discomfort glare. With increasing veiling luminance in the elderly, it might be expected that there will be stronger effects in visual performance caused by discomfort glare for the elderly than the younger population.In the present study, the effects of discomfort glare on visual performance in a complex and temporarily varying visual environment were investigated. In particular, since the peripheral visual field is of increasing interest for presenting information, the effects of discomfort glare when both the central and the peripheral vision are involved in a visual task were investigated. Effects were investigated using a projection display in a driving simulator task with participants of different ages. The working hypothesis is that if more binding attention resources are caused by the discomfort glare scenes, participants should be less focused on the detection task and less performed. In the experimental design, the “Salience” and “Value” elements in the SEEV attention model should remain the same since the task itself is not changed by the discomfort glare scene. Besides, it is assumed that the “Expectancy” should be increased since the glare scene might act as a hint of an upcoming detection task. On the other hand, the “Effort” should be increased by the glare masking disturbance and thus reduce the attention performance.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In a projection environment, participants performed attention tasks that contained complex visual information and that required them to detect visual targets that relied on both the central vision and the peripheral vision. Results showed reduced visual performance in all ages when transient discomfort glare was presented. Discomfort glare reduces performance in detecting or processing peripheral information and therefore should be avoided.When exposed to a sudden discomfort glare situation that acts as a distracter, one’s limited resource for processing visual information is shared. As a result, it is quite likely one may miss some important visual information in such a case. This might result in crucial issues when one is performing visual inspections of switching information for safety and quality control at airports or power plants, or for examination in hospitals or factories, etc. Also, with the development of electronic paper technologies, there are more and more e-paper devices introduced in daily life. Users of such e-Ink displays might be disturbed by the refreshing moment, i.e. displayed information being switched. Where to present and how to arrange various visual information on a display is therefore an important issue. For example, it is necessary to avoid any distracting factor while performing a critical visual task, and the most important information should be displayed in the central visual field.Finally, the experimental outcome demonstrates that display systems, as used in virtual reality settings, offer the possibility to conduct experiments about effects of glare on human performance even though the luminance level of such display systems is far lower than the luminance level of real glare source.