@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A novel hybrid 3D video service algorithm based on scalable video coding (SVC) technology

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Field: An efficient scheme for hybrid 3D video service technology.Core Algorithm: An adaptive search range control mechanism for inter-layer prediction.Implementation: JSVM 9.19 reference software with standard sequences.Performance: Up-to 1.41dB of quality improvement with some bit saving.Applications: Hybrid broadcasting systems for next generation TV technology.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Scalable video coding,Multiple channels,Local disparity vector,Interlayer prediction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A scalable video coding (SVC) server can simultaneously provide a single bitstream with a fixed maximum service layer for different kinds of devices having different memory capacity, network bandwidth, and CPU performance requirements. An efficient hybrid 3D video service scheme is proposed without violation of the SVC standard technology for multiple transmission paths. A dynamic local disparity vector estimation algorithm is used to reflect the motion shift component between stereo views in the inter-layer prediction stage of the SVC encoder. To improve the coding efficiency, an adaptive search scheme based on distortion rates (DRs) between corresponding and reference macroblocks is used. Based on experimental results, up to 1.41dB of quality improvement using JSVM 9.19 reference software is verified.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The technology of commercial TV systems has advanced dramatically over the past decades. The functionality of a TV has been extended with fast advancements in IT convergence technologies and a number of smart features have been added to the latest smart and networked TVs. Due to market and consumer demands, video quality has also been significantly improved with an increase in the pixel density from standard definition to ultra high definition (UHD). Thus, a next generation TV system demands integration of technologies from the display panel, circuits/systems, to image and signal processing algorithms. As extensive increase in the amount of multimedia data, data splitting and transmission techniques have become important for real-time multimedia services.Networking environments, such as the internet, can differ according to a wide variety of requirements for available bandwidth and computing power. The communication channels that comprise modern network infrastructures span a broad bandwidth range. Compressed code-streams created for one particular class of resource may not be satisfactory, efficient, or even useful for servicing users with different resource capacities.To handle this heterogeneity issue, a highly efficient scalable video coding technique with multiple layers is required to provide stable multimedia services to multiple end-user systems. The Joint Video Team (JVT) has finalized scalable video coding (SVC) as an international standard [1].SVC has been developed as an extension of H.264/Advanced Video Coding (H.264/AVC) [2]. The objective of SVC standardization was to enable encoding of a high-quality video bitstream containing one or more subset bitstreams that can themselves be decoded with a complexity and reconstruction quality similar to the quality achieved using the existing H.264/AVC design. The same data quantity should exist in the original larger high-quality video bitstream and the subset bitstream, which is derived by dropping packets from the larger bitstream [3].A subset bitstream can represent a lower spatial resolution (smaller screen), a lower temporal resolution (lower frame rate), or a lower quality video signal (separately or in combination), compared to the bitstream from which it is derived. The following modalities are possible [3]:•Temporal (frame rate) scalability: Motion compensation dependencies are structured so that complete pictures (i.e. their associated packets) can be dropped from the bitstream. (Temporal scalability is already enabled in H.264/AVC. SVC only provides supplemental enhancement information to improve usage.)Spatial (picture size) scalability: Video is encoded at multiple spatial resolutions. Data and decoded samples of lower resolutions can be used to predict data or samples of higher resolutions in order to reduce the bit rate required to encode higher resolutions.SNR/Quality/Fidelity scalability: Video is encoded at a single spatial resolution but at different qualities. Data and decoded samples of lower qualities can be used to predict data or samples of higher qualities in order to reduce the bit rate required to encode higher qualities.Combined scalability: A combination of the 3 scalability modalities described above.In the SVC standard shown in Fig. 1, a coded bitstream is composed of a base layer and several enhancement layers [1,3]. The base layer conventionally contains a reduced resolution or a reduced quality version of each coded frame for mobile devices, such as portable phones, PDAs, and smart phones having low computational power. But this base layer can provide high quality video for applications. The upper enhancement layers are used to provide a higher quality service for PSNR, the frame-rate, and image resolution. For generation of the desired frame-rate, temporal decomposition of the structure of hierarchical B pictures has been widely used because of simplicity and effectiveness.Also, 3D video service is becoming popular in order to view content more naturally [4,5]. With rapid advancements in display technology, 3D television has won significant attention due to a potential to capture a large share of the consumer electronics market in the near future. While 2D digital television is well established, 3D television is not yet established in the consumer electronics market. Research on stereoscopic video has received attention over the past decade in order to provide viewers with more realistic viewing than traditional 2D video.Much researches had reported adaptive streaming schemes using SVC technology. An adaptive content delivery system has been devised to maintain smooth content delivery at an acceptable quality of service (QoS) level for received video [6] using the characteristics of scalable video coding (SVC) and P2P networks. A novel spatial-layer rate-control algorithm has been proposed for scalable video coding (SVC). First, by analysis of relationships among the best initial quantization parameter (QP), channel bandwidth, and the initial frames complexity measure, an adaptive QP-initialization model was introduced to determine the starting QP value for the base layer and also for the spatial enhancement layers of SVC [7]. A theoretical analysis of distortion in multi-layer coding structures has been performed [8] with specific attention to the prediction structure used to achieve temporal, spatial, and quality scalability of scalable video coding (SVC). The average peak-signal-to-noise (PSNR) of SVC could be a weighted combination of the bit rates assigned to all streams [8].A theoretical analysis of distortion in multi-layer coding structures has been suggested [8]. A short overview of techniques and a detailed analysis of the encoder/decoder drift problem was performed. This problem is the major reason why scalable coding has been less efficient than single-layer coding in most implementations [9]. A novel RC approach that aimed to deliver several HRD-compliant temporal resolutions within a particular dependency layer was proposed. Instead of using the common SVC encoder configuration consisting of a dependency layer per each temporal resolution, a compact configuration that did not require additional dependency layers to provide different HRD-compliant temporal resolutions has been proposed [10].A framework for a private recommender service based on the Enhanced Middleware of Collaborative Privacy (EMCP) [11] and an overview of SVC and the relationship to mobile delivery methods along with innovative use cases were introduced that applied SVC technology in mobile networks [12]. A low-overhead content-adaptive spatial scalability SVC (CASS-SVC) coder was proposed consisting of three main modules of a mosaic-guided video re-targeter, a side-information coder, and a non-homogeneous inter-layer predictive coder [13].A method to solve the problem of adaptive multi-path SVC streaming under bandwidth, delay and differential delay constraints has been proposed [14] based on Max Flow and an Auxiliary Graph. Several extensions were made based on this approach to address different situations, such as provisioning from multiple sources and provisioning in dynamic network environments with rapid background traffic fluctuations. A network-adaptive SVC streaming system was designed and implemented to extract partial SVC bitstreams to meet required target bitrates and spatial resolutions [15].A video streaming distribution algorithm based on Variance Coefficient Weighting (VCM) and Modified Grey Relational Analysis (MGRA) for SVC streams has been reported [16]. The method considered different channel parameters comprehensively, and presented a dynamic network option. Few reports exist for hybrid video service with multiple channels and most surveyed works focused on control of decoded layers based on bandwidth changes. A simple scheme to improve the coding gain when hybrid 3D video service is provided has been previously proposed [17], but the proposed method was composed of two stages including a refinement process.Most of the introduced methods have focused on how to control the quality of bitstream as layer or channel condition for only scalable 2-dimensional video service. However, 3-dimensional video devices are very popular and various platforms from UHD TV to portable phone (smart phone), nowdays. With this situation, a scheme for providing 2-dimensional and 3-dimensional video service simultaneously is needed based on multiple channel connections.In this study, a more efficient algorithm is proposed to provide layered 3D video content generation and transmission under available channel connections based on quality enhancements of the SVC encoding server. Adaptive disparity vector estimation is designed to improve the coding efficiency using inter-layer prediction.The outline of the paper is as follows: In Section 2, an SVC encoding scheme for a hybrid 3D video broadcasting service is introduced. A definition of disparity, a method to estimate the local disparity vector, and the structure of the propose algorithm are presented in Section 3. Simulation results and analysis are presented in Section 4, and concluding remarks with discussion are presented in Section 5.A variable block size for intra and inter mode prediction maximizes the coding efficiency based on rate-distortion optimization (RDO) in an extension of H.264/AVC [2]. The block sizes are MODE SKIP, 16×16, 16×8, 8×16, 8×8, 8×4, 4×8, and 4×4 for inter-frame coding. Intra mode prediction (nine modes for a 4×4 luma block and 8×8 luma block, and four modes for 16×16 luma, and I PCM blocks) follows inter mode prediction to determine the best residual image [2].Motion-compensated prediction and intra-prediction are used for spatial scalability in single-layer coding in each spatial layer (Fig. 1). However, in order to improve the coding efficiency for simulcasting of different spatial resolutions, additional inter-layer prediction mechanisms are incorporated [1]. The main goal when designing inter-layer prediction tools is to enable usage of as much lower layer information as possible to improve the rate-distortion efficiency of the enhancement layers [1]. The three additional inter layer prediction concepts [1] that have been added in SVC are; (1) prediction of macroblock modes and associated motion parameters, (2) prediction of the residual signal, and (3) prediction of the intra texture.A concept for a hybrid 3D video service based on multiple channel connections is shown in Fig. 2. With an SVC encoding service, a user with 2D display devices can use the 2D bitstream by decoding the base layer, or up to enhancement layer 1. However, if a user has a high quality device and a 3D display device, such as 3D Smart TV, then 3D video consumption is possible by decoding up to enhancement layer 2. Multiple transmission paths can exist to reach end-users (Fig. 2). If video data can be split and transmitted properly, video service will be more efficient based on bandwidth use.The SVC encoding scheme is suitable to achieve this kind of hybrid 3D video service. However, it would not be efficient for the coding gain to simply apply the current SVC structure directly. If use can be made of the information that exists in correlations between two stereo views, the coding gain of the structure can be improved. A disparity vector in a stereoscopic viewing system and an effective scheme for reflecting this vector in the encoding system are first introduced.The human visual system extracts a variety of depth (range) information from the image projected on the retina. Depth information is calculated through the regulation and convergence to take action in order to meet the target to focus on the retina. The human brain integrates these information and binocular parallax information is utilized as the three-dimensional space information.In a stereoscopic viewing system, there is a horizontal shift vector for the same scene (Fig. 3). Vertical alignment of two camera sensors is assumed to be perfect. This occurs when two eyes capture the same scene simultaneously. This shift measure is defined as the disparity vector between left and right images in stereoscopic viewing system. If pixel positions of the same object arexlandxrfor the projected images, then the disparity vector can be defined as:(1)d=(xl-xr).The disparity component causes a large bit number in 3D video compression of the current SVC standard. Examples of the actual disparity between left and right images are shown in Fig. 4. SVC technology uses an inter-layer prediction mechanism. In this process, the encoder uses information from the lower layer image and texture. Stereo views in the base layer and the enhancement layer are originally shifted by the given disparity of two camera sensors. This causes a considerable coding degradation in the inter-layer prediction process.To improve this situation, a local disparity vector estimation method s proposed. For each macroblock (MB), the local disparity vector is generally computed as:(2)D(dx,dy)=argmin∑m∑n|Mbr(m,n)-Mbl(m+s,n)|,s∈[dmin,dmax]whereD(dx,dy)is the computed local disparity vector for each axis,(m,n)is the macroblock point, s is the shift point of the macroblock unit,Mbrdenotes the corresponding macroblock of the right image, andMbldenotes the corresponding macroblock of the left image, respectively.s(∈[dmin,dmax])is a search range of the disparity vector. The disparity vectorD(dx,dy)of each macroblock is examined to find the location that has the minimum distortion cost from Eq. (2) of all search areas in the first frame of the group of picture (GOP).Using the defined matching cost, the disparity vector of each macroblock can be computed. The computed disparity vector is used for residual data prediction in inter-layer prediction of the SVC encoding structure. Examples of residual data based on assigned disparity vectors are shown in Fig. 5. In Fig. 5(a) and (c), a large amount of residual data (dark-white regions) is observed when the disparity vector is 0 in Fig. 5(a) and (c). A small residual data amount is observed in Fig. 5(b) and (d). Thus, if we can find a proper disparity vector to reduce the amount of residual data, the coding gain can be improved.In this study, the initial global disparity vector is computed for each macroblock at the first frame of the GOP. The initial vector is subsequently adaptively updated to achieve more coding gain in B-pictures (inter frames). The global disparity vector is searched for each macroblock in the first frame (Fig. 6). For all macroblocks, the search process is performed with the defined full search range to find all vectors to be used as initial vectors of the co-located macroblocks in successive frames. The full search range was set as 50 horizontally.To use the structure of the header, the time-point as an instance of changing the disparity vectors is considered by inserting the IDR picture of each GOP unit. An example is shown in Fig. 6 for changing disparity vectors based on the connection status of multiple networks.After finding the global disparity vector in the first frame of the current GOP, an update procedure is used to improve the prediction performance in the inter-layer prediction process. If the current frame is not the first frame or the IDR frame in the GOP, the disparity vectors of all macroblocks are not computed. Then, the mode is checked whether it is not intra mode, SNR mode, and inter layer prediction. If the given condition is not satisfied, the macroblock information of the base layer is used.To design an adaptive search method, two SAD values are defined, firstly as shown in Fig. 7:(3)DAinit=∑m∑nMBiR(m,n)-MBiL(m,n),whereMBiLandMBiRare the corresponding macroblocks of left and right images, respectively, andDAinitis the difference value between two macroblocks.DArecan be computed in the same way asDAinitof the corresponding blocks of the current MB in the reference frame. Other parameters are defined in Fig. 8.(4)DBinit=∑m∑nMBiR(m,n)-MBiL(m+dx,n),whereDBinitis the difference value between two macroblocks after moving the macroblock by shifting the disparity vector dx. In this equation, only the horizontal component (x-axis) is considered. Therefore, only dx has been included in Eq. (4). Also,DBreis computed in the same way asDBinitusing the reference frames.Based on the defined two measures, the distortion rate of the current macroblock at the initial frame is computed as:(5)DRinit=DBinitDAinit(0⩽DRinit⩽1)Also, another distortion rate of the current macroblock in the B-picture (inter frame) is defined, similar to Eq. (5), as:(6)DRre=DBreDAre(0⩽DRre⩽1).Usually, the motion of the object changes locally as the frame goes by. To cope with this local motion and characteristics in the B-picture, an adaptive search range is used for each macroblock to improve the coding efficiency as:(7)SRd=α×(DRre-DRinit)whereαis a parameter that has been tuned experimentally for makingSRdan integer value.Based on the designed adaptive search range (SRd), an additional search is performed to find a more suitable disparity vector if the value of DRre is greater than the DRinit value. Otherwise, the global disparity vectorD(dx,dy)is used to predict the residual image in the inter-layer prediction of the SVC encoder. When the value of DRre is greater than DRinit, the distortion value of the current macroblock using the global disparity vector (GDV) is usually large. In this case, an additional search is performed to find a more suitable disparity vector. Otherwise, the global disparity vector is used for residual data prediction because the distortion value of the current macroblock using the global disparity vector (GDV) is good enough.The proposed adaptive search range mechanism employs distortion rates as we can see in Eqs. (5)–(7). There are some adaptive search range control methods to speed-up the block motion estimation procedure [18,19]. However, they used motion vector of neighboring blocks or layers to set smaller search range unlike the proposed adaptive search range method.The standard sequences Kendo, Lovebird, Newspaper, and GT_FLY were used to verify performance. The reference frame was 1 and the GOP size was 16. The number of layers was 3 (Base layer: VGA (512×384), 2 enhancement layers: right view XGA (1024×768) and left view XGA (1024×768)). QP values were 20, 26, 32, and 38 for the base layer, 20, 26, 32, and 38 for enhancement layer 1, and 2, 14, 20, 26, 32 for enhancement layer 2.JSVM 9.19 reference software of the JVT (joint video team) was used as a reference code for evaluation of the encoding performance. JSVM software was used with Visual C++ 6.0 with “Win32 Release” mode. All algorithms for comparison were run on an HW platform of a Pentium-5 PC with a 3.3GHz quad-core CPU and 4 GByte of RAM.Performance was evaluated and compared based on the peak signal to noise ratio (PSNR) and bit numbers, and 3 measures were defined for evaluation of the encoding performance, including average ΔPSNR, average ΔBitrate, and an encoding-time saving factor, ΔT. The average ΔPSNR was the difference in (dB) between the average PSNR of the proposed method and the corresponding value of another method. The average PSNR was defined as:(8)PSNR‾=4·PSNRY+PSNRCb+PSNRCr4,wherePSNRY,PSNRCb, andPSNRCrare peak-to-noise ratios of the luminance and two chrominance components, respectively. As performance improved, this criterion became larger. The average ΔBits was the bit-rate difference as a percentage (%) between compared methods.(9)ΔBitrate=BitrateProposed-BitrateOriginalBitrateOriginal×100.It must be noted that positive values forPSNR‾and ΔBitrate indicated increments and negative values indicated decrements. ΔTime is the difference value between the original JSVM with global disparity vector estimation and the original JSVM using the refinement process as:(10)ΔTime=TimeProposed-TimeOriginalTimeOriginal×100.A positive value indicated an increase in the encoding time.Performance of the proposed algorithm compared with the original JSVM software is shown in Table 1. The original JSVM software used the inter-layer prediction to increase the coding efficiency [1]. The three additional inter-layer prediction concepts [1] that were added in SVC were (1) prediction of macroblock modes and associated motion parameters, (2) prediction of the residual signal, and (3) prediction of the intra texture.The proposed algorithm produced a quality improvement of 0.66dB, compared to JSVM based on the global disparity vector (GDV) with a bit-saving effect (Table 1). For the Undo_Dancer sequence, small bit-saving factors were observed with a better quality (1.06dB). In the Poznan_Street sequence, up to 0.94dB of quality improvement was obtained with a decrease in bits. Thus, the proposed algorithm provided improved quality with a bit savings.Compared to the original JSVM encoder, the proposed algorithm showed improvement. A 0.93dB quality improvement was observed with a bitrate saving effect. In the Undo_Dancer sequence, quality was improved by 1.27dB. For all cases, bit numbers were decreased (Table 1). A 0.32dB quality improvement was observed as a minimum value.A total of 0.59% of encoding time was used, compared to JSVM based on the global disparity vector (GDV). Although quality improvement was achieved, the time consumed to find an adaptive local disparity vector was negligible. For the Undo_Dancer sequence, the additional time needed was 0.93%. Thus, the proposed refinement mechanism was effective for quality improvement and time consumption simultaneously. Compared with the original JSVM encoder, the time increase was 0.93%, only a small increment in the processing time.The rate-distortion (RD) performance of the proposed algorithm is shown in Fig. 9. The proposed scheme exhibited superior performance, compared with the JSVM 9.19 original encoder and produced better quality based on the overall bit rate. Moreover, in very high bitrate areas, the proposed algorithm yielded better RDO performance because of a bit saving effect. The proposed algorithm achieved up to 1.41dB of improvement with a smaller number of bits.For the Balloons sequence, the proposed algorithm achieved better performance than the original JSVM encoder. As the bit rate increased, the improvement also increased. For the Undo_Dancer sequence, comparable performance was observed between the proposed method and JSVM based on the global disparity vector (GDV). However, the performance of the proposed adaptive algorithm was improved more in high bitrate regions. Thus, the proposed algorithm was more effective for very high quality video service (high bitrate regions). For the Kendo sequence, the quality was improved for all bitrates. For the Undo_Dancer sequence, less quality improvement was observed. Thus, the proposed algorithm was more effective for fast or complex motion sequences.The proposed scheme was able to support both 2D and 3D video services using conventional SVC technology. A 3D display would consume the delivered 3D video contents. Otherwise, only 2D contents would be consumed. The algorithm provided 2D spatial scalability that could be extended with more enhancement layers. Thus, different video size contents could be selected according to the capacity of a user device.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
An efficient scheme for hybrid 3D video service has been proposed using SVC standard technology. A local disparity vector estimation algorithm was used to reflect the motion shift component between stereo views. To improve the coding efficiency in the inter-layer prediction stage of the SVC encoder, an adaptive search range control mechanism has been used to find a more suitable local disparity vector based on the motion properties of a given macroblock. Based on experimental results, up to 1.41dB of quality improvement was achieved with a bit savings. The proposed scheme can provide multi-resolution video service for efficient hybrid 3D video services. Thus, it will be useful for hybrid broadcasting systems and services for next generation TV technology.