@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Effects of stereoscopic movies: The positions of stereoscopic objects and the viewing conditions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We examined the effects of positions of stereoscopic objects and seat location on the viewers.People feel more dizziness in ‘Near (to viewers)’ condition with sitting on the sides.People feel more dizziness in ‘Far (from viewers)’ condition with sitting on the middle.People feel more arousal and satisfaction in ‘Both’ condition.Wearing stereoscopic glasses or having prior experiences effects on the viewer.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Stereoscopic,Movie,Seat location,Viewing condition,Viewing experience,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The present study investigates the effects of relative positions of stereoscopic objects (PSO) (‘Far’ (from viewers) vs. ‘Near’ (to viewers) vs. ‘Both’) and seat location on viewers’ psychological responses. People who watched a movie with ‘Both’ conditions reported more arousal and satisfaction compared to people who watched a movie with either the ‘Far’ or ‘Near’ condition. More importantly, interaction effects were reported such as more dizziness (a) with the ‘Near’ condition if sitting on the left or right side in the cinema and (b) with the ‘Far’ condition if sitting in the middle of the cinema. Additionally, people who wore glasses felt more eye fatigue than those who did not. Secondly, people felt less presence, sensation of depth, and arousal if they had prior experience viewing stereoscopic movies. The results indicate that viewing experience with different PSOs and/or seat locations can influence psychological response.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
After the enormous success of the stereoscopic movie, Avatar, there has been increasing interest in stereoscopic content and technologies. Major Hollywood studios market stereoscopic movies heavily in the hope that they can increase box office revenues. Studios argue that the differences between normal and stereoscopic movies are as big as those between black-and-white (B&W) and color pictures [1]. Despite the recent industry hype of stereoscopic content and technologies, however, little is known about viewers’ perceptual, cognitive, and social responses to stereoscopic stimuli. Most studies on stereoscopic content and technologies are engineering-based, and focused primarily on technical factors (e.g., fidelity of stereoscopic objects, synchronization of two cameras, reduction of unnatural stereoscopic syntheses, etc.) while ignoring viewers’ psychological responses.After excluding purely engineering-based stereoscopic studies, we can find less than ten studies on viewers’ psychological responses to stereoscopic images (see Table 1) [1–8]. These studies, however, do not address the range of psychological variables important to the stereoscopic experience, because they have predominantly focused on assessment or the inconvenience. In addition, the above studies do not impact the movie industry in any significant manner given the lack of generalizability of the findings. For example, stereoscopic stimuli used in those studies are abnormal in that they are either still images or very short movie clips less than 2min in duration. Consequently, those stimuli lack the story lines and the characters that are the major reasons for watching movies. Findings from such studies cannot be easily applied to our understanding of normal media stimuli with stories and characters. Second, none of the above studies were conducted in a movie theater. The lack of ecological validity makes predicting audience responses to stereoscopic stimuli in a movie theater very difficult. Finally, as with many laboratory-based experiments, the small number of participants in these studies again limits the generalizability of the findings. Moreover, the small number of participants makes it difficult to analyze possible individual factors (e.g., prior exposure to stereoscopic technologies, wearing glasses, age, gender, etc.) that might influence each individual’s stereoscopic viewing experiences.To address the above shortcomings, the current study investigates a full range of viewers’ psychological responses to stereoscopic movies in a movie theater. More specifically, we measure viewers’ feelings of presence, arousal. Feeling of presence is defined as a psychological state in which virtual (para-authentic or artificial) objects are experienced as actual objects in either sensory or non-sensory ways [9]. Arousal is one of the major effects of presence. Lombard and Ditton (1997) explain that “people use television viewing to increase or decrease their arousal levels and it seems likely that the range of this manipulation is expanded with media that evoke presence” [10]. In addition, we measure sensation of depth, overall satisfaction, dizziness and eye fatigue as common inconveniences. To increase the generalizability of the current study, we invited 188 participants to a real movie theater and let them watch a 15-min stereoscopic movie specifically made for the current experiment. Unlike previous studies, we also measured possible individual factors – prior exposure to stereoscopic technologies, wearing glasses – that might influence viewers’ stereoscopic experience along with standard demographics such as age and gender. We expect that the current study will have a major impact on the stereoscopic industry, especially the stereoscopic movie industry. The current study also provides new information to the scientific community about viewers’ stereoscopic experiences.Usually, stereoscopic images are produced by a stereoscopic camera, which uses a combination of two separate monoscopic cameras arranged either horizontally or vertically. By adjusting the distance or angle of these two monoscopic cameras, either convergent or divergent stereoscopic images can be made. As a result, viewers can see an object in a spatial place, not on a plane screen. Even though the underlying technological mechanism is simple, producing realistic stereoscopic images requires very careful stereoscopic camera maneuvering [11]. Even small errors in camera configuration and convergence distance calculation can result in significant image distortion and general viewing discomfort [7]. To minimize viewing discomfort, movie directors and camera technicians set up a safety zone, called the ‘safety depth range’ for image convergence and divergence. Too much convergence or divergence of two monoscopic images makes objects get out of the safety zone, resulting in placement of the objects that is either too near or too far. If objects are placed on a space either too near or too far from viewers, significant viewing discomfort occurs.In general, the range of the safety zone is narrower when objects are near to viewers (i.e., ‘Near’ condition) than when objects are far from viewers (i.e., ‘Far’ condition) [5] (see Fig. 1). That is, objects in the ‘Near’ condition have a higher probability of causing viewing discomfort than objects in the ‘Far’ condition. That is why James Francis Cameron avoided placing objects and characters near the viewers in his stereoscopic film, Avatar. At the same time, however, a ‘Near’ condition has a higher potential to cause stronger emotional effects than a ‘Far’ condition, because people feel more aroused when they are physically closer to objects. That is the reason why Timothy William Burton frequently placed objects and characters near to the viewers in his stereoscopic movie, Alice in Wonderland. While there are many casual and anecdotal evaluations of which movie is a better stereoscopic viewing experience, there has been no empirical comparison of the effects of the relative positions of stereoscopic objects on viewers’ psychological responses. In the current study, therefore, we attempt to provide one of the first scientific answers to the following research question by comparing three possible locations of stereoscopic objects—‘Near’ vs. ‘Far’ vs. ‘Both’ (‘Near’ and ‘Far’).Research Question (RQ) 1: What are the effects of relative positions of stereoscopic objects (‘Near’ vs. ‘Far’ vs. ‘Both’) during a stereoscopic viewing experience?In addition to the position of stereoscopic objects, seat location in a movie theater has been regarded as an important factor in determining viewers’ stereoscopic experience. There are two main reasons why the industry and policy makers are interested in the effects of seat location in a stereoscopic movie theater. First, the box office industry believes that possible differences in stereoscopic viewing experiences caused by different seat locations can be used as a logical excuse to adjust admission prices. Second, policy makers and health professionals worry that watching stereoscopic images primarily on either the left or right side of the screen might cause dizziness or eye fatigue. In fact, the Japanese Stereoscopic Consortium Safety Guidelines [12] recommend that viewers should watch stereoscopic images in seats located on a vertically and horizontally middle line from the screen in order to prevent possible negative side effects. Chiba (2010) claims that viewers can experience significant physical and psychological discomfort when they watch stereoscopic images from the extreme sides of a theater, because the angle of each monoscopic image projected to each viewer’s eye can be distorted from this side viewing perspective. Chiba’s argument is based on the calculation of image angle distortion, and does not provide results from actual field trials. As a result, both policy makers and the movie industry do not have empirical grounds for imposing health regulations and price discrimination. Therefore in the current study, we test psychological and physical effects of seat location (left vs. center vs. right) on stereoscopic experience in a movie theater.RQ 2: What are the effects of seat location (Left vs. Middle vs. Right) during a stereoscopic viewing experience?We believe that there might be complicated interactions between an object’s position on the stereoscopic screen and viewers’ seat location, because both factors affect the viewing angles of the stereoscopic images and the length of stereoscopic safety zones. For example, possible main effects of a stereoscopic object’s position on a screen can be either strengthened or weakened by the location of the viewer’s. That is, stereoscopic objects positioned either far from or near to viewers can be experienced as even more far or near depending on the viewer’s position. Therefore, the current study employs a full-factorial design to test possible interaction effects between these two main factors.RQ 3: What are the interaction effects of objects’ positions in stereoscopic images (‘Near’ vs. ‘Far’ vs. ‘Both’) and viewers’ seat locations (Left vs. Middle vs. Right) during a stereoscopic viewing experience?Viewers usually have to wear polarized or shutter glasses to watch stereoscopic movies because non-glasses systems are costly and still have many technological limitations. Wearing two sets of glasses (i.e., for viewing stereoscopic images and for vision correction) to watch stereoscopic images results in a significantly different stereoscopic viewing experience. One reason for this is that glasses for vision correction project distorted images onto the retina of the eyes even before wearing stereoscopic glasses. As a result, viewers with corrective glasses need to go through two steps of adjustments to watch stereoscopic images comfortably; one to adjust for retina disparity caused by new eyesight [13] and the other to adjust for stereoscopic disparity caused by two monoscopic images. Even long-time corrective glasses wearers who have fully corrected vision experience additional discomfort when wearing shutter or polarized glasses for stereoscopic images, because the stereoscopic glasses distorts their adjusted vision systems [12]. The second and perhaps most obvious reason is that wearing two sets of glasses is simply very uncomfortable and inconvenient. Viewers who already wear corrective glasses, thus, will have a more negative stereoscopic viewing experience. Therefore, in our study we measured and statistically controlled for participants’ wearing of corrective glasses. In addition, we also investigated possible negative effects of wearing corrective glasses during a stereoscopic viewing experience.RQ 4: What are the effects of wearing corrective glasses during a stereoscopic viewing experience?When new technologies are introduced, people usually get excited and show positive affective responses given the strong tendency to like novel technologies such as new humanoid robots, new tablet PC systems, and so on [14]. Some people even argue that human beings are hardwired to seek novelty in their everyday lives [15]. The initial liking of novel things and new gadgets, however, is not durable and fades away as the novel things become familiar [14]. Even infants show similar patterns of behaviors. With an increasing number of exposures to familiar stimuli, infants adjust their preference from a familiar to a novel stimulus [16]. We expect similar novelty effects in people’s psychological responses to stereoscopic images. We expect that affective responses such as arousal and liking may decrease if people have multiple prior stereoscopic movie viewing experiences.RQ 5: What are the effects of prior exposures to stereoscopic movies during a stereoscopic viewing experience?

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
