@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The effects of Chinese typeface design, stroke weight, and contrast polarity on glance based legibility

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This study examines aspects of the legibility of Chinese digital typography.Legibility was measured as the amount of time needed to read text accurately.Typeface style, weight, and contrast polarity were compared across two studies.Hei-style type, set in bold weight in positive contrast was the most legible.Findings have implications for optimal rendering of text on digital displays.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Legibility,Typeface,Visual perception,Font weight,Contrast polarity,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Modern interfaces increasingly rely on screens filled with digital text to display information to users. Previous research has shown that even relatively subtle differences in the design of the on-screen typeface can influence to-device glance time in a measurable and meaningful way (Reimer et al., 2014). Here we outline a methodology for rapidly and flexibly investigating the legibility of typefaces on digital screens in glance-like contexts, and apply this method to a comparison of 5 Simplified Chinese typefaces. We find that the legibility of the typefaces, measured as the minimum presentation time needed to read character strings accurately and respond to a yes/no lexical decision task, is sensitive to differences in the typeface’s design characteristics. The most legible typeface under study (“MT YingHei”) could be read 33.1% faster than the least legible typeface in this glance-induced context. A second study examined two different weights of the MT YingHei type family (medium and bold), as well as two contrast polarity (color) conditions to investigate how these variations impact legibility thresholds. Results indicate that bold weight text is easier to read in this enforced glance-like context, and that positive polarity text (black on white) is easier to read compared to white on black text under the lighting conditions considered. These results are discussed in terms of contextual factors that may mediate glance-reading behavior, as well as how type design interacts with the practical limitations of a moderate density pixel grid.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The meteoric rise of the smartphone, and the incorporation of electronic displays into an increasing number of technologies (in-vehicle devices, wearables, subway signage, advertising, etc.) have made digital screens essential to daily life. Use of these information sources has resulted in a new kind of reading behavior, markedly different from traditional long-form or “embedded” reading. Instead, more and more text is now read in short bursts of attention or otherwise performed in brief glances. Where once text might have been static and predictable, as in the dependable columns of a newspaper, a sign papered on the wall, or the display of text in a vehicle instrument cluster, it is now dynamic, shifting and changing to suit the next article, function, or app. While high-resolution displays (300-400PPI) have become increasingly common in smartphone hardware specifications, most desktop displays and in-vehicle device screens continue to rely on lower pixel densities (80-110PPI) [1,2]. Combined with the diverse environments in which displays may be used, it becomes clear that the display’s readability may vary considerably, dependent on a large number of interacting factors.As the interfaces that display information to us become more complex and the characteristics of what we can display become more flexible, it becomes necessary to form an empirical understanding of what makes text easier to encode, understand, and retain. Clear information presentation, particularly in the context of at-a-glance reading behavior, will be essential to global technology development, deployment, and marketing.Previous research has shown that even something as subtle as a display’s typeface can significantly impact reading behavior and task completion time [3]. That study compared two seemingly similar sans-serif typefaces: a humanist style typeface, and a square grotesque. In a fully simulated driving environment, drivers spent less time glancing at an in-vehicle display set in a humanist style typeface as compared to a square grotesque typeface, particularly among males. The differences governing the design of these typefaces, relatively subtle outside the world of typography, nevertheless had a significant and real impact on driver behavior.The results of this study led to the development of a simplified psychophysical technique—a lexical decision task used in combination with a thresholding procedure—for assessing typeface legibility, the results of which were consistent with the results obtained from the original driving simulator study [4]. This simplified method allows for multiple interacting typographic factors to be examined and compared simultaneously in a more controlled framework. The method greatly increases the speed and flexibility of investigation while providing results that extend beyond the automotive context. It was hypothesized that the lexical decision task used would generalize to studies of non-Latin character sets, such as Simplified Chinese. Given the rapid adoption of smartphones, in-vehicle technology, and other types of digital screens by Chinese consumers [5], a psychophysical investigation of Chinese legibility factors was developed to assess this hypothesis.Chinese typographic styles can be classified into several broad categories, including Kai, Ming, and Hei [6]. Kai typefaces resemble handwritten calligraphy. Ming (also called Song) typefaces were designed for printing, and therefore use simpler stroke patterns, but still contain subtle detailing and fine stroke widths similar to Western serif typefaces such as Times New Roman. Hei typefaces feature thicker, more regular strokes and a minimalistic design aesthetic, placing them on par with Western sans-serif typefaces such as Helvetica.Several studies have attempted to examine the effect of typographic style on the legibility of Chinese characters. Early work in this area showed that character identification accuracy suffered when a handwriting-like Kai typeface was used to render characters, as opposed to one made for digital screens [7]. Similar work has shown the Kai style to be inferior to the Ming style on digital screens [6]. On the other hand, subsequent research using a reading comprehension paradigm failed to find an effect of typeface style [8]. Other studies of Chinese typography that use paradigms in which text is read with little or no time pressure, such as tests of reading comprehension or character search tasks, have also failed to find an effect of typeface design [9–11]. All of the aforementioned studies typically compare two typeface styles, most commonly Ming and Kai. Shieh et al. [7] reported using a Kai typeface and a “computer” typeface (the exact typeface is not reported, but the paper’s figures suggest a Hei typeface). More recent work that examined the typography of digital roadway signage in a simulated driving task found an advantage of Hei-style typefaces [12]. At present, it appears that the relatively subtle differences within Chinese type styles are under-studied, perhaps because the methodologies typically used to investigate legibility lack sufficient sensitivity to reveal differences within styles.Typographic style interacts with a number of other display factors, including the colors used for the background and foreground of the display. Several studies of the effects of color and/or contrast polarity have shown mixed results, with several indicating legibility benefits for positive polarity (dark on light) displays [8,11], another showing advantages for negative polarity (light on dark) displays [10], and at least one study that failed to show an effect of display color [7]. Recent research suggests that positive polarity displays provide a legibility advantage over negative polarity displays, and that this is most likely due to pupillary dilation in the presence of darker backgrounds, which provide less illumination than a light background [13–15]. The balance of evidence seems to suggest a legibility advantage for positive polarity digital text, consistent with early research on the legibility of printed materials [16].In addition to text polarity, the weight, or line thickness, of the typeface can affect legibility. Studies of Latin text show that legibility is usually optimal when using typical medium weight fonts, and that legibility can be hindered if the font weight is extremely light or bold [17,18]. However, it should be noted that Sheedy et al’s [19] research suggests that bold weight fonts may produce a legibility advantage in difficult “near threshold” reading conditions. To our knowledge, no comparable studies of the effect of stroke weight have been carried out on Chinese typefaces, at least as can be determined from English language literature reviews.In summary, there has been relatively little research to date on how certain design factors, such as typeface style, font weight, and contrast polarity, affect the legibility of Chinese characters on digital screens. While several studies have compared Ming and Kai style typefaces, there has been little work done with Hei typefaces, and critically, no work to date has examined possible design differences within a single typeface style (such as the many different Hei-style typefaces currently available). The methods used in these studies typically rely on reading comprehension, character search, or serial presentation tasks. Studies have shown that such self-paced methods are not sufficiently sensitive to differences between typeface styles, while techniques that place constraints on evaluation time have been able to reveal such differences [7]. These results suggest that typeface design may play a more prominent role in constrained glance-like reading contexts. At the same time, investigations of the effects of font weight and display contrast polarity on Chinese legibility are sparse.Here we present two studies that employ a psychophysical technique for enforcing glance-like reading behavior to examine these issues in more detail. Study I examines the relative legibility of five Simplified Chinese typefaces, four of which are within the Hei-style family. Study II expands upon these findings by choosing the most legible typeface from Study I and presenting it in two different weights and in two different contrast polarities.A total of 34 participants who natively read Simplified Chinese were recruited for this study. Of these, 5 were excluded from analysis due to an apparent failure to understand the task, 6 were excluded because they failed to reach a stable threshold estimate in the allotted time (see Section 2.1.5, and [4] for a fuller explanation of this criterion), and 1 was excluded due to technical problems with the equipment. This left a total of 22 participants between the ages of 30 and 75, equally split between men and women (men: mean age=43.9, SD=10.3; women: mean age=45.5, SD=10.1). There was no significant difference in age between genders (t(20.0)=0.356, p=0.726). All participants gave their written, informed consent to participate, as outlined by the Committee on the Use of Humans as Experiment Subjects (COUHES) of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and were compensated for their involvement in the study. All data were collected by trained MIT staff in university-owned facilities.Owing to cultural/local factors that can affect the interpretation of Chinese script, participants were required to be native readers of Simplified Chinese from Mainland China. Participants also had to be in self-reported reasonably good health for their age. Exclusion criteria included experience of a major medical illness or hospitalization in the last six months, conditions that impair vision (other than typical nearsightedness or farsightedness), or a history of epilepsy, Parkinson’s disease, Alzheimer’s disease, dementia, mild cognitive impairment, or other neurological problems. All participants had normal or corrected-to-normal vision (glasses or contact lenses) and were tested on site for near acuity using the Federal Aviation Administration’s test for near acuity (Form 8500-1), and for far acuity using a Snellen eye chart.The experiment was conducted using a 2.5GHz Mac Mini running Mac OS X 10.9.1. Stimuli were created and displayed using Matlab running the Psychtoolbox 3 [20,21]. Stimuli were displayed on an Asus 24” (60.96cm) LCD monitor. The monitor had a resolution of 1920×1080 pixels and a refresh rate of 109.9Hz. Participants responded to stimuli using a standard keyboard. The experiment was conducted in a quiet, dimly lit room. Participants were seated approximately 27.5” (0.7m) from the screen, within a recommended range specified in international testing guidelines [22]. Head restraints were not used, as we wished to allow some freedom of motion, as would be the case when performing real-world tasks such as dual-task driving. Participants were encouraged to be mindful of their posture and to avoid leaning toward the screen.Stimuli in this experiment were Mandarin words and pseudowords written in Simplified Chinese characters. Each stimulus was composed of a pair of Simplified Chinese characters that, when read left to right, either formed a single, commonly understood word/concept, or did not do so. Two-character words were selected from a compiled list of words and characters ordered by their frequency of occurrence in Chinese movie subtitles [23]. Low frequency words were chosen, and these were also balanced for the frequency rate of the first character and the number of strokes occurring in each character.More complex characters require finer visual acuity to identify [24]. As this complexity interferes with reading speed [25], the characters chosen were moderately to highly complex in terms of stroke count, with a range of 9–20 strokes per character.Pseudowords were created by swapping the character order of the word stimuli. If the resulting combination made a word (as determined by comparing the flipped pair to the list of known words and in consultation with a Chinese linguist and a group of native Chinese readers), it was discarded. The remaining combinations made up the list of pseudowords, also balanced for the number of strokes per character. The presented order of words and pseudowords was randomized for each participant, and no stimuli were repeated during a session.Each participant saw stimuli displayed in 5 different typefaces (see Fig. 1): Monotype’s “MHeiGB18030C Medium”, hereafter referred to as MT Hei; Monotype’s “MYingHei 18030C Medium”, hereafter referred to as MT YingHei; Monotype’s “CYuen2PRC SemiBold”, hereafter referred to as MT CYuen; Microsoft’s “YaHei Regular”, hereafter referred to as “MS YaHei”; and Monotype’s “MSung PRC Medium”, hereafter referred to as “MT Sung”. All typefaces were of a medium or semi-bold weight, ensuring that character strokes were of similar thickness. All typefaces with the exception of MT Sung were of the modern Hei style (MT CYuen melds characteristics of Hei with a “Rounded Gothic” style), while MT Sung is drawn in the more traditional Ming style. A Ming style typeface was included as a way of verifying the sensitivity of the methodology, as it was expected that a Ming typeface would be less legible than the Hei typefaces, owing to the Ming style’s use of fine detailing [6]. The presented order of the 5 typefaces was randomized for each participant. A sixth typeface drawn in the calligraphic Kai style, Monotype’s “M Kai PRC Medium”, was used for a short set of practice trials.All typefaces were scaled such that character heights averaged 5mm on screen (a mean of 16 pixels, subtending approximately 21.79arcmin from an assumed distance of 0.7m). The 5mm text height was chosen because it was found to be relatively common among a small sample of Chinese-language in-vehicle interfaces. Text was displayed in pure black (RGB: 0, 0, 0) against a background of pure white (RGB: 255, 255, 255) at the center of the screen.Participants performed a 2-alternative forced-choice lexical decision task as illustrated in Fig. 2. Each trial of the experiment began with the presentation of a fixation rectangle lasting 1000ms. This was followed by a mask stimulus presented for 200ms, which was in turn followed by a word or pseudoword character pair presented for a variable duration. The word/pseudoword stimulus was followed by another 200ms mask, and finally, a prompt screen that asked the participant to determine whether the character pair had been a word or pseudoword. Participants were instructed to interpret the meaning of the character pairs as read from left to right. These instructions were presented in Simplified Chinese, with two example character pairings for clarity. The participant made his response by pressing one of two keys on the keyboard. The next trial began after a 2-s intertrial interval. All on-screen stimuli were centered on the screen. Each typeface was presented for 100 trials, or 500 trials altogether. Short rest periods were inserted after every 50 trials. Prior to primary data collection, participants completed a series of practice trials with a novel typeface to ensure sufficient familiarity with the task.During the 5 main data collection blocks, task difficulty was controlled via an adaptive staircase procedure [26,27]. This technique changes the difficulty of the task based on a participant’s pattern of correct and incorrect responses. Using a “3-down, 1-up” rule, the task is made more difficult (stimulus duration is decreased) after three consecutive correct responses, and made easier (stimulus duration is increased) after one incorrect response. Following this rule, stimulus duration will converge on a difficulty that produces 79.4% accuracy [27].We modified the staircase algorithm to accommodate the experiment’s workflow in the following ways. First, stimulus duration was initially decremented in a controlled manner to allow the participant to adapt to the expected task difficulty. At the start of each typeface/polarity block, stimulus duration was set at 800ms. Three trials were performed at this setting, regardless of the participant’s responses. Stimulus duration was then decremented to 600ms for the next 3 trials, 400ms for 3 trials after that, and finally, 200ms for another 3 trials. Staircase control of stimulus duration was initiated on the 13th trial of the condition.The staircase’s step size (the increment by which stimulus duration was adjusted, not to be confused with stimulus duration itself) was gradually decreased throughout each condition, allowing the staircase to make finer adjustments as the condition progressed. Step size was initially set to 24 frames (200ms), and was reduced by a factor of 20% after every 3 staircase reversals (when the staircase switched from increasing to decreasing difficulty or vice versa). Over the course of 100 trials per condition, step size reached a minimum of 1 frame. Third, stimulus duration was constrained to be at least 33.6ms and at most 1000ms. While the 119.9Hz monitor used in this study was capable of a minimum presentation time of 8.3ms, it was felt that this value made the stimulus practically invisible and constituted a nearly impossible task difficulty, particularly for older participants. A floor of 33.6ms was implemented to reduce participant frustration and increase the number of trial responses informed by veridical perception.Staircase levels were reset at the start of each typeface/polarity block, allowing for the calculation of separate stimulus duration thresholds for each of the 5 conditions. Each condition is calibrated to the same hypothetical accuracy level. Therefore, a less legible typeface should require a longer presentation time (and thus a higher threshold) to reach the same accuracy level as a more legible typeface.In some cases, a sequence of early staircase reversals, caused either by participant confusion or erroneous responses, could cause step size to be reduced too early, and thus threshold estimates were fail to stabilize in the allotted time. As described in Section 2.1.1, these “miscalibrated” participants were excluded from analysis.Presentation time thresholds were calculated for each typeface by computing the median presentation time of the last 20 trials of each typeface condition. Participant responses were also saved for secondary analyses of reaction time and accuracy. Standard parametric statistical tests were used, including repeated-measures ANOVA and the Student’s t-test. All data were exported from Matlab and analyzed and visualized in R [28].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This study employed psychophysical techniques to quantify the legibility of digital Chinese typography as the minimum amount of time necessary to read a pair of characters with approximately 80% accuracy. Presentation time thresholds suggest that Hei style typefaces have the best on-screen legibility among the typefaces studied, perhaps due to their relatively simple, structured designs. A follow-up investigation demonstrated a strong legibility advantage for positive polarity text under laboratory lighting conditions, as well as an advantage for bold weight text. These results have important implications for the rendering of script-based characters on digital displays in a large emerging market. The psychophysical technique utilized (lexical decision) appears to be a repeatable methodology for evaluating relative legibility differences. Future work may extend the investigations presented here on typeface design, stroke weight, and contrast polarity to consider the influence of physical display characteristics, environmental influences, graphic design, language, and so forth.