@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Localization in vehicular ad hoc networks using data fusion and V2V communication

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The paper deals with challenging localization problem in vehicular ad-hoc networks.A novel approach is proposed based on the idea of cooperative localization.Our scheme integrates available data and cooperatively improves location accuracy.Localization is more accurate and robust to sensor inaccuracies or even to failures.The estimation of vehicle prior and sequential decentralized EKF improve further.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Vehicular ad-hoc networks,Data fusion,Extended Kalman filtering,Cooperative vehicle localization,Sequential extended Kalman filtering,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In Vehicular ad-hoc networks (VANETs), one of the challenging tasks is to find an accurate localization information. In this paper, we have addressed this problem by introducing a novel approach based on the idea of cooperative localization. Our proposed scheme incorporates different techniques of localization along with data fusion as well as vehicle-to-vehicle communication, to integrate the available data and cooperatively improve the accuracy of the localization information of the vehicles. The simulation results show that sharing the localization information and deploying that of the neighboring vehicles, not only assures the vehicles in a vicinity to obtain more accurate localization information, but also find the results robust to sensor inaccuracies or even to failures. Moreover, further improvement has been achieved by estimating the vehicle prior (prior mean and covariance) using unscented transform (UT) together with sequential decentralized extended Kalman filtering.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Vehicular ad-hoc networks (VANETs) are a specific type of ad-hoc networks, which are infrastructure-free as well as they have fixed and mobile nodes. In VANETs, the nodes are deemed vehicles with high dynamicity causing rapid changes in the network topology. VANET can be viewed as an intelligent component of Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) as the vehicles communicate with each other as well as with the roadside base stations/roadside units (RSUs) located at critical points of the road, such as intersections or construction sites. VANETs differ notably from other types of ad-hoc networks, such as wireless sensor networks (WSNs) or mobile ad-hoc networks (MANETs) in terms of node dynamics and heterogeneity. The comprehensive well-organized VANETs are responsible for extracting, managing and interpreting the information to achieve knowledge, and making it available for travelers. A comprehensive overview of the properties, features and applications of VANETs are presented in [1].VANETs have various applications including safe and convenient driving, emergency and entertainment applications, intelligent navigation, etc [2]. The key features of the VANETs over the conventional ITS are their network-based structure and the capability of communication between vehicles, i.e. vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V), and vehicles to roadside units (V2R) or other available infrastructures (V2I), by utilizing the underlying communication platforms and standardized protocols [2,3]. In V2V, the vehicles communicate with each other to share the information needed by an application or so called “service”. For example, vehicles can share velocity information while they are moving on the same lane, to provide information on safe speed under safety service. Vehicles can even communicate with the nearby roadside units (V2R) for further assistance, for instance a vehicle could inform about the surrounding traffic situation to an approaching distant vehicle by sharing the traffic information with its nearest roadside unit. Moreover, the vehicles have privilege to communicate with the already existing infrastructures and the ITS service providers, such as traffic agencies to get relevant information (e.g. traffic information for convenient driving). The information exchange over a wireless network between the vehicles, roadside units, and infrastructure usually consists of various context based attributes, such as vehicle’s speed, location, and direction of travel [4,5]. With these information, an advanced driving system can decide whether a crash is likely to alert the driver to brake, or even a more advanced autonomous driving system can brake the vehicle if a driver is slow to respond. Besides V2V, the V2I communications are further deployed to develop assisted driving systems. Other services of V2V include transferring the emergency messages, enhancing GPS accuracy, etc. V2I, on the other hand, is applied in toll collection, transferring important localized message related to road-traffic situation as well as providing access for some ITS related services.One of the crucial information attributes in VANETs is location and its accurate calculation is a challenging issue [6]. The commonly used sensors such as odometer and Global Positioning System (GPS) are often employed to calculate the location of a vehicle. The use of GPS is fairly simply and the cost is low. However, it sometimes gives inaccurate results because of satellite blockage particularly in the urban areas. Therefore, the localization problem in VANETs is still an open issue.In this paper, we propose a new localization approach for localization of a vehicle using vehicle motion model (for modeling the dynamic motion model of a vehicle) along with V2V communication and a data fusion method. We measure the belief of each vehicle about its current location using Extended Kalman Filter (EKF) [7], and then improve it by communicating with the neighboring vehicles and incorporating their beliefs about that vehicle’s location. This approach allows us the simultaneous and efficient use of all the available sources of information unlike inability of the existing systems. This would lead us to achieve a real-time autonomous framework in VANETs due to their recursive online location estimation and ability to recover from failure.The remaining of the paper is organized as follows. The related works are reviewed in Section 2, while a brief background is given in Section 3. Section 4 describes our new localization approach. Section 5 presents the simulation results. Section 6 addresses some important issues associated with the proposed method. The conclusion is drawn in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
