@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
MEMS based fiber optical microendoscopes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We summarize state of the art in MEMS based fiber optical microendoscopy for early cancer assessment.MEMS scanner technology is a key enabling element in miniaturization of microendoscope.Electrostatic actuation is the most popular mechanism to drive MEMS scanners.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
MEMS scanner,Confocal,Two-photon,OCT,Fluorescence imaging,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Fiber-optical microendoscopy has recently been an essential medical diagnostic tool for patients in investigating tissues in vivo due to affordable cost, high quality imaging performance, compact size, high-speed imaging, and flexible movement. Microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) scanner technology has been playing a key role in shaping the miniaturization and enabling high-speed imaging of fiber-optical microendoscopy for over 20years. In this article, both review of MEMS based fiber-optical microendoscopy for optical coherence tomography, confocal, and two-photon imaging will be discussed. These advanced optical endoscopic imaging modalities provide cellular and molecular features with deep tissue penetration enabling guided resections and early cancer assessment.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
One of the major public health problems in human history is the Cancer disease killing over 7million people each year [1]. Currently, the clinical diagnosis of most cancers and their precursors is based on gross structural features obtained from biopsy procedures, such as extent of local invasion, the presence of enlarged regional lymph nodes, and detection of lesions (>1cm) in organs [2]. While this biopsy process has been the standard of care, it has many disadvantages, such as long diagnosis time, invasiveness, artifacts, sampling error, time consumption, relatively high cost, and interpretive variability. Therefore, the understanding of the underlying fundamental system biology is less explored due to the technical limits. It is not until 1895 that the scientific and medical communities are forever in debt to an accidental discovery of X-rays made by a German physicist Wilhelm Conrad Röntgen. Afterward, many noninvasive imaging modalities based on variety physical properties such as ultrasound (US), computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imager (MRI) have been invented to perform disease analysis, diagnosis, prognosis, staging, treatment, and follow-up [3]. Even though, the above modalities are useful for delineating the deep extent of advanced carcinomas, they are insensitive to detect small, earlier intraepithelial lesions, which are more readily cured [4]. In contrast to the above modalities, optical imaging of tissue can be carried out noninvasively in real-time and in vivo, yielding high spatial resolution (submicron to micron scale). Moreover, the optical imaging modalities are inexpensive, robust, and portable because of advances in computing, optical fiber, semiconductor, and microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) technologies [5–7]. Current imaging modalities used in fiber optical microendoscopy include: optical coherence tomography (OCT) [8–10], confocal microscopy (CM) [11–13], and two-photon (2P) microscopy [14–16]. Those imaging modalities are often combined with the development of contrast agents targeting cancerous receptors enhancing accurate cancer detection [17,18]. Typically, MEMS technology has been integrated at the distal end as a scanning element with either raster scanning, random access, or lissajous scanning mode inside these microendoscopy to achieve two-dimensional (2D) en face scan imaging. Some of the advantages are fast speed (kHz-MHz), small in size (a few millimeters scale), low to medium power consumption, ease of integration, batch fabrication, and low cost. Sections below will briefly introduce each optical imaging modality, and its fiber optical endoscopic version based on MEMS scanner technology.OCT was first demonstrated in early 1990s [8]. Since then, numerous applications of OCT for both biomedical and materials applications have emerged. At the same time, the resolution and capabilities of OCT technology have improved dramatically. OCT is the optical analog of US which can perform micron-scale resolution, cross-sectional tomographic imaging of the internal microstructure in materials and biological systems. OCT performs imaging by measuring the magnitude and echo time delay of backscattered light. In the standard embodiment of OCT imaging, an incident light beam is directed at the object to be imaged, and the time delay and magnitude of backscattered or backreflected light is measured in the axial or longitudinal direction. The beam is scanned in the transverse direction, and rapid successive axial measurements are performed, as shown in Fig. 1a. The result is a 2D data set, which represents the optical reflection or backscattering in a cross-sectional plane through the material or tissue. Frequency domain OCT employs a Michelson interferometer. The input light from a broadband frequency sweeping light source is divided into the reference arm and sample arm. The light beams on both arms are reflected back and form an interference signal at one port of the beam splitter. This interference signal is read by a photodetector and provides the depth information of the sample through inverse Fourier transform. By using the short coherence length of a broadband light source, the resolution of OCT can reach 1–15μm depending on the light source employed, shown in Fig. 1b. The penetration depth of OCT is normally 1–3mm, which is sufficient to image the depth of the epithelial layer, where most cancers are originated.CM concept was first introduced by Marvin Minsky in the 1957 when he was a postdoctoral fellow at Harvard University [11]. The modality uses linear light-tissue interactions to generate high image contrast with micron-scale resolution [11–13]. The principal advantage of CM is its ability to record section information of three-dimensional (3D) tissue data with cellular definition by rejecting out of focus light from its unique optical sectioning property via a pinhole (Fig. 2a). The achievable field of view (FOV) of CM is typically limited (<100μm2) and it requires the use of exogenous fluorophores to enhance image contrast. In standard operation, CM can be employed in two imaging modes namely reflectance and fluorescence. The former relies on the backscattered light from within the tissue and provide structural and anatomical information of cells and tissues whereas the latter records light generated by fluorescence contrast agents that target specific microstructures and has high sensibility and specificity. Fluorescence signal from linear light-tissue interaction is produced when a single excitation photon in the ultraviolet (UV) or visible regime is absorbed by electrons in tissue biomolecules that then transition into higher-energy (excited-state) levels. The electrons emit visible fluorescence photons when it spontaneously relaxes to the ground state, as shown in Fig. 2b. In this process, the fluorescence intensity (F) depends linearly on the incident excitation intensity (I). Tabletop confocal microscopes are commonly used in research laboratories and to perform sub-cellular resolution (<5μm) imaging in cells and biology tissue specimens ex vivo. Optical sectioning is achieved with use of a pinhole placed in between the objective lens and the detector that allows only the light that originates from within a tiny volume in the focal plane below the tissue surface to be collected. Scattered light from all other origins outside of this focus does not have the proper trajectory to enter the pinhole and thus become spatially filtered, as shown in Fig. 2a. Fig. 2c shows excitation light trajectory in fluorescein. CM can be sub-divided into two main types namely (1) single-axis confocal (SAC) and 2) dual-axis confocal (DAC). In the SAC configuration, a high numerical aperture (NA) objective (typically>0.5) is needed to achieve subcellular resolution, and this geometry achieves limiting working distance (WD). The scanning mechanism (or scanner) is usually placed on the pinhole side of the objective or in the pre-objective position. On the contrary, the DAC design uses two low NA objectives enabling off-axis illumination and collection. The latter architecture provides a long WD allowing a scanning mechanism to be placed post-objectively. For optical fiber based confocal microendoscopy, the single-mode optical fiber core is used as a pinhole.2P microscopy is a fluorescence imaging technique that allows imaging of living tissue up to around one millimeter. The modality employs two-photon absorption that is nonlinear light-tissue interactions to generate image contrast [14]. It is a concept first described by Maria Goeppert-Mayer in 1931 [15]. Fluorescence is generated when two lower-energy (longer wavelength) photons in the near-infrared (NIR) regime arrive at tissue biomolecules simultaneously, as shown in Fig. 3a [16]. Typically, each photon has half of the energy needed to generate 2P effect. Instead of using a conventional UV or visible light source to excite the fluorophores, 2P excitation utilizes NIR laser to allow deeper tissue penetration. Due to the low probability of simultaneous or near simultaneous absorption of 2P by a single fluorophore, use of femtosecond laser, ultrashort 70–200femtosecond (fs) with high peak intensity pulses of light, is required. The result obtained from this technique is a restricted focal volume only in the focal plane, Fig. 3c. Therefore, the probability of absorbing two photons increases with the square of the photon flux, and the fluorescence intensity (F) is proportional to the square of the excitation intensity (I2). This modality improves both axial depth discrimination and image contrast. Furthermore, photobleaching and photodamage to the samples are reduced. Sophisticated 2P imaging laboratory instruments have been developed to collect fluorescence imaging with sub-cellular resolution and tissue penetration. This technology is being adapted for in vivo imaging as an microendoscope by using the core of a photonic crystal fiber (PCF) or hollow air core fiber [19] to deliver the high peak intensity, ultra-short pulse to the tissue with minimal waveform distortions. In addition, other imaging methods are being developed with other nonlinear effects such as multiphoton (>2) absorption, second harmonic generation, and coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering (CARS) [19]. For example, the latest three-photon table-top microscopy were demonstrated in vivo imaging on a mouse brain with up to 1.2mm penetration depth [20].The first MEMS based OCT microendoscope was introduced by Pan et al. employing a one-dimensional (1D) electrothermally actuated MEMS mirror in 2001 [21]. In 2006, Piyawattanametha et al. from M.C. Wu’s group at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) developed a novel angular vertical combdrive (AVC) actuated 2D MEMS scanner that was fabricated using surface and bulk micromachining processes [22], as shown in Fig. 4. Combdrive actuator is a type of electrostatic actuations that is commonly used in MEMS scanners with torsional rotation due to its relatively high actuation force. When voltage is applied between the movable and the fixed combdrive electrodes, the moving electrode rotates about their torsion axis until the restoring torque and the electrostatic torque are equal resulting in the rotation of MEMS scanners [22].Soon after the success of a batch fabrication, those electrostatic MEMS scanners were integrated and packaged into a novel OCT endomicroscopic catheter in J.G. Fujimoto’s laboratory at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) for in vivo ultrahigh resolution 3D and en face imaging. To the best of our knowledge, it is the first electrostatic MEMS scanner based microendoscope and used for in vivo small animal imaging [23], as shown in Fig. 5.Different from the AVC actuated scanner, another type of gimbal-less monolithic silicon micromirror with dedicate amplification mechanism was developed by Milanovic et al. [24] for tip-tilt-piston applications. An additional mirror plate is bonded onto the top of actuation structure, which provides a very high fill-in factor with more than 90%. The early stage design can perform tilt and tip scan with frequency less than 3kHz. The piston motion (z-axis out-of-plane displacement) is relatively small, less than few microns. The similar gimbal-less micromirror was successfully used for a 3D endoscopic OCT system [25]. Based on electrostatic actuation, a cantilever-based scanner was also developed and integrated into an OCT catheter system [26].Most recently, gimbal-less electrostatic scanners have been significantly improved and commercialized by Mirrorcle Technologies, Inc and they have been recently integrated into a handheld ultrahigh speed swept source OCT system [27], as shown in Fig. 6. High-resolution large FOV in vivo images on an eye have been demonstrated with the imaging system, shown in Fig. 7.Instead of steering light beams by micromirror, moving a focus lens by electrostatic MEMS actuators is an alternative approach for 3D imaging. Park et al. [28] have developed a forward imaging OCT endoscopic catheter using MEMS lens actuators. A group led by H. Toshiyoshi from the University of Tokyo has demonstrated a new all-optical MEMS fiber based OCT microendoscopes [29], shown in Fig. 8. Recently, those MEMS scanners have been commercialized by Santec Inc. for high speed OCT products. In addition to the MEMS scanner design for OCT medical microendoscopes, researchers also made efforts improving the alignment, wiring and packaging strategies. For example, the Silicon-on-Bench (SiOB) can potentially increase the accuracy of the micro-optics alignment. Wiring and electricity delivery are realized by soldering ball that is self-assembled inside the silicon trench. Another wire-bonding free technique using through-hole via silicon on insulator (SOI) wafer was proposed by Samuelson et al. [30] for much more compact packaging.In the most recent progress, an endoscopic swept-source optical coherence tomography based on a 2D electrothermal MEMS scanner with large z-axis stroke and tilting angle has been developed for in vivo imaging on mouse [31]. Based on the similar electrothermal driving principle, a miniature microendoscope catheter with a novel electrothermal MEMS scanner based on SiOB technology was developed [32].Electromagnetic MEMS 2D scanners have been developed for OCT microendoscopes [33,34]. However, the outer electrical coils usually occupy a decent amount of space and prevent further miniaturization of microendoscopes. The group led by H. Zappe from the University of Freiburg has made effort in the tunable micro-optics for many years. A recent pneumatically actuated tunable lens has been integrated with magnetically actuated scanner into an OCT microendoscope system with SiOB platform technology [35]. Based on thin-film lead-zirconate-titanate (PZT) base MEMS scanner, researchers have developed a proof-of-concept endoscopic OCT system [36,37].The development of MEMS based confocal microendoscopes has made rapid progress over the past decades since the seminal work demonstrated by Dickensheets and Kino [38] from Stanford University in 1996. The microendoscope employs two cascaded 1D MEMS scanners as a scanning element to perform lissajous scanning during image acquisition, as shown in Fig. 9.Based on optical architecture, we can divide CM into two main configurations, which are single-axis and dual-axis confocal microendoscopy. The single-axis architecture is where the optical fiber and objective are co-located along the same optical axis. A high NA objective is usually used to achieve sub-cellular resolution and efficient light collection, and the same lens provides both illumination and collection of light [39–41]. Another alternative lens such as gradient index (GRIN) lenses have been used to achieve millimeter dimensions. These rod-shaped objectives have a refractive index, n, that decreases continuously as a functional of the radial coordinate and can be reduced in size but increased in length with flat surfaces that allow for easy assembly. The WD is determined by the geometry of the objective and is typically on the order of a few hundred microns. Because of this space limitation, the scanning mechanism is typically located on the fiber side of the objective (pre-objective position). In this arrangement, some of the illumination light (or noise) scattered by tissue present in between the objective and focal volume can be collected reducing image contrast. The dynamic range of this configuration is, therefore, limited, and images are usually collected in horizontal or en face cross-sections (plane parallel to the tissue surface). Hence, the dual-axis architecture [42–44] was developed to overcome some of these limitations and uses crossed off-axis illumination and collection of light along separate optical axes to overcome out of focus light tissue scattering. Such novel approach provides a significantly higher dynamic range and allows for the collection of vertical cross-sectional images (plane perpendicular to the tissue surface). This orientation is used by pathologists to evaluate for abnormalities in the differentiation pattern of the epithelium.The first confocal microendoscope demonstrated for clinical use employed the SAC architecture and was developed by Optiscan Pty. Ltd. [41]. This instrument has been integrated into the insertion tube of a medical endoscope (Pentax Precision Instruments EC-3870K, Tokyo, Japan). Scanning of the distal tip of a single-mode optical fiber is performed using a cantilever mechanism, as shown in Fig. 10a. A GRIN objective with an NA∼0.6 focuses the beam into the tissue. Axial scanning is performed with a nitinol Z-actuator that translates the focal volume over a distance of 0–250μm sub-surface. The diameter of the confocal microendoscope unit is around 5mm. The overall size of the medical endoscope is 12.8mm in diameter, as shown in Fig. 10b, which is slightly larger than that of conventional instruments. This instrument can achieve transverse and axial resolutions of 0.7 and 7μm, respectively. The images are collected in horizontal cross-sections at a frame rate of either 0.8 or 1.6Hz and digitized to dimensions of 1024×1024pixels, resulting in an FOV of 500×500μm2. The excitation wavelength is at 488nm. The fluorescence emission is at over 505nm and is collected through the core of a single-mode fiber.Electromagnetic MEMS microscanner based SAC microendoscope was developed by Olympus Inc. for a proof-of-concept, shown in Fig. 11[45]. Later on, based on the MEMS electrostatic staggered vertical comb (SVC) scanner was integrated into microendoscopes with a custom made objective lens co-developed by O. Solgaard’s group at Stanford University and R.R. Richards-Kortum’s group at the Rice University developed [46,47]. Based on similar scanning mirror design as the Stanford University team, X. Zhang’s group from the University of Texas at Austin developed a handheld miniature fiber-optics based fluorescence hyperspectral confocal imaging system using their custom-made SVC MEMS scanners [48]. The system was used for oral cancer detection with a large FOV by hand-made mosaicing. Most recently, electrothermal or electromagnetic scanners based confocal microendoscope have also been developed for 3D imaging [49]. However, those proof-of-concept designs have not been used for in vivo imaging due the relatively large enclosure.The DAC architecture is a novel confocal design that separates the illumination and collection beams along different optical axes, using the region of overlap between the two beams (focal volume) to define the resolution [50–53], as shown in Fig. 12a. Low NA objectives are used to enable a long WD so that the scanner can be placed on the tissue side of the lens or in the post-objective position. In this configuration, the two beams are always incident to the objective on axis, thus the scan mirror can sweep a diffraction-limited focal volume over an arbitrarily large FOV, limited only by the maximum deflection angle of the mirror. This feature allows for the size of the instrument to be scaled down to millimeter dimensions without losing performance. In addition, very little of the light that is scattered by tissue along the illumination path (noise) is collected in this geometry, resulting in a much higher dynamic range. Consequently, optical sections can be collected in the vertical cross-section to achieve deep tissue imaging with NIR light. This view shows the relationship among tissue microstructures as they vary with depth and provides important diagnostic information about variations in the differentiation pattern of the tissue. Handheld and miniaturized dual-axis imaging tools have been used for both in vivo and ex vivo on transgenic mouse models (cancer model or brain imaging with green-fluorescent protein/red-fluorescent protein (GFP/RFP) endogenous marker) and human skin imaging [54–59].In the outside diameter (OD) 5.5mm miniature microendoscope instrument, a MEMS scanner performs beam scanning while maintaining the fixed region of intersection between the two focal beams below the tissue surface. This device has an active mirror surface (600×650μm2) for each beam that is connected together by a strut and is designed to deflect both beams equally to preserve the overlapping focal volume without introducing aberrations. This barbell-shaped scanner rotates on a gimbal around an inner and outer spring in two dimensions, as shown in Fig. 12b. Orthogonal rows of SVCs actuate the micromirror using electrostatic forces. The maximum optical scan angle is +/− 3.3° on the inner axis and +/− 1.0 ° on the outer axis, and the resonance frequencies of the device are 3.54kHz an 1.1kHz, respectively. Images can be acquired up to 30Hz with a maximum FOV of 800×400μm2 using post-objective scanning. The MEMS based dual-axis confocal microendoscope has been applied for in vivo high-resolution imaging for the human low gastrointestinal (GI) tract first the time in 2012 [60], in vivo images are shown in Fig. 13a–c. Large FOV images (over mm scale) can be reconstructed by custom-made mosaicing algorithms [59]. Individual human colon crypts can be visualized in real time and in vivo, as shown in Fig. 13d and e, and potentially used for optical biopsy and colorectal cancer early detection in the near future.Taking advantages of the superior dynamic range and long WD characteristics of the dual-axis microendoscope [61,62], multi-spectral fluorescent deep imaging with vertical cross-sectional imaging can be achieved [63–65]. Latest version of dual-axis confocal microendoscope employed a 2D MEMS scanner mounted on a thin-film PZT actuation platform to achieve large out-of-plane (piston mode) vertical displacement (>500μm) for dynamic focus tracking [66], as shown in Fig. 14.Endoscope-compatible instruments are also being developed for collection of 2P excited fluorescence. While rapid progress has also been made recently in this area, this nonlinear effect is much weaker and presents a number of technical challenges for generating a sufficient throughput of fluorescence photons for a practical clinical system. The development of PCF [19] represents an important milestone for in vivo microendoscopy by effectively transmitting the excitation light. These hollow-core fibers preserve the width of the ultrashort pulse as it propagates over distances of several meters from the instrument unit to the endoscope without incurring distortions to provide the high peak intensities needed to generate 2P excited fluorescence. Similar to confocal microendoscopy, the scanning mechanism also plays a key role in the design of the miniature 2P microendoscopes. Both bulk PZT based scanning sheet/tubing [67] and MEMS scanners [68] have been developed to address this important feature. Submicron to micrometer lateral resolutions can be realized with 2P microendoscopy. However, ongoing stringent requirements in neuroscience are the main driving force behind the development of MEMS scanner based endoscopic imaging probes. New endoscopic probes enable new imaging capabilities to inspect the nervous system across multiple spatial scales at faster speeds and over larger tissue volumes than previously possible. Moreover, portable, miniaturized fluorescence microscopes with only 2.9g allow brain imaging in freely behaving mice [69]. 3D acquisition is achieved with actuating MEMS based micromotor along optical axis during en face scans. Clinical imaging for cancer diagnosis in human for these MEMS scanner based endoscopic probes has yet to be demonstrated.A miniature MEMS 2D scanner based 2P microendoscope has been developed by Piyawattanametha et al. for in vivo imaging the microvasculature of the brain of living mice. The exploded isometric computer-aided-design (CAD) schematic of the imaging instrument is shown in Fig. 15a. Tiny lens mounts are used to align the collimating optics with the optical fibers. A direct-current (DC) electromagnetic micromotor (Faulhaber Group, GmbH, Germany) that is integrated into the microendoscope drives the focusing shuttle to adjust the position of the PCF. Control wires for the MEMS scanner and micromotor are wire-bonded onto electrodes located on the printed circuit board. This configuration uses separate optical fibers to deliver the ultrashort pulse and to collect fluorescence, as shown in Fig. 15b. The incident light (red arrow, in Fig. 15b) is comprised of ∼110-fs pulses delivered by a PCF that provides up to 1nJ of energy. This beam is collimated by an aspheric lens and reflected by the MEMS micromirror into a micro-optical assembly (GRINTECH GmbH, Jena, Germany) that consists of four GRIN lenses, designated as scan, tube, collection, and objective. The scan and tube lenses work as a beam expander. This beam under-fills the back aperture of the objective lens, which has a working distance of 280μm. A dichroic microprism with a short-pass cut-off at 700nm than deflects the NIR beam to the tissue. Fluorescence (green arrows, in Fig. 15b) is then collected by the full aperture of the objective lens and delivered through a multimode fiber to the photomultiplier tube (PMT). The image resolution (FWHM) was characterized with 100-nm diameter fluorescence beads and found to be 1.29±0.05μm and 10.3±0.3μm in the transverse and axial dimensions, respectively. The housing, shuttle, and base plate are made from a special conductive plastic (polyetheretherketone) to minimize any static charge that may damage the MEMS microscanner. A photo of the assembled instrument contained within a package with dimensions of 2.0×1.9×1.1cm3 and having a mass of 2.9g is shown in Fig. 15c, scale bar 1cm. The size and weight of this MEMS based microendoscope is compatible with imaging the brain microvasculature in vivo in freely moving mice.An electrostatically actuated MEMS scanner [68] is designed around a 2D 750×750μm2 micromirror that rotates on a gimbal in the xy-plane, as shown in the SEM in Fig. 16a, scale bar 250μm. The mirror surface has a radius of curvature >1m and average surface roughness of <16nm. There are two inner and four outer combdrive banks of electrostatic, SVC actuators that steer the micromirror. The inner and outer combdrive banks have 103 and 53 combdrive fingers, respectively. These combdrive fingers interdigitate and provide electrostatic torque in one direction, while the torsional springs supply a restoring torque in the opposite direction. The inner (fast axis) and outer (slow axis) springs that suspend the mirror and outside gimbal frame are 259×6μm2 and 416×8μm2, respectively. The whole MEMS chip die footprint is 3.2×3.0mm2. A pair of control lines drives the opposing pairs of combdrive banks for the inner and outer axes of the scanner are about ±5° and ±4°, respectively. In dynamic operation, scan rates can be adjusted from near static to over the mechanical resonant frequencies of 1.08kHz and 0.56kHz for the inner (solid) and outer (dashed) axes, respectively, as shown by the frequency response in Fig. 16b. A raster-scan pattern, with one axis of the scanner oscillating at resonance and the other at the frame rate of 1–15Hz, is generally used. Images with dimensions of 400×135pixels2 are collected, resulting in a 295×100μm2 FOV.The ability of this MEMS based microendoscope to perform functional imaging was demonstrated by attaching it to the cranium of live mice for collection of 2P excited fluorescence images of neocortical microvasculature in vivo. Visualization of capillaries is seen in Fig. 17a–c, scale bar 50μm. The images shown are averaged over eight frames that were acquired in 2s at a frame rate of 4Hz. The mice were first anesthetized with an intraperitoneal injection of ketamine and xylazine.Furthermore, individual erythrocytes can be tracked as they flow through these vessels. Data were acquired by operating the MEMS micromirror in line-scan mode, where the outer axis is scanned at resonance while the inner axis is held stationary. The red blood cells that move in a parallel direction to the line scan appear as dark streaks. Moreover, the flow velocities can be measured from the slope (dy/dt) of these dark streaks near the center of the line scan, as shown in Fig. 17d.With the same SVC electrostatic scanner, Hoy et al. [70,71] demonstrated a 2P microendoscope system and also used it for micro-surgery with high intensity ultrafast laser power. Similar MEMS scanner based microendoscopes have also been developed for different applications. Tang et al. [72,73] demonstrated a handheld 2P imaging probe by using gimbal-less electrostatically actuated MEMS scanner. In addition, some resonant microscanners have been commercialized by OPUS microsystem company for laser scanning applications. Researchers can directly integrate those scanners into their 2P microendoscope prototypes to replace bulk galvo scanners [74].Cantilever [75,76] or PZT tubing [77–81] based scanning fiber can also be used for ultra-thin 2P microendoscope because of its compact size and robustness. Wu et al. [79] from X. Li’s biomedical imaging group has developed a PZT scanning fiber based 2P microendoscope for in vivo imaging in mouse model, as shown in Fig. 18a. The scan head of the 2P microendoscope consists of a small tubular piezoelectric actuator that spirally scans a double-clad fiber. This fiber is effective for delivery of femtosecond laser pulses for excitation and collection of fluorescence [80]. Excitation is delivered through the core (3.5μm diameter and 0.19 NA), and fluorescence is collected by the core and by the inner cladding (103μm diameter and 0.24NA). The beam is focused by a GRIN lens with 0.22 pitch and a 1.8mm diameter. The distal end of the instrument is housed in a thin-wall hypodermic tube with an overall diameter of 2.4mm. The en face image is produced by a resonant scan of the double-clad fiber in a spiral pattern. The optical fiber extends out of the tubular piezoelectric actuator as a freestanding cantilever. The outer surface of the piezoelectric tube is divided symmetrically into four quadrants that form two orthogonal pairs of drive electrodes. Each pair of opposing quadrants is driven independently out of phase at the mechanical resonance of the fiber cantilever at ∼1690Hz. At this frequency, images consisting of 512 circular scans are generated at 3.3Hz. The diameter of the FOV is ∼160μm using the GRIN lens with a magnification of 0.5. Fig. 18b shows imaging system layout.The potential of 2P microendoscopy to perform optical sectioning was demonstrated with rat oral mucosa stained with acridine orange. 3D volumetric image was generated by collecting horizontal (en face) cross-sections. Moreover, second harmonic generation (SHG) images can be acquired using the similar imaging system and used for in vivo study of cervical tissue with a comparable imaging quality to that by bench-top microscopy, as shown in Fig. 18c and d.Table 1summarizes the properties and characteristics of various optical microendoscopy.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
