@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Identifying regions of interest in reading an image

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We develop an effective method to analyze human’s regions of interest (ROI).Results of two experiments can be compared to test the robustness of the method.The CIEL∗ has been analyze to check the amount of variation between fixation maps.The fixation map can be easy used to analyze the ROIs between images.The delta L∗ value is more effective by computing the fixation map of entire image.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Region of interest,Image quality assessment,Eye movement,Eye-tracking device,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The aim of this study is to develop an effective method to analyze regions of interest (ROIs). Two experiments were conducted at different times using different groups of observers with different images on different displays. Observers’ eye-movement data were collected. Fixation maps showing CIELAB L∗ values were created. The ΔL∗ values between the two maps were used to quantify differences in visual fields, counting methods, observer variability and repeatability between the two experiments.The results showed that fixation maps can be used to effectively analyze the distribution of eye movements between images. The ΔL∗ value calculated for two fixation maps is easy to understand and computes differences based only on ROIs more effectively than differences based on the entire image. The results from the two experiments were consistent, indicating that eye-tracking data are robust for evaluating image quality.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
One of the goals of imaging research is to develop a metric based on image statistics to assess images. Earlier metrics, such as the peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) [1] and root mean square error (RMSE) [2], were focused on the physical measurement of image quality and do not correspond well with the results of visual assessment [3–5]. More recent studies were conducted based on visual assessments using psychophysical methods to investigate parameters that affect the judgment of image quality, such as the naturalness, colorfulness, and sharpness of the images. Efforts were then made to develop color models that predict these parameters and pool the individual parameters to form an overall image quality index [6–13].The above methods were based on a global analysis of the entire image. Another approach is to identify the regions of interest (ROIs) in an image, defined as the areas of an image that attract more visual attention than the other areas [14,15]. Privitera and Stark have noted that ROIs are defined as the loci of the human’s eye fixations and that they can be analyzed using their spatial distribution over the visual stimulus and their temporal ordering [14]. Privitera and Stark have developed an image quality model based on the focus of visual attention within an image rather than the entire image [15,16]. Privitera et al. [15] have conducted a series of experiments to fit the measured scan path data and identify ROIs, first using an eye-tracking system. They then used geometrical spatial kernels and linear filter models to locate the ROIs in an image. Nguyen et al. [3] have grouped ROIs based on an analysis of scan-paths and sequences of fixation for viewing grayscale images and subsequently performed compression based on the ROIs of an image. The algorithm only addresses grayscale images and thus may not work well for color images.Because the eye is the first element of the visual system to receive visual information, it is also the only means by which the brain obtains external images. Henderson and Hollingworth [17] have found that eye movements are critical for the efficient and timely acquisition of visual information during complex visual-cognitive tasks. The eye-tracking technique has been widely applied in various research areas, such as human factor and interface design, advertising and marketing, psychology and neuroscience, attention span studies and visual text analysis. In the image assessment research field, fixation-map analysis provides an opportunity to objectively define the principal ROIs for viewing images [18]. This study differs from the previous studies in that it employs an eye-tracking technique to develop an effective method to analyze ROIs.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study, two experiments were performed to examine the role of ROIs in the task of assessing image quality for 17 images using an eye-movement system. The results can be described in terms of a fixation map, and the distribution of eye movements between images can be directly analyzed in terms of CIELAB color differences. The results from two experiments were highly consistent. This implies that the eye-tracking technique can provide robust results. Additionally, it is easy to understand the experimental uncertainty in terms of color differences.Table 9summarizes the experimental uncertainties in terms of ΔL∗ values, including visual field, FD and FC method, interobserver variability and repeatability. The results of FD and FC are quite similar. The results showed that the typical IOV result, representing the typical observer variability, is approximately 3 ΔL∗ units. The repeatability for images used in both experiments is good and was smaller than IOV. This result concluded that eye-tracking is robust for studies that evaluate image quality.In different types of images, there was a clear trend that the observers tend to focus on either human faces or animal eyes. Vu et al. examines visual fixation patterns in subjects performing an image quality assessment task, with similar results [26]. This study also shows that observers tend to ignore the blue sky, grass and foliage in the landscape images; they nearly always pay attention to the image’s main objects, such as a building or a fountain. The results were similar to those found by Santella and DeCarlo [16]. Observers could not clearly identify ROIs when the images included too many objects; thus, they almost always focused on the central region of the images. The central region attracted more attention than the background and the other objects in the images studied.As noted earlier, Privitera et al. [15] and Henderson and Hollingworth [17] paved the way for a new wave of ROI research. This study continued those earlier studies by focusing on a more detailed examination of ROIs. Eye-movement measurements provide a valuable method for describing imaging science in terms of ROIs. The fixation map method described here is effective in correlating ROIs to an image. The color-difference or lightness-difference value calculated between two fixation maps is both easy to understand and highly effective because it computes the difference only based on ROIs, which receive the most attention.