@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A framework for real-time Twitter data analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A framework for real-time Twitter data analysisWe propose improvements to the Soft Frequent Pattern Mining (SFPM) algorithmThe stream of tweets is organized in dynamic windows whose size depends both on the volume of tweets and timeThe set of keywords used to query Twitter is progressively refined to highlight the user’s point of viewComparisons with two state of the art systems

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Social sensing,Twitter analysis,Topic detection,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Twitter is a popular social network which allows millions of users to share their opinions on what happens all over the world. In this work we present a system for real-time Twitter data analysis in order to follow popular events from the user’s perspective. The method we propose extends and improves the Soft Frequent Pattern Mining (SFPM) algorithm by overcoming its limitations in dealing with dynamic, real-time, detection scenarios. In particular, in order to obtain timely results, the stream of tweets is organized in dynamic windows whose size depends both on the volume of tweets and time. Since we aim to highlight the user’s point of view, the set of keywords used to query Twitter is progressively refined to include new relevant terms which reflect the emergence of new subtopics or new trends in the main topic. The real-time detection system has been evaluated during the 2014 FIFA World Cup and experimental results show the effectiveness of our solution.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Over the last 40 years, providing automatic solutions to analyze text documents collection has been one of the most attractive challenges in the field of information retrieval. More recently, the focus has moved towards dynamic, distributed environments, where documents are continuously created by the users of a virtual community, i.e. the social network. In the case of Twitter, such text portions, called tweets, are usually related to events which involve many people in different parts of the world.In this paper we present a framework to analyze the Twitter stream in order to detect relevant topics within a generic macro event.Differently from other techniques which focus on the detection of specific events, e.g. earthquakes, or provide offline solutions for the analysis of tweets that match some static filter, our system has been designed to adapt its behavior to the specific nature of incoming data. After choosing some generic terms to query Twitter, the stream of tweets is split into dynamics windows which are analyzed to promptly detect relevant topics. Since our aim is to capture the user’s perspective on discussing the events, the initial set of keywords is progressively updated to include new important terms emerging from the tweets, or to delete those unused.The topic detection algorithm we present is an improved version of Soft Frequent Pattern Mining (SFPM), designed to overcome the limitations of SFPM in dealing with dynamic, real-time, detection scenarios. We chose SFPM as core of our framework for two reasons. First, because of its better performance in detecting relevant topics as compared to other basic techniques [1]; second, because of its modular design, which allows to easily change the way relevant terms are selected, while maintaining the efficiency of a simplified Frequent Pattern Mining approach.This paper extends a previous preliminary version of the method we proposed in [2], and includes three major novel contributions. The first is a comprehensive review of the state of the art techniques for real-time event detection and trend identification. The second contribution is an in-depth comparison between the performances achieved by our framework and three alternative solutions, namely, a basic SFPM-based approach and two complete real-time systems, i.e. enBlogue and TwitterMonitor. The third contribution is the validation of the system proposed on data flowed through Twitter during the 64 matches of FIFA World Cup 2014.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: some related works are outlined in Section 2. The topic detection system we propose is described in Section 3. Section 4 presents the experimental results. Conclusions are discussed in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
