@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
MEMS-based tactile displays

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper describes tactile displays with MEMS technology.Tactile displays represent tactile sensation with various simulation methods.We classify the displays according to tactile sensation presented on them and describe them.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Tactile display,MEMS,Actuators,Smart materials,Mechanoreceptors,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper discusses state-of-the-art tactile displays fabricated by a micro-electronic-mechanical-system (MEMS). A tactile display conveys tactile sensations to users by using actuators. Traditional tactile displays consist of large size actuators, such as a motor or an ultrasound vibrator, to convey tactile feedback by vibration. In addition, the tactile sensation of traditional displays has poor resolution. Microelectromechanical system (MEMS) technology, which is a miniature fabrication process, enables etching, sputtering and assembling of miniature structures. Recently, the technology was applied to tactile displays. For example, shape memory alloy (SMA) actuators are widely used in tactile displays to convey roughness or vibration. The actuators are fabricated by a sputtering process and then thinned. The displays convey various tactile sensations, including feedback and tactile sensations of objects such as paper or wood. This paper is a review of tactile displays fabricated by MEMS technology. We also describe the fabrication processes and stimulation methods to present the potential and applications of the displays.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Humans distinguish their surrounding environments on the basis of the five senses of sight, hearing, touch, smell and taste. The largest sensory organ of humans is skin, which has a surface area of almost 1.6m2 and includes a variety of receptors. Unlike the other senses, the sense of touch is distributed across all of skin [1]. Humans determine the surface conditions of objects and perform actions on the objects based on tactile information such as pressure, vibration and temperature [2].Devices that convey tactile information artificially have been proposed. Such a device is called a tactile display. The display mimics human tactile sensation using receptors. Three stimulation types are used [3]: simulation of physical characteristics of objects, stimulation of receptors with the vibration of actuators, and direct stimulation of receptors.The first type is simulation of physical characteristics of objects on the display. Several researchers have fabricated braille displays with piezo actuators [4–6]. A braille display with a shape memory alloy actuator was also fabricated [7]. Some studies report tactile displays with ultrasound vibration to change the surface texture. Watanabe et al. fabricated a tactile display that changes the tactile sensation of the contact part with a squeeze film [8]. Asano et al. fabricated a tactile display that changes the tactile sensation by applying vibration to the contact part [9]. Kitazawa et al. fabricated a tactile display that converts motor rotation into stiffness on the display [10]. Some researchers have used smart fluids to represent stiffness [11–14]. Stanley et al. fabricated a tactile display that changes stiffness by air pressure and particle jamming [15]. Konyo et al. fabricated a tactile display with ion conducting polymer gel film actuators [16]. Kameyama et al. fabricated tactile display for surgical operation [17]. The display represented cutting force of soft tissue with smart fluid. The display could convey resistive or shear force by changing the frequency. Winfield et al. fabricated a tactile display to the control friction force [18]. Simon et al. fabricated a tactile display with Peltier elements to control surface temperature [19].The second type is stimulation of receptors with the vibration of actuators. Maeno et al. fabricated a tactile display with an ultrasound vibrator to stimulate mechanoreceptors [20]. Some researchers fabricated tactile displays that convey tactile sensation using an air jet [21] or a suction force [22]. Some fabricated a tactile display with piezo actuators. Ikei et al. evaluated the surface textures of a display by comparing it with real surface textures [23,24]. Kyung et al. combined Peltier elements in a display to convey thermal information [25,26].The third type is direct stimulation of receptors. The resolution of these displays is a few tens of millimeters. Electro-tactile displays with electrodes have been proposed [27–29]. Paul et al. fabricated an electrode array to stimulate a tongue by using the concept of the electro-tactile display [30]. We summarize the displays in Table 1.The resolutions of the displays are a few millimeters or less. Moreover, the sizes of the displays are large. Most displays are not suitable for portable use. To improve tactile displays, microelectromechanical system (MEMS) technology has been shown to have numerous benefits. The minute fabrication process it uses is based on semiconductor manufacturing technology. This technology has been applied to micro-mechanisms such as accelerometers, nozzles of ink jet printers and electrical circuits. In MEMS devices, minute structures are fabricated on a substrate by etching and sputtering. In the etching process, gaps are created chemically using gases or solutions. In the sputtering process, metal layers are formed by depositing metal particles. In both of these processes, the pattern of gaps is controlled using a mask. By repeating these processes, a minute structure is finally fabricated. Smart materials, such as piezoelectric materials or shape memory alloys, can also be introduced. With these materials, various functions are added to a device. MEMS also offers high productivity, allowing multiplestructures to be fabricated simultaneously using a single pattern. Structures that can be used to convey tactile sensation can be fabricated in a dense pattern on a substrate. Finally, MEMS allows a high level of integration, so that sensors and actuators can be fabricated together. By using MEMS technology, high-resolution tactile displays can be fabricated and assembled on a substrate. Such displays can convey several tactile sensations at once, so that users can perceive richer tactile experience.In this paper, we focus on tactile displays based on MEMS technology and describe the displays according to the tactile sensation conveyed. We also describe characteristics of the displays such as the material used, the fabrication process and the actuation method.The structure of skin is important for stimulating receptors. Here, we describe the structure of human skin and the tactile mechanisms involved. The skin of a human is the largest sensory organ [3]. Mechanoreceptors located beneath the skin detect strain, vibration and temperature changes when the skin is subjected to mechanical stimulation. This allows the human to experience tactile sensations, thermal sensations and pain. Humans distinguish the surrounding environment and determine their actions based on the information from receptors, together with other information such as that obtained through the senses of smell and sight. Skin also has functions of protection from bacteria, thermal control, secretion, excretion, synthesis of vitamins, and breathing. Skin is classified into nonhairy and hairy parts. Nonhairy parts are distributed over the palms, thenar eminence, and fingers. Here, the location of receptors and the structure of skin such as fingerprints are optimized to increase sensitivity. Thus, nonhairy parts are suitable for distinguishing the surface texture of objects [31]. Hairy parts have an air root and occupy most of the skin. Beginning at the surface, skin is classified into epidermal, dermal and subcutaneous tissue, as shown in Fig. 1. One is receptors for temperature or pain and are only nerve endings. In addition, receptors for temperature are classified into warm receptors and cold receptors. Other is mechanoreceptors. Mechanoreceptors react to tactile information such as pressure and vibration. Mechanoreceptors and nerve cells are collectively called mechanoreceptor units. The units play an important role in distinguishing the surface of an object. We describe the tactile mechanism associated with these units in the following section.Mechanoreceptor units are classified on the basis of adaptability and their receptive field. The receptive field is the area where neuronal firing from mechanoreceptors occurs due mechanical stimulation. Type I units have a small field receiving stimulation with a clear boundary. In contrast, Type II has a large field receiving stimulation with an unclear boundary. Adaptability is a response to stimulation. The fast adaptive (FA) type responds to changes in stimulation and the slow adaptive (SA) type responds to constant stimulation. Mechanoreceptors are classified into the categories FA-I, FA-II, SA-I, SA-II. The Meissner corpuscle corresponds to FA-I and the Pacinian corpuscle corresponds to FA-I. The Merkel disc corresponds to SA-I and the Ruffini corpuscle corresponds to SA-II. The locations of these are shown in Fig. 1. The density of the units is different in each part of the skin. For example, the density in the fingertips is high, but decreases towards the palm [32]. Signals from the mechanoreceptors pass through the spinal cord and go to the brain, where they are processed.According to discrimination experiments using geometrical patterns conducted by Johnson et al., the smallest detectable width of gap is 0.9mm [33]. In addition, the resolution of the fingertips and the brachium is 3mm and 30mm, respectively, in the case of two points of stimulation. Because mechanoreceptors are located densely in the fingertips and lips, the resolution is high there. In the case of discriminating surface texture patterns, patterns having a roughness of 100μm cannot be distinguished when the fingertips of subjects simply make contact with the textures [34]. However, surfaces having a roughness of 10μm are detectable when subjects trace the texture [35]. Thus, when touching the surface of real objects, users are able to perceive tactile sensation. In tactile displays, if tactile elements have a separation of 0.9mm or less, richer tactile sensations can be conveyed. Using MEMS technology, miniature tactile display elements can be positioned with spacings of a few hundred microns. Thus, high-resolution tactile displays are realized. In the following sections, we describe tactile displays fabricated using MEMS technology.This type of tactile display directly conveys physical characteristics such as surface texture, stiffness and temperature, based on displacement of actuators or the type of materials used. We describe some types of tactile displays using tactile sensation in the following subsections.A braille display is the simplest example of a tactile display. The display conveys literal information to blind people using raised dots. Characters are represented by the pattern of dots. We consider braille dots as surface textures. Wu et al. fabricated a braille display with a thin flexible polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) diaphragm [36,37]. The diaphragm is deformed by air pressure controlled by external valves that represent the braille dots. Micro pneumatic valve have been also fabricated by other researchers [38,39]. Braille displays based on phase changes have also been reported. Braille displays based on a solid-to-liquid phase change were fabricated [40,41]. This phase change is controlled by a micro fabricated heater. Jun et al. fabricated a display using Paraffin wax. The wax increases its volume when it changes from solid to liquid at a low temperature. The display encapsulates the wax and deforms rubber braille dots. In another study, a display was fabricated that was based on expansion of air by a heater and an e-beam evaporator [42].Smart materials that change characteristics due to stimulation have been applied to braille displays. Tsujita et al. fabricated a display using electrorheological (ER) fluid [43,44]. The ER fluid forms chain-like clusters along the direction of applied voltage and changes its viscosity. The display consisted of pins and microchannels fabricated by photolithography. Braille dots are represented by the actuation of pins restricted by the clusters in the ER fluid. Goto et al. focused on clusters of ER fluid and fabricated a braille display that represents braille code with bumps of clusters [45]. An electro-conjugate fluid (ECF), one of the smart fluids, generates flows along the direction of applied voltage. Kim et al. fabricated a braille display based on an ECF [46]. They produced electrodes using electroforming and lithography to generate flow in the assembly. The display produces dots by deforming a diaphragm using the ECF flow.Braille displays based on the deformation of smart materials have also been proposed. Kato et al. fabricated a display using an ionic polymer metal composite (IPMC) and organic transistors [47], as shown in Fig. 2. The IPMC is deformed by an applied voltage and small dots in Fig. 2(a) are actuated. The display produces braille dot patterns by the vibration of IPMC actuators, as shown in Fig. 2(b). Campanella et al. fabricated a braille display with an etched silicon wafer and an optical actuator consisting of liquid crystalline elastomers and carbon nanotubes [48]. The actuators change their bulk dimension through photothermal conversion. The display reproduces braille code with a pattern of light. Soulimane et al. proposed a braille display using piezo actuators [49], which are deformed by an applied voltage. However, the displacement produced was extremely small. To solve this problem, Watanabe et al. reported a braille display with a hydraulic displacement amplification mechanism (HDAM) [50,51]. The mechanism was fabricated by a liquid encapsulation method in a MEMS device [52]. As a result, the displacement of the piezo actuators was increased to 100μm. They confirmed that braille code could be effectively produced using vibrations of the piezo actuators.These displays convey surface textures such as roughness and shapes. To convey the texture, displacement of an actuator is used. Displays using actuators driven by air pressure have been reported. Shikida et al. fabricated a tactile display that used bubbles. A diaphragm with a fingertip contact is actuated by changes in the bubble volume [53,54]. Doh et al. fabricated a tactile display by controlling based on air pressure control [55]. King et al. fabricated a tactile display to enhance the da Vinci system in surgical operations [56,57]. Yoshikawa fabricated a tactile display using shape memory alloy (SMA) [58], which recovers its shape by heating. Hence, the heat needed for actuation is typically wasted. However, newer displays consist of thin sputtered SMA actuators to remove heat effectively after they recover shapes. Paschew et al. fabricated a tactile display using poly-N-isopropylacrylamide (PNIPAAm) actuators [59]. PNIPAAm is a material that is polymerized by light and changes its volume when heated. The PNIPAAm actuator array was fabricated using photolithography. This display uses photothermal conversion and presents a three-dimensional texture pattern converted from a light pattern.Some authors have fabricated displays based on electrostatic force. Sasaki et al. fabricated a tactile display using tulip-like actuators [60]. Youn et al. fabricated a tactile display that produces vibration and friction forces using an electrostatic force [61]. They confirmed that the vibrations and friction forces could be controlled by the voltage and frequency. The actuators are controlled using an electrostatic force and utilized as clutches to produce bumps on the display. Na et al. utilized an electromagnetic force to control air pressure in a display [62].Force display represents the stiffness of objects. Stiffness is important tactile information that helps humans to identify objects. For example, doctors press on the tissues of patients and detect tumors that are stiffer than normal tissues. This is an easy and effective diagnosis method called palpation.Authors reported a tactile display using magnetorheological (MR) fluid, which is another smart fluid [63]. The MR fluid is encapsulated beneath a PDMS membrane by the liquid encapsulation method in a MEMS device [64]. The MR fluid forms clusters along the direction of an external magnetic field. The display changes its spatial stiffness distribution by forming clusters, and stiff spots with a size of 5mm are produced by controlling the magnetic field distribution, as shown in Fig. 3. Yang et al. fabricated a tactile display combining MR fluid and a spring [65]. A chamber was fabricated using MEMS technology, and the MR fluid and a solenoid were assembled within it.Humans use not only tactile sensation but also other information such as temperature. When humans touch metal and plastic to compare them, they perceive that the metal is colder than the plastic because the heat flux between the metal and fingertips is higher. Thus, the fingertips lose heat and feel cold [66]. A thermal display conveys the temperature of objects. Since it plays an important role, we include thermal displays in tactile displays and describe them. Most fabricated thermal displays are based on Peltier elements [14]. Few studies have reported displays based on MEMS technology. Arai et al. fabricated a thermal display with micro channels [67], as shown in Fig. 4. In the display, ethanol and water are supplied and mixed through the channels. They are spread by air pressure to a fingertip. Then, the fingertip is cooled by the vaporization of ethanol, as shown in Fig. 4(b). They experimentally confirmed that the temperature of the target area was fell by 5–10K by controlling the mixture ratio. This display was integrated with a pneumatic display to convey not only thermal sensation but also tactile sensation.Studies of tactile displays based on vibration have been reported [68]. This type of display takes advantage of the vibration of the actuator to deform skin and stimulate mechanoreceptors beneath the skin. Carreras et al. fabricated a tactile display to represent tactile feedback using pneumatic actuators [68]. They experimentally confirmed that the display could produce tactile patterns.Tactile displays using smart materials have been reported. Vitushinsky fabricated a tactile display based on thin SMA actuators that can move cyclically [69]. Tactile displays based on electrostatic forces have also been proposed [70–73]. Such displays stimulate fingertips by using the displacement and vibration of dielectric polymers. Choi et al. fabricated a display with the polymer actuators and attached them to fingertips [74]. Lee et al. fabricated a tactile display that amplifies the displacement using a structure such as a hydraulic displacement amplification mechanism (HDAM). [75]. Kim et al. fabricated a thin membrane actuator for haptics [76]. The actuator was driven by the combination of ion migration and the piezoelectric effect. The display can produce a driven by electromagnetic forces [77–81]. Casset et al. fabricated a tactile display based on piezo actuators [82]. This display conveys tactile sensation by vibration of an actuator. Watanabe et al. fabricated a tactile display that amplified the displacement of a piezo actuator using a HDAM [83]. They evaluated the tactile sensation of the display, and their results are summarized in Fig. 5(b). Kosemura et al. compared the tactile sensation of the display with tactile samples. They confirmed that the display displacement of 400μm. Some studies reported tactile displays based on array actuators successfully conveyed the tactile sensation of samples such as wood and rubber [84]. Fig. 6shows the dependence of the displacement on the stimulation frequency for different types of actuators. Pneumatic and SMA actuators operate at low frequency and can stimulate only SA type mechanoreceptors. However, these actuators exhibit a large displacement. Polymer and electromagnetic actuators can operate at high frequency and stimulate a range of mechanoreceptors. Piezo actuators can generate the same displacement at different frequency.Electro-tactile displays directly control the activity of receptors, unlike mechanical stimulation. The display applies a voltage to the surface of the skin and increases the intermembranous voltage. When the voltage exceeds the threshold value, neuronal firing occurs [85]. The firing stimulates receptors and tactile sensation is artificially conveyed to the user. The display is expected to be wearable because its volume is small and it requires little electric power compared to a vibration-type display. Ostrom et al. fabricated an electro-tactile display hat used electrodes produced on a substrate using sputtering [86]. Kitamura et al. fabricated a needle-shaped electro-tactile display [87,88]. Titanium wire was etched to fabricate the needle electrode, which can easily penetrate the high-impedance stratum corneum to apply a voltage directly to the epidermis. The display requires only a few volts to convey vibration and the sense of pressure, as shown in Fig. 7(b). This voltage is lower than that for the flat electrode tactile display fabricated by Kaijimoto et al. [26]. Electro tactile displays are suitable for portable use because they only need electrode and power supply and are easily miniaturized. However, they need improvements to reproduce various tactile sensation.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper reviewed tactile displays based on MEMS technology, categorized by the type of stimulation they produce. There are a few reports on tactile displays using MEMS. The different types of displays are summarized in Table 2. Most of the reported displays used deformation or vibration of actuators. It is considered that the development of MEMS displays is increasing. In the future, by improvement of MEMS fabrication methods and the use of smart materials, tactile displays that can convey not only sensations such as resistive force and temperature, but also stickiness [89] and wetness [90] will be fabricated.