@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A distributed beaconless routing protocol for real-time video dissemination in multimedia VANETs

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We design a framework for video (and in general high data rate applications) transmission over a VANET.Our framework includes both application and routing layer design.We analyze MAC layer behavior and improve its utilization by solving the Spurious Forwarding problem.We tested our protocols on a real scenario, and considered both QoS and QoE, including MOS experiments in a real car.We grant a high data rate in ad-hoc mode, also for long distance, through our backbone beaconless approach.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Vehicular ad hoc networks,Multimedia dissemination,QoE,Safety,Smart service,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Vehicular Ad-Hoc Networks (VANETs) will play an important role in Smart Cities and will support the development of not only safety applications, but also car smart video surveillance services. Recent improvements in multimedia over VANETs allow drivers, passengers, and rescue teams to capture, share, and access on-road multimedia services. Vehicles can cooperate with each other to transmit live flows of traffic accidents or disasters and provide drivers, passengers, and rescue teams rich visual information about a monitored area. Since humans will watch the videos, their distribution must be done by considering the provided Quality of Experience (QoE) even in multi-hop, multi-path, and dynamic environments. This article introduces an application framework to handle this kind of services and a routing protocol, the DBD (Distributed Beaconless Dissemination), that enhances the dissemination of live video flows on multimedia highway VANETs. DBD uses a backbone-based approach to create and maintain persistent and high quality routes during the video delivery in opportunistic Vehicle to Vehicle (V2V) scenarios. It also improves the performance of the IEEE 802.11p MAC layer, by solving the Spurious Forwarding (SF) problem, while increasing the packet delivery ratio and reducing the forwarding delay. Performance evaluation results show the benefits of DBD compared to existing works in forwarding videos over VANETs, where main objective and subjective QoE results are measured.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Safety and video surveillance car applications are key Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) services for smart city scenarios and have been attracting an important attention from governments, car manufacturers, academia, and society [1]. Nowadays, the distribution of real-time multimedia content over Vehicular Ad-Hoc Networks (VANETs) is becoming a reality and allowing drivers/passengers to have new experiences with on-road videos in a smart city [2,3]. According to Cisco, video traffic will represent over 90% of the global IP data in a few years, where thousands of users will produce, share, and consume multimedia services ubiquitously, including in their vehicles.Multimedia VANETs are well-suited for capturing and sharing environmental monitoring, surveillance, traffic accidents, and disaster-based video smart city applications. Live streaming video flows provide users and authorities (e.g., first responder teams and paramedics) with more precise information than simple text messages and allow them to determine a suitable action, while reducing human reaction times [4]. Vehicles can cooperate with each other to disseminate short videos of dangerous situations to visually inform drivers and rescue teams about them both in the city and on a highway.The perception of videos shared and watched by humans, characterized in terms of Quality of Experience (QoE), is directly measured by the acceptability of the users and is related to, but differs from the extensively studied concept Quality of Service (QoS) [5]. QoS-based approaches and metrics, such as the ones based on link/network-related parameters (packet loss, packet delay, and/or Received Signal Strength Indicator (RSSI)) fail to capture subjective aspects of video content related to human visual system as expected for human-centric environments. Therefore, QoE objective and subjective metrics, such as Structural Similarity (SSIM), Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR), and Mean Opinion Score (MOS) must be used to measure the video quality level from the user point-of-view [6].The broadcast nature of vehicular communications brings many technical challenges to the delivery of real-time video flows in VANETs with QoE support. The distribution of live video sequences (from seconds to minutes) with QoE assurance in a VANET is strongly influenced by forwarding schemes, especially in long distance transmissions where, for instance, there are no emergency vehicles in the surroundings and multi-hop V2V communications are required. The destination vehicle(s) can be placed kilometers away from the source and expects to receive on-line video sequences with a good quality level through V2V forwarding schemes.Several forwarding solutions have been proposed in the literature for VANETs [7]. A contention-based forwarding is a well-accepted approach for forwarding data in dynamic multimedia VANETs, where end-to-end routes may not exist at anytime [8]. Opportunistic schemes decide the next-hop forwarder based on a distribution contention phase and with an extra delay; reactive solutions create and maintain a route on-demand, but they are not easily adaptable to geo-cast routing. Proactive solutions define the relay nodes before the content transmission, which is not suitable for dynamic scenarios, like cities. To improve the system performance and video quality level, an opportunistic and beaconless geographic routing protocol is required, in order to create and maintain a high quality backbone for video flows, while increasing the packet delivery ratio, reacting well to dynamic environments or node failures, and avoiding the Spurious Forwarding (SF) problem [9]: this is an issue that because of time-contingent transmissions may erroneously stop the packet propagation, affecting the packet delivery ratio, more and more as the bit rate raises.This article presents a protocol for real-time video dissemination on multimedia highway VANETs, called DBD (Distributed Beaconless Dissemination), together with an application framework that allows vehicles to seamlessly share videos (e.g., danger situations, disasters, or surveillance smart city applications) with other peers in a multi-path fashion and with QoE assurance. Our proposed protocol creates V2V backbones for fast video packet relaying, thus increasing the packet delivery ratio, reducing the forwarding delay caused by the contention phase of reactive/opportunistic geographic routing schemes, and enhancing the user experience when watching live video flows. At the same time, it also aims to improve the IEEE 802.11p MAC (Medium Access Control) layer utilization to solve the SF problem.The proposed solution improves the transmission of live on-road videos for medium-long distances as required for disaster, surveillance, and even for many entertainment multimedia smart city services. The benefits of DBD compared to existing works in forwarding video flows in urban highway infrastructureless VANETs are demonstrated with the aid of simulation and real QoE experiments, where main objective and subjective QoE results are presented, namely SSIM, PSNR, and MOS. To our knowledge, this is the first attempt to evaluate a routing scheme for live video streaming in VANETs with real MOS experiments.The remainder of the article is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the related works; our proposal is explained in Section 3, together with details about the SF problem. Section 4 presents the test environment, scenario, implementations, and simulation results. The conclusion and future work are described in Section 5.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
