@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Twitter in academic events: A study of temporal usage, communication, sentimental and topical patterns in 16 Computer Science conferences

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Analysis of Twitter on 16 CS conferences over five years.Over time, users increase informational use and decrease conversational usage.LDA allows conference clustering, unveiling shared areas of interest.Sentiment analysis exposes differences between research communities.Model of user participation explains the importance of different social features.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Twitter,Academic conferences,Evolution over time,Topic models,Sentiment analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Twitter is often referred to as a backchannel for conferences. While the main conference takes place in a physical setting, on-site and off-site attendees socialize, introduce new ideas or broadcast information by microblogging on Twitter. In this paper we analyze scholars’ Twitter usage in 16 Computer Science conferences over a timespan of five years. Our primary finding is that over the years there are differences with respect to the uses of Twitter, with an increase of informational activity (retweets and URLs), and a decrease of conversational usage (replies and mentions), which also impacts the network structure – meaning the amount of connected components – of the informational and conversational networks. We also applied topic modeling over the tweets’ content and found that when clustering conferences according to their topics the resulting dendrogram clearly reveals the similarities and differences of the actual research interests of those events. Furthermore, we also analyzed the sentiment of tweets and found persistent differences among conferences. It also shows that some communities consistently express messages with higher levels of emotions while others do it in a more neutral manner. Finally, we investigated some features that can help predict future user participation in the online Twitter conference activity. By casting the problem as a classification task, we created a model that identifies factors that contribute to the continuing user participation. Our results have implications for research communities to implement strategies for continuous and active participation among members. Moreover, our work reveals the potential for the use of information shared on Twitter in order to facilitate communication and cooperation among research communities, by providing visibility to new resources or researchers from relevant but often little known research communities.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Twitter has gained a lot in popularity as one of the most used and valuable microblogging services in recent years. According to the current statistics as published by the company itself11https://about.twitter.com/companyas of May 2015., there are more than 300 million monthly active users, generating over 500 million tweets every day, expressing their opinions on several issues all over the world. This massive amount of data generated by the crowd has been shown to be very useful in many ways, e.g., to predict the stock market [8], to support government efforts in cases of natural disasters [1], to assess political polarization in the public [11,41], and so on.Another popular application of Twitter not only on a global scale, but in a more contextualized one, is the usage of the microblogging service in specific local events, which happen around the world. Usual examples are large sports events such as the World Cup or the NFL finals, but also smaller events such as conferences, meetings or workshops where people gather together in communities around specific topics. These events are typically identified with a particular hashtag on Twitter (e.g., #www2014) and setup by an organizing team to give the audience a simple-to-use platform to discuss and share impressions or opinions happening during these events to serve as a back-channel for communication [2,31,52].It is not surprising that recent research has also identified the need to study Twitter further for instance for communication [13,47] or dissemination [3,26,29,45,49] purposes. These studies suggest that Twitter serves as an important tool for scholars to establish new links in a community or to increase the visibility of their research within the scientific landscape. Although there is a considerable body of work in this area, there is not much focus yet in studying a large sample of scientific events at the same time, which would help to generalize the results obtained. Until now, most researchers have investigated only one, or as many as three, scientific events simultaneously, while ignoring temporal effects in terms of usage, networking, or content. These are important aspects to be considered, since Twitter’s population and content types are quickly and continually changing [25].Studying Twitter as a back-channeling tool for events such as academic conferences has several uses. For instance, by investigating usage patterns or content published, conference organizers could be able to better understand their attendees. By identifying (i) which are the most popular conference topics, (ii) who emerge as the online community leaders, (iii) how participants interact, (iv) what is the users’ sentiment towards the event, etc. organizers and researchers can create attendance and participation prediction models, they can also quantify trending topics in their respective research community, or they might invent novel recommendation systems helping academics connect to each other with greater ease [17,46,47].Objective:Overall, our objective with this kind of work is to shed light on how Twitter is used for communication purposes across scientific events over time (and especially in the computer science domain). What is more, we wish to unveil community characteristics such as topical trends and sentiment which can be used to forecast whether or not a user will be returning to the scientific event in the following years.Research questions: In this respect we have identified five research questions, which we used to drive our investigation. In particular, they are as follows:RQ1 (Usage): Do people use Twitter more for socializing with peers or for information sharing during conferences? How has such use of Twitter changed over the years?RQ2 (Network): What are the structures of conversation and information sharing networks at each conference? Have these network structures changed over time?RQ3 (Topics): To what extent do conferences differ in their topical coverage? Is there a topical drift in time over the years or does this stay stable?RQ4 (Sentiment): Are there differences in the sentiment of Twitter posts between conferences? Does sentiment of the tweets posted in each year of the conference change over time?RQ5 (Engagement): Do users who participate on Twitter during conferences keep participating over time? Which features are more helpful to predict this user behavior?To answer these questions, we crawled Twitter to collect a dataset that consists of tweets from 16 Computer Science conferences from 2009 to 2013 – all 16 conferences each year. We examined the use given to Twitter in these conferences by characterizing its use through retweets, replies, etc. We studied the structures of conversation and information-sharing by deriving two networks from the dataset: conversational (replies and mentions) and informational (retweets) networks. Moreover, we studied the content of the tweets posted by analyzing their sentiments and latent topics trends. Furthermore, to understand the factors that drive users’ continuous participation, we propose a prediction framework which incorporates usage, content and network metrics.Findings:As a result of our analyses, we found: (i) an increasing trend of informational usage (URLs and retweets) compared to the stable pattern of conversational usage (replies and mentions) of conferences on Twitter over time; (ii) the conversation network is more fragmented than the information network, along with an increase in the fragmenting of the over time; (iii) important differences between conferences in terms of the sentiments extracted from their tweets; (iv) Dynamic Topic Model (DTM) compared to traditional LDA, captures relevant and different words and topics, but the latter provides more consistency in the semantic of topics, and (v) that the number of conference tweets, the users’ centrality in information networks, and the sentimentality of tweets are relevant features to predict users’ continuous participation on Twitter during academic conferences. These results summarize the online user participation of a real research community, which in turn helps to understand how it is perceived in online social networks and whether it is able to attract recurring attention over time.Contributions: Overall, our contributions can be summarized as follows:•The in-depth study and a set of interesting findings on the temporal dynamics Twitter usage of 16 Computer Science conferences in the years 2009–2013.The mining, introduction and provision of a novel large-scale dataset22The dataset is shared by request at dparra@ing.puc.cl.to study Twitter usage patterns in academic conferences over time.Paper structure:Section 2 reviews Twitter as a backchannel in academic events. Then, Section 3 describes the dataset in this study and how we obtained it. Section 4 presents the experiment setup, followed by Section 5 which provides the results. Section 6 summarizes our findings and concludes our paper. Finally, Section 7 discusses the limitations of our research and provides insights to future work in this field.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we investigated how Twitter has been used in academic conferences and how this has changed over the years. We addressed this research under five research questions to study the usage, the network structures, latent topics, user sentiment, and user participation on Twitter during conferences.To answer the first research question RQ1, we computed four features to quantitatively measure two aspects of Twitter use at conferences: informational usage and conversational usage. Our results show that researchers are, in fact, using Twitter in 2013 in a different way than they did back in 2009, by favoring the information-sharing value of Twitter. Users have increased the use of the retweet operation and the sharing of external resources by means of URL posting, along with a proportional decrease in the use of Twitter for conversational interactions, such as replies and mentions.Secondly, in order to answer RQ2, we constructed the conversation network and the retweet network of each conference and used network properties to measure how people interacted over the years. Our results show that with an increase in participants over time, the conversation scattered into smaller groups, while the information flow (retweets) stayed mostly within one giant componentRegarding research question RQ3 we attempted to discover latent topics emerging from users’ tweets, and whether these topics could help us categorize the conferences, as well as analyze differences in topical evolution across the years. Interestingly, we found that representing the conferences as their topics, high quality clusters could be extracted, which made the grouping together of conferences with similar interests and research areas possible; in addition to setting apart those conferences who have less topics in common. At the same time, it was possible to account for latent topical differences over time between conferences by applying Dynamic Topic Models (DTM).As for the fourth research question RQ4, we investigated the extent to which conferences differ in regards to the sentiment expressed in their tweets, and whether their overall sentiment changes over time. We found that half of the conferences do not present consistent patterns of sentiment. Yet, well-established communities, such as CHI and WWW present stable patterns and Human Computer Interaction conferences (CHI, IUST, UBICOMP) show consistently more emotion and a higher number of positive tweets than conferences in more analytical areas such as WWW, KDD and ISWC.Finally, to answer the fifth research question RQ5, we trained a binary classifier based on the information generated from Twitter usage, such as the user’s network position,, and sentiment inferred from the tweeted content. Our model shows a promising performance, achieving the best prediction when combining conversational features, informational features, sentiment and baseline features. We also found that the most influential factors in driving users’ continuous participation are actively using the conference hashtag, possessing a central position in the information network (as measured by eigenvector centrality), and talking to a larger amount of participantsWeacknowledge there are some limitations to the work presented. First of all, we obtained the quasi-random tweets from the historical tweets, however this approach still needs refinement regarding the choices of several parameters, although we achieved reasonable results compared to other studies.1212As of the time we run our analysis, we did not find other articles presenting efficient methods to efficiently sample random tweets from Twitter that could have served as a basis for our study. However, later, Liu et al. [25] provided statistics and a method on how to derive a random sample from Twitter, although their method is slightly different to ours their results are similar.Secondly, we assumed that conference hashtags were the medium through which users shared information and interacted with others during and about the conference. Although this is adopted by related studies, we may have collected an incomplete set of data as a result of the fact that some participants simply did not use the official hashtag when tweeting about the conference.In future work, we plan to extend our study to a larger set of conferences across different domains in the field such as Information Systems and Data Mining, in order to see whether users in these conferences behave differently on Twitter. In addition, we expect to perform further analysis on the content of tweets. We plan to conduct another experiment involving entity extraction on the topic models, in order to better identify which people, concepts, or places generate the most interest in a conference. We also plan to further study the content of the URLs shared by users on Twitter. So far, we haven’t investigated which type of resources and content people share, and whether we can find differences between research communities. We also plan to incorporate content features in our classification model, in order to tell whether the content shared is also a predictor of continuous conference participation.