@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Effects of display method, text display rate and observation angle on comprehension performance and subjective preferences for reading Chinese on an LED display

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We investigated the optimum dynamic text display methods for delivering Chinese messages on an LED display.The optimal display rate is 160cpm whereas speeds at 320cpm or above are not recommended.Leading display method should be used when the display rate at 320cpm or above is necessary.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
LED display,Chinese comprehension performance,Subjective preference,Text display rate,Observation angle,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study examined the effects of display method, text display rate, and observation angle on comprehension performance and subjective preferences for Chinese characters presented on an LED display. The factors and levels studied were as follows: four text display methods (rapid serial visual presentation ‘RSVP’, leading, paged view scrolling, and continuous scrolling), three text display rates (160 characters per min ‘cpm’, 240cpm, and 320cpm), and seven observation angles (−75°, −60°, −30°, 0°, 30°, 60°, and 75°). The results indicated that a display rate of 160cpm was in general superior to 240 and 320cpm for comprehension scores and subjective evaluations. The effects of display method and observation angle were found to be non significant. However, there was a significant interaction between display method and display rate. The results of this study were used to make ergonomics recommendations applicable to LED displays for determining optimum dynamic text display methods for Chinese characters.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Electronic information display systems are commonly used in public places such as airports, railway stations, and catering outlets. Such systems provide a useful means of delivering timely messages to passengers, customers and workers. Light-Emitting Diode (LED) display systems, in particular, permit changes to be easily made for different display sizes, and present the superlative source of information and video image display with a wide viewing angle and a bright and clear image [1] to allow large numbers of people to read messages simultaneously in various environments and circumstances. The important parameters for the manufacture of LED products and the properties (such as the brightness and luminance of LEDs) have been widely studied for several decades, [e.g., 2–5] and they are still being actively studied in recent years [e.g., 6–8]. However, reading performance on LED displays, especially for reading Chinese characters, has been rarely assessed. The increasing use of LED displays in different market niches and applications has led to increased interest by human factors researchers in exploring effective methods of displaying dynamic information on LED displays. Although some research has been conducted on variable information displays for short English messages in traffic control systems, no studies have examined optimal presentation methods for disseminating large amount of information. Previous work that has been reported on dynamic text displays has only focused on small screens on devices such as wristwatch, cellular phones, pagers and desktop phones [e.g., 9–11] and on website design for CRT (Cathode-Ray-Tubes) or LCD (Liquid Crystal Display) screens [e.g.,12–15]. The effects of design factors on the reading and comprehension of Chinese characters on LED displays tended to be neglected in human factors and ergonomics. Therefore, there is an urgent need to examine the possibility of improving comprehension performance and subjective evaluations through appropriate use of display factors on LED displays, in particular for reading Chinese characters.In attempts to overcome the problem of limited screen size of LED display units, several different methods of presenting dynamic material on displays have been used. The effect of these different LED display methods on Chinese reading and comprehension is important for systems design but are as yet, unknown. The three common categories of display methods for presenting dynamic text on a screen are RSVP (rapid serial visual presentation), leading, and scrolling. The RSVP method serially displays words at a fixed point on the screen, usually at a predetermined rate, in rapid succession. Some advantages of RSVP displays have been reported by human factors researchers. The method directs reader attention to the next text unit because each text unit is presented in the same fixed screen area thus eliminating the need to decide where and when the eyes should be moved next [16,17]. In theory, RSVP has the potential to eliminate the saccades necessary for normal reading [18]. The leading display (originally termed the Times Square display after the display at Times Square in New York City) employs the technique of moving strings of words from right to left. This method can avoid breaking up words and sentences on a screen of limited size and thus improve the smoothness of presentation and enhance understanding of the text presented. In scrolling display, blocks of text move up or down in either a continuous, a line-by-line or page-by-page manner. For scrolling methods, the paged view and continuous scrolling view are two common ways of displaying a large amount of text on screen [19]. For the same display rate, continuous scrolling requires subjects to read through the displayed text during its motion, while paged view scrolling allows subjects to read the information during the static period between scrolling motions. In the current study, the four display methods of RSVP, leading, paged view scrolling and continuous scrolling were tested for use with an LED display. Because of the availability of a static period for reading, it was expected that paged view scrolling may result in higher subjective and objective performance measures than the continuous scrolling method. Muter and Kang [20] suggested that the leading method was as good an English text presentation technique as RSVP in term of comprehension score, and was preferred by readers. However, among the three display methods: RSVP, leading, and scrolling, Chen and Chien [21] suggested that RSVP appeared to be the most practical alternative for small screens and led to the highest reading comprehension for Chinese readers. It was thus anticipated here that both RSVP and leading display methods may result in higher comprehension performance and subjective ratings than the two scrolling methods.For a dynamic display, the speed of text movement is an important determinant for reading and understanding the information presented. There has been some research on the effect of text display speed for the RSVP and leading display methods on computer screens. In research on scrolling display method on computer screens, the speed of scrolling was controlled by the users and so the optimal scrolling speed for LED displays is still unknown. Previous work on the speed of dynamic text display has produced varied results for reading tasks with different display methods. So far, there have been no studies on the effects of the display methods of RSVP, leading, paged view scrolling, and continuous scrolling at different display rates on comprehension of LED displayed messages. The authors here considered that there might be an interaction effect between the display rate and display method and the effect on comprehension performance, therefore, it was necessary to perform a systematic study on these two factors. Sun et al. [22] found that the average fixation time for horizontal reading of Chinese static texts was 0.26s, i.e. a reading speed of 230 characters per minute (cpm). Since dynamic text presentation automatically directs reader attention to the next text unit which will be in the same screen area, unnecessary eye movements are eliminated therefore it is not unreasonable to expect that speeds around or below 230cpm should provide sufficient reading time and therefore result in reasonable comprehension performance and good subjective ratings.LED displays are usually used for presenting messages for a large group of viewers, who normally read the information from different viewing distances and angles. Therefore, apart from the effects of the display method, task factors like observation angle may also have a marked effect on the comprehension performance of viewers. Observation angle is defined as the angle between the observer’s line of sight and the normal line bisecting a display surface. Oetjen and Ziefle [23] showed that anisotropy (having properties that vary according to the direction of measurement) was a critical factor limiting visual performance on a TFT (Thin-Film-Transistor) screen. It was found that for a TFT screen performance was worst when small targets had to be detected when at an off-axis viewing angle of 50° but, that, performance did not deteriorate markedly at the same viewing angle for a CRT screen. A viewing angle of 0° was also found to produce less eye strain and was most preferred by subjects, but the viewing angle was found to have no significant effect on fatigue. Filippidis et al. [24] investigated the relationship between observation angle, angular separation of a sign, and maximum viewing distance from which the text on a signage was legible. The angular separation of a sign is defined as the angle between the two ends of the sign subtended at the distant observer’s eyes. It varies with the size of the sign, the distance of the observer, and the observation angle. As the observation angle increases, the angular separation of the sign and hence the text on it decreases. Filippidis et al. found that the maximum observation angle beyond which the messages on the sign became unreadable was 85°. It is thought that there may also be a maximum observation angle beyond which it will no longer be possible for users to resolve and comprehend the messages on an LED display board. Although an LED display, unlike a TFT screen, does not have an anisotropy effect, the larger the observation angle, the smaller the angular separation of the characters, thus the more difficult it is to read messages on the display board. It is therefore to be expected that subjects observing a display from the extreme sides will perform worse than those viewing from directly in front of the display board and that reading at larger observation angles will result in lower ratings for the subjective evaluation of attributes.Although some research has been conducted on understanding how the task factors mentioned above affect comprehension performance with English written language, no studies have examined the effects of these factors on Chinese reading and comprehension for LED displays. English and Chinese writing systems are very different. The English writing system consists of 26 upper- and 26 lower-case letters, where a letter can be simplified and still be reasonably discriminable from other letters. Whereas, Chinese characters use more varied dots and lines, and many of them have very much more complex shapes than English letters. Lines in Chinese characters can be vertical, diagonal, and horizontal, and they can be straight, gently curved, or with a hook. Because of the very large number of Chinese characters used it is necessary to have complex shapes if they are to be discriminated from each other [25–27]. It seems highly likely that such complexity in character shapes will influence the effects of display method, information display rate, and observation angle on the comprehension and subjective evaluation of reading Chinese messages from a display.In this study, an experiment was conducted to obtain performance measures and subjective evaluations for different display methods and text display rates from subjects viewing LED displays at different observation angles. Since the effects of display factors on reading Chinese have also been widely studied since the last decade [e.g., 15,28–30] and have been continuously receiving a lot of attention by the community, the results of this study would be able to demonstrate the effects of different design factors on Chinese comprehension performance and provide a basis for recommendations for optimizing dynamic text interfaces. The findings were also expected to provide some useful guidance to human factors engineers in understanding the effects of display and task factors on the readability of electronic text so as to facilitate the design of better information interfaces for Chinese on LED displays.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
