@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Attention and intended action in multitasking: An understanding of cognitive workload

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Attention is an important factor concerning cueing of an intended action.Stimulus driven situation of attention capture has facilitative effect.Performance decrement is not associated with an increased cognitive workload.The results have practical significance concerning human errors in multitasking.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Attention,Display,Prospective memory error,Multitasking,Cognitive workload analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The study investigates the effect of attention on prospective memory performance in programmer multitasking (N=60) incorporating a taxonomical understanding of prospective memory errors. It also presents an analysis of cognitive workload (CWL). The results demonstrate that people are more vulnerable to prospective memory performance failure when there is a situation that one is required to devote more attention in monitoring to identify a cue for an intended action. Omission error is the most prominent among all types of prospective memory error. Analysis reveals that when there is a stimulus driven situation of attention capture, a performance decrement observed in terms of prospective memory is not necessarily concerned with an increase in CWL.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Multitasking refers to a situation where an individual is involved in simultaneous performance of two or more tasks that he/she has to devote attention to in an effort to accomplish desired task–goals. Multitasking is increasingly becoming a part of daily job performance in the modern work environment. For instance, in software programming individuals are often involved in handling multiple tasks by opening multiple windows on the screen.Cognitive workload (CWL) refers to the information processing demands imposed by the performance of a task [1]. A particular issue about CWL stems from the increase of potential errors in handling multiple tasks if the CWL is not at the optimal level of an individual. The demand–capacity relationship forms the state of overload, underload, and optimal state. In a complex environment, safe and efficient operation of the interactive system requires that the information-processing demands imposed on the individual do not exceed their capabilities [2]. Thus, high CWL (i.e., deviation from the optimal level) restricts the user in the interaction with the system leading to degradation in performance [3].Multitasking can be approached from a perspective of theoretical emphasis of human cognition or human factors perspective with an emphasis on applied research. The current work is presented with a strong orientation towards the latter benefiting from the former. The orientation is explained by the fact that the study is situational, forming a multitasking environment. A critical synthesis is observed since the main interest is to focus on an understanding of human error in a multitasking environment of programming. The necessity of having an effective presentation of visual information is crucial in such contexts of human–computer interaction (HCI). The more intriguing issue is that of remembering to carry out an intended action relying on the visual cues. This aspect of human cognition pertains to the topic of prospective memory. However, in the literature of display research, the topic of prospective memory has not been identified as an important aspect of user cognition. In general, a prospective memory task refers to remembering to perform a delayed intention. It is concerned with memory for activities that one intends to perform at an appropriate occasion in the future [4]. The present research incorporates the issues of attention and analysis of CWL in a real-life scenario of prospective memory task. In other words, the present research intends to investigate the role of attention in prospective memory performance in the context of programmer multitasking with an emphasis on CWL analysis. The practical implications of this research broadly pertain to the issues of interactive systems.Handling of information from multiple sources is cognitively more demanding than focusing on a single task. It is because human cognition has processing limitations which is clearly present when there are processing requirements in handling multiple tasks. For example, in carrying out programming (i.e., writing codes) and at the same time handling multiple windows, one needs to interleave tasks to cope with the multi-task demands. This manifests that when one is involved in multitasking how he/she manages multiple (task) goals of independent tasks and/or subtasks of a larger task is critical. Thus, the situation requires keeping one’s current goals activated and also to remember future actions. This constitutes the components of task prioritization and task scheduling. The task prioritization process allocates an individual’s limited recourses in order to fulfill task demands. The task scheduling is about performing, delaying, or completing a task. Under such situations of managing processing resources in order to accomplish successful performance one has to keep his/her goals in mind, remember to perform acts at appropriate moments, and avoid falling into habitual acts. Thus, there is a matter of intentional control since retrieval of an intended action occurs at a time when the individual is busy with other demanding tasks. There is so much to gain in terms of better understanding of multitasking from the work that emphasizes on the ability of people to maintain and realize intentions [5,6]. Moreover, in understanding human error, intention is the reference point with which ongoing action or actual outcomes are compared [7] and it is at the core of a prospective memory task. Human errors associated with failing to execute a delayed intention are common. Concerning such prospective memory errors, Dismukes et al. [8] noted that suspending or deferring an action may remove it from the normal environmental cues (e.g., displays, callouts, procedural flows) that serve to trigger retrieval from memory and it is easy to forget to complete deferred actions.As mentioned above, a prospective memory task is concerned with remembering to perform a delayed intention [9,10]. Reason [11] noted that an intention exists as a collection of critically active cognitive schemata. Their activation is refreshed by periodic reviews of the intention. Reason assumes that in the absence of this review procedure, the activation of these schemata will decay spontaneously. Forgetting planned actions can also be caused by interference from earlier or later planning. Reason [12] stressed the vulnerability of individuals to prospective memory errors as among the most common form of human fallibility in everyday life. One of the risks of prospective memory errors in a demanding environment is that of performing a habitual action instead of the intended task [13,14].As a matter of fact, human actions constitute a major source of vulnerability to the integrity of any interactive system. The situation becomes more complex if the situation is that of multitasking. In contrast to accomplishing tasks sequentially, in multitasking there is an issue pertaining to the involvement of different tasks interfering with one another [15,16]. Because the mental resources are limited, the tasks interfere with each other thus erroneous human actions are of great concern. Human error has been an important topic among the practitioners and the researchers in the work environment in an effort to optimize human and system performance. Many have attempted to provide a technical definition of their own concerning the concept. The net result of the efforts has been a clear demonstration of the difficulty to provide a precise definition of human error. Reason [12] made significant contributions on this topic. According to Reason, human error is a generic term to encompass all occasions in which a planned sequence of mental or physical activity fails to achieve its intended outcome. Broadly, error can be understood as either the cause of something, the event, or the consequence of an action [17]. Furthermore, different professional points of view have different emphasis. For instance, Marsden and Hollnagel [18] noted that: (a) engineering perspective considers human as a crucial system component, thus failures can be described in the similar way as for any other constituent equipment, (b) professionals with a psychological orientation often emphasize that human behavior is essentially purposive and that it can only be fully understood with reference to subjective goals and significance of intentions, (c) on the other hand, sociologists have traditionally ascribed the primary forms of erroneous actions to features of the prevailing socio-technical system.In consolidation of the above points, it is understandable that human error involves a deviation from the specifiable functional criteria of an action. It is thus an occasion in which an individual’s action is characterized by the presence of a corresponding ideal state of the action itself for which fulfillment of the operative criteria is required. Without the specified performance criteria the state of action becomes nothing more than a value judgment [19]. That is, there is a specified performance standard or certain criteria against which the (deviant) action can be measured or compared. Therefore, at the instance of an error the individual has failed to fulfill the execution of the action as desired. This implies that an error can only be said to exist if a clear performance standard can define the ideal state of the action as the criteria for acceptance of a response [20].Attentional processes and the issue of visual cue are crucial in the present context of multitasking. Definitions of attention share a component of selectivity – that a primary function of attention is to select information for further processing [21]. Thus, selectivity of processing is central to the topic of attention. According to James [22], the essence of attention is focusing of one’s awareness essentially with the withdrawal from several simultaneously possible objects or trains of thought in order to deal effectively with others.Attention and multitasking are closely linked since the ability to multitask effectively concerns one’s ability to focus and allocate attentional resources [23]. The complication however is the prospective memory processes involved. In a demanding situation while one is busy with an engaging task, prospective memory suffers [24]. It must be emphasized that in a retrospective memory task one is directed to be in a retrieval mode. In contrast, a prospective memory task requires one to self-initiate and execute the intended action at the appropriate moment without a request for retrieval. Thus, in a prospective memory task, attention needs to be switched from the current task, activating the execution of the intended action in the midst of various tasks. This concerns the mechanisms of the target that could easily be noticed. If the cue has high likelihood of being noticed, higher is the possibility that an individual’s attention would be captured (thus, more likely to retrieve and execute the intended action). McDaniel and Einstein [14, p. 13] noted, “By definition, prospective memory tasks are those in which remembering to recall is the primary challenge.” It is common for prospective memory task cues to be unnoticed; because there is no task relevant instruction given to the individual at the time of retrieval (unlike retrospective memory tasks in which the instruction is given at the time of retrieval) [25]. This leads to the question of how an intended action is activated at the appropriate window of opportunity. In this regard, monitoring (for the appropriate moment) is an important aspect of how the cognitive system enables us to remember and execute the intended action [9,26]. This is particularly crucial when individuals are engrossed in a current task, such as programming in a multitasking environment. Some activities are more engaging due to their nature, pacing, and interest value [14, p. 62]. This suggests that prospective memory task requires attention of the individuals in monitoring what is happening in the environment. Otherwise the performance could suffer in such a situation. This is because the processes involved in becoming oriented to the prospective memory target, retrieving the intended action, scheduling execution of the various tasks could be compromised due to the currently engaging task. Kvavilashvili [27] presented evidence that more-engaging ongoing tasks lead to decreased thoughts about the prospective memory task. Attention permits us to notice things around us thereby allowing us to prioritize our visual processing and intended action [28, p. 25].Given the limitation of human cognitive system, an important concern is about the facilitating factors related to the effectiveness in multitasking. Pertaining to the current context of programmer multitasking, it is important to investigate the issue of attention with a suitable experimental design which would provide rich empirical data. This effort serves scientific curiosity directing towards: (a) an investigation of the critical role of attention in prospective memory performance, and (b) shedding light on the nature of CWL experienced by the programmers. Also, a taxonomical understanding of prospective memory errors is pursued in the current study.The nature of the target (that acts as a cue) in a prospective memory task is inherently critical for determining the kinds of processes that support retrieval and execution of the intended action. This is because a target that catches the attention of an individual not only produces switching from the current activity, but also signals execution of the intended action [29]. Therefore, an important characterization of attention is the requirement of devoting attention to monitoring to identify a cue namely, contracted attention (CA) and protracted attention (PA). A situation is characterized by PA if an individual needs to devote more attention in monitoring as compared to another situation [24]. In the present study, when a word is displayed by fading, an individual needs to devote more attention in monitoring as compared to the display by non-fading of a word (characterized by PA and CA respectively).In multitasking, while busy with a current task other events outside the (current) attentional window cease to capture attention [30] thus the cue needs to be salient. However, the question arises whether prospective memory performance decrement is necessarily associated with an increase in CWL. If such is the situation that CA is thought to capture attention in a stimulus-driven manner and attention shift is stimulus driven, CWL should be unaffected irrespective of performance variation [31]. This suggests that even if PA produces a performance decrement as compared to CA, there will be a null effect on CWL. This line of thought is an impetus for the CWL analysis in the present study. With respect to prospective memory errors the current experiment intends to examine the proportion of – invalid response error (failure to a produce desired response within the stipulated time), multi-response error (in which multiple responses are made), and omission error (failure to act) comprising overall prospective memory performance failure. Of these error modes, cases of omission error are expected to be highest. This is conceivable since the situation is such that one has to monitor the word display in the corner window while programming. In the demanding environment such as the present study of programmer multitasking, there is a concern of higher vulnerability to inadvertent omission if the cues that normally trigger execution of an action are not prominent [32].In the light of the aforementioned issues of attention and CWL concerning prospective memory, the present paper reports the experimental investigation of the following hypotheses:1.PA has higher cases of omission error than CA.Prospective memory performance decrement is independent of CWL variation.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
