@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Co-ideation of disaster preparedness strategies through a participatory design approach: Challenges and opportunities experienced at Turrialba volcano, Costa Rica

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
First application of participatory design to volcanic disaster risk management.Two participatory ideation workshops with communities at Turrialba volcano.Uptake self-protective measures influenced by transfer of risk and responsibility.Workshop challenges resulted from human, cultural and resource factors.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
case study,collaborative design,interdisciplinarity,participatory design,reflective practice,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Disaster preparedness is key to coping and adaptation during the immediate aftermath of a natural hazard, but the majority of those at risk do not feel prepared. In this participatory action research we investigate the use of a participatory design approach to increase disaster preparedness around Turrialba volcano, Costa Rica. We present a case study of two ideation workshops and explore the process, outcomes, challenges and opportunities during ideation. Socio-cognitive dimensions, specifically risk and responsibility transfer, appear to be important factors influencing the uptake of self-protective measures. Challenges in workshop facilitation were of a human, cultural and resource nature. However, the overall process was successful with participants showing indications of empowerment and a number of pressing design opportunities identified.Volcanic activity results in tremendous human, social, environmental and economic costs (Auker, Sparks, Siebert, Crosweller, & Ewert, 2013): between 1900 and 2012 volcanic eruptions have been identified as the cause of more than 4.5 million fatalities worldwide (Center for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters, 2012); they inhibited development and poverty reduction efforts (DFID, 2006); devastated complete ecosystems (de Bock, 2013; DeGange, Byrd, Walker, & Waythomas, 2010); and the economic cost of volcanic activity from 1900 to 2014 has been estimated as at least US$3 billion (Center for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters, 2012). These costs are only set to increase in future natural disasters as an increasing number of people are living in high risk (Table 1) areas, resulting in additional economic and infrastructure development, thereby increasing the relative risk in these areas (Basher, 2006; Gencer, 2013).A multi-strand approach to minimize losses as the results of disasters has been implemented globally by the UN since the 1960s (UNISDR, 2013). The current 10-year plan is outlined by the Hyogo Framework for Action (UNISDR, 2005). Established in 2005 it seeks to establish resilience (Table 1) at all levels of society through the systematic integration of risk reduction into policy. It aims to achieve this by addressing the following strategic goals and priorities: (1) governance, (2) assessment and monitoring, (3) knowledge and education, (4) risk factors and (5) disaster preparedness and response.Disaster preparedness at individual, household and community levels is a fundamental component of resilience (Paton, 2003), and can be defined as the process of encouraging availability of resources to facilitate coping and the systems and competencies to coordinate and utilize these resources (Paton, Smith, & Johnston, 2005). It plays a particularly important role in coping and adaptation during the immediate aftermath of a natural hazard, when individuals and communities are expected to be self-reliant (e.g. isolated from external/government assistance) for a minimum of 72 h (e.g. FEMA, 2014; New Zealand Civil Defence, 2014).To encourage disaster preparedness at local levels, efforts have traditionally focused on education regarding natural hazards and associated risks. This is predominantly accomplished through one-way communication that takes the form of distribution of printed material aimed at a homogeneous audience (O'Neill, 2004). The material commonly emphasizes actions individuals can perform to protect themselves (O'Neill, 2004). Implicit in this approach is the fallacious belief that imparting scholarly information automatically leads to awareness, which converts to (appropriate) actions (Boura, 1998; Lindell & Whitney, 2000; Paton et al., 2005). However, people's actions in the face of risk are not just determined by objective scientific information but also by how this information is perceived in light of people's expectations, previous experiences and beliefs, which arise from their social, cultural, economic and political context (Paton, Smith, Daly, & Johnston, 2008). Key socio-cognitive factors that lead to adaptation of self-protective measures include high salience of the hazard; a belief that the hazard will negatively affect oneself; a low level of anxiety; an action coping ability; sense of self efficacy; and a sense of response efficacy (Kievik & Gutteling, 2011; Linley & Joseph, 2004; Paton, Smith, & Johnston, 2000).Despite existing outreach and educational initiatives many people fail to take basic precautions, such as developing a family evacuation plan or keeping a kit with emergency supplies (Al-rousan, Rubenstein, & Wallace, 2014; Karanci, Aksit, & Dirik, 2005; Kievik & Gutteling, 2011; Paton et al., 2000). Consequently, the questions ‘How can people be better motivated to prepare for natural hazards?’ and ‘How can the intention to prepare be facilitated into tangible actions?’ become important. An increasing number of academic studies and organizations advocate community engagement in disaster risk management (FEMA, 2012; Paton et al., 2005), yet few studies address the real-life process and challenges of these approaches. Therefore, in this study we present and reflect on a case study of the use of a participatory design approach to increase levels of individual, household and community disaster preparedness.The overall aim of this participatory action research was to involve participants in collaborative ideation of concepts that can be developed to increase levels of self-reliance in the immediate aftermath of a potential (volcanic) disaster, through enhancing and promoting the adoption of self-protective behaviours. Self-protective behaviours are preventative actions undertaken by residents to reduce their risk (personal and economic) when faced with a natural hazard (Kievik & Gutteling, 2011). This work does not cover the complete design development process, but details the early phase of the project during which ideas for possible outcomes were generated. Here we present the process, outcomes, challenges and opportunities experienced during the facilitation of two participatory ideation workshops focused around disaster preparedness in a volcanic context. Specific objectives were to: (1) gain insight into why people fail to engage in self-protective behaviour in response to existing information, (2) develop a better understanding of what may motivate people to engage in self-protective behaviour, (3) identify what information to support engagement in self-protective behaviour is relevant to communities and (4) collaboratively assess how this information can best be delivered.In this work we focus on the volcanic hazards at Turrialba volcano (Figure 1), one of the six historically active11We adhere here to the Smithsonian's Global Volcanism Program definition of historically active as ‘documented during or shortly after observation’volcanoes of Costa Rica. As the result of its geographic setting, Costa Rica is exposed to a wide range of natural hazards, which include tropical storms, landslides, droughts, earthquakes and volcanoes. Costa Rica ranks second in the world on a list of countries most exposed to three or more natural hazards based on land area, and with 77.9% of its population and 80.1% of its GDP (Gross Domestic Product) in areas of risk it ranks 8th with respect to economic risk from multiple hazards as based on GDP (The World Bank, 2005).After a period of quiescence following its 1864–1866 eruption, Turrialba reawakened in 1996 (Martini et al., 2010). The volcano has a radius of approximately 20 km but only its summit is a National Park: the upper and lower slopes are used for agriculture, the area is famous for the ‘Turrialba cheese’ produced there, and is home to the major archaeological site of Guayabo. This pre-Columbian city experienced at least three eruptions during its occupation from 770 B.C. – 1300 A.D., and its features suggest the inhabitants had a direct connection with the environment and possibly practiced natural religious beliefs (Hurtado de Mendoza, 2004). Unfortunately there are no surviving pre-Columbian oral traditions about these eruptions. Tourism is another main source of income in the area, but it has suffered from the closure of the National Park since 2010 (with the exception of 6 months of temporary reopening in 2011) after increases in activity at Turrialba (van Manen, 2014).With at least 20 eruptions recorded in the geological record (Reagan, Duarte, Soto, & Fernandez, 2006; Soto, 1988), Turrialba presents a significant threat to Costa Rica's Central Valley, the hub of the nation's economic activity, containing the capital, other large population centres and the international airport. The potential hazards at Turrialba are wide-ranging: from large Plinian explosions, pyroclastic flows, lateral blasts and landslides that have the potential for widespread destruction (Reagan et al., 2006), to smaller, more localized and higher probability Strombolian to Vulcanian explosions, lava flows and the persistent release of toxic volcanic gases such as sulfur dioxide, hydrogen sulfide and hydrogen chloride. The latter have already resulted in environmental, health and socio-economic impacts (e.g. de Bock, 2013; D'Alessandro, 2006; Delmelle, Stix, Baxter, Garcia-Alvarez, & Barquero, 2002; Hansell & Oppenheimer, 2004; Rymer et al., 2009).The most recent activity has been characterized by small-scale events, which included minor to moderate phreatic eruptions in 2010 and 2012–2014 (OVSICORI-UNA, 2010, 2012, 2013, 2014) and persistent gas release since 2007 (Martini et al., 2010). Minor volcanic ash fall up to 35 km downwind from the volcano was reported intermittently throughout those years (OVSICORI-UNA, 2010, 2012, 2013; 2014; Smithsonian Institution, 2011). The gas release has resulted in the devastation of local ecosystems (de Bock, 2013) and the damage is clearly visible in the environment (Figure 1).Costa Rica has a comprehensive legal, financial and institutional framework for disaster risk reduction (DRR). This is overseen by the Comisión Nacional de Prevención de Riesgos y Atención de Emergencias (CNE; www.cne.go.cr). The CNE and its two main scientific advisors in the domain of volcanic and tectonic hazards, OVSICORI-UNA (Observatorio Vulcanológico y Sismológico de Costa Rica, Universidad Nacional) and RSN-ICE (Red Sísmica Nacional-Instituto Costarricense de Electricidad), disseminate information to the general public through a range of formal oral and written communication methods that include an online and social media presence, public meetings and printed posters and leaflets (e.g. http://www.cne.go.cr/index.php/educacienuprincipal-92/planes-de-emergencia-menuprincipal-110). Furthermore, DRR has been part of the Costa Rican curriculum since the 1980s. In response to the Hyogo Framework for action, Costa Rica's PLANERRYD (Plan Nacional de Educación para la Reducción del Riesgo y los Desastres) strategy has revised the objective of risk reduction curriculum to the development of a culture of disaster risk prevention (UNICEF, 2012) and DRR is included in a number of subjects, which include science, Spanish and social studies.However, previous work in communities surrounding Turrialba volcano has shown that there is a lack of disaster preparedness at individual, household and community levels, despite high levels of hazard awareness and the education and local preparation initiatives that have occurred (van Manen, 2014). This lack of preparedness exacerbates the risk posed by Turrialba. This observation is not unique: worldwide there is insufficient action and progress on DRR at local levels (GNDR, 2009). Yet efforts directed at the local level can have the biggest impact during and after an event (IFRC, 2011). In light of Turrialba's continued activity and the relatively low probability but high impact occurrence of the acute hazards such as ashfall, engaging local communities with disaster risk management is key.‘Recognition of the fact that the choices that can be made are […] more about how communities and their members experience them in the context of their social, psychological, cultural and institutional characteristics means that the process of making these choices should no longer be viewed as the preserve of emergency managers. It should be regarded as an intrinsically community-based process.’ (Paton, 2005)Participant engagement in the development of ideas that can be developed to enhance and promote the adoption of self-protective behaviours was at the crux of this work: by providing the opportunity to be involved to those most affected by and concerned about the volcanic activity, who therefore have the greatest need for disaster preparedness, they are given (co-) ownership of the results (Hussain, Sanders, & Steinert, 2012). This is the core principle of participatory design, which originated during the 1960s and 70s (e.g. Cross, 1972; Ehn, 1993; Sanders & Stappers, 2008). Robertson and Simenson (2012) define participatory design as ‘to investigate, reflect upon, understand, establish, develop and support mutual learning processes as they unfold between participants in collective “reflection-in-action” during the design process’. Participatory design generally results in outcomes that are more accessible and flexible to changing contexts, bringing about greater levels of satisfaction and suitability (Robertson & Simonsen, 2012; Scariot, Heemann, & Padovani, 2012).Participatory design is frequently facilitated through workshops that bring together designers, users and other stakeholders to assess user needs, problems with existing products or systems and co-create new solutions (Hussain et al., 2012). Therefore, to design more effective solutions to promote self-protective behaviours, it was decided to hold two participatory workshops. These focused on disaster preparedness and were predominantly geared towards co-ideation.All the data originating from the workshops were digitally recorded and coded, so they could be used as reference materials in the development of concepts. Questionnaire data were coded and analyzed using Microsoft Excel. The qualitative data from the workshops were explored using content analysis. Reflective analysis through individual and group-based evaluation with co-facilitators and others was also used.Two workshops were conducted around Turrialba: the first on 12 February 2014 in a community centre in Santa Cruz de Turrialba (from here forth referred to as ‘Santa Cruz’; Figure 1) and the second on 13 February 2014 in the school at Hacienda La Central Volcán Turrialba (from here forth referred to as ‘La Central’; Figure 1). Each of these lasted around two hours. Workshop venues and timings were decided in consultation with members of the local population and employees of the Sistema Nacional de Áreas de Conservación (SINAC; Costa Rica National Park Service), who are responsible for administration of the National Park that comprises Turrialba volcano and have a good rapport with local communities. The workshop in Santa Cruz followed a SINAC‐hosted meeting regarding the current emergency management plan.Participation in the workshops was on a voluntary basis and was open to all residents in communities surrounding Turrialba volcano. The workshops were advertised using posters and word-of-mouth starting 8–9 days prior to the dates. Posters were placed in public places such as shops and bars in surrounding communities and handed to individuals while promoting the workshop verbally. Employees of SINAC also encouraged participation in the 12 February workshop.Prior to commencing the workshops, participants were given a letter explaining the reason for and nature of the workshop, including the researchers' contact details. Informed consent was obtained through a registration form on which name, address and a signature were recorded. Participants were not provided with compensation for attending but refreshments were provided free of charge.After registration participants were given a short questionnaire aimed at evaluating participant demographics and level of preparedness. It also provided some insight into initial thoughts people had regarding what would help them to prepare for a volcanic crisis. While sitting down to complete the questionnaires participants naturally split into a number of groups due to the way the venues had been arranged (Figure 2).Once questionnaires had been completed, participants were given a general welcome and introduction. During all following activities, printed prompts were provided to each table to remind participants of the activity or question (Figure 3). Subsequently they were asked to brainstorm around ‘eruption preparedness’, listing all words or thoughts that came to mind on individual post-it notes. Groups were then asked to collate all post-it notes on a single wall, and arrange them to identify common themes (Figure 2A).Next, participants were introduced to or reminded of the three key steps to disaster preparedness that are common in disaster risk management strategies across the globe: (1) Be informed, (2) Have a plan and (3) Keep an emergency kit (American Red Cross, 2014; CNE, 2014; FEMA, 2014; New Zealand Civil Defence, 2014; Rijksoverheid, 2014).The second exercise again asked participants to brainstorm in groups, this time about ‘How would you motivate people to prepare?’ and ‘What would help you to prepare for an eruption?’ They were requested to use large sheets of A1-size paper and markers to write down or illustrate their ideas. In addition, some of the researchers' ideas were presented to each group as inspiration.After presenting a number of concepts the third phase of the workshops then asked groups to select their favourite idea and develop this further by answering the questions ‘Who is it for?’, ‘What is it?’, ‘When can will it be used?’, ‘Where can it be used?’ and ‘How does it work?’. Participants were encouraged to develop ideas on large sheets of paper, through writing and/or drawing (Figure 2B).A single representative of each group was then asked to present their idea to all participants and researchers, and a single ‘display’ board of their idea was mounted on a wall. Once all ideas had been presented participants were given 3 stickers to prioritize ideas by voting for their favourite (Figure 2C). The three stickers enabled people to give a certain idea more weight if they felt strongly about it. Workshops concluded by thanking participants for attending and the contributions they made and providing them with an informal certificate of participation.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This project aims to take a collaborative participatory design approach to the development of local-level disaster risk management strategies. As part of this we facilitated two workshops at Turrialba volcano (Costa Rica) focused on idea generation surrounding the theme of disaster preparedness. The 36 workshop participants included end-users, decision makers and relevant government employees.The workshops revealed that participants' key priorities centre on the well being of family members, friends and others, as well as impacts (livelihood), infrastructure (evacuation routes) and the availability and accessibility of information. This contributes to a relatively high level of anxiety, as well as fair levels of hazard salience. Some socio-cognitive dimensions that influence the uptake of self-protective measures at Turrialba include transfer of responsibility and risk through mechanisms such as risk compensation and optimism bias. Furthermore, variable outcome expectancy and low self efficacy and action coping levels suggest that the design outcomes of this project should aim to redress these perceptions.Challenges encountered during the workshop were of a human, cultural and resource nature and highlight the importance of developing people's capacity to participate. However, in line with the one of the key attributes of participatory processes, empowerment, participants started taking stock of their resources, which is an important step towards disaster preparedness.The ideas provided at the workshops will be used as input for design development through further collaborative participation with communities. However, to provide focus and direction for these future workshops, the ideas presented by the communities will first be developed into a number of rough concepts that incorporate the design constraints identified.Increasing capacity to adapt at individual, household and community levels is only a small component of a comprehensive resilience strategy. However, as disasters are mostly felt at these levels, increasing resilience through community engagement is crucial. Although the implementation of final outcomes will be dependent on civic reciprocity, the fact that they were developed through a participatory process is likely to result in more sustainable disaster risk management in the area, which have a higher return on investment.For participatory approaches to disaster risk management to become more mainstream, closing the gap between action at national and local levels, the real-world challenges and opportunities of conducting this type of work must be discussed. Despite the surmountable challenges experienced, this work has also identified a number of pressing design opportunities, if designers, scientists and policy makers are willing to deal with the challenges of participatory design in non-Western less-developed settings, demonstrating flexibility and willingness to compromise.