@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The n-alcohols liquid doping effect on the twisted nematic liquid crystals

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We present a simple and efficient way to improve the performance of the twisted nematic liquid crystal (LC) system.The LCs modified by liquid dopant exhibit the functions of lower driving voltage and shorter response time.We replace the solid dopant by the liquid dopant for avoiding the drawbacks of precipitation and aggregation.The result of time-evolved transmittance shows the voltage can be held after the doping of n-hexanol liquid.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Liquid crystals,Liquid dopant,Doping effect,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We present a simple and efficient way to improve the performance of the twisted nematic liquid crystal (LC) system by doping a small amount of n-alcohols. The LCs modified by n-hexanol demonstrates the optimum electro-optical properties of lower driving voltage and shorter response time. Our measurements indicate that the liquid dopant n-alcohols can be used to modify LCs for lowering zenithal anchoring energy relative to undoped LCs. Without the drawbacks of precipitation and aggregation that the nanoparticles could have, the method of doping n-alcohol liquids provides a more stable and reliable choice to apply in the various LC display systems.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The nematic liquid crystals (LCs) are the most common type of anisotropic fluid with the electrically controllable property. Based on the specific feature, nematic LCs have been developed to a mature technology providing a wide range of applications including various electro-optical devices such as LC displays (LCDs) [1–4], switchable grating [5], and phase modulator [6]. Nowadays, LCDs have become a kind of common display device with different size and it is full of our life. Although the LCDs are a mature technology, it is always an important issue to shorten the response time and decrease the driving voltage for achieving the results of fast switching and energy-saving. Besides, the orientation of LC molecules is crucial for optimizing the operation of LCD. The methods to tune the LC pretilt angles such as doping polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane (POSS) nanoparticles in the planar-aligned LC cells [7] or by changing the chemical structure of the alignment film [8] have been researched. In recent years, nanoparticles have been used as dopants in LC systems to improve the electro-optical properties of LCs caused by the reduction of ion effect and the elastic coefficient [9–14]. For instance, the conductive carbon nanotubes (CNTs) were found that it could be used to decrease the driving voltage of twisted nematic (TN) LCs by lowering the ion effect. But, because of the conductive property of CNTs, the CNTs doped LCs are not able to maintain enough voltage-holding ratio (VHR) across the LC cells [15]. In LCDs, the low VHR condition may lead to a poor contrast and the phenomenon of image sticking, which degrades the performance of LCDs [16]. And it has been demonstrated that the insulating nanoparticles such as diamond powders, ZnO, TiO2, and Si3N4 used as dopant can efficiently decrease the driving voltage and still maintain a high VHR level [17,18]. However, the doped insulating nanoparticles in LCs might precipitate or aggregate after a long time use without suitable treatments such as surface modifications and lost the function of ion absorption. To solve the problem, we developed an alternative way to avoid the drawbacks of using nanoparticles and can successfully improve the electro-optical properties of the LCs.In this paper, functional liquids, different kinds of n-alcohols were used to dope into the LC host for modification as liquid dopants. The LCs modified by the n-alcohols demonstrates fantastic electro-optical properties in the ways of decreasing driving voltage and shortening response time. Besides, from the results of time-evolved transmittance, it shows that doped LCs could still maintain a high voltage holding level. Moreover, according to the calculation results from the measurements of LC parameters, our data conclude that the doped n-alcohols can be treated as liquid dopants to efficiently lower the zenithal anchoring energy, the strength to enforce the LC molecules lay down and align in the surface, between the alignment layer and LCs. Essentially, the n-alcohol liquids doping method provides a more reliable choice than the use of nanoparticles doping. The liquid dopant n-alcohols are possibly used in different LC systems that open a simple and efficient way to enhance the performance of LC electro-optical devices for the display applications.In our experiment, a nematic LC mixture of the ZCE-5099LA (Chisso) and the n-alcohols such as n-ethanol, n-butanol, n-hexanol and n-octanol were employed. The 4.2μm thickness ITO (indium tin oxide) glass cells with mutually perpendicular rubbed polyimide (PI) as alignment layers were prepared. The PI we used is AL-12G which is supplied from Daily Polymer Corp. For curing the PI, we pre-baked them in the oven at 80°C about 10min and then at 220°C in 1h for entirely curing the PI. About the rubbing condition of alignment layers, the rubbing strength RS is calculated by the formula [19]: RS=NM (2πrn/ν−1). With the parameters (N=1, M∼1mm, r=42mm, n=28.3Hz and ν=20.0mms−1), the rubbing strength RS is about 400mm in our experiment. To realize the effect of n-alcohols doping in the nematic LCs, a small amount of n-alcohols were added into LC ZCE-5099LA. Then these materials were uniformly mixed by gently stirring in glass bottles for 1h. In our experiments, we deal with these alcohols in a very careful way. These materials were uniformly mixed by gently stirring in glass bottles for 1h. We stir these materials in a very slow speed and the glass bottles were sealed for avoiding alcohols leaking. And we found the n-alcohols have good miscibility and stability with the LC mixture, no layers separation condition was observed after few days. Subsequently, the LC ZCE-5099LA mixed with different concentrations of n-alcohols (modified LCs) were injected into the cells by capillary action.After these materials were injected into cells, these cells were sealed with UV gel immediately. To further understand the electro-optical properties of modified LCs, the transmittances of the cells under various applied voltage were measured. The voltage–transmittance curves were measured by an electro-optical measuring system consisting of a He–Ne (632.8nm) laser, a pair of polarizers, sample cell mounted in rotatable holder and the photodetector, as shown in Fig. 1. At the beginning, the polarizers were tuned to be perpendicular with each other to make sure the transmittance minimum. Then the sample cell with modified LCs was placed between the crossed polarizers and tuned to make the transmittance reach maximum by setting the rubbing directing to be parallel or perpendicular with the polarization of polarizers. The sample cell was driven by an AC field (1kHz, square wave) supplied by the function generator SRS DS360 which was controlled by a computer with LabView programming. Then the transmittances under applied voltage were recorded through the photodetector. The voltage required for reaching 90% and 10% transmittance relative to the initial light intensity was defined as driving voltage V90 and V10, respectively. The contrast ratio (CR) was obtained by calculating the maximum light transmission over the minimum transmission in the electric field off and on (5V) states, respectively. And so on, the polarized optical microscope (POM) observations of sample cells in bright and dark states were conducted using Olympus BX51. The response time was calculated by the sum of rise time τon and decay time τoff. The switching times of the τon and τoff were recorded for varying the transmittances 100–10% and 0–90% in the electric field (5V) on and off, respectively. In addition, to confirm the ion problem for the LCs doped with n-alcohols, the time-evolved transmittances were measured in 3 DC volts.For determining the anchoring energy Wθof the LCs doped with n-alcohols, the modified LCs were injected into the 15μm thickness ITO glass cells with anti-parallel alignment layers to measure the values of saturation voltages Vs, dielectric anisotropy Δε, and elastic constants K. To obtain the saturation voltages Vs, the sample cell with anti-parallel alignment layers was placed between the crossed polarizers with its rubbing direction 45° from one of the polarizers. And then the sample cell was driven by an AC field (1kHz, square wave) supplied by the function generator SRS DS360 which was controlled by a computer with LabView programming. The saturation voltages Vsare measured as the transmittance reaches to the 10% of the maximum intensity. And the dielectric anisotropy Δε and elastic constants K were found out by the measurements through Instec ALCT instrument. The saturation voltages Vswere examined by the measurement of the phase retardation.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
