@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
New display concept for realistic reproduction of high-luminance colors

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new display concept for the reproduction of high-luminance colors was proposed.A new display was compared with the conventional display using xvYCC and sRGB-encoded images.xvYCC compatible display was realized.Impact of sRGB expansion was verified through the subjective experime.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Reproduction of high-luminance colors,Realistic display,xvYCC compatible display,Color gamut extension,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A new display concept for reproduction of high-luminance colors based on a liquid crystal display has been developed using a brighter backlight unit and color mapping algorithms. The new concept is able to display brighter colors close to a peak luminance of a display white than conventional displays so that realistic scene of brighter colors is better reproduced. It may also be one of the future display solutions needed to extend the color gamut in the direction of brighter colors, which is a principal limitation in conventional displays even in high-dynamic range display systems. With the new concept, an xvYCC- (extended-video YCbCr) compatible display can be easily realized.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Over the past decade, the color gamut of the standard display for the high definition television system and computer displays has been defined by Rec.709 (ITU) and sRGB (IEC) [1,2]. Such displays can reproduce only a portion of all colors visible to humans. To extend beyond this limitation on color gamuts, new wide color-gamut standards such as xvYCC, ITU-R-BT.1361, Adobe-RGB, scRGB and ITU-R.BT.2020 for UHDTV have been published [3–5].Currently, some wide color gamut displays in the form of multi-primary displays or those using highly saturated primary colors, such as LED and laser displays, are available on the market [6–8]. However, recent technology of the wide color gamut displays focuses mainly on increasing the color purity of the primary colors and the number of display primaries [6,7]. With these efforts, the color gamut can be extended in the direction of more saturated primary colors, as shown in Fig. 1.Fig. 1 shows only the maximum range of the color-gamut boundaries. In other words,the projected two-dimensional CIE-xy chromaticity diagram represents the color gamut without luminance information. To analyze the color gamut with respect to luminance more accurately, three-dimensional color spaces with an additional luminance or lightness axis are required.Even though these display types can extend the wide color gamut in the direction of increasing color purity, there are still limitations on the gamut extension in the region of high-luminance colors. The reason for this limitation is that a conventional display reproduces colors by the additive mixture of primary colors. Thus, the reproduction of the high-luminance colors close to the peak luminance of a display white is principally impossible.Fig. 2illustrates this limitation in three-dimensional YCbCr color space. The display white with luminance YW=1 is optically composed by the mixture of the three primary colors: YW=YR+YG+YB=0.3+0.59+0.11. For that reason, the luminance of all primary colors and other mixed colors cannot possibly exceed the luminance of the display peak white.However, humans can perceive not only a peak display white but also brighter colors, of which the brightness levels are close to a brightness level of a perceived white. This human-perceptible color gamut is called an optimal illuminant color space, as shown in Fig. 3. This was studied in an article [9].The brightest gamut range of the optimal illuminant color space is indicated as the red-line in Fig. 3; CIE-L∗=100 (L∗=100 is equivalent to Y=1). This range includes many colors with the same luminance of the peak display white, such as yellow, green, and cyan. However, the reproducible color range of the conventional display has only one point of the peak display white at the brightness level of CIE-L∗=100.Thus, the chromatic colors having the same luminance as the peak display white cannot be reproduced on the conventional display even though these colors are captured by a camera. These colors are named as “high-luminance chromatic colors” hereafter.This limitation of high-luminance chromatic colors in relation to the peak display white of the conventional display causes degradation image qualities during high-luminance color reproductions. This often occurs during display on a high dynamic range (HDR) imaging system; for example, to capture and to display the colored illumination on a stage during live music performances (see Fig. 4) or colors of brighter LED-lighting of Christmas trees.In such cases, the conventional display usually clips bright colors to boundary colors of the display gamut so that corresponding colors may be desaturated or their luminance may be decreased while maintaining their chroma even in more sophisticated mapping algorithms. This limitation reduces the dynamic range of the original scene and results in a dull-image look to observers. This is one of the reasons of why human observers feel that a live scene is much better than a reproduced image on display. To overcome this problem, a significant research area is HDR imaging in the field of extended-encoding schemes such as LogluvTIff, OpenEXR, scRGB, RGBE, and HDRi [11], and some HDR displays [12] that can reproduce much higher peak luminance than conventional displays. However, HDR displays unfortunately use the same additive mixture reproduction concept as conventional displays; they still cannot reproduce the high-luminance colors close to the peak display white.To summarize, current displays may need to extend their color gamut in the direction of highly saturated colors in order to realize UHDTV standard Rec.2020 and the dynamic range of displays should be increased to enable HDR imaging. On the other hand, this requires reproducing high-luminance colors closer to a luminance of the peak display white to enable all human-perceptible colors.With respect to an effective usage of the display color gamut, extending the gamut in the direction of the higher-luminance colors may be much more meaningful than extending the color gamut in the direction of the saturated colors, because the occurrence statistic of high luminance colors is usually much higher than the saturated colors outside of the Rec.709 color gamut.In Section 2, the concept of the proposed display will be explained in detail. In Section 3, an implementation of the proposed display using a conventional LCD will be described in terms of a standard color reproduction and a color reproduction using the sRGB gamut expansion. In the same section, simulation results of test images for standard color reproduction and experimental results of a subjective image quality assessment for the sRGB gamut-expanding method will be presented. Finally, the paper concludes with the results and a discussion of some future research directions.As previously mentioned, the low-luminance color problem in conventional display systems can easily be solved by using high-luminance primary colors; this is realized, for example, by using a brighter backlight in an LCD with an appropriate color-mapping algorithm. This concept is shown in Fig. 5.The inner “Gamut1” indicates the color gamut of the conventional display. Here, we replace the backlight with one having approximately twice the brightness (w2/w1=2). Therefore, the color gamut of the new display with brighter backlight will be linearly enlarged to the outer “Gamut2”, thereby the luminance of RGB primary colors are changed from (YR1, YG1, YB1) to the values of (YR2, YG2, YB2), respectively.As the following step, a mapping of an input video signal (source gamut) to the enlarged display gamut (target gamut) will be required. For example, as shown in Fig. 5, the relative lower luminance of “w1” of the target gamut (Gamut2) can be selected as the matched white point of the source gamut. The point of “w1” is freely selectable within the target gamut according to the desired mapping strategy.Therefore, the source gamut can be mapped inside the target gamut. If the source gamut is the Rec.709 or sRGB gamut, then the source gamut can be mapped into the target gamut without any change of colors, as is done for the conventional sRGB display.In contrast, if a video signal is encoded by the wide gamut of the xvYCC, nearly the entire region of the xvYCC source gamut, excepting only some low-luminance colors (marked as “Out of Gamut Colors” in Fig. 6; marked in green color but outside the target gamut), can be successfully matched into the target gamut, marked in green in Fig. 6. This means that the high-luminance colors (marked as “High-luminance Colors”; marked in green color but outside the upper sRGB gamut in Fig. 6) of xvYCC can be reproduced more than by the conventional display system.The important thing is that the proposed mapping algorithms use only a part of the whole volume of the target gamut in order to reproduce high-luminance colors close to the white-luminance of the source gamut.Furthermore, some part of the highly saturated color region, indicated as “Out of Gamut Color” in Fig. 6, can be included by using an increased purity of primary colors compared with the sRGB standard. This means that the slope of the primary-color1For interpretation of color in Figs. 5, 9, and 10 the reader is referred to the web version of this article.1vectors (R2, G2, and B2 in Fig. 5) will be much smaller.In contrast to the described standard color reproduction, the sRGB gamut expansion algorithm has been developed.The block diagram of the whole mapping process is shown in Fig. 7. As a first step, the nonlinear RGBNL signal of the sRGB (or Rec.709) will be converted into the linear RGBLsignal by applying the inverse gamma function (Γ−1) according to the sRGB-specification.(1)YW1=W1/W2Respectively, the standard sRGB-gamut will be compressed to the “Source Gamut” in linear YCbCr color space, as shown in Fig. 8. Where, the linear YCbCr signals are converted from the RGBLby the linear transformation with the matrix M.(2)YLCbLCrL=M·RLGLBLwithM=0.2990.5870.114-0.189-0.3310.50.5-0.419-0.081The sRGB expansion can be carried out in the linear YCbCr color space, as indicated the “Gamut Mapping” block in Fig. 7.To improve a pleasantness of the popular sRGB images, the sRGB gamut can be mapped to the freely definable “target-expanding gamut” as a part of the target gamut of a display with a brighter backlight (see Fig. 8).The boundary of the “target-expanding gamut”, marked as “B2”, can be constructed with the combination of the boundaries of the “Target Gamut” for the side and lower limit and of the freely definable “target-expanding gamut” for the upper limit.Thereby, the luminance YB2,Max of the upper limit of the B2 for a given color vectorF→=(YL,CbL,CrL)can be defined as a function of the normalized chroma CN. The parameter kCin the range of [0,1] adjusts the slope strength of the upper limit of the source gamut. For example, the value kC=0 means that the upper limit has a flat plane (YB2,Max(C)=YW1).(3)YB2,Max(C)=YW1·(1-kC·CN)withCN=YW1YLCandC=CbL2+CrL2For the gamut mapping from the “source gamut” to the “target-expanding gamut”, we used the simple mapping algorithm using a concept of constant saturation as shown in Fig. 8. Any color inside the sRGB gamut will be linearly increased to the target-expanding gamut along the line of constant saturation. A linearly increasing gain can be determined by comparing the two gamut boundaries (source and target-expanding gamut) for a given constant saturation.More precisely, the detailed mapping algorithm from the input colorF→to the linearly scaledF→GMstarts with the determination of the two boundary colorsF→B1andF→B2. The vectorF→B1is the linear stretching of the vectorF→along the line of the constant saturation. It can be formulated as the following equation.(4)F→B1=k1·F→⇔lineartransform(M-1·F→B1)︸=F→B1,RGB=k1·(M-1·F→)︸=F→RGBBecause of the linear transformation between the YCbCrLand RGBL, this relationship in the YCbCrLcolor space can also be applied in the linear RGBLspace. The unknown k1 can be then computed by a boundary condition of the “source gamut” (B1). At least one value of RGB components of all boundary colors (F→B1,RGB) on B1 has the value of either having the maximum value of kW1 or the minimum value of 0.The other gain k2 can be determined using of the following similar equation like k1 case.(5)F→B2=k2·F→But, the boundary colorF→B2on B2 may be distinguished in two types. For the first color types on the boundary of the “target gamut”, at least one channel value of RGB channels must either possess the minimum value of 0 or the maximum value of 1, as mentioned in the case k1. Therefore, for the determination of k2, the same procedure in the RGB domain can be applied as in k1-case.However, for the second type colors on the upper-limit of B2, which was designed according to the Eq. (3), the computation of k2 is differ from the first type colors. The luminance value ofF→B2for the second type is same with the YB2,MAX(C) in Eq. (3). Thus, the relationship of the luminance components ofF→andF→B2can be described by the following Eq. (6). The gain k2 can be determined from the Eq. (6).(6)YB2,Max(C)=k2·YLThe final step of the mapping of the input colorF→can be computed by the multiplying the mapping gain km.(7)F→GM=km·F→withkm=k2/k1The gamut-mapped signalF→GM=(YGM,CbGM,CrGM)is then transformed reversely to the final sRGBGM signal by the inverse transformation (M−1) and the nonlinear transformation (Γ).As a mapping result, the luminance of the sRGB chromatic colors will be increased while maintaining their hue so that the image may look more brilliant and colorful than the sRGB original.In addition, there are some more sophisticated algorithms which can determine clipped colors on the boundary of the sRGB color gamut from sRGB images and map them to estimated higher-luminance colors [13]. However, this is not discussed further because our aim is to develop a new concept of a high-luminance color display beyond the conventional display. We believe that the method of expanding the sRGB gamut toward the higher-luminance color region is important for research in the near future. We seek to show only the additional impact and feasibility of our new display concept by introducing a simple mapping algorithm.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
