@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Stereoscopic 3D displays and human performance: A comprehensive review

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We reviewed the performance implications of stereoscopic 3D displays versus non-stereo 2D.We summarized and classified results of over 160 publications.We found that stereo 3D display viewing improved performance in 60% of experiments.In only 25% of experiments, S3D displays clearly offered no benefit over 2D viewing.Stereoscopic 3D displays were most helpful for the spatial manipulation of objects.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Stereopsis,Three-dimensional display,Human factors,Depth perception,Binocular vision,S3D,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
To answer the question: “what is 3D good for?” we reviewed the body of literature concerning the performance implications of stereoscopic 3D (S3D) displays versus non-stereo (2D or monoscopic) displays. We summarized results of over 160 publications describing over 180 experiments spanning 51years of research in various fields including human factors psychology/engineering, human–computer interaction, vision science, visualization, and medicine. Publications were included if they described at least one task with a performance-based experimental evaluation of an S3D display versus a non-stereo display under comparable viewing conditions. We classified each study according to the experimental task(s) of primary interest: (a) judgments of positions and/or distances; (b) finding, identifying, or classifying objects; (c) spatial manipulations of real or virtual objects; (d) navigation; (e) spatial understanding, memory, or recall and (f) learning, training, or planning. We found that S3D display viewing improved performance over traditional non-stereo (2D) displays in 60% of the reported experiments. In 15% of the experiments, S3D either showed a marginal benefit or the results were mixed or unclear. In 25% of experiments, S3D displays offered no benefit over non-stereo 2D viewing (and in some rare cases, harmed performance). From this review, stereoscopic 3D displays were found to be most useful for tasks involving the manipulation of objects and for finding/identifying/classifying objects or imagery. We examine instances where S3D did not support superior task performance. We discuss the implications of our findings with regard to various fields of research concerning stereoscopic displays within the context of the investigated tasks.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Visual depth perception involves the mental combination of various monocular and binocular visual cues to determine the 3D shapes of objects in the world, their spatial arrangements relative to each other, and their locations relative to oneself. Monocular cues, also known as pictorial or perspective cues, are those that require only one eye to perceive depth, and are easily seen even in two-dimensional representations such as paintings, photographs, or videos. Examples of monocular depth cues include relative size, occlusion, shading, spatial frequency of textures, motion parallax, etc. (e.g., [9]). Unfortunately, if any of these monocular cues to depth are degraded, ambiguous, or are altogether absent in imagery when shown via traditional two-dimensional display surfaces, then depth perception and performance may suffer. This issue may partly explain why there is such a growing interest in display technologies that present not just monocular but also binocular cues to object depth (via binocular parallax/disparity cues), so that a potentially more accurate, natural, and robust depth percept can be provided to viewers.Stereoscopic 3D displays (S3D) are a technology in which high resolution color imagery can allow both monocular and binocular depth cues to coexist in a single display system, with relatively little extra cost in terms of software, hardware, or imagery requirements. S3D displays are systems in which two slightly different views of a scene are provided to a viewer, one image for each eye (the combination of these “half-images” is usually called a “stereo pair”). This allows the viewer’s binocular visual system to extract depth information in a scene using this disparate information (stereopsis). A variety of clever display engineering methods have been invented so that each eye receives one and only one image from a stereo pair, including mirrors, optics, eye-glasses with shutters (active), polarizing filters (passive), color filters (anaglyph), and lenticular screens and parallax barriers (autostereoscopic displays). Although S3D display technology has recently garnered wide interest and application in entertainment, medicine, industrial design, education, research, and in the military, this technology push into widespread use has occurred mostly in the absence of considering the task performance implications of these new displays, or when their use might be effectively neutral or even negative.Our main research interest in S3D displays is specifically in terms of performance. There are many tasks, which may span many work domains, that could conceivably benefit from S3D technology. For example, spatial understanding of a complex scene (e.g., surgery, imagery analysis, or route planning), tasks that require manipulation of virtual objects (e.g., CAD drawing or teleoperation of a robotic arm), or tasks involving navigation (e.g., teleoperation of a robotic vehicle) are all spatial tasks that seem logical candidates for S3D technology, among many others. Visual display researchers, designers, and users could benefit tremendously from a clear understanding of where and when S3D technology actually increases user performance, as opposed to only increasing user interest due to the novelty of the technology, or simply increasing the subjective impression of realism devoid of subsequent performance gains (naïve realism; see [64]).In a previous, more limited review of the human factors literature [40], we examined this question as applied to S3D displays: “What is 3D good for?” Theoretically, given that primates have largely-overlapping visual fields affording stereoscopic vision, whereas much of the animal kingdom does not, there must have been notable advantages in terms of survival for this capability to have evolved. We therefore expected to find some clear performance advantages for stereoscopic displays. In particular, for tasks that are close-up (in the near-field, within a few meters of a viewer’s personal space) where binocular disparity cues are relatively larger, and for tasks that are difficult due to poor-quality or absent monocular depth cues. Indeed, in the human factors literature, we previously confirmed S3D displays were most helpful for depth-related near tasks like spatial manipulations of objects, especially if these were difficult/complex tasks. For example, think of the difficulty and complexity (and the precision of spatial vision needed) for threading a needle, conducting surgery, explosive ordinance disposal, understanding a complex twisted wire shape, spotting objects in camouflage, etc. It becomes apparent why the additional provision of any depth cues, especially binocular depth cues, can aid performance. Two of the three most important or “heavily-weighted” depth cues, at least for near-field vision in everyday life, are (self) motion parallax and binocular parallax (e.g., [9]), both of which are incidentally missing from the vast majority of modern display devices. An excellent discussion of perceptual depth cue combination, and its measurement and modeling, is available in Landy et al. [36].In 58% of the studies in our previous review, S3D showed a definite benefit over non-stereo displays (2D), which we found to be a surprisingly large number based on the often conflicting research results spread throughout various domains. S3D seemed to promote increased spatial understanding of complex/ambiguous scenes: 77% of spatial appreciation studies demonstrated a benefit of S3D use. For spatial manipulations of real or virtual objects, 67% of studies showed a definite benefit of S3D. Stereoscopic 3D displays also seemed beneficial for tasks involving judging distances, discerning relative positions, finding and identifying objects, and navigation – all of which showed a benefit for S3D in approximately 50% of the studies involving these tasks.Alternatively, we also noted some important instances where S3D failed to support better performance. S3D helped little or not at all for tasks that were simple or well-learned, or, understandably, for tasks that did not rely heavily on depth information. For example, experts generally receive less benefit from S3D than novices, and increasing the difficulty of a task can sometimes reveal a benefit of S3D where there was not one before; both are issues to which we will return in later sections. S3D also helped little or not at all where other (monocular) depth cues were strong, or for tasks in which depth information was far away or otherwise lay outside the effective viewing volume (i.e., binocular disparity cues were small or absent). These are reasonable explanations for why 28% of the 71 human factors studies reviewed found no benefit of S3D over traditional non-stereo 2D displays for various performance tasks.We have now completed a more comprehensive review of all research fields that have experimentally investigated non-stereo versus S3D displays in order to determine those tasks best supported by S3D technology. Here, we focus mainly on the performance implications for users. There already exist several comprehensive experiments and reviews comparing performance with “2D versus 3D” displays (e.g., [3,21,75,65]; see reviews by [46,12]), but nearly all these works utilized flat 2D displays to show images of 3D perspective geometry (sometimes called “2½D” or “perspective 3D”). Essentially, these previous reviews compared non-stereo displays of 2D data versus non-stereo displays of 3D data, but in neither case was the binocular visual system required to properly appreciate the stimuli (all depth cues were monocular). Instead, we focused our review on studies in which binocular vision was explicitly required, i.e., for viewing stereoscopic stimuli. In other words, we compare stereoscopic 3D displays of 3D data to traditional non-stereo (2D) displays of 3D data. Due to possible confusion these terms can cause, we will use the terms “stereoscopic 3D” or “S3D” to refer to the stereo display hardware used in the reviewed studies, as this terminology is becoming the dominant preference within the research community (e.g., see recent issues of the Proceedings of the IS&T/SPIE Stereoscopic Displays and Applications annual conference). Alternatively, “non-stereo displays” or sometimes “2D” will be used to refer to the non-stereo two-dimensional display hardware on which only monocular/pictorial/perspective cues to depth were visible in the baseline comparison cases.There is a vast literature on the topic of S3D displays and their implications for perception, cognition, and experience of quality and comfort (e.g., [18,53,51,52]; for the important topic of viewer discomfort with S3D displays, the interested reader can see: [71,58,55,56,25,28,74,54,2,26,35,44,67,68]). Additionally, there is an experimental psychology body of literature comparing monocular vision (using only one-eye) versus binocular vision (using both eyes) during real-world tasks, which involve no displays whatsoever and serves to demonstrate the importance of binocular cues for visual tasks in everyday life, and which are strongly suggestive of possible areas of benefit for similar tasks conducted via S3D displays. For instance, studies of exteroceptive, visuomotor task performance show the benefits of binocular vision for real-world reaching, grasping, and manual control (prehension) tasks (e.g., [62,73,5,39,42,43,29,49]). And binocular vision is also beneficial for ground navigation/locomotion tasks—where it has been demonstrated that walking over/around obstacles or over uneven terrain is hampered with strictly monocular viewing (e.g., [22,50]).Despite the apparent benefits of stereoscopic vision for humans in the real-world, the benefits provided by S3D display sources are less obvious. This might be partly due to the fact that what matters most to the viewer’s visual system in terms of binocular depth cues is the magnitude of binocular disparity (the difference in visual angle between the two eyes of a real or virtual object and the viewer’s point of fixation), as opposed to only considering the camera separations, the viewing distances, the on-screen half-image separations of stereo pairs, or other isolated metrics that contribute only indirectly to the perception of depth on S3D systems. The binocular disparity that a viewer ultimately experiences via an S3D display is a function of various features in both the camera/scene space (camera separation, distances between camera and real or virtual objects in a scene, camera fields-of-view, camera alignment, etc.) and the viewer/display space (viewer eye separation, viewer distance to display surface, size and resolution of the displays, etc.). These points are explained in detail by Jones et al. [30], Woods et al. [79], Williams and Parrish [78], Ware et al. [72], Grinberg et al. [20], Kim et al. [32], among others. Unfortunately, binocular disparity magnitudes have been relatively poorly documented in comparative performance studies using S3D (more on this later), which we believe has contributed substantially to confusion about the extent to which S3D displays may improve performance.Another reason that the benefits of S3D displays may be less obvious is the lack of modern representative summaries on the relationship between S3D displays and performance (reviews of performance with stereoscopic displays in the medical domain are given by Hofmeister et al. [24], Getty and Green [19], van Beurden et al. [69], Held and Hui [23]. Some limited reviews on this topic in the human factors literature include factors affecting human performance in teleoperated robotics by Chen et al. [7], a brief review of several S3D studies in Naikar [46], and a brief review in Boff [4]. We believe a comprehensive review of experimental studies comparing non-stereo (2D) to S3D displays is warranted at this time. This is especially true given the present widespread interest in S3D by both the research community as well as the general public.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
