@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
CSAR: A Content-Scent based Architecture for Information-Centric mobile ad hoc networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A Content-Scent based Architecture is designed for mobile ad hoc networks.We define content-scent, Scent-Table, and operation of Scent-Tables.Broadcast-based and scent-based routing principle is proposed.An in-network caching mechanism is designed based on content-scent emitting.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Future Internet,Information-Centric Networking,Mobile ad hoc networks,Routing scheme,Content-scent,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Information-Centric Networking (ICN) is regarded as one of the representative network architectures of Future Internet. In this paper, an information-centric architecture called Content-Scent based Architecture (CSAR) will be proposed for mobile ad hoc networks. In CSAR, each content has its special content-scent and can be found by tracing the scent it spreads over the network. The content-scent has the property similar to the natural scent that can spread over air, mix with other scents, decay with distance and time, and strengthen with fresh supplement. Using this property, scent-based routing and reliable content delivery functionalities are provided for the mobile ad hoc environment. Simulation results show that CSAR has an efficient route discovery procedure with less routing overhead and better in-network caching for the mobile ad hoc networks.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A mobile ad hoc network (MANET) [1] is a collection of mobile nodes without fixed infrastructure. It is a multi-hop wireless network, in which mobile nodes can be either end points or routers. MANETs can be established quickly at emergency scenarios, such as, battlefield communications and disaster relief.Inherited from wired network protocol stack, mobile nodes are usually assigned IP addresses. A single determined path which contains a series of nodes between source and destination nodes is set up by IP based routing protocols. However, IP based routing solutions are not suitable for the wireless networks because of their high degree of topological dynamics [2]. It is difficult to maintain IP addresses for mobile nodes. And point-to-point transmissions at MAC layer in these solutions do not utilize the broadcast nature of the wireless environment.TCP/IP architecture was designed over 40 years ago with certain design principles [3]. New functionalities and services are difficult to add to the network core, which is called the ossification of Internet [4]. Hence, there are many clean slate redesign architectures for Future Internet recently. Information-Centric Networking (ICN) [5–8] is one of the most prominent architectures among them. An information-centric network [9] is a communication network in which content is treated as the first-class citizen rather than host. Although many ICN architectures are designed for wired networks originally, they can be particularly beneficial in wireless environment, since it does not need to maintain end-to-end connections. The recent years’ works [10–12] have shown that ICN idea can be applied into the design of MANET architecture.Based on ICN architecture, a Content-Scent based Architecture (CSAR) is proposed for mobile ad hoc networks. CSAR assumes that content has its special content-scent. This makes it possible that consumers find a content by tracing its content-scent over the network. The content-scent is assumed having the property similar to the natural scent that can spread over air, mix with other scents, decay with distance and time, and strengthen with fresh supplement. The spreading nature is more appropriate to the broadcast environment and allows content providers to publish contents by broadcasting content-scents over the network. The mixing nature provides a mechanism to store a lot of content-scents in a compact data structure, and to reduce size of routing tables. This reduction is extremely important for the information-centric networks (including wired and wireless networks) because the amount of contents in the networks is huge. Finally, the decaying and strengthening natures are most suited for mobile ad hoc environment.The main contributions of this paper include:•A Content-Scent based Architecture is designed for mobile ad hoc networks. It provides routing and reliable content delivery functionalities.Content-scent of a content is defined and the mixed content-scents of different contents are stored in a compact data structure called Scent-Table. In addition, a content-scent emitting and attenuation mechanism for content-scents is proposed.According to the content-scent emitting mechanism, an in-network caching mechanism for content is designed in the procedure of data delivery.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present the related work. Then, content-scent and Scent-Table are defined in Section 3. Broadcast-based and scent-based routing principles are presented in Section 4. Detail of procedures in CSAR is presented in Section 5; the architecture is evaluated and results are showed in Section 6; in Section 7, we conclude the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
