@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Super multi-view and holographic displays using MEMS devices

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A MEMS SLM enlarges the screen size and the viewing zone of holographic displays.Speckles can be eliminated from holographic reconstructed images using a MEMS SLM.MEMS SLMs increase the viewpoints and resolution of super multi-view displays.Multi-view display modules using MEMS projectors enable a large-screen SMV display.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
3D display,Holography,Super multi-view display,MEMS spatial light modulator,MEMS scanner,Visual fatigue,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Holographic displays and super multi-view (SMV) displays have been developed to solve the accommodation–vergence conflict that is responsible for visual fatigue caused by the 3D images that are generated by conventional three-dimensional (3D) displays upon which the eye cannot focus. However, holographic and SMV displays provide 3D images upon which the eye can readily focus so that the accommodation–vergence conflict does not occur. Because these two display techniques require the generation of a very large amount of image data, the high data bandwidth of microelectromechanical (MEMS) devices is effectively utilized. The present article describes the holographic display system that employs a MEMS spatial light modulator (SLM), which increases the screen size and viewing zone angle. Two SMV displays are also described, where one employs MEMS SLMs and the other an array of MEMS projectors. The resolution and the number of viewpoints of the SMV displays have increased. Moreover, the technique using a MEMS SLM to eliminate speckles from holographic reconstructed images is also described.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Three-dimensional (3D) displays [1] can represent the depth of objects; therefore, they can provide viewers with a more realistic sensation than that obtained from two-dimensional (2D) displays. Recently, glasses-free 3D displays have been developed. However, conventional 3D displays cause visual fatigue because of the accommodation–vergence conflict [2], which prevents the widespread use of 3D displays. Because the eye cannot readily focus upon the 3D images generated by conventional 3D displays but rather tend to focus on the display screen, the eye focusing function, i.e., accommodation, does not function properly, whereas vergence correctly perceives the depth of 3D images from the rotating angles of both eyes. The holographic display and the super multi-view (SMV) display have been developed because they offer the possibility of solving the accommodation–vergence conflict by providing a 3D image upon which the eye can readily focus. Microelectromechanical (MEMS) devices play an important role in the development of these displays because of their high data bandwidth.A holographic display is based on wavefront reconstruction [3]. Because the wavefront of light can be controlled, sharp 3D images are generated. Thus, the eye can focus upon the resulting 3D images; therefore, the accommodation–vergence conflict does not occur. However, to control the wavefront of light, the pixel pitch of spatial light modulators (SLMs), upon which hologram patterns are displayed, should be reduced to be comparable to the wavelength of light. However, when the pixel pitch is reduced, the number of pixels must be increased to enlarge the screen size. The high-speed operation of MEMS devices is utilized to display ultra-high-resolution hologram patterns using the time-multiplexing technique [4]. Although holography can generate 3D images without visual fatigue, holographic images are degraded by speckles. Speckles are random light patterns caused by the coherence of laser light used for the hologram reconstruction. Therefore, the generation of speckles is an inherent problem of holography. Recently, a technique that eliminates speckles using MEMS devices has been proposed [5].The SMV display is based on ray reconstruction. Because SMV displays can be realized by improving conventional multi-view displays, they may be commercialized sooner than holographic displays. While conventional multi-view displays generate several viewpoints, the SMV display generates a large number of viewpoints to produce 3D images upon which the eye can focus, and thereby solving the accommodation–vergence conflict [6]. As the required number of pixels significantly increase for displaying SMV images, MEMS devices are utilized to provide the very large number of pixels required [7,8].This article describes the means by which MEMS devices are utilized to construct holographic and SMV displays. Two techniques employed for holographic displays are described in Section 2, and two techniques employed for SMV displays are described in Section 3.Fig. 1illustrates wavefront reconstruction by the SLM. A 3D image consists of a multitude of object points and the SLM generates spherical waves designed to converge to these object points. Because the generated spherical waves result in sharp object points in space, the eye can focus on the reconstructed images. Holography inherently generates 3D images that do not conflict with human 3D perception, thus, holography is considered an ideal 3D display technique.The requirements for the SLMs used for holographic displays are described as follows. The viewing zone angle of holography is given by 2sin−1(λ/2p), where p is the pixel pitch of the SLMs and λ is the wavelength of the light. The screen size of a holographic display is given by Np×Mp, where N×M is the resolution of the SLMs. Therefore, a small pixel pitch and a very large resolution are required for the SLMs. For instance, to obtain a screen size of 40 in and a viewing zone angle of 30°, the pixel pitch must be reduced to 0.97μm and the resolution must be increased to 764,000×430,000 when the wavelength of light is 0.6μm. Owing to the great difficulty of developing such ultra-high-resolution SLMs, several alternative display techniques have been developed. A technique using a MEMS SLM is described below.Fig. 2illustrates the technique of horizontally scanning holography employing a MEMS SLM that can operate at a high frame rate [4]. An anamorphic imaging system consists of two orthogonally aligned cylindrical lenses with different magnifications in the horizontal and vertical directions. The elementary holograms generated by the MEMS SLM are de-magnified in the horizontal direction and magnified in the vertical direction. Because the horizontal pixel pitch is correspondingly reduced, the horizontal viewing zone angle increases. The vertically stretched elementary holograms are scanned horizontally so that the screen size increases. Because the reconstructed images have only horizontal parallax, a vertical diffuser is placed on the screen to increase the vertical viewing area.A digital micromirror device (DMD) was to construct a holographic display. The first display system was constructed using a DMD with a frame rate of 13,333Hz [4]. The display system had a screen size of 3.5 in and a viewing zone angle of 15°. A technique for reducing the image blur that is caused by the scanning error of the horizontal scanner was developed [9]. In addition, because the DMD can generate only binary patterns, two techniques have been developed to improve the grayscale representation of the reconstructed images [10,11]. The responses of eye accommodation, i.e., the eye focusing function, to the reconstructed images were measured to ensure that the eye could readily focus on the holographic images [12]. Recently, the generation of color reconstructed images with a screen size of 6.2 in and viewing zone angles of 14.7° (R), 11.8° (G), and 11.2° (B) was achieved using a DMD with a frame rate of 22,727kHz [13]. Fig. 3provides a photograph of the color holographic display system, and a representative color 3D image generated by that system is shown in Fig. 4from three viewing angles.Fig. 5depicts the process of speckle generation by holographic displays. A reconstructed image consists of an aggregate of object points, and random phases are added to the object points to express rough surfaces because most objects have rough surfaces. Speckles are accordingly generated by the random interference among object points.A MEMS SLM can be used to eliminate speckles in holographic images as follows [5]. The object points that constitute the reconstructed image are divided into several groups consisting of sparse object points that are sufficiently separated to avoid interference with each other, as illustrated in Fig. 5. These object point groups are then sequentially displayed. The sparseness and temporal summation of the object points suppress speckle generation. As shown in Fig. 6, the MEMS SLM sequentially displays hologram patterns that consist of a 2D array of half-zone plates [14] to generate the object point groups.Fig. 7shows two representative speckle-less reconstructed images [15]. In this case, a DMD having a frame rate of 22,727Hz and a resolution of 1,024×768 was used as the MEMS SLM. Each object point group consisted of 16×24 object points and each object point was generated by a half-zone plate, which was displayed by 64×32 pixels. The object point groups were displayed with sixteen horizontal shifts and eight vertical shifts, so that a total of 128 object point groups were displayed. Each object point group was decomposed into eight bit-planes; thus, the reconstructed image could be displayed using 256 gray levels. Reconstructed images consisting of 256×192 object points were displayed at a frame rate of 22.2Hz. A laser diode was used to illuminate the DMD, and its output intensity was modulated according to the bit-plane number.Multi-view displays, which are most commonly used to construct glasses-free 3D displays, generate multiple viewpoints at a specific distance from the display screen. Rays emitted from the screen are converged to generate multiple viewpoints. The rays converging to the viewpoints are used to display parallax images, which are the images viewed from the corresponding viewpoints. When the eye is located at one of the viewpoints, it observes a corresponding parallax image. SMV displays increase the number of viewpoints to tens or hundreds in order to solve the accommodation–vergence conflict [6]. The interval of viewpoints is reduced to be smaller than the pupil diameter of the eye such that two or more rays passing through a point in the 3D image enter the pupil of the eye, as illustrated in Fig. 8. When the eye focuses on one point of the 3D image, as shown in Fig. 8(a), rays passing through this point converge on the retina so that a sharp retinal image is obtained. However, when the eye focuses on the display screen, as shown in Fig. 8(b), rays do not converge on the retina; therefore, a blurred retinal image is obtained. Therefore, the eye more readily focuses on the 3D image rather than the display screen, and the accommodation–vergence conflict does not occur.Because SMV displays should generate a large number of viewpoints, several display systems have been developed, such as, the flat-panel system [16,17], the multi-projection system [18,19], and a hybrid system [20] that combines both flat-panel and multi-projection systems. Display systems using MEMS devices [7,8] have also been developed.An SMV display using MEMS SLMs has been developed [7]. The proposed SMV display consists of multiple time-multiplexing display modules, where each module projects plural images to generate plural viewpoints by use of the time-multiplexing technique. Multiple modules project a large number of images on an identical screen to increase the number of viewpoints.Fig. 9depicts the proposed time-multiplexing display module. The module contains a MEMS SLM, a light source array, and an aperture array. A number of images are displayed by the MEMS SLM at a high frame rate, and the light sources emit light one after another in synchronism with the image update of the MEMS SLM. The light sources are arranged two-dimensionally. However, their horizontal positions vary. The light source array illuminates the MEMS SLM through a condenser lens. The light modulated by the MEMS SLM is imaged by an imaging lens. The aperture array is located at the output side of the module, which is the conjugate of the light source array. The apertures are also arranged two-dimensionally and their horizontal positions vary in an equivalent manner to that of the light source array. A number of images emitted by the module pass through different apertures. Several modules are arranged horizontally and all images are combined by a common lens. A vertical diffuser is used as a display screen. All images are superimposed on the vertical diffuser, and are given different horizontal display directions by the common lens because all aperture positions are different horizontally. The vertical diffuser cancels the difference of the vertical projection directions.A DMD with a maximum frame rate of 8000Hz was used to construct the time-multiplexing display module, and the resolution was 1024×768. The DMD technique imposes a trade-off between the frame rate and the number of gray levels. We determined that the frame rate was 900Hz and the number of gray levels was 32. The display module was designed to project 15 images at a frame rate of 60fps. The light source array consisted of 15 LEDs. Fig. 10(a) presents a photograph of a single display module with 15 viewpoints. Four modules are combined to construct the SMV display having 60 viewpoints, as shown in Fig. 10(b).To realize a large-screen SMV display, multi-view display modules using MEMS projectors were developed [8]. Because the module has a frameless screen, multiple modules are aligned two-dimensionally to obtain a large screen. The MEMS projector consists of a biaxial MEMS scanning mirror and RGB lasers and does not use a projection lens. The MEMS projectors have low energy consumption and are compact as well as inexpensive.The multi-view display module is illustrated in Fig. 11. The module consists of an array of MEMS projectors, a vertical diffuser, and a lenticular lens. All MEMS projectors have different horizontal positions. All images generated by the MEMS projectors are superimposed on the vertical diffuser. The lenticular lens is placed in the vicinity of the vertical diffuser. Fig. 12shows horizontal sectional views of the multi-view module. Each cylindrical lens constituting the lenticular lens generates multiple light spots near its focal plane. Because the light spot is an image of the scanning mirror of the MEMS projector, the number of light spots is equal to the number of projectors. Because the light spot works as a 3D pixel, the horizontal resolution of the module increases. By properly modulating the lasers in the MEMS projector, the horizontal positions of dots in the horizontal scan lines can be controlled. Because light from the dots is refracted by the cylindrical lens, the dots at different horizontal positions generate different viewpoints.Fig. 13shows a prototype module constructed using four MEMS projectors. The MEMS projectors used were commercial products with a resolution of 848×480. The lenticular lens consisted of 40 cylindrical lenses; therefore, the horizontal resolution of the module was 160. Because four scan lines corresponded to one 3D pixel, the vertical resolution of the module was 120, and the number of views was 64. The screen size was 14.4 in. Because the aim of this study was to verify the proposed display technique, the constructed module was not constructed with a frameless screen.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
