@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Evaluating and improving color washout of vertical aligned liquid crystal display

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We optimized an 8-domain VA LCD by minimizing its color washout.We adopted the index G value to analyze the degree of color washout.The color washout is improved in all the oblique viewing direction.In general, the quality of LCD is raised.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Color washout,Multi-domain vertical aligned (MVA),Coupled capacity (CC-type) LCD,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We demonstrated an optimized 8-domain vertical aligned (VA) liquid crystal display (LCD) by minimizing its color washout. The index G is adopted to analyze the degree of color washout through simulation. By using linearly and circularly polarized incident light, the optimized regime of the area and applied voltage ratios of sub-pixels is obtained. In the experiments with the circularly polarized light, the images are sensuously improved in a coupled capacity type LCD by applying the simulated applied voltage ratio of two sub-pixels.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
While large-screen liquid crystal display (LCD) becomes main stream of TV markets, consumers demand high quality of color image not only at normal direction but also at the oblique directions. Vertical alignment (VA) LC mode technology is wildly used in TV design owing to the advantage of high contrast ratio. To eliminate the unsymmetrical viewing character, multi-domain VA (MVA) LC mode technology has been proposed [1], in which one pixel is divided into 4 domains with 4 different pre-determined directions depicted in Fig. 1a. These multiple domains can be obtained by introducing protrusions on both substrates [2], patterned electrodes which induce fringe fields of 4 directions (Patterned Vertical Alignment, PVA) [3], etc. The MVA LCD has high contrast ratio and is symmetric with no gray level inversion. However, it still shows noticeable color washout phenomena in the oblique viewing directions [4]. To further improve the performance of 4-domain VA mode, an 8-domain VA LC mode was proposed [5–9]. One pixel is further divided into two sub-pixels A and B, which is illustrated in Fig. 1b. The tilt angles of LC directors in the sub-pixel A and B are designed to be different in order to fine tune the image quality. And this can be achieved by applying different voltages to the sub-pixels through different common electrode voltages [7], two transistors (TT-type) [8] or a coupled capacity (CC-type) between them. The latter design is especially simple to be adapted in the manufacture, and the LCDs can be maintained in the low cost. Additional Refresh Technology (ART) and Innolux multi-domain vertically alignment (iMVA) [9] of 8-domain CC-type MVA LC mode, were proposed to improve image sticking occurred in the CC-type design. However, the color washout phenomena in these 8-domain VA LC mode still needs to be analyzed.Color washout is a phrase to describe the displayed images with fading colors, which is due to losing color gradient, or sometimes color shift. It usually happens when we view a display at the oblique directions and compared the pictures with that at the normal direction. It results from the different voltage–transmittance (V–T) curves of normal viewing angle (on-axis) and oblique viewing angle (off-axis). Therefore, these deviations have positive relationship with color shift and color washout.When a display is designed, the V–T curve of normal incident is used to determine the applied voltage of each gray level. The gray level versus transmittance curve is called the gamma curve. Since the V–T curve of on-axis is different from that of off-axis; the gamma curves of different oblique viewing angle can be various. Fig. 2shows the typical gamma curves of VA mode LCD at various oblique viewing angles. Since the deviation varied in many shapes, it is important to have an index to render the overall color washout of the images. And from this index, one can analyze the factors which influence the images in order to optimize the color quality of LCD.Several indexes [9–13] which wish to reveal the discrepancy of on and off axis images have been proposed. P value, [10,11] is defined by the transmittance ratio of off-axis to that of on-axis at 96th gray level. It is very easy to obtain but cannot manifest the whole deviation of two gamma curves. The area between two gamma curves is another solution; however it fails to reveal the curvature information. For example: with the same value of areas, a flatter gamma curve renders less gradient brightness in some gray levels and the color washout is more severe.As the image quality becomes better, these two methods are insufficient. To include the gradient of transmittance in the gamma curve, an off-axis image distortion index D was proposed [12]. It is defined by averaging the percentages of brightness gradient differences between every on and off-axis gray level. In this paper we adopted the index G[13] to render the color washout phenomenon, which can be calculated from the transmittance curves of various viewing angles. The optimized area and applied voltage ratios of sub-pixels A and B are obtained through simulations and the approximate results are demonstrated in an iMVA CC-type LCD.To exhibit the colorful image, the gamma curve with the exponential index of 2.2 is usually adopted for the normal view. This value is analogized to that of the traditional CRT (Cathode Ray Tube) monitor, and the images render a perceptually-uniform gray scale. When the gamma curves become viewing angle dependent as the LCD do, we can expect that different images are emerged at off-axis and the qualities are usually worse.The index G is defined to be the average deviation of the exponential index of every two gray levels for all the gamma curves from 2.2. In the normal viewing direction, the transmittances of gray levels i and j are Tiand Tjrespectively, and the corresponding gamma value is γ0=2.2. The relationship between the gray level and transmittance can be written as:(1)Ti(on-axis)=Aiγ0.(2)Tj(on-axis)=Ajγ0.By eliminating the common factor A, the gamma value of the on-axis can be obtained as:(3)γ0=log(Ti(on-axis))-log(Tj(on-axis))log(i)-log(j).For each gamma curve of off-axis, the gamma value γ can be calculated for every two gray levels. Every deviation from γ0 is undesired, and(4)G=〈γ-γ0〉i,j=1∼255,i≠j=logTi(off-axis)-logTj(off-axis)log(i)-log(j)-γ0i,j=1∼255,i≠jwhere 〈 〉 mean to average every two different gray levels except the dark state (level 0). Smaller index G indicates little deviation of gamma value from γ0.We first calculate index G values of an 8-domain VA LC mode by the commercial simulator LCD Master (Shintech). The parameters of the liquid crystal material used in the simulation are: K11=15.9pN, K22=6.9pN, and K33=17.1pN, ne=1.5966, no=1.4869, ε//=3.6, ε⊥=7.5. The optical structure, corresponding material [14] and parameters for the use of linearly polarized incident light are shown in Fig. 3. We define two parameters, RA, the ratio of the area of sub-pixel A to total pixel area, and a, the voltage ratio of sub-pixel B (VLCB) to A (VLCB) to minimize the index G:(5)RA=area of sub-pixel Atotal area,0⩽RA⩽1.(6)a=VLCBVLCA,0⩽a⩽1.In the cases of RA=0 and 1, or a=1, the 8-domain VA is reduced to 4-domain VA. Since the voltage at sub-pixel B is always less than that of sub-pixel A due to a coupled capacitance between them, the transmittance is less in sub-pixel B. The closer RA to 1, the reduced brightness is less. Fig. 4shows the index G at the worst oblique angle (θ=60°, ϕ=45°) of various a and RA. In the dark region, where G is small, the corresponding voltage ratio a is between 0.55 and 0.75, and RA is under 0.6.In the situation of RA=0.5, the area of sub-pixel A equals to the area of sub-pixel B. Fig. 5a shows the gamma curves of the normal and the worst oblique viewing (θ=60°, ϕ=45°) directions of a=1 (4-domain VA) and a=0.68 (8-domain VA), respectively. When the voltage ratio a decreases from 1 to 0.68, that is, the 8 domains begin to manifest, the gamma curve is moved closely to that of the normal incident. Fig. 5b shows the images of gray levels corresponding to the normal, worst oblique viewing directions of 4- and 8-domain VA. The grayness is clearly distinguishable in the normal and oblique viewing direction of 8-domain VA; however the maxima brightness of latter is reduced. That is, by sacrificing a bit of brightness, we can reduce the color washout in the oblique viewing direction. Since the overall luminance of the 8-domain VA panel is less than that of the 4 domain VA, the contrast ratio reduces a bit. Fig. 6shows the G values and contrast ratios as a varies from 0.02 to 1. The smallest color washout takes place when a is 0.68.When a circularly polarized light is used, the optical structure of 8-domain VA must be redesigned, which is shown in Fig. 7a. Fig. 7b shows the index G at the worst oblique direction (θ=60°, ϕ=45°) of various a and RA. The small value of G regime locates when a is between 0.55 and 0.7, and RA is under 0.45. Fig. 8a shows the gamma curves of the normal and worst oblique viewing (θ=60°, ϕ=45°) directions of a=1 (4-domains VA) and a=0.68 (8-domains VA), respectively. Beyond the gray lever 100, the transmittances of 4-domain VA mode are higher than 1 and the color washout is severe. It is clearly suppressed in the 8-domain VA mode. Fig. 8b shows the G values and contrast ratios as function of a when RA=0.5. The contrast ratio does not reduce as a decrease, and the smallest color washout and highest contrast take place when a is 0.66.To demonstrate the optimized 8-domain VA mode using the simulation results, we use an existing iMVA panel, in which RA is 0.45 and a can be tuned between 1 and 0.7 by adjusting the driving frequency and gate signals. A circularly polarized light is the incident light. The optical microscopy the images of the RGB sub-pixels with three difference applied voltages are shown in Fig. 9. Fig. 10shows the measured gamma curves of 4- (a=1) and 8-domain (a=0.7) at different viewing directions. The corresponding index G values decreases from 1.24 of 4-domain to 1.10 of 8-domain. In the high gray level regime, the transmittance bump of the 4-domain curve is clearly reduced compared with that of the 8-domain curve and the color washout is suppressed. Fig. 11shows the real pictures of normal and oblique viewing angles of the traditional 4-domain and 8-domain VA LCD. The human face and the fruits of 8-domain VA have more texture and are colorful in the oblique direction. The quality of images has been improved.In summary, when using linear polarized light in the simulation, the brightness of sub-pixel B is always dimmer than that of the sub-pixel A. The overall luminance of the 8-domain VA panel is less than that of the 4 domain VA, and in consequence the contrast ratio reduces a bit. For the circularly polarized incident light, we obtain a better contrast ratio and less color washout image simultaneously with a=0.66. This result can be understood from the oblique gamma curves show in Fig. 8a. From the 4-domain curve, the transmittances of the gray lever 165 (=250×0.66, analogy to the applied voltage) are higher that of the gray level 250. The brightness of sub-pixel B is brighter than that of the sub-pixel A. When a=0.66, the combination luminance of two sub-pixels is brighter than that of the 4 domain VA, in consequence, the contrast ratio rises. In the experiments, the color washout is apparently reduced when we applied a=0.7, which is the approximate optimized data from the simulation, to the iMVA panel.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
By dividing one pixel into two sub-pixels, we successfully optimize the area and applied voltage ratio of sub-pixels A and B, and the gamma curve is moved close to that of the normal incident. Accordingly, the index G is reduced and the color washout phenomena are diminished.When using linear polarized light, the overall luminance of the 8-domain VA panel is less than that of the 4 domain VA. That is, by decreasing the applied voltages of one of the sub-pixels and sacrificing a bit of brightness; the color washout in the oblique viewing direction is reduced. For the circularly polarized incident light, a better contrast ratio and less color washout are obtained with sub-pixel voltage ratio of 0.66 and RA=0.5.We also demonstrate the reducing color washout phenomenon in an iMVA panel by applying the approximate simulation results. The images are less changed when the observers move around the LCD due to the low index G in the oblique viewing direction. Overall, the image quality of the LCD is improved.