@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Measurement of minimum angle of resolution (MAR) for the spatial grating consisting of lines of two colors

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Minimum angle of resolution (MAR) is measured for colored grating.Colored grating consists of two colors from R, G, B, White and Black.MAR is the smallest for grating of White and Black.MAR for grating with Blue is not always smaller than grating with other colors.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Minimum angle of resolution (MAR),Two alternative forced choice (2AFC),Visual acuity,Grating,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Minimum angle of resolution (MAR) was measured for the grating which consisted of lines of two colors selected from Red, Green, Blue, White and Black. Method of two alternative forced choice (2AFC) was used where the participants were asked to answer the direction of the color grating of the horizontal or vertical directions. From the measured psychometric function of the ratio of the correct answers, MAR which corresponded to the threshold of 75% correct answer ratio was determined. MAR of the grating patches with more than one primary color was measured to be affected by the combination of colors and to be 10–30% larger than that of the grating patch of White–Black. While the resolving power for Blue pattern had been known to be worse than those for Green and Red patterns, MAR of the grating including Blue was not always the worst.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
One pixel of display consists of the subpixels of the different colors. Various colors can be generated by the separate control of luminance of each subpixel in a pixel. Configuration of the subpixels of the different colors inside pixels determines the capability of the display to spatially generate the colored image information.It had been known that people resolve the Blue patterns poorly compared with the Green or Red patterns. On retina inside human eyes, L-, M- and S-cone photoreceptors were distributed which respond preferentially to long-, middle- and short-wavelength light, respectively. The different resolving power of the colors was generally attributed to the different spatial distribution of L-, M- and S-cone [1–4]. And this phenomenon has been used in some of the display applications such that the subpixel configuration is not RGB stripe or the spatial distributions of the subpixel of Red, Green and Blue colors are not equal [5–8].However, most of the photos or the images that people observe consist of the various colors and the images represented by one primary color are quite rare. Hence, the resolving power for the images consisting of multiple colors may show the trends different from those consisting of one primary color. In this respect, the minimum angle of resolution (MAR) was investigated using the grating patches consisting of the repeating two color lines.Two alternative forced choice (2AFC) method was employed where patches of the grating of the horizontal or vertical directions were shown to the participant and each participant was asked to answer the line direction of each grating patch. The ratios of the correct answers were collected for the various color conditions and MAR were determined from the threshold condition of the correct answer ratio of 75%.To measure the minimum angle of resolution (MAR) and the visual acuity, the grating patch of black and white lines had been used to determine whether the participant could discern the direction of the grating [9,10]. To measure MAR for the various combination of colors, an experiment was designed using the grating with two colors.Two alternative forced choice (2AFC) method was used to determine whether the participant could discern the direction of the grating [11]. As a patch for the experiment, the grating with the vertical or horizontal directions was used and the participant was asked to answer whether the direction of the grating are vertical or horizontal. Fig. 1(a) illustrates the grating patch where two color lines of the same thickness of the vertical or horizontal directions were repeatedly placed. When the people can discern the grating lines, the ratio of correct answer will approach the asymptotic value of 100%. When the participant cannot discern the grating lines, the participant will guess the grating direction and the ratio of correct answer will approach the asymptotic value of 50%. Hence, in this experiment based on 2AFC method, the threshold that the participant can discern the grating should be (100+50)/2%=75%. The typical psychometric function obtained from the experiment based on 2AFC method is illustrated in Fig. 1(b).While the grating of the luminance profile of the sine wave was generally used for the measurement of MAR, the luminance profile of the input signal of Fig. 1(a) was the shape of the square wave. Yet, it was reported that the result obtained from the grating of the luminance profile of the square wave was equivalent to that obtained from the grating of the luminance profile of the sine wave [12]. Hence, the color grating of the luminance profile of the square wave of Fig. 1(a) was be used for the experiment. If MAR is not dependent on the colors, MAR will be the same irrespective of the colors of the grating.For the measurement, the input signal consisting of 4 grating patches of the vertical or horizontal directions was used as illustrated in Fig. 2(a). The visual acuity was reported to be affected by the patterns around the optotype [13]. Therefore, this input signal consisting of 4 grating may provide the different result from that using only one grating. But in the observation of the images of photos or scenery, multiple color patterns exist inside one image. Hence, input signal of 4 grating patches were selected to investigate MAR on the case that multiple colors patterns were observed simultaneously.These 4 grating patch were placed near the center of the sample display as illustrated in an example of input signal of Fig. 2(a). Other area on the sample display was set at black level. Display of the diagonal size of 15.6in., pixel pitch of 0.18mm, pixel numbers of 1920×1080 and the color gamut of 62% with respect to NTSC was used as the display sample. The width and the height of the grating patch of Fig. 2(a) were selected to be 180 pixels and the gratings patches were separated by the distance of 8 pixels.Fig. 2(b) illustrates the schematic setup of the experiment. Observation distance between the participant and the screen was selected as 5m. Head of the participant was located such that eyes of the participant were on the line that passed through the center of the display sample. Illuminance of the experimental room was measured to be 300 lux by illuminance meter (LX-101, Lutron) and kept constant during the experiment.When the horizontal and the vertical directions for 4 grating patches were used for equal number of times, 16 combinations of directions were possible for each input signal as illustrated in Fig. 3(a). Two colors of each grating were selected among White (W), Black (K), Red (R), Green (G) and Blue (B). And the lines of these two colors were repeated with the same spatial period in the grating patch. Selected colors were categorized into 3 groups, by the inclusion of White or Black. First color group consisted of White and one of other colors. Second color group consisted of Black and one of other colors. Third group consisted of combinations of the primary colors. For each color groups, 16 input signals were prepared as illustrated in Fig. 3(a). Hence, 48 input signals and 192 patches were prepared for each condition of the same line thickness. Grating of White–Black was always placed inside all the input signals as reference. Fig. 3(b) illustrates an example of input signal image of pattern type HV02 and color group 1.To measure the luminance of the colors on the sample display, luminance meter (Spyder 4.0 Elite) was used [14]. Measured luminance and color coordinates for White (W), Black (K), Red (R), Green (G) and Blue (B) were illustrated in Fig. 4. The luminance of the black level was measured to be 0.617cd/m2. Sum of the measured luminance of Green, Red and Blue was equal to the measured luminance of White.Line thickness of the grating was selected as 0.9mm, 1.08mm 1.26mm such that the participant was difficult to discern the White–Black grating of T=0.9mm and could easily discern the White–Black grating patch of T=1.26mm on the observation distance. Generally 2 s had been reported to be given to the participant for this type of experiment using the grating patch [15,16]. As there were 4 grating patches on each input signal, the duration of 8 s was selected. During experiment, each input signal from one of 3 color groups of Fig. 3 was displayed for 8 s. Every time the input signal was changed, a beep sound was made to notify the change of the input signal to the participant. After 4 s, the other beep sound was given to notify that 4 s passed. Within 8 s, each participant was asked to answer whether the each direction of four gratings patches were horizontal or vertical. All participants answered within the given 8 s without the shortage of the time. Measurement for one color groups took about 128 s as one color group consisted of 16 input signals. After 16 input signals of one color group were displayed, the resting time of 3min was provided and experiment was continued and the input signals from other color groups were displayed. Total measurement for 3 color groups took about 12min. The participant can become tired or lose interest near the end of the experiment and this can affect the result. Hence, 3 sequences were designed where the order of color groups 1, 2 and 3 were interchanged as illustrated in Fig. 5. For each participant, each sequence was measured per day. In case of White–Black combination, the grating patches of the same line thickness were shown 144times to each participant. In case of other combinations of KWRGB, each combination was shown 48times to each participant.Four participants with the visual acuity of 1.2 in decimal notation were selected. They were in their twenties and three of them wore the corrected eyeglasses as listed in Table 1. Visual acuity of 1.0 in decimal notation corresponds to the ability to discern the interval of 1.5mm at the distance of 5m. Before the experiment started, each participant was explained about the purpose of the experiment and the correct verbal response during the experiment such that the participant must answer the direction of the grating patch even when the participant could not discern the grating patch. Input signals described in Fig. 3(a) and Table 1 were shown to the participants and from the answers of the participants, the ratio of the correct answers were collected for the grating patches at the different lines colors and line thickness.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
