@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
MEMS optical switches and interconnects

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper reviews several optical connecting devices that are based on microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) components.The reviewed MEMS-based optical connecting devices are divided into two categories: optical switches and optical interconnects.Working principles of these optical connecting devices are discussed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
MEMS-based optical switches,MEMS-based optical interconnect,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper reviews several optical connecting devices that are based on microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) components. In this paper, we divide optical connecting devices into two categories. The first category includes MEMS-based optical switches developed for optical fiber communication, which perform optical switching, wavelength division multiplexing (WDM) routing, and/or optical cross connection. The other category consists of MEMS-based optical interconnects that have been constructed primarily for use in rack-to-rack, board-to-board, chip-to-chip, card-to-card and/or intra-chip interface connections. Working principles of these MEMS optical connecting devices will also be discussed in this paper.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Optical switches [1–4] were intensively exploited during the boom of optical fiber communication [5–8] where data are transmitted for long haul through optical fibers. They were able to implement switching, wavelength division multiplexing (WDM) [9–12] routing, and/or optical cross connection. Transmitting data with light is not an exclusive privilege of long-haul optical fiber communication. Nowadays, optical fibers or simply free-space light rays have been employed to replace electrical wires or cables for short-distance rack-to-rack [13], board-to-board [14–16], chip-to-chip [17,18], and even intra-chip [19,20] interconnection. This therefore boosts up the studies related to optical interconnects.Particularly, it is attractive to implement these switches and interconnects with microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) components. MEMS components enable low crosstalk, high extinction ratio, low polarization dependence, low insertion loss, etc. In this paper, we will review various MEMS optical switches [4,21–30] for fiber communication in Section 2, and discuss in Section 3 several MEMS optical interconnects potentially for use in rack-to-rack, board-to-board, chip-to-chip, card-to-card and/or intra-chip interface connections.Fig. 1shows the operation principle of an example 1×2 optical switch proposed by Lee et al. [21]. When no voltage is applied, the light is directed from fiber A to fiber B by a 45° reflector. When the voltage is applied, the mirror is rotated clockwise. Hence, the light is directed from fiber A to fiber C to realize switching. It can be further expanded to a 1×N switch as long as a proper micromirror with multiple stable positions is available.N×N optical switches, often called optical cross connects (OXC), are definitely more intriguing than simple 1×N switches. According to their optical system configurations, MEMS OXCs are roughly divided into two categories – 2D OXCs (Fig. 2[24]) and 3D OXCs (Fig. 3[24]). In a 2D OXC all the components take their places on a 2D plane, whereas in a 3D OXC components are deployed over the entire 3D space.Fig. 2 is the schematic of a N×N MEMS 2D OXC. It requires a 2D array of N2 micromirrors, each of which has dual states and can be poised either to reflect light, or to simply let the light pass without being blocked. Two linear fiber collimator arrays, each with N fibers, provide the input and output ports, respectively. The signal routing is performed by controlling the state of each mirror.2×2 switches are a unique type of 2D OXC, which can be implemented without using the configuration shown in Fig. 2; they can take simpler forms, some of which even require only one micromirror to perform the routing [22].Fig. 4displays the SEM image of a 2×2 optical fiber switch demonstrated by Lee et al. [21]. The silicon-based 2×2 optical fiber switch is constructed using four fibers with ball lenses and four vertical torsion mirrors. The micro ball lens collimates the light from the fiber and increases the working distance; the fibers and ball lenses are inserted in V grooves and micro pits, respectively.Fig. 5presents their experimental result obtained using the 2×2 optical fiber switch in Fig. 4 demonstrating the ON–OFF switching behavior at an output fiber. The measured insertion loss of the TRANSMISSION state where the light takes a fiber–fiber path is 0.55dB, while the insertion loss of the REFLECTION state where the light takes a fiber-mirror–mirror-fiber path is 0.9dB. The average loss per mirror, which is caused by the reflection loss, loss through scattering from the rough polysilicon surface and loss from the curvature of the mirror, is 0.35dB. The crosstalk of their switch is below −60dB.Fig. 3 shows the concept of a 3D MEMS optical switch which consists of an input fiber array, an output fiber array, and 2D arrays of scanning mirrors, By controlling the tilt angles of mirrors, one can guide the light from an input fiber to a selected output fiber. With this architecture, very-large-port-count optical cross connects (OXC) can be achieved [23,31–43]. It is worth mentioning that several factors have to be considered when designing an OXC as they can affect the OXC performance [38]. For example, the mirror curvature and light path length both play an important role in the optical insertion loss.Fig. 6is the schematic of an optical cross connect reported by Kim et al. [37], which includes an additional Fourier-transform lens. The input/output fibers are arranged in a 36×36 square array with a 1.25mm pitch so that 1296 input and 1296 output ports are achieved. The beam waists at the first mirror array are about 500μm in diameter. The Fourier-transform lens is placed at a distance of one focal length from the MEMS mirror array, and this distance is comparable to the Rayleigh range of the optical beam (130mm). This Fourier-transform lens ensures the waist size of the beam at the output mirror is the same as that at the input mirror. It lowers the required maximum angle, reduces the required mirror size, increases the tolerance to curvature of mirrors, and reduces the difference in the path length among connections of different input–output pairs.The number of possible connections of the described optical cross connect in Fig. 6 is 12962=1,679,616. Fig. 7presents the histograms of connection insertion losses for port counts of 1102×1103 (4.0dB maximum loss), 1045×1046 (3.5dB maximum loss), and 910×910 (3.0dB maximum loss), respectively.With MEMS mirrors, high port count 2D and 3D optical cross connects have been realized. A N×N 2D OXC requires a N×N array of micromirrors, while a N×N 3D OXC requires a total of only 2N micromirrors (2 chips, each with N mirrors). Also, in a 2D OXC, where fiber arrays are usually placed closed to the MEMS chip, the pathlength, can vary significantly from route to route when N becomes large, making the footprint of the entire mirror array large as well. Therefore, compared to the 2D OXC, the 3D OXC architecture can potentially achieve a larger port count, i.e., larger N. However, the mirror in a 2D OXC only needs to be a dual-state component, whereas each mirror in a 3D OXC has to be able to scan continuously about two orthogonal axes.The N×N OXCs described in the previous sections lack the capability to manipulate individual wavelength channels in a WDM network. A wavelength-selective N×N OXC which is able to route different wavelength channels independently is definitely intriguing, and can be constructed with 1×N wavelength-selective switches (WSS) and N×1 WSS as the building blocks.Fig. 8is a 1×N wavelength-selective switch (WSS) proposed by Marom et al. [9] that comprises input and output fibers, a micro-lens array, a condenser lens, a MEMS micromirror array, a resolution lens and a diffraction grating. The input beam emerging from the center port of the linear fiber array is first focused on the focal plane B by the condenser lens as displayed in Fig. 9. Then, a second subsystem spatially separates different wavelength channels with the resolution lens and diffraction grating. The beam of each wavelength channel is then focused on a corresponding mirror in the MEMS mirror array, which, by adjusting its tilt angle, directs the light of this particular wavelength to the desired output fiber port to accomplish wavelength-selective switching.A more advanced version of MEMS WSS was later demonstrated by Marom et al., as shown in Fig. 9[9]. The anamorphic prism pair inserted between the fiber collimator array and the condenser lens maximizes the channel passband. Moreover, the polarization walkoff crystal and half-wave plate minimize the polarization dependence.It is worth mentioning that the setups shown in Figs. 8 and 9 can also be used as N×1 wavelength-selective switches due to the reciprocity of light propagation.Fig. 10presents a SiOBs (silicon optical benches)-based 4-channel×2.5-Gbps optical interconnect module proposed by Hsiao et al. [44] that consists of a transmitting part and a receiving part. Vertical-cavity surface-emitting lasers (VCSEL) are chosen as the light sources due to their popularity in both academia and industry. With 45° reflectors, the assembly process, which involves integrating VCSELs and fibers, can be facilitated. As shown in Fig. 10, the optical path length from the VCSEL to the fiber is 180μm. Both the VCSEL and photodiode arrays have a pitch of 250μm. The VCSEL-to-fiber and fiber-to-PD coupling efficiencies are −5.65 and −1.98dB, respectively.A silicon 45° micro reflector is fabricated using an anisotropic wet etching process. An array of micromachined V-grooves, which are used to hold optical fibers, is also engraved on the silicon optical bench. VCSEL and PD arrays are flip-chip assembled on the tops by the Au/Sn eutectic solder to form the transmitting and receiving parts, respectively.Fig. 11(a) shows a 45° micro reflector of the interconnect in Fig. 11. The etching depth is determined by the required optical path from VCSEL to the fiber (or from the fiber to PD). Fig. 11(b) displays an AFM image of the 45° micro reflector. The purpose of this AFM measurement is to obtain the surface roughness to determine whether this slant surface is suitable as an optical mirror. The data in Fig. 11(b) indicate that the RMS surface roughness of this slant reflective surface is less than 20nm, which is less than one tenth of a wavelength as is required for an optical mirror. Fig. 12(a) and (b) presents the optical eye diagrams of the transmitting part and the receiving part, respectively, which are obtained at a data rate of 2.5Gbps. The crosstalk between adjacent channels is as low as −30dB, guaranteeing clearly open eyes even when all the four channels are simultaneously active.It is worth mentioning that multimode fibers are used in this interconnect module. Multimode fibers are rarely seen in long-distance optical fiber communication due to the modal dispersion. However, given their larger numerical apertures compared to single-mode fibers, in a short-distance system with a modest data rate as this one shown in Fig. 12, multimode fibers can be used to achieve higher coupling efficiencies, therefore eliminating the need for components such as focusing/collimating microlenses.Fig. 13presents the concept of a board-to-board MEMS free-space optical interconnect proposed by Chou et al. [15], which is a telecentric 4-f optical system with a VCSEL array and a photodetector array. Alignment between optical components are definitely more critical in free-space optical interconnects than in their fiber-based or waveguide-based counterparts. This interconnect can be fine-adjusted with more (five) degrees of freedom than other previously reported MEMS free-space optical interconnects [45–47].By translating the bulk lens on the left using a MEMS actuator, an undesired tilt of the receiving board can be compensated for, as shown in Fig. 14. With the MEMS lens scanner demonstrated by the same research group which exhibits a maximum displacement of ±170μm [46], the tilt tolerance of the receiving board can be increased to ±1.6°. Moreover, using a MEMS rotary stage to rotate the double-sided microlens array, a rotation of the receiving board about the optical axis can be compensated for, as shown in Fig. 15. The same research group has also developed such a stage with a rotation angle of up to 2.3° [47]. Both the MEMS translation and rotation stages described above are driven by electrothermal mechanism, and utilize bistable mechanical brakes to achieve zero power hold.Fig. 16is a card-to-card optical interconnect architecture proposed by Wang et al. [48]. Building elements include VCSEL array(s), photodetector array(s), microlens arrays, and MEMS micromirror arrays with steering ability. As shown in Fig. 16, the card-to-card distance is 30cm and the tilt directions and angles of the steering micromirrors determine data routes, i.e., which card(s) to be the transmitting ends and which card(s) to be the receiving end(s). This architecture, by utilizing MEMS steering mirrors, offers high flexibility and degree of freedom to dynamically change the data routes. The longest card-to-card distance that can be allowed is determined by the divergence of the light after its being emitted from the VCSEL and passing the microlens. Thus, if the divergence can be reduced, the maximum allowed card-to-card distance can be extended. This enables the accommodation of more cards. The working process of this optical interconnect is as follows.The microlens is placed one focal length away from the VCSEL to collimate the optical beam from the VCSEL. Then, the optical beam is steered by the MEMS-based micromirror to travel from the transmitter to the receiver, where it is detected by a photodetector.Fig. 17shows their experimental setup that demonstrates the feasibility of this interconnect concept. It is composed an 850-nm 1×4 VCSEL array with a 250μm pitch, a 1×4 PD array, micromirror arrays and microlens arrays for both the VCSELs and PDs. Fig. 18presents their results of the bit error rate (BER) versus the transmitter–receiver horizontal distance. It can be clearly seen that the BER increases with the distance. The experimental results caused by several factors including beam size of Gaussian beam varies from VCSEL to steering micromirror. Moreover, raising the size (large clear aperture) of microlens can compensate the loss of power and decrease the diffraction effect at the transmitter side.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
