@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Stochastic barrier coverage in wireless sensor networks based on distributed learning automata

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Proposing a new approach to barrier coverage in wireless sensor network.Modeling barrier coverage with stochastic edge-weighted graph.Finding an optimal solution for the network stochastic edge-weighted coverage graph.Comparing the performance of the proposed method with the greedy and optimal methods.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Barrier coverage,Stochastic coverage graph,Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs),Distributed Learning Automata (DLA),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Barrier coverage is one of the most important applications of wireless sensor networks. It is used to detect mobile objects are entering into the boundary of a sensor network field. Energy efficiency is one of the main concerns in barrier coverage for wireless sensor networks and its solution can be widely used in sensor barrier applications, such as intrusion detectors and border security. In this work, we take the energy efficiency as objectives of the study on barrier coverage. The cost in the present paper can be any performance measurement and normally is defined as any resource which is consumed by sensor barrier. In this paper, barrier coverage problem is modeled based on stochastic coverage graph first. Then, a distributed learning automata-based method is proposed to find a near optimal solution to the stochastic barrier coverage problem. The stochastic barrier coverage problem seeks to find minimum required number of sensor nodes to construct sensor barrier path. To study the performance of the proposed method, computer simulations are conducted. The simulation results show that the proposed algorithm significantly outperforms the greedy based algorithm and optimal method in terms of number of network barrier paths.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Nowadays, wireless sensor networks are implemented in a wide range of applications such as border surveillance and intrusion detection. Coverage is one the adapted metrics to measure the quality of service (surveillance) in networks [2]. For instance, sensor nodes can be deployed in borders of a country to detect intrusion, around forests to detect fire, both sides of gas and oil pipe lines to detect potential sabotage, around chemical factories to detect leakage and emission of chemical gases, and etc. The main goal of these applications is to detect any kind of intruders when they enter or penetrate into the network region [3]. The problem, which is referred to as barrier coverage problem, arises from the fact that sensors tend to unnecessarily cover the whole area in the network, rather than detecting only those intruders that enter or exit a network.Basically, barrier coverage can be categorized into two classifications: weak barrier coverage and strong barrier coverage [4]. In weak barrier coverage, we only need to detect intruders moving along congruent crossing paths; and in strong barrier coverage, we need to detect intruders with arbitrary moving paths. In most of the studies in coverage problem of wireless sensor networks, sensors are supposed to have an omnidirectional sensing model, in which the sensing range of a sensor is mostly a disk model and an object can be covered or detected by a sensor if it is within the sensing range of the sensor [5,6].Fig. 1shows a network which can support 2-barrier coverage. It can be seen in the figure that any intruders can be detected by deployed sensor nodes. For instance, two intruders penetrating into the network can be seen in this network. We require that, in order to cover them, every crossing path be covered by deployed sensor nodes in networks. A path is a crossing path if it crosses from top to bottom [2]. In real implementation of wireless sensor networks, intruders are highly unlikely to follow such paths; a short path across the belt region is more likely to be taken.A wireless sensor network consists of tiny nodes. Each node in network has a low computation power, battery capability, transmission power, etc. Thus, energy consumption is one of the critical issues in this kind of network. Scheduling algorithms try to schedule sensor nodes into proper status to save restricted resources in network. In barrier coverage, also most of the approaches select appropriate nodes to guarantee detection of intruders to network borders.In this work, we model barrier coverage problem with stochastic edge-weighted graph, called it stochastic barrier coverage, and propose a novel method based on distributed learning automata to address the problem of stochastic barrier coverage in wireless sensor networks. In the proposed algorithm which is called DLASBC, each node in the network is equipped with a learning automaton which learns (schedules) best node to cover barrier path based on distributed learning automata structure. The DLASBC is developed around the modeling tool of distributed learning automata. It is established that the number of barriers in a network, gained by DLASBC, is better than that of other similar schemes. Our main purpose is to increase network barriers.The main contributions of this paper are as following:•Proposing a new approach to barrier coverage in wireless sensor network.Modeling barrier coverage with stochastic edge-weighted graph.Finding an optimal solution for the network stochastic edge-weighted coverage graph.Comparing the performance of the proposed method with the greedy and optimal methods.The rest of the paper is organized as following. Section 2 briefly surveys related works. Problem statement is given in Section 3. In Section 4, we overview the learning automata and distributed learning automata. The proposed method is given in Section 5. Section 6 reports the performance of our proposed network barrier monitoring scheme. Finally, Section 7 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
