@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Fast methods based on modal stability procedure to evaluate natural frequency variability for industrial shell-type structures

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Methods are proposed to take into account variability in dynamic finite element analysis.They are based on a mechanical assumption.They are fast and non-intrusive.They are relevant for a large number of degrees of freedom and a large number of random variables.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Sensitivity analysis,Modal stability procedure,Natural frequency,Variability,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper proposes a set of parametric numerical methods to predict the effect of uncertainties in the input parameters on the natural frequencies of structures. The first method, called MCS–MSP, involves the Monte Carlo simulation (MCS) and the modal stability procedure (MSP). Here the weak sensitivity of the mode shape to variations in the input parameters of the model is exploited. A single finite element analysis is required for the MCS–MSP, leading to a fast Monte Carlo simulation. Next, two first order methods are presented that rely on the calculation of frequency sensitivity to random variables using either the finite element method (FOFE) or the MSP (FOMSP). These first order methods require only as many finite element or MSP analyses as the number of random variables. These fast and non-intrusive methods are intended to be used with industrial-size models with a large number of degrees of freedom and a large number of random variables. Finally, two applications are presented: a spot welded plate assembly and a car body in white. The stochastic results obtained (mean value, standard deviation, coefficient of variation, statistical distribution) with the three presented methods are compared to those obtained using the direct MCS as a reference. For both examples, the quality of the results obtained with these fast methods is satisfactory. Moreover, the gains are very valuable: the computation time involved in the proposed approaches based on MSP assumption is lower than the computation time needed for six deterministic finite element analyses.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Given the scope of the effects of uncertainty in the analysis and design of engineering structures, the understanding and thus the control of the phenomenon of variability are a challenging research issue today. In this paper, the variability of natural frequencies, due to uncertainties in material and physical properties, is studied. This research has been conducted in the context of the French research program MADIAV, and dedicated to the variability of acoustic performances of cars. For a complete vibroacoustic study, frequency response analysis is certainly needed. The study of the natural frequencies is a first step here, and it is intended to extend our work to the frequency response analysis.Among those to take variability into account in finite element analysis are Elishakoff and Ren [1], Ghanem and Spanos [2]. In the automotive context, vibro-acoustic variability was studied by Wood and Joachim [3], Kompella and Bernhard [4], Scigliano et al. [5], Lionnet and Lardeur [6], Hills et al. [7], and by Durand et al. [8]. After a consideration of uncertainties in structural dynamics, Mace et al. [9] presented an introduction to probabilistic and non-probabilistic methods. An overview of non-probabilistic methods is also given by Moens and Vandepitte [10], and Moens and Hanss [11]. The Monte Carlo simulation MCS [12], one of the best-known probabilistic methods, consists of performing a large number of trials in order to estimate the output variability. The output stochastic data in terms of mean value, standard deviation, coefficient of variation and distribution is thus obtained. The MCS method is reliable but highly time consuming for large industrial models that may contain several million degrees of freedom since the corresponding number of trials needed is very large, typically more than several thousand. In the past few years, several works have been carried out to propose an alleviated numerical approach capable of performing structural variability calculations for industrial models within a reasonable computational time. Among the techniques proposed to reduce the huge number of calculations, one can find line-sampling [13,14], subset simulation [15] and parallel processing techniques [16]. The first order [17] or the second order [18] perturbation approach is another well-known method. This type of approach is used for two of the methods proposed in this paper. Variability is mainly due to the manufacturing process and the uncertainties in material and structural parameters. In this context, Gallina et al. [19] experimentally and numerically examined the influence of uncertainties of several brake components parameters on the variability of the natural frequencies. Cirillo et al. [20] compared two probabilistic approaches: a Monte Carlo method and a response surface method to study the vibrational properties of an aero-engine combustor, achieving a 4-fold reduction in the computation time taken to evaluate the variability of two structural frequencies. Another approach, known as the meta-model technique, was used by Pichler et al. [21] to obtain a polynomial approximation of the modal quantities. In the same framework of structural dynamics, Hinke et al. [22] used the component mode synthesis technique for vibration analysis of the frequency response of very large systems with limited computational resources. Hinke et al. [14] also proposed the modeling of spatial variations using random fields. The spatial correlation is calculated using the Karhunen–Loève expansion, and the response statistics are then evaluated by MCS. Noh and Park [23] proposed a formulation for determining the response variability of laminated composite plates due to the spatial randomness of the Poisson׳s ratio, by decomposing the constitutive matrix using a Taylor expansion. The modal stability procedure (MCS–MSP), presented in the next section, can be seen as an application of a reanalysis technique for a non-deterministic problem. Balmes et al. [24] generalize these reanalysis techniques with the residue iteration method and provide a class of iterative solvers for modal analysis. The approach of Kirsch et al. [25] is based on the integration of matrix factorization, series expansion and reduced basis, in non-linear dynamic reanalysis to obtain an efficient local approximation and an accurate global approximation. Massa et al. [26] focus on methods using the homotopy perturbation and projection techniques for the precise reanalysis of frequencies and eigenvectors even if the mode shapes do change. These papers give an overview of the recent research on the subject of uncertainty in structural dynamics.The objective of this paper is to evaluate the variability of natural frequencies for industrial models with a large number of degrees of freedom and a large number of random variables. Uncertain parameters (material properties such as elastic moduli or physical properties such as shell thicknesses) are assumed to be independent. The proposed methods use a probabilistic approach, and they are compatible with any statistical law for the description of input parameters. Gaussian distribution laws are used for the examples presented in this paper, and in order to prevent non-physical values truncated Gaussian laws are used. Ideally a very fast and robust approach is required for a large number of degrees of freedom and a large number of random variables. In this work, three fast methods for assessing the frequency variability for industrial models, are proposed. The FOFE and FOMSP methods are first order approaches. These three methods are non-intrusive, and so they are compatible with any standard finite element software.The remainder of the paper is organized in the following manner: some theoretical principles of the MCS–MSP formulation are first provided in Section 2. Next, theoretical principles and a detailed description of the FOFE and FOMSP methods are given in Section 3. In Section 4, the application of these methods on first an assembly of two welded plates followed by an automotive car body in white, are presented. The paper closes with concluding comments and suggestions for future work.A general outline of the modal stability procedure (MSP), called the Monte Carlo simulation–MSP (MCS–MSP) in this paper, has been presented by Martini [27] and Arnoult et al. [28]. The MCS–MSP is a numerical method for the calculation of variability in the context of modal analysis and frequency response analysis. It is based on the mechanical assumption of modal stability, i.e. that the mode shapes of the structure are assumed to be weakly sensitive to variations in the input parameters. For modal analysis, the MCS–MSP requires only a single finite element analysis in the nominal configuration to obtain the mode shapes and modal elementary strains. Then, a fast Monte Carlo simulation is performed to calculate the perturbed frequency at each trial and the variability of the natural frequencies of the structure is subsequently determined. The flowchart of the MCS–MSP method may be found in [27,30]. The deterministic natural value problem for finite element dynamic analysis is given by:(1)K0ϕ0=λ0M0ϕ0where the subscript “0” defines the nominal case,K0is the stiffness matrix,M0is the mass matrix,λ0is the eigenvalue andϕ0is the eigenvector. For the perturbed system due to input uncertainties, the solution is given by:(2)Kpϕp=λpMpϕpwhere the subscript “p” denotes the perturbed case. From the matrix perturbation theory [29], the perturbed eigenvector may be written as:(3)ϕp=ϕ0+ΔϕpConsidering the expression of the Rayleigh quotient and Eq. (3), one can write:(4)ωp2=(ϕ0+Δϕp)TKp(ϕ0+Δϕp)(ϕ0+Δϕp)TMp(ϕ0+Δϕp)=ϕ0TKpϕ0ϕ0TMpϕ0according to the modal stability assumptionΔϕp=0, where the numerator constitutes the internal strain energy and the denominator is proportional to the kinetic energy. Extracting mass and stiffness matrices,MpandKp, at each MCS trial is an expensive operation, and may be unavailable with some finite element software. In order to avoid this operation, the numerator is written in terms of elementary modal strains, and the denominator is simplified by assuming a diagonal mass matrix. For a given mode of a structure discretized with n finite elements, the expression of the perturbed natural angular frequency is:(5)ωp2=∑j=1n∫Vp,jεp,jTHp,jεp,jdV∑j=1nϕ0,jTmp,jϕ0,jwhereεp,jis the elementary modal strain vector,Vp,jis the finite element volume,Hp,jis the constitutive law matrix for jth element,mp,jis the mass matrix for the jth element andϕ0,jis the nominal eigenvector for jth element. It has been demonstrated thatεp,jcan be expressed in terms of the nominal strains and the perturbed uncertain parameters. Eq. (5) is used to evaluate the perturbed frequency values using MCS, with the expressionω=2πfto relate the angular frequency to the frequency. It may be applied with any type of structural or continuum finite element. The MCS–MSP method has already proved to be accurate and cost-effective when applied to a car windscreen discretized with three-node triangle finite element type [28]. Here, the MCS–MSP application is extended to an industrial model made up of shell elements (three-node triangle and four-node quadrilateral elements), solid elements (four-node tetrahedral and eight-node hexahedron elements), spring and mass elements [30].In Section 4, the MCS–MSP method is tested on examples to highlight its performances and its limitations. For the two examples, the error analysis due to the methods proposed is discussed. A clear distinction is made between two types of errors: the mesh convergence error and the modal stability error.The FOFE and FOMSP methods are based on the calculation of the sensitivity of the frequency to each of the random variables νi. Using Taylor׳s theorem limited to the first order terms, the perturbed frequency f may be approximated as follows:(6)f=f0+∑i=1n∂f∂νiΔνiwhere f0 denotes the nominal frequency, and ∂f⧸∂νidefines the frequency sensitivity to the random variable νi. If the random variables are assumed to be uncorrelated and their probabilistic distributions are symmetric around their nominal values, then the mean value, the standard deviation and the coefficient of variation (CoV) are approximated by:(7)m(f)=f0(8)σ(f)=∑i=1n(∂f∂νi)2σ2(νi)(9)CoV(f)=σ(f)m(f).Accordingly, the mean frequency is equal to the nominal frequency. The standard deviation expression highlights the frequency sensitivity to the random variables. The calculation of the partial derivative of the frequency with respect to a random variable is discussed in the next section.The sensitivity assessment is useful when performing parametric studies, probabilistic analysis, parameter identification, and optimization [31]. In numerical modal analysis, the calculation of the frequency sensitivity may be performed with an analytical, a semi-analytical or a numerical method as reported by Li et al. [32], where the authors compared the three methods to calculate the sensitivity of the natural frequencies with respect to the composite laminate thickness variation. Lee et al. [33] used a numerical method in order to calculate the sensitivities of mode shapes and natural frequencies. Dunne [34] compared the Monte Carlo simulation and first order sensitivity analysis, for the frequency response of a box-type structure. This first order approximation is found to yield excellent results and is therefore implemented in the commercial software CDH/VAO [35] for optimization and vibro-acoustic variability. In this regard, the method is applied to frequency response analysis but not to frequencies. In the present work, the first order numerical method is presented for frequency variability. The partial derivative of the frequency with respect to the random variable νiis approximated using the finite differences method, and the frequency sensitivity may thus be written as:(10)∂f∂νi≃ΔfΔνi=f(νi+Δνi)−f(νi)Δνi.This approximation of the derivative uses the first order right-sided finite difference scheme. Two ways are proposed to calculate the perturbed and nominal frequencies f (νi+Δνi) and f (νi). The first approach proposed, called first order with finite element (FOFE), consists of the evaluation of both perturbed and nominal frequencies using the finite element method. Two finite element analyses are thus necessary to evaluate the sensitivity of the frequency parameter to one random variable νi:(11)fFE(νi+Δνi)−fFE(νi)Δνi.The second first order approach, called first order with modal stability procedure (FOMSP), relies on MSP for calculation of the required frequencies by using Eq. (5). The sensitivity of the frequency parameter to one random variable νimay be written as:(12)fMSP(νi+Δνi)−fMSP(νi)Δνi.It is important to note that the nominal value of the frequency calculated with fMSP(νi) must be the same as that calculated using the finite element method fFE(νi). In practice, however, there is a discrepancy between the results obtained using MSP and those obtained with the software Abaqus [36] that is very small when the mesh is sufficiently fine, as will be explained in Section 4.1.1. In the following sections, the first order methods FOFE and FOMSP are tested on two examples to highlight their performances as well as their limitations.The basic algorithm of the first order methods FOMSP and FOFE is described inFig. 1. One finite element modal analysis is first performed. Then for each studied uncertain parameter, of type E, h and ρ, one MSP run or one FE run are executed for FOMSP or FOFE respectively. Sensitivity can then be calculated for each variable and statistical results in terms of mean value, standard deviation and CoV are calculated according to Eqs. (7)–(9).To evaluate the efficiency of the proposed methods (MCS–MSP, FOMSP, FOFE), two examples corresponding to an assembly of spot welded plates and a car body in white structure, are considered. The results related to the variability of the structural frequency due to input uncertainties are compared to those obtained with the reference direct MCS (repetitive Abaqus [36] runs). The computational costs are also compared.An assembly of two steel plates welded at three points is first considered (Fig. 2). Before the stochastic study, a sensitivity analysis to determine the influence of the stiffness of spot welds on the frequencies has been performed. Frequencies are almost independent of the stiffnesses of the links [37] between the two plates. Indeed, a spot weld is quite stiff and consequently, reasonable stiffness variations of the spot weld does not affect significantly the mechanical behavior of the structure. The random variables are Young׳s moduli, densities and thicknesses of the individual plates, leading to six independent random variables: νi={E1, h1, ρ1, E2,h2, ρ2}. These parameters are defined by truncated Gaussian distribution laws. A finite element model is then set up. A non-uniform discretization, with Abaqus software [36], is performed using three-node triangular S3 shell elements and four-node quadrilateral S4R shell elements for sheets. Spot welds are here modeled with eight-node hexahedral C3D8 solid elements connected to plates using interpolation elements involving kinematic relations between the degrees of freedom of the nodes concerned. This modeling technique is also used for the Renault car body in white model [38], described in Section 4.2.1. The final mesh, which meets the convergence requirements for the nominal analysis, is composed of 4416 elements (112 triangles, 4205 quadrangles, 3 hexahedrons and 96 interpolation elements) and the model contains about 27,000 degrees of freedom. A free-free linear vibration analysis is performed using the Abaqus finite element software (Lanczos method) to calculate the nominal natural frequencies, the mode shapes, as well as the elementary modal strains. The first five mode shapes are illustrated inFig. 3 and they range from simple bending or torsional modes to more complex combined bending and torsional modes.For the application of MCS–MSP, thanks to the modal stability assumption, the study of the mesh convergence in the nominal configuration is sufficient. For this example (welded plates), in the nominal configuration, the mesh convergence has been verified using a standard iterative mesh refinement. Then the mesh which leads to errors less than 0.5% compared to a very fine mesh, has been selected. For this mesh, the nominal frequencies obtained with MCS–MSP have been compared to the nominal frequencies obtained with Abaqus. The differences are also less than 0.5%. Complementary tests show that these differences between nominal Abaqus and MCS–MSP results tend to 0% for finer meshes. Finally, one can conclude that for this example the mesh convergence error, defined by the difference between the nominal frequencies obtained with Abaqus and MCS–MSP, is less than 1%. The comparison between the nominal frequencies obtained with MCS–MSP and with Abaqus, is an alternative way to assess the convergence level obtained with a given mesh, without comparison with a finer mesh. This test is not strictly equivalent to a classical convergence analysis, but the authors are convinced that it is a good indicator to measure the mesh quality.A convergence study is first performed so that the optimal number of MCS trials yielding accurate statistical data in terms of mean, standard deviation and CoV can be determined. It is necessary to ensure the convergence of this numerical method in order to compare it with the reference MCS. For this purpose, a MCS–MSP calculation made up of 100,000 runs, considered as a reference, has been performed, and the influence of the number of trials is examined. The relative errors in the mean value and standard deviation of the frequency, compared to the reference values, are reported inFig. 4. Only the results related to the first structural frequency are presented. However similar trends are observed for other modes, within the frequency range of interest. The relative errors are small, even for a moderate number of trials; 2000 MCS–MSP trials indeed provide a maximum relative error of 0.3% and 3% on the mean value and standard deviation respectively. By setting a threshold limit criterion for convergence to 1% with regard to standard deviation, 10,000 trials are necessary and sufficient whatever the input coefficient of variation. For two input variability levels (CoV=5% or 15%),Fig.5 shows the evolution of the standard deviation when the number of MCS–MSP trials varies, for the frequencies 1, 2, 5, 7 and 8. With a convergence criterion of 1%, it is confirmed that 10,000 trials are sufficient for both variability levels. Accordingly, 10,000 is adopted as the number of trials for the rest of this paper.Here, the modal stability assumption is investigated, according to which, the mode shapes are insensitive to the random inputs variations. The Modal Assurance Criterion (MAC) has been used for several years as a measure of the correlation between mode shapes [39,40] in particular between numerically and experimentally obtained mode shapes. The maximum value of the MAC indicator, observed for perfectly correlated modes, is 1; with a MAC value greater than 0.9 generally indicating highly correlated modes. The MAC is a reliable indicator of the accuracy of the assumption used in the context of this study. It is calculated here for the first 20 modes of the plate assembly model according to:(13)MACk=(ϕpkϕ0k)2(ϕpkϕpk)(ϕ0kϕ0k).So, for the MAC calculation, the perturbed eigenvector ϕpkand the corresponding nominal eigenvector ϕ0kare needed for each mode examined. The perturbed eigenvectors are calculated using direct finite element runs with Abaqus. 10 randomly perturbed finite element analyses are performed to examine the MAC indicator over the first 20 modes (seeFig. 6). Plate Young׳s moduli, thicknesses and densities E1, h1, ρ1, E2,h2, ρ2 with independent Gaussian distributions and a coefficient of variation CoV=5%, are considered.According to Fig. 6, the MAC indicator is excellent for modes 1 to 6 and 9 to 15, with a mean value—calculated for each mode—greater than or equal to 0.97 (Table 1). For modes 7, 8, 16, 17 and 18, MAC mean values lie however between 0.6 and 0.8, which is not so bad. Finally, the overall mean MAC value is 0.91, which can be considered as good.The same study is performed with a larger variability level CoV (E, h, ρ)=20%. FromTable 2, the overall tendency is somewhat similar when compared with the values in Table 1. For the modes 7, 8, 16, 17 and 18, the mean MAC values are close to 0.6. The overall mean value of MAC is equal to 0.77, a value that can be considered as acceptable.The study of the MAC for the welded plates example shows values worsen slightly with increasing frequency and increasing input coefficient of variation. However the MAC is an indicator [39,40] that has no direct relationship with the error in the perturbed frequency. In the following sections, the errors in mean value and standard deviation are studied for the three methods (MCS–MSP, FOMSP and FOFE), where the MAC is close to 1 (modes 1 and 2) or lower (modes 7 and 8).Concerning the modal stability error,Fig. 7 highlights the robustness of MCS–MSP, by giving the relation between the MAC values and the error levels. Even if the MAC value is not good for some trials (values less than 0.6), the errors of MCS–MSP compared to MCS on the mean value and the standard deviation of frequencies are always lower than 5%. Even for higher variability levels (up to 20%), the errors do not exceed 6% (Table 3). This means that from a statistical point of view, the modal stability assumption is quite robust. For the application of the proposed methods to other examples, the user is advised to perform some random trials, to calculate the MAC values between nominal mode shapes and perturbed mode shapes. From our experience, if the mean MAC value is more than 0.8, the quality of statistical results will be good or acceptable.The number of trials is equal to 10,000 according to the previous discussion. The distributions obtained by MCS–MSP are compared with those obtained by the reference MCS for frequencies 1, 2, 7 and 8. According toFig. 8, distributions are close to Gaussian. Moreover, a good correlation can be observed between MCS and MCS–MSP distributions for frequencies 1, 2, 7 and 8 in particular for the case CoV=5%. One can observe that of course the standard deviation is higher for CoV=20% than CoV=5%. According to Table 3, errors in the standard deviation are generally larger than those in the mean value. For the first eight frequencies, the errors in the mean value and the standard deviation are very small. The overall performance of the MCS–MSP method to predict the mean value and standard deviation of a frequency is therefore very satisfactory, with the errors remaining small. In this work it is considered errors in standard deviation less than 10% as quite acceptable, since other methods presented in the literature frequently lead possibly to much larger errors, even for simple and academic test cases. Ahmad [41] compares in his Ph.D. thesis the Stochastic Finite Element Methods (SFEM) and Monte Carlo Simulations (MCS) for an oil rig modeled with 15 bar finite elements. The elasticity moduli of bars are considered as random parameters with CoV(Ei)=10% for each element i. Relative errors between SFEM and MCS on standard deviation of eigenvalues 1–5 are reported for different orders p of polynomial chaos. For p=1 errors vary from 10% to 17%, p=4 is needed to obtain errors lower than 5% but the computational cost is higher in this case.The first order approaches FOFE and FOMSP are applied to the welded plate example with six random variables. FOFE requires six finite element perturbed runs whereas FOMSP requires six MSP runs; this is in addition of the nominal finite element analysis for both methods. The statistical results in terms of mean value and standard deviation of the frequencies are calculated. This method exploits the first order sensitivity (Eq. (10)) of frequency to random variable νibased on a finite difference scheme. The approximation stability of the frequency derivative is tested by varying the relative perturbation level of νi. In practice, this choice is not obvious [31], since on the one hand too large a value leads to a poor approximation of the derivatives, on the other hand too small a value leads to numerical errors and thus an unsatisfactory quality of the sensitivity calculation.Fig. 9 shows the evolution of the sensitivity when the perturbation level varies. The results are shown for mode 1 but similar results are observed for other modes. The sensitivity is stable around 10−3 and consequently this value is herein retained as a good compromise. Sensitivity to variables E1, h1, ρ1, E2, h2, ρ2 of the first five frequencies is examined using FOFE and FOMSP.Fig. 10 shows that results obtained with both approaches are very close. This means that the modal stability assumption only has a slight effect on the frequency sensitivity. In addition, it is observed that for each variable Ei, hiand ρi, the sensitivity of frequency increases as the mode number increases.Next, the statistical results obtained with these approaches are compared with those obtained using the reference MCS.Fig. 11 shows the error in the mean value and in the standard deviation of the first natural frequency, when CoV(E, h, ρ) varies. The same tendencies can be first observed with both methods. The errors in the mean value and the standard deviation obtained with FOFE and FOMSP are very close. Globally, the errors tend to increase when the level of input variability increases. With these first order methods the mean frequencies are equal to the nominal frequency (Eq. (7)), obtained by a single FE analysis for FOFE, and a single MSP evaluation for FOMSP. However, the comparison with the reference MCS is very satisfactory, since the error is lower than 5% for CoV=20%. The calculation of the standard deviation (Eq. (8)) depends on the sensitivity with respect to each parameter, the error is lower than 6% for CoV=20%. The accuracy obtained compared with the reference MCS is also good here.The same study is now carried out for mode 8 (Fig. 12), for which the MAC mean value is equal to 0.8 for CoV(E, h, ρ)=5% and equal to 0.6 for CoV(E, h, ρ)=20% (Tables 1 and 2). The errors obtained with FOMSP and FOFE are quite similar. The maximal error in the mean value is about 8% for CoV=20%, and the maximal error in the standard deviation is lower than 9%. Finally the errors are only slightly larger for mode 8 compared to mode 1. All the results obtained show that a first order approach is satisfactory to assess the mean value and the standard deviation of frequencies. For this example, similar results are obtained with FOFE and FOMSP. But FOMSP is computationally cheaper than FOFE and provides good statistical predictions. Henceforth, in the following sections, the first order method is restricted to the FOMSP approach.The proposed MCS–MSP and FOMSP approaches are now assessed—with respect to the reference MCS—to compare their performances. 10,000 trials are executed with both MCS–MSP and reference MCS with CoV={1%, 5%, 10%, 15%, 20%} for the six variables, whereas only six MSP runs are necessary for the FOMSP.Fig. 13 depicts the error in the standard deviation with respect to the reference MCS, for different values of the input coefficient of variation. Only modes 1 and 8 are considered here, but it is worth noting that the same tendencies are obtained for the first eight frequencies. According to Fig. 13, both FOMSP and MCS–MSP approaches lead to errors that stay close until CoV=10%. These errors are less than 3% for frequency 1, and less than 7% for frequency 8. For higher values of the coefficient of variation, from 10% to 20%, the MCS–MSP method tends to yield a better prediction compared with FOMSP. This is due to the fact that the MSP formulation is capable of capturing non-linear behavior, whereas FOMSP is a first order method. In summary, for this example, both fast approaches have proven their effectiveness and accuracy for a coefficient of variation below 10%. For higher values of CoV, the MCS–MSP is more reliable than FOMSP, given its ability to capture non-linearities.MCS–MSP, FOFE and FOMSP are all cost-effective. MCS–MSP requires a single nominal finite element analysis and a fast Monte Carlo simulation using MSP trials (Eq. (5)). Concerning methods with sensitivity, the first approach FOFE (Eq. (11)) requires a number of finite element analyses equal to the number of variable parameters in addition to the nominal finite element analysis. The second approach FOMSP (Eq. (12)) requires a number of MCS–MSP runs equal to the number of variable parameters in addition to the nominal finite element analysis. Accordingly, FOMSP is expected to be much more economical compared to the other methods. The CPU time is assessed for each approach. The welded plate model (26,898 degrees of freedom) is considered here and the computing station used has the following specifications: Intel (R) Core (TM) i5 M480 3.67 GHz with 8GB RAM.Table 4 reports the details of the computational time and the gains calculated with respect to the reference MCS, considering five natural frequencies. Accordingly, the FOFE method leads to the lowest but significant gain. The cost of FOFE is equivalent to the cost of seven deterministic finite element runs. The cost of MCS–MSP is equivalent to the cost of approximately six deterministic finite element runs, whereas FOMSP costs only about as much as one deterministic finite element run. In summary, for the welded plate example, the FOFE, FOMSP and MCS–MSP have proven to be accurate and very economic from the point of view of computation time.In order to compare the efficiency of different approaches, an indicator which couples CPU time (ex: Table 4) and precision (ex: Table 3) is introduced. This Cost-Precision indicator CP is defined by:(14)CP=(1−NFE10000)10p×(1−e)pwhere NFE is the number of equivalent deterministic FE runs corresponding to any given method, 10,000 is the number of trials for MCS and e is the error obtained by any given method on the mean value or standard deviation of a frequency. The value p=4 is herein retained as a good compromise. The indicator CP varies from 0 to 1. The CP values are assessed in the following way: 0.5 fair, 0.6 satisfactory, 0.7 good, 0.8 very good, 0.9 excellent and 1 perfect. This indicator is calculated for frequencies 1 and 8 (Table 5). The results obtained with MCS–MSP and FOMSP range from good to excellent.MCS–MSP and FOMSP approaches are now applied to an industrial model, a so called car body in white. The finite element model was prepared and provided by the Renault company, whose structure consists of 214 sheet metal parts connected by 3200 spot welds. These parts are modeled using 97,000 shell elements (S4R and S3). Each spot weld is modeled using a solid hexahedral element (C3D8) joined to plates by kinematic relations (interpolation elements). This spot weld model [38] has also been used for the first example. Other parts meshed with solid elements are added to the model. It also contains some bar, beam, spring and mass elements. In total, the model contains about 840,000 degrees of freedomFig. 14.In dynamics, for a complex structure like a car body, reducing the number of random variables is difficult and possibly not desirable. Indeed, depending on the mode shape, some variables may have more or less influence. If one is interested by a large number of modes, almost all the variables may be significant. Shell thicknesses of each component are considered here as uncertain, leading to a large number of independent parameters: 214. These parameters are defined by truncated Gaussian distribution laws. The finite element Abaqus software [36] is used for the free-free vibration analysis of the model over a frequency range from 0 to 75Hz.Fig. 15 depicts some mode shapes of the car body in white, in the nominal configuration. On this figure, the colors represent the amplitude of displacement, red and blue colors corresponding to the maximum and the minimum values respectively. This gives an overview of the nature of the modes obtained: local, global or combined modes. For instance, the first mode is a local mode (roof stiffener), the second and third are global torsion modes, and the fourth is a global bending one. Globally the complexity of the modes increases as frequency increases.For the application of MCS–MSP, thanks to the modal stability assumption, the study of the mesh convergence in the nominal configuration is sufficient. The approach described in Section 4.1.1 (comparison between Abaqus and MCS-MSP results) has been used for the car body, indeed the mesh refinement would be a tedious task for a complete car body. For this example, the maximum differences between the nominal frequencies obtained with MCS–MSP and Abaqus, called here the mesh convergence error, are less than 1%. One can conclude that the quality of the mesh is correct for the frequency range of interest.The direct Monte Carlo method (repetitive finite element runs) is computationally very expensive for this model. The computing station used to perform these calculations has been described in Section 4.1.7. A single finite element run for just the first four modes needs about six minutes of computation time (meaning about 40 days to compute the 10,000 trials needed).From a practical point of view, the plate thicknesses vary with CoV=5% to perform the reference MCS made up of 10,000 trials.Fig. 16 shows the evolution of the standard deviation when the number of trials varies, for the first four frequencies. 1000 trials would be sufficient for modes 2, 3 and 4, with a convergence criterion of 1%. For mode 1, which is a local bending mode, the convergence is slow, and therefore more trials needed. The highest frequency CoV value (Table 6) is obtained for mode 1 which is a local mode. It is also observed that the CoV of frequencies are smaller than the CoV of the inputs. From the point of view of the mechanism of propagation of uncertainty, the large number of random variables in this case leads to a compensation phenomenon. According to this study of the first four frequencies, it is observed that about 5000 direct MCS trials [42] may be sufficient for a global mode (modes 2, 3 and 4), but about 10,000 direct MCS trials are preferable for a local mode (mode 1). Finally, 10,000 trials are used for the MCS, as well as the MCS–MSP.The modal stability assumption used by the MCS–MSP method is assessed here for the car body in white. Five trials are performed over the first 20 modes, with CoV(h)=5%. The MAC indicator [39,40] is calculated using Eq. (13) (Fig.17). The mean values of MAC are shown inTable 7. Up to mode 7 (67Hz), MAC values are excellent, whereas for the next modes, the MAC value is between 0.4 and 1. For the body in white, one can observe the same trends as those observed with the model of two welded plates. Over the first 20 modes, the MAC mean value is generally greater than 0.8, which is a good indicator value. The overall MAC mean value is 0.9. However, it is worth noting that MAC is only an indicator [39] for the comparison between two mode shapes, and there is no direct or easy relation between the degradation of the MAC values and the errors in the mean value or the standard deviation of frequencies. In the low frequency range, the modal stability assumption is globally acceptable. The objective of this study is also to observe the errors due to the modal stability assumption, when the MAC values are not very good.Concerning the modal stability error,Fig.18 highlights the robustness of MCS–MSP, by giving the relation between the MAC values and the error levels. Even if the MAC value is not good for some trials (values less than 0.6), the errors on the mean value and the standard deviation of frequencies are always lower than 5%.MCS–MSP is compared with the reference method MCS. The number of trials is equal to 10,000 for the MCS–MSP method. Reference MCS and MCS–MSP distributions for the first four frequencies are plotted inFig. 19 for 10,000 trials. The distributions obtained are quasi-Gaussian, and the results obtained with MCS–MSP and MCS are very close. MCS–MSP errors in the mean value and the standard deviation for the first four frequencies are listed inTable 8. The MCS–MSP error in the mean frequency is less than 1%, whereas for the standard deviation the error is slightly higher, about 1% for frequencies 2, 3 and 4 and about 4% for the local mode 1. In conclusion MCS–MSP predictions are accurate for this industrial model body in white, even in terms of standard deviation.Fig. 20 shows the evolution of the MCS–MSP error in the mean and standard deviation of frequency 3, when the coefficient of variation varies. The MCS–MSP error tends towards zero for very low CoV values and increases with CoV. Even for very high values of CoV (20%), the errors of MCS–MSP: 3% on the mean value and 9% on the standard deviation, are quite satisfactory for this industrial application.Performances of MCS–MSP and FOMSP are compared here, to be specific, the errors in the standard deviation of frequencies 2 and 4 are examined (Fig. 21). These frequencies correspond to torsional and bending global modes (Fig. 15). Firstly, MCS–MSP and FOMSP behave in the same way with respect to the reference MCS and the difference between the results obtained using the two methods is small. Secondly, they both lead to small errors with respect to the reference MCS, except when the variability level is very large.Next, MCS–MSP and FOMSP are examined for mode 12, for which the MAC value is somewhat lower (see Fig. 17).Fig. 22 shows the mean value and the standard deviation results. A slight difference in the prediction of the mean frequency is observed when the variability level is high. This is expected since due to the first order assumption, the mean frequency given by FOMSP corresponds to the nominal frequency, irrespective of the variability level. Despite this approximation, the error in mean frequency obtained using FOMSP remains very low: the maximum error is equal to 2% for CoV(h)=20%. The MCS–MSP evaluation is more accurate for the mean frequency, the mean error is less than 1% for CoV(h)=20%. For the values of error in standard deviation of the frequency 12, however, both approaches yield a significant discrepancy compared with the reference MCS, when the variability level is higher than 10%. The maximum error is about 30% for CoV(h)=20%.In conclusion, for a large number of random variables, even when the modal stability assumption is not met, the predictions of mean frequency with economic methods are always precise. But the standard deviation of frequency 12 is precise only when the variability level is small or moderate (CoV<10%). For the body in white, uncertainty input levels up to 5% may be considered as realistic. In this case, the errors on the mean value and standard deviation compared to MCS are always lower than 5% and this error level is satisfactory. Higher input uncertainty levels (10%, 15%, 20%) are not realistic but they have been considered to assess the performances and the limitations of MCS–MSP.The computational costs of reference MCS, MCS–MSP, FOMSP and FOFE when applied to the car body in white model, for the case with 214 random parameters, are investigated. The computational performances are obtained on a machine with an Intel (R) Core (TM) i5 M480 3.67GHz with 8GB RAM. FromTable 9, considering four natural frequencies, the gains are very significant, especially with the MCS–MSP and FOMSP approaches, when compared with the direct Monte Carlo simulation. Computational cost using MCS–MSP is equivalent to the cost of about four deterministic finite element calculations, while the FOMSP costs the same as about two deterministic finite element calculations. The FOFE gain is lower and costs as much as 215 deterministic finite element calculations. For this industrial model with a large number of degrees of freedom and a large number of random parameters, FOMSP and MCS–MSP both involve a reasonable CPU time and therefore make it possible to perform the analysis of variability of the structural frequency in an industrial setting requiring a high level of reactivity.The indicator CP, introduced in Section 4.1.7, which couples CPU time and precision is calculated for frequencies 2 and 4 (Table 10). The CP values are nearly systematically bigger than 0.6, leading to the conclusion that the proposed methods constitute a good compromise between the computational time and the precision.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, numerical parametric methods have been proposed for predicting the effect of uncertainties in the input parameters on the natural frequencies of structures. The first method proposed (MCS–MSP) consists of the modal stability procedure (MSP), and exploits the property of weak sensitivity of the mode shape to variations in the model input parameters. A single finite element analysis is required for the MCS–MSP, leading to a fast Monte Carlo simulation. Next, two first order methods have been presented, that rely on the calculation of the sensitivity of the frequency to random variables, using either the finite element method (FOFE), or based on the MSP formulation (FOMSP). These first order methods require as many finite element or MSP analyses as there are random variables. These fast and non-intrusive methods are intended to be used for industrial models with a large number of degrees of freedom and a large number of random variables. In this study, two applications of these methods have been presented: a spot welded plates assembly and a car body in white containing 27,000 and 840,000 degrees of freedom respectively.The MCS–MSP has been applied to both models, and the gain compared with the reference direct Monte Carlo simulation is significant: the computational cost of the MCS–MSP is lower than the computational cost of six deterministic finite element analyses.Two fast first order methods have also been proposed involving the calculation of the sensitivity of the frequency to random parameters. The sensitivity is evaluated by a finite difference scheme using either finite element analysis, leading to the FOFE method or the MSP, leading to the FOMSP. Compared with the direct MCS, MCS–MSP and FOMSP have been shown to provide very good predictions of statistical quantities. For both examples, the errors in the mean frequencies and in the standard deviation of the frequencies, are small to moderate, and demonstrate the efficiency of these two methods. To the authors’ knowledge, there is no other method in the literature as fast as the one proposed in this paper for evaluating the variability of frequencies in industrial models of similar complexity as the car body in white. A perspective relative to the MCS–MSP method is the control of the error due to the modal stability assumption. Future research will extend too the application of these fast methods to frequency response analysis.