@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A nonconformal scheme for scattering analysis from PEC objects

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A simple nonconformal scheme for electromagnetic scattering is proposed.Several basis functions modeling surface electric currents are discussed.Practical applications of the proposed nonconformal scheme are presented.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Electromagnetic scattering,Method of moments,Nonconformal meshes,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A novel nonconformal scheme for electromagnetic scattering analysis from perfect electric conducting (PEC) objects is presented in this paper. In this nonconformal scheme, the constant vector basis functions defined on a single triangle element are used as basis functions to solve the magnetic field integral equation (MFIE). Several commonly used basis functions for the MFIE are discussed and it is shown that the use of the new basis functions for the MFIE is reasonable. The construction of constant vector basis function as well as details for the calculation of the admittance matrix elements resulted from the use of method of moments (MoM) to the MFIE are given. It is shown that the use of the constant vector basis functions to the MFIE results in an efficient nonconformal scheme. Numerical results further validate the effectivity and efficiency of the proposed nonconformal scheme.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Finite-difference time domain (FDTD) method [1], finite element method (FEM) [2] and method of moments (MoM) [3] are three commonly used full-wave numerical methods for the analysis of electromagnetic problems. Features of these three methods are quite different. The FDTD method is quite effective for time-domain and wide-band problems. However, it is not as accurate as the other two methods. The FEM is usually used for problems associated with inhomogeneous medium. But, it needs the whole volume of the object to be meshed which results in too many number of unknowns. Besides, condition number of the corresponding matrix system resulted from the FEM are usually poor. This makes the solution time relatively long when iterative method are used to solve the resultant linear system. Compared with the FDTD and the FEM, the MoM combined with the integral equation method is particularly attractive for electromagnetic scattering and radiation problems. This is because the radiation boundary condition has already been included in the Green׳s function used in this scheme. Thus, only the surface or the volume of the object to be analyzed needs to be meshed. While both the FDTD and the FEM needs some suitable absorption boundary conditions for the analysis of electromagnetic scattering and radiation problems which results in a larger solution domain.For the analysis of electromagnetic scattering from perfect electric conducting (PEC) objects, since the unknown equivalent currents only exists on the surface of a PEC object, the surface integral equation (SIE) can be used to model the corresponding problem. Then the MoM can be used to solve the corresponding SIE. In this process, firstly the surfaces of the corresponding PEC scatterer have to be meshed with suitable discretized elements. Since triangular meshes can model arbitrarily shaped scatterer, they are used widely for solution of integral equation by MoM [4–6]. Secondly, suitable basis functions should be defined on the corresponding discretized surface of the corresponding scatterer. Then through the use of the Galerkin׳s method, we get the resulted linear system. When the linear system is solved, we can get the corresponding equivalent surface currents and other interesting results such as radar cross section (RCS) data.Basis functions defined on triangular meshes are usually designed to invoke special properties across internal boundaries of the discretized meshes. The most frequently used characters of basis functions are their continuity properties across the common edge between two neighboring patches. For example, the normal components of the popularly used Rao–Wilton–Glisson (RWG) [4] basis functions are continuous across the common edge of two neighboring triangular patches while the tangential components of then×RWG[7,8] basis functions are continuous across the common boundaries of the corresponding meshes. Since the continuity condition are required for these basis functions, quality of the discretized meshes are very important for successful implementation of the MoM. This means that the discretization is required to be conformal in order to enforce the continuity condition of basis functions. However, it has been found that generating a conformal discretization of high-definition targets is a tedious and time consuming work. Besides, in some cases we may need to mix different classes of basis functions together for the same discretized meshes to fully incorporating the known physics of the problem. Unfortunately, the requirement of the continuity conditions for basis functions on discretized meshes makes this process very complicated if not possible. On the other hand, it has been found that explicit enforcement of the continuity conditions for basis functions are not needed in some cases. In two dimensions, it is reported in [9] that the use of the high order basis function sets eliminates the explicit enforcement of continuity conditions. In [10], it has also been found that the continuity constraints can be replaced by a partition of unity function to maintain the h and p convergence. For three dimension cases, it has already been proposed in [11] that the monopolar RWG basis function set which does not enforce any continuity conditions between neighboring patches can be used directly to the MFIE for the analysis of electromagnetic scattering problems of PEC objects. This kind of basis function set is then used in the discontinuous Galerkin׳s method in [12] for electromagnetic wave scattering problems in [12]. In [13], a novel method which use RWG basis functions but with a volume testing of the EFIE has also been proposed for a nonconformal discretization of the EFIE.Different from the work in [11,12], we propose to use the piece-wise constant vector basis functions to the MFIE which results in a simple and efficient nonconformal scheme of the MFIE. The definition as well as the construction process for the constant vector basis functions are presented. Details for the calculation of the admittance matrix elements are also presented. The nonconformal discretized meshes used for several PEC scatterers are also shown. Numerical results for both RCS results and the iterative characteristics of the MFIE using nonconformal meshes show the advantage of the proposed scheme.We consider the electromagnetic scattering problem for a conducting object with closed surface S in free space. Suppose the incident and scattered magnetic fields are denoted byHi(r)andHs(r)respectively and the equivalent surface electric currents are denoted asJs(r). The boundary condition for the magnetic fieldsH(r)can be expressed as [5](1)n(r)×Hi(r)=Js(r)−n(r)×Hs(r)withn(r)being the unit normal vector of the surface S. Then the traditional MFIE can be expressed as(2)n(r)×Hi(r)=12Js(r)−n(r)×p.v.∬S∇G(r,r′)×Js(r′)ds׳In (1) and (2),r,r′∈S, p.v. is the Cauchy principle value integral and the Green׳s functionG(r,r′)can be expressed as(3)G(r,r′)=e−jkR/4πRwithR=|r−r′|being the distance between the source pointr′and the field pointrand k being the wave number of free space.Similarly, if the incident electric fields are denoted byEi(r), the electric field integral equation (EFIE) can be expressed as [4](4)−n(r)×Ei(r)=n(r)×∬S[jωμJs(r′)G(r,r′)−jωε(∇′⋅Js(r′))∇′G(r,r′)]ds′In (4),μandεare respectively the permittivity and permeability of free space.To solve the integral equations by MoM, basis functions are needed to expand the unknown surface currents. The basis functions that expand the unknown vectors are required to follow the mathematical constraints inherited from the integral equation formulation. Next, we analyze several commonly used basis functions defined on triangular patches for the MFIE. For simplicity, the basis functions and testing functions discussed in this paper are denoted respectively asbn(r)(n=1,2,…N)andtm(r)(m=1,2,…N)if the total number of unknowns is N.It can be seen clearly from (4) that the divergence operator is imposed on the surface currents. In this case, the divergence-conforming Rao–Wilton–Glisson (RWG) functions which keep the continuity of the normal component of the surface currents between neighboring elements are firstly used in [4] to solve the EFIE. Afterwards, this kind of basis function is also used to solve the MFIE in [5]. SinceJ(r)is associated with the tangential component of the magnetic fieldsH(r)in (1), the continuity condition for the surface currentsJs(r)is in fact that for the magnetic fieldsH(r).Let us consider two neighboring triangular elements shown inFig. 1. The three unit vectorsu(r),τ(r)andn(r)which are orthogonal with each other are shown in this figure. If the basis function imposing normal component continuity conditions between neighboring elements, then we have the following equation:(5)u1(r)⋅bn1(r)=u2(r)⋅bn2(r)Since the basis functions are used to expand the surface currents which is associated with the tangential magnetic fields, then from (5), we get(6)u1(r)⋅(n1(r)×H1(r))=u2(r)⋅(n2(r)×H2(r))which can be further written as(7)(u1(r)×n1(r))⋅H1(r)=(u2(r)×(n2(r))⋅H2(r)(8)τ1(r)⋅H1(r)=τ2(r)⋅H2(r)That is, from the normal continuity condition (5) for the basis function, we have derived the tangential continuity condition for the magnetic fieldsH(r). Therefore, the normal component continuity condition for the surface currentsJ(r)is in fact the tangential component continuity condition for the magnetic fieldsH(r).If the basis functions imposing tangential component continuity condition between neighboring elements, then we have the following equation:(9)τ1(r)⋅bn1(r)=τ2(r)⋅bn2(r)By the use of the relationship ofJ(r)andH(r)in (1), (9) can be written as(10)τ1(r)⋅(n1(r)×H1(r))=τ2(r)⋅(n2(r)×H2(r))With the application of vector identity, (10) can be further expressed as(11)(τ1(r)×n1(r))⋅H1(r)=(τ2(r)×n2(r))⋅H2(r)i.e.,(12)u1(r)⋅H1(r)=u2(r)⋅H2(r)Eq. (12) shows clearly that the tangential component continuity condition for the surface currentsJ(r)is in fact the normal component continuity condition for the magnetic fieldsH(r). The curl-conformingn(r)×RWGbasis functions used for the MFIE in [7,8] belongs to this kind of basis function.Although the divergence operator is imposed on surface currentsJs(r)in (2), there is no any vector differential operation on the sameJs(r)in the MFIE. Therefore, the enforcement of the normal/tangential continuity condition for the surface currentsJs(r)is not necessary. In fact, in [11,14], the monopolar RWG basis functions are used to discretize the MFIE. This scheme gives more accurate results than the traditional used RWG basis functions, especially for objects with sharp edges or corners. Since the monopolar RWG basis function is only defined on a single triangular patch, then it does not impose any normal or tangential component continuous condition for neighboring triangular elements. This also shows that there is no need to impose explicitly the continuous conditions when expanding the surface currentsJs(r)for the MFIE. In [12], it is pointed out that for the use of discontinuous Galerkin׳s method, the trial and basis functions are at most divergence-conforming and square-integrable functions can also be noted. Besides, there is in fact no any contour interior penalty terms for the MFIE in [12].Since functions that do not impose normal or tangential continuous conditions can be used to expand the unknown currents in the MFIE, the monopolar RWG basis functions are not the only appropriate one. In this section, we propose that the piece-wise constant vector functions can also be used to discretize the MFIE. In [15], the piece-wise constant vector basis function which is defined on a single tetrahedron have already been used to discretize the volume polarization currents for the volume integral equation. Then it is reasonable to use piece-wise constant vector basis functions that are defined on flat triangles for the surface integral equation. Particularly, this results in a simple and efficient nonconformal scheme for the MFIE.Since the surface of a PEC scatterer has been discretized with triangular meshes, the surface currentsJs(r)can be expanded in two orthogonal directions using a local two dimensional orthogonal coordinate system on the corresponding plane. The unit vectors in the two orthogonal directions can be selected as the basis functions to expandJs(r)in the corresponding triangle. To see this more clearly, we can refer toFig. 2. In this figure, the local orthogonal coordinate system can be constructed by choosing one coordinate direction along one edge of the triangle and the other coordinate direction perpendicular to the former direction. Since there are three edges for each triangle, any edge vector can be used as one basis function. For consistency, in this paper, the edge vector which points from the first vertex to the second vertex of a triangle are selected as one basis functions defined on the corresponding triangle. Particularly, since the piece-wise constant vector basis functions only spans on a single triangle, there is no need to use conformal meshes. The two neighboring trianglesTnandTn′shown in Fig. 2 need not to share a common edge strictly. Thus,TnandTn′need not to share the common nodes 1(1′) and 2(2′). Therefore, the space distribution ofTnandTn′as is shown in the right figure of Fig. 2 is also appropriate. Correspondingly, this results in a nonconformal discretization of the surface of a PEC object.To get a better conditioned matrix system, in this paper, the edge vector defined on a triangleTnare normalized with the area ofTn. Then the corresponding basis functions in the triangleTncan be expressed as(13)bi(r∈Tn)={(1/An)τni=n(1/An)uni=n+NIn (13),Anis the area ofTn.τnanduncan be calculated from the global coordinate vectors for the three vertices of the triangleTnwhich are denoted respectively ofr1,r2andr3in Fig. 2.Suppose the surface of a PEC scatterer is discretized with N triangles, this will results in 2N basis functions and the surface currentsJs(r)can be expanded as(14)Js(r)=∑n=12NJnbn(r)=∑n=1NJn(1/An)τn+∑n=N+12NJn(1/An−N)un−NThrough the use of the Galerkin׳s method, the testing function sets are the same one of the basis functions sets. The right-hand of the MFIE results in the admittance matrix and the left-hand of the MFIE results in the driving vector. The elements of the admittance matrixYcan be expressed as(15)Ymn=Ymn(1)+Ymn(2)Ymn(1)can be calculated as(16)Ymn(1)=(1/2)∬Tmtm(r)⋅bn(r)={(1/2)m=n0elseIt should be noted thatYmn(1)are zero even when the basis functionsbn(r)and the testing functiontm(r)are defined on the same triangleTnbecause the two basis functions are orthogonal with each other inTn.Ymn(2)can be further expressed as(17)Ymn(2)=−∬Tmtm(r)⋅n(r)×∬Tn∇G(r,r′)×bn(r′)ds′ds=∬Tmn(r)×tm(r)⋅∬Tn∇G(r,⊳r′)×bn(r′)ds′ds=∬Tmn(r)×{(1/Am)τm(1/Am)um}⋅∬Tn∇G(r,r′)×{(1/An)τn(1/An)un}ds′ds=1/AmAn∬Tmn(r)×{τmum}⋅{τnun}∬Tn∇G(r,r′)ds′dsFor accurate calculation of the integral on the source triangle, the nearly singularity of the Green׳s function should be dealt with carefully. To do this, the nearly singularity terms are extracted from the Green׳s function which can be written as(18)∬Tn∇G(r,r′)ds′=∬Tn∇[G(r,r′)−14π∇1R+k28π∇R]ds′+14π∬Tn∇1Rds′−k28π∬Tn∇Rds′=G1+G2+G3In (18),G1can be calculated numerically using Gaussian quadrature.G2andG3can be calculated analytically using the singularity extraction technique and the associated analytical formulation developed in [15,16].In this section, we first validate our scheme using constant vector basis functions and conformal meshes for several PEC objects. Then, the nonconformal discretization are used to show the effectivity and efficiency of the proposed nonconformal scheme for the MFIE. The conjugate gradient (CG) algorithm is used to solve the resultant linear system with the residual error of 1.0E−3 unless otherwise noted.Firstly, we calculate the RCS of a PEC sphere with radiusr=0.7λ0. This is a model representing PEC scatterer with curved surfaces.Fig. 3(a) and (b) shows the bistatic RCS of this model in H plane and E plane. For comparison, the analytical results using Mie series are also shown in these two figures. The MFIE using constant vector basis functions and 5356 unknowns are denoted by MFIECon5356 and that using the RWG basis functions and 5697 unknowns are denoted by MFIERWG5697. It can be seen from these two figures that the MFIE using both kind of basis functions gives similar bistatic RCS results for similar number of unknowns and both results agree well to the analytical results using Mie series.Then we consider a PEC scatter with partial curved surfaces which is a PEC cone with bottom radiusr=0.4λ0and heighth=1.0λ0.Fig. 4(a) and (b) shows the bistatic RCS of this cone in H plane and E plane. The EFIE results using RWG basis functions and very fine meshes which results in 7785 unknowns (EFIERWG7785) are also shown for comparison. Again the MFIE results using constant vector basis functions for 4960 unknowns and those using RWG basis functions for 5124 unknowns agrees well with the EFIE results.Next, we study the convergence characters of the MFIE using constant vector basis functions.Figs. 5 and 6 show the number of iterations of the MFIE using constant vector basis functions (MFIEConst) for different number of unknowns for the model in Figs. 3 and 4. Fig. 5 shows that number of iterations for both methods varies slowly with the increase of the number of unknowns. However, the number of iterations for the MFIEConst is only about half of that of the MFIE using the RWG basis functions (MFIERWG) for every discretization cases. In Fig. 6, the number of iterations for the MFIERWG increases very fast with the increase of the number of unknowns. However, that of the MFIEConst keeps stable with the increase of the number of unknowns. Particularly, the number of iterations for the MFIEConst is much smaller than that of the MFIERWG basis functions for every discretization case. In fact, when the number of unknowns is about 10,000, the number of iterations of the MFIEConst is only about 20% of that of the MFIERWG. Then we study the number of iterations of the MFIE with the variation of the residual error for both methods.Figs. 7 and 8 show the corresponding results for the MFIEConst and the MFIERWG methods. Both figures show that the MFIEConst iterates much fast than the MFIERWG for every residual error cases. Especially, the number of iterations for the MFIEConst increases very slowly with the decrease of the residual error. However, the number of iterations of the MFIERWG increases very fast when the residual error varies from 0.1 to 1E−7. All the results shown from Fig. 4 to 8 show that the novel MFIEConst scheme iterates much faster than the traditional used MFIERWG scheme when iterative algorithm is used to solve the resultant linear system.Finally, the condition number of the system matrix resulting from the MFIEConst and MFIERWG are compared inTable 1 for the two models shown in Figs. 3 and 4. Besides, the total solution time for both methods is also presented for the former two models in this table. The same number of unknowns as that in Figs. 3 and 4 respectively are used for this test. The normalized residual error of 0.001 is used for the iterative process. It can be seen from this table that the condition number of the system matrix resulting from the use of the constant vector basis functions is smaller than that using the RWG basis functions. Moreover, the total solution time of the proposed scheme is much less than that of the MFIE using the RWG basis functions. The total solution time mainly includes two parts: the time filling the impedance matrix and that solving the corresponding linear system using iterative solver. The expression of the impedance matrix elements presented in formulation (16) and (17) is very simple which means fast filling of the impedance matrix. Besides, the constant vector basis functions iterate much faster than the RWG basis functions. Therefore, the total solution time using the vector constant basis functions is much less than that using the traditional RWG basis functions.In this section, we consider the application of the MFIE for nonconformal discretization using constant vector basis functions. Three models which represent PEC scatterer with curved surfaces, sharp edges and partial curved surfaces are studied.First, we consider a PEC sphere with radiusr=0.7λ0. This model has already been studied in Section 4.1 using conformal meshes. In this section, it is discretized with nonconformal meshes. Three nonconformal discretization cases are studied.Fig. 9(a)–(c) shows the nonconformal discretization using two, three and four kinds of meshes. The corresponding RCS results in H plane and E plane are shown inFig. 10(a) and (b) respectively with MFIEConstNoncfm1 corresponds to Fig. 9(a), MFIEConstNoncfm2 corresponds to Fig. 9(b) and MFIEConstNoncfm3 corresponds to Fig. 9(c). The number of iterations is 13 for all three discretization cases to converge to the residual error of 0.001 using CG method. Fig. 9(a) results in 1938 and 924 elements for every part. In Fig. 9(b), the corresponding discretized elements for every kind of mesh size are respectively of 1594, 414 and 746 while in Fig. 9(c), the corresponding discretized elements for every kind of mesh size are respectively of 970, 406, 1594, 462. It can be seen clearly that all the three nonconformal discretization results agree well with the analytical results using Mie series.Second, we investigate a model with sharp edges and corners which is a PEC cube with edge length ofl=1.0λ0. InFig. 11(a), the cube is discretized with two kinds of meshes resulting 1726 and 1998 elements for every part. In Fig. 11(b), it is discretized with three kinds of meshes resulting 1596, 840 and 1112 elements for every part. The corresponding RCS results in H plane and E plane for both nonconformal discretization cases are shown inFig. 12(a) and (b) respectively. The results of MFIEConstNoncfm1 correspond to Fig. 11(a) and those of the MFIEConstNoncfm2 correspond to Fig. 11(b). For comparison, the EFIE results using 8046 RWG basis functions and conformal meshes are also shown. The number of iterations is respectively of 27 and 26 for the two discretization cases when CG is used to solve the resultant linear system to converge to the error of 0.001. All the results show that the MFIE results using the proposed nonconformal scheme agree with those of the EFIE using RWG basis functions.Finally, the cone which has been studied in Fig. 4 is further investigated using three and four kinds of nonconformal meshes. InFig. 13(a) the discretized elements are respectively of 774, 490 and 1442 for every part while in Fig. 13(b) the discretized elements are respectively of 774, 740, 626 and 1018 for every part. The corresponding RCS results in H plane and E plane for both nonconformal discretization cases are shown inFig. 14(a) and (b) respectively. The results of MFIEConstNoncfm1 correspond to Fig. 13(a) and those of the MFIEConstNoncfm2 correspond to Fig. 13(b). The EFIE results using RWG basis functions resulting 7785 unknowns are also shown for comparison. Only 16 iterations are needed to solve the resultant linear system using CG method to converge to the error 0.001. It can be seen that the nonconformal results of the MFIE for this model also agree well with the EFIE results. These results further show the effectivity of the proposed nonconformal scheme for the MFIE.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
