@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Finite element simulation for analysing experimental friction tests under severe conditions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Use of finite element model to analyse experimental results.Analysis of the dry friction process at high sliding speed.Interpretation of an experimental signal measured on a ballistic set-up.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Finite element method,Tribometer,Dry friction,Experimental set-up,Very-high sliding speed,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, a finite element model is proposed for analysing friction process derived from an experimental tribometer set-up able to reproduce severe contact conditions under dynamic loading. A pair of low carbon steel is studied when interacting for a sliding velocity varying from 15 to 82m/s and a normal pressure of 50 and 200MPa. The specificity of this device lies in the high-speed range with a maximum velocity close to 120m/s. This high-speed range requires taking into account the dynamic phenomena due to fast loading and short transition time. The numerical simulations for the main objectives have to propose a support for the experimental signals analyse (inverse method) and to validate the calibration of the measuring device. The phenomena generated by the dynamic loading are highlighted and allows defining precisely the measurements and the physical quantities obtained during the tests. Therefore several recommendations are proposed to improve experimental data analysis considering structure effects related to the device.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The growing need in productivity leads to increase rates of processes and use material under extreme conditions. Under high sliding speed, friction has to be considered with respect of energy consumption increase and lifetime of components. A precise knowledge of the friction factor becomes of crucial interest for designers. For this reason, it is essential to develop efficient devices to characterise and to measure the forces related to friction.In recent decades, many devices have been proposed as tribometers to study dry friction. The most commonly used tribometers include a pin or a sphere loaded onto a test sample with an imposed normal force. Thanks to their simplicity of implementation in apparatus, a large domain of applications can be investigated from coating tests to railway braking [1–3]. Corresponding to a long time of interaction, wear and degradation mechanisms can also be suitably studied but generally under relatively low normal pressure. Other techniques that are more specific use a modified torsional Kolsky bar apparatus [4,5] or impact plates for applying high normal pressure [6,7]. These experimental techniques are most appropriate for studying initial mechanisms of friction. To reach very high speed (up to 800m/s) other original devices based on rotating ball system with magnetic fields must be considered [8,9].For each proposed devices, one of the most important characteristics is the specification of conditions under which friction is analysed. The phenomena involved in friction can lead to excessive energy consumption from the start that can modify rapidly the sliding conditions. Depending on the selected devices, the friction process must be differently analysed, when the contact takes place before or after a running phase. Another important challenge is to combine high sliding velocity with large normal pressure to have a better description of the processes studied and observed during real applications. Under these extreme conditions, the complexity of the phenomena encountered during friction is combined with independent dynamic phenomena caused by the use of high speed. For these reasons, it is essential to master the experimental tool to avoid missing valuable information from the friction phenomena itself because of improper filtering. As discussed above, a real challenge encountered by researchers is to develop optimised devices or tools available to characterise and to analyse faithfully the actual phenomena due to friction without artefact.In this work, a specific experimental device is presented to combine high contact pressure and high sliding speed. Thanks to this set-up, the friction process is analysed during the initial phase (i.e. without running phase). A numerical study based on this device is conducted to validate the calibration and to propose a detailed analysis of the phenomena generated during the process of friction. From the numerical work, it is possible to estimate the perturbations caused by the device and the phenomena directly related to friction. Completed by previous results, friction experiments of a low carbon steel tribo-pair are linked to a numerical analysis to improve the determination of the experimental friction coefficient intensity.A specific sensor for measuring forces generated during the friction was developed to combine the high sliding speed and high contact pressure [10–12]. This sensor is integrated on a ballistic bench able of reaching sliding speeds above 120m/s. The ballistic device presented inFig. 1 is composed of two coaxial tubes: the first one is the launch tube and the second one is the receiving tube leading to a shock absorber. This equipment was originally developed to study extreme cutting conditions and to reproduce perfectly orthogonal cutting conditions [13,14]. A pneumatic gas gun is used to propel the projectile at high speed into the launch tube. A sufficient tube length combined with an adjusted projectile mass (different geometries and different materials in order to have a suitable kinetic energy), provides almost a constant speed (less than 4% variation) to the projectile during the sliding process. At the end of the launch tube i.e. just before the friction process, a set of three lasers coupled to laser diodes allows to measure precisely the velocity and acceleration of the projectile during the friction phase. Assuming that the specimen remains in contact with the projectile during the test, the kinematics of the specimen is deduced from previous measurements. Initially, an additional set of measurement just placed after the friction process has confirmed that speed is maintained.The load sensor shown inFig. 2 is attached to the receiving tube and supports two plates labelledA. A dynamometer ring allows applying the normal force FNby elastic deformation for which the magnitude is imposed by the thickness of platesA, the width of specimenBand the initial spacing of the dynamometer. The translation motion of the specimenBis caused by an inelastic collision with the projectile. The specimenBis caught by a shock absorber for post-mortem analysis of the rubbed surfaces. The tangential forces FTgenerated by friction are deduced from the deformation of a thin component on which two sets of strain gauges are glued on both sides of the sensor.The samples shown inFig. 3 consists of two parts: platesAand sampleB. The plates, which are fixed elements of the tribosystem, have a length Lpof 12mm and a width Wpof 24mm including the friction width of 10mm relating the contact with the specimenB. The specimenBwhich have a width Weof 10mm constitutes the mobile part and moves in translation along the length Le(60mm). A part with a length leof 15mm is designed to guide the specimen after impact with the projectile. The surfaces, which will be in contact during the friction process, are prepared by grinding in the same direction than the rubbing movement (Ra=0.9μm).All the tests are carried out under dry friction conditions for a low carbon steel C22 (Re=340MPa) on itself. The chemical composition of the material used for the samples is listed inTable 1. Note that the friction tests are conducted with a single pass between two new surfaces (no running-in phase is performed). The main interest of a single pass rub [15] is to learn more about friction phenomena without being obstructed by wear.Fig. 4 presents typical recorded signals from the two gauges glued on the device during dry friction of steel on steel at 40m/s. The normal pressure PNis deduced from the normal applied force FNdivided by the apparent friction surface Weand Le.The effective friction duration of 1.5ms can be divided into four main phasesPhase I corresponds to the impact between the projectile and the specimenB, involving high localisation of plastic deformation on the impact side and inducing a first strain peak on the recorded signal, Fig. 4b. It must be noted that the projectile and specifically the contact surface with specimenBwas designed to ensure an inelastic choc. Hence, after impact, the kinetic energy of the projectile is transferred to the set of elements specimen–projectile in permanent contact during the process of friction. At this time, the projectile velocity is the same as the velocity of the specimenB. A constant sliding velocity measured before and after the interaction event confirms the conservation of the kinetic. A proportional deformation of the specimenBto the impact velocity is about 3mm in this case (see Fig. 4b). This first peak may be attributed to the static friction coefficient that is larger than the coefficient of kinetic friction.Phase II is the sliding stage assumed at constant normal pressure. Variations of the signal magnitude measured from the two gauges are observed. This difference might be explained by combination of natural frequencies modes of the load sensor with the supposed periodic phenomena of friction. A frequency analysis conducted below will suggest complementary explanations. This phase is considered as the interval where friction process is supposed quasi-stationary. The mean value of friction coefficient is defined during this period.It must be noted that a possible cause of disturbances observed on the recordings may be the results of successive interactions between asperities at microscopic scale [16].Phase III corresponds to a decreasing signal of gauges following the significant deformation of the specimenBcaused by impact. The intense plastic deformation localised on the impact area increases the width Heof the specimen and therefore, the normal pressure applied. For higher pressure, the friction coefficient is reduced and the tangential force decreases [17].Phase IV is the final step before the end of the contact between plates and specimen. A significant change in the signal is observed before a decrease in intensity. This evolution is caused by changes in stiffness of specimenB(see Fig. 3). A competition appears between the increase of the tangential force resulting from the normal pressure drop and the elastic deformation of the specimenBthat overall reduces the loading applied by the dynamometer ring.In order to complete the interpretation of this experimental result, it is necessary to distinguish natural vibration of the measurement sensor from friction phenomena. In addition, since the load is applied for only very short periods of time, the effect of the propagation of stress waves must be considered [4]. This is even more important that the compression impedance of the different parts of load sensor is different. Numerical modelling of the set-up is conducted and reported in details below.The aim of this modelling part is twofold. On the one hand it must allow us to specify the performance of the developed sensor by an analysis of its dynamic response and on the other hand to validate static calibration of the sensor in the dynamic field. Modelling is also conducted to highlight phenomena that are specific to the sensor and that appear as superimposed onto the physical phenomena during testing. Thus, three steps are proposed: a global modelling of the experimental set-up to provide elements of comparison and analysis with the real recorded signal, then a frequency analysis of the device to characterise the disturbances inherent to the sensor and finally a validation of the calibration procedure using the established numerical results.The finite element software ABAQUS/Explicit in version 6.11 [18] was used to simulate the friction test. The model is set up in different parts (seeFig. 5): (1) the receiving tube reduced to 300mm in length, (2) the load sensor fixed on the tube, (3) the dynamometer ring, (4) the platesAfixed on the ring, (5) the specimenBand (6) the projectile with a spherical nose.The specific geometry of the load sensor imposed a three-dimensional analysis and a special attention between the accuracy of the result and the CPU time must be conducted. The number and the size of elements were defined by a convergence study (350509 elements, 444875 nodes). The meshed finite element model presented in Fig. 5 is constructed from ten-node modified quadratic tetrahedron elements for the load sensor (Abaqus type C3D10M) and from eight node three-dimensional brick elements with linear reduced integration (Abaqus type C3D8R) for the other parts. The dynamometer ring and the platesBare designed in a sole part (3–4) but are defined with distinct material behaviours. Except for the specimenBand the platesA, all the parts are considered to have an elastic behaviour with a Young׳s modulus E of 210GPa, a Poisson׳s coefficient υ of 0.3 and a density ρ of 7800kg/m3. A specific material is defined for the projectile nose with an imposed high yield stress σYof 1200MPa. Therefore, the projectile is assumed as rigid comparing with other parts of the set-up.Displacements and rotations at the extremity of the tube are constrained corresponding to an embedded boundary condition. The tube is connected with the load sensor. Only the translation along Z-axis is free for the dynamometer ring and the contact with the load sensor is supposed without friction. A normal stress is applied during the contact between both specimens (AandB). Applying displacement Δz to the initial spacing of the dynamometer imposes the loading in term of initial radial pressure. A movement of translation along the Y-axis at constant velocity is applied to the projectile during all the process. The weak variation (less than 5%) of the velocity before and after friction process experimentally measured validates this condition. In addition, energy consumed by friction is very low compared to the kinetic energy available (lower than 2%).For a sliding velocity and a normal pressure respectively fixed to 40m/s and 50MPa the kinetic energy available is(1)EP=12MPVP2=1200Jwith VPand MPrespectively the velocity and the mass of the projectile (MP=1.5Kg)The consumed energy by friction can be written as(2)Ef=2FTVPt=2μPNSappVPt=180JWith FTthe tangential friction force, Sappthe apparent contact surface, t the time duration of friction.It is worth noting that the model is not able to predict the friction force or the friction factor. As usually in finite element simulation the contact behaviour must be imposed by a contact law. The interaction at the interface between the samplesAandBis defined by a "surface to surface" contact with a kinematic contact method [18]. Assuming that the contact condition is a sliding contact, the friction Coulomb׳s law applied through the friction coefficient μ can be expressed as(3)τf=µσnwhere τfis the friction stress and σnthe normal stress at the contact surface.Since the normal force FNis imposed, the tangential force FTat the interface between the partsAandBis directly given by(4)FT=µFNThe modelling study focuses on the analysis of the signal transmitted to the load sensor caused by imposed contact conditions (constant normal force FNand friction μ). Thus, the velocity does not have a significant influence on signal variations since friction is imposed. Thus only one velocity (40m/s) is studied. The simulation is performed with ABAQUS/explicit without themo-mechanical coupling. Nevertheless, in order to take into account plastic deformation mainly due to impact at high velocity (see Fig. 4b) the samples (AandB) follow a thermoviscoplastic behaviour described by the Johnson–Cook׳s law [19](5)σ¯=[A+B(ε¯p)n][1+Cln(ε¯̇pε̇0p)][1−(T−TroomT−Tmelt)m]whereσ¯is the von Mises equivalent stress,ε¯pthe equivalent plastic strain andε¯̇pthe equivalent plastic strain rate. As reported in the literature, to describe dynamic behaviour of material in a correct way a relevant description in term of constitutive relation has to be used as in [20–22]. In this case, the strain rate sensitivity, the temperature sensitivity and the microstructure effect are considered using physical consideration. However, in this work, the Johnson–Cook׳s model implemented in Abaqus is enough to model our process since large deformation takes place only on the impact side between the specimen and the projectile. Along the friction zone, the strain level observed is relatively low and plasticity is not so important. The values of the parameters of the constitutive equation are given inTable 2.To define the thermal softening of the material during dynamic loading, the heat equation is used, Eq. (6). A fraction β of the plastic work is converted into heat and the actual temperature T is estimated from the initial temperature T0 by(6)T=T0+βρCP∫σdεwhere β is the Taylor–Quinney factor which is currently chosen at 0.9 [24], and Cpis the specific heat at constant pressure.The numerical modelling of the experimental device is performed in two steps: firstly, a static calculation to evaluate the normal vibration modes of the set-up (the eigenmodes) and to confirm the calibration. Secondly, a dynamic simulation of the impact and friction process is realized.The results obtained from the finite element calculation are presented inFig. 6 for the steel/steel friction at 40m/s. The normal stress σyyis defined by the mean of values calculated for each node (i) corresponding to the gauge area.(7)σyy=1n∑i=1nσyyiSimilar signals are obtained from both sides of the sensor due to a symmetric loading in contrary to experiments due to a real friction process.Firstly, the projectile impacts the specimenBwhich is plastically deformed as shown in Fig. 6b. The loading lasts up to 0.1ms but no intensive peak is observed because no static friction is considered in the numerical study. The calculated normal stress oscillates around an average value. A correspondence between the previously defined phase II is observed. Beyond this friction time duration, the evolution of the stress is further analysed in comparison to the signal recorded in Section 4.2 summarizing the results. The strong oscillations observed in the signal might be caused by the reflected compression waves in the load cell generated by the process of elastic waves propagation.The presented experimental set-up for very high sliding velocities imposes a very short periods of time to applied the load and consequently stress waves propagation are generated. The different components are considered as perfectly elastic solids except for the two specimens. The symmetrical design of the set-up allows reducing the type of elastic wave propagated through the device in wave of dilatation. The interaction between the specimens generates a compression pulse, which travels through the load sensor and the receiving tube. Due to the thin-walled part of the load sensor where the gauges are glued, the pulse can travel with limited distortion so long as the elastic limit of material is not reached. Contrary to the principle of the Split Hopkinson pressure bar, the impedance of the used load sensor is not constant. In our case a certain fraction of the input compression wave generated by friction force FTis reflected in the opposite direction when an impedance variation is encountered. These reflections can occur before and after the moment when the wave travels through the gauge area. Due to the dimensions of different parts of the load sensor and following the velocity of waves propagation defined byE/ρ, the frequency of disturbance varied from 0.4×10−3 to 1×10−3ms. The recorded compression strain, which is proportional to the intensity of the friction is also limited by the first reflection wave and reduced by the following reflected tension wave. These reflections can be repeated several times during measurement. Therefore a reduced signal is actually recorded which must be taken into account to define more precisely the friction coefficient value by limiting structural effect due to the device.For quantifying the dynamical properties of the presented experimental device a frequency analysis is proposed in this following part. Indeed, to explain the signal recorded from the strain gauges it was necessary to distinguish the normal vibration modes of the set-up from the friction phenomena. This frequency analysis of the load sensor equipped with the dynamometer ring (seeFig. 7) is used to identify different eigenmodes of the assembly. These natural frequencies affect measurement of deformations recorded by strain gauges 1 and 2 either in phase or out of phase. When the eigenmodes of the device are superposed with periodic phenomena of friction, a resonance may occur and lead to amplify the recorded signal. For example, with a frequency of 1845Hz, the natural vibration mode is a distortion around the X-axis. The induced strains by loading on the gauge 1 and 2 are alternatively reflected by accumulation in compression on one gauge and subtracted in tension on the other one. This partially explains the differences between the signals recorded by the two gauges. The phase difference is clearly visible on the recorded signals presented in Fig. 4. Deformation recorded by gauges can also be cancelled when compressive strain is compensated by tension strain generated by flexion around X-axis.Table 3 summarises the main natural vibration modes that could disrupt records and their influence on strain gauges 1 and 2.According to the location of gauges which are symmetrically bonded to the sensor, perturbations due to the natural frequency can be in phases or out-of-phase. In the first case (call “perturbation in phase”), the signals recorded by the two gauges are symmetrically amplified. In the second case (call “out-of-phase”) one of signals are amplified and the other one is reduced. The offset signal is then amplified.In addition, according to the orientation of gauges, only strains along the Y-axis are recorded and therefore some natural mode cannot interfere with the measurement (symbolized by a cross in Table 3). The frequency that appears as the most perturbing on the measurements is 1845Hz and for which amplitude is maximal.A frequency domain analysis is also applied to the measurement and numerical signals. The resulting frequency resolution for the spectral analysis using the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) is presented inTable 4. Due to the fact that similar results are found between measurement and numerical simulation, the frequencies are mainly induced by load cell and not by the friction process. In addition the defined frequency domain includes natural frequencies of the load cell reported in Table 3. Therefore, application of numerical filters to reduce eigenmodes effects requires a great attention to not loose physical effects induced by friction.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
