@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A systematic development of EAS three-dimensional finite elements for the alleviation of locking phenomena

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Methodology that allows for the adequate choice of enhancing parameters for solid finite element.The developed framework is based on a mathematical technique of subspace analysis.The methodology was expanded to take into account the effects of shear locking.A formulation with in-plane reduced integration and hourglass stabilization is presented.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Subspace analysis,Finite Element Method,Locking,Enhanced Assumed Strain method,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The treatment of locking phenomena in finite element analysis has been extensively studied over the last decades. Among other techniques, the use of Enhanced Assumed Strain (EAS) methods can lead to formulations that yield good results, although sometimes computationally expensive. This is mainly due to the use of enhancing parameters, element-wise defined and related to the element topology (2D, plate, shell or solid), integration scheme and even the problem itself to be solved (incompressible materials, thin-walled structures, etc.). The subspace analysis framework is based on a mathematical technique, where the constraints to be respected by the formulations are applied at each Gauss point of the finite element mesh. Although this methodology can be found in the literature for some locking pathology, it was never applied before to the analysis of transverse shear locking in 3D finite elements. Therefore, in the current work the authors expand the existing subspace methodology to take into account the occurrence of this type locking in solid elements. This analysis is developed for different integration schemes in order to assess their performances. Previous EAS formulations are analyzed and an alternative formulation for the EAS parameters is proposed and applied to a set of benchmark linear and nonlinear problems for solid and solid–shell elements, in order to evaluate the occurrence of locking phenomena and infer about their potential applications.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Classical finite element formulations rely on displacements as primary variables within each element, by interpolation of nodal values. Afterward, strain and stress fields can be obtained, as well as the elemental and global stiffness matrices of the model. Being a numerical approximation procedure for solving the weak form of differential equations, it is possible that bad conditioning and underestimation of nodal displacements occurs. This is due to a spurious overestimation of stiffness terms, leading to near-zero values of displacements (locking effects) [1,2].For instance, shear locking effects are usual in plate and shell finite elements based on Reissner–Mindlin formulations, as thickness values, tend to zero. This is due to the fact that the ratio between the overall dimensions of the elements, compared to the thickness, can become excessive, which can in turn lead to ill-conditioning of the numerical solution. Membrane locking effects, on the other hand, are associated to bad performance of curved elements in pure bending situations. Finally, volumetric locking can be related to the inability of a given three-dimensional finite element formulation in reproducing isochoric deformation patterns along with large deformations, mesh distortions and, eventually, an elasto-plastic constitutive behavior.The reduced integration (RI) and selective reduced integration (SRI) techniques were among the first used to alleviate locking problems [3,4]. Due to the lower quadrature order, the elements are able to represent deformation patterns that fully integrated elements cannot. Relevant work in the field of RI/SRI methodologies can be found in classical publications in the literature [5–12]. However, given the rank deficiency of the stiffness matrix, these schemes have poor performances in bending-dominated problems and can often lead to spurious deformation patterns. Moreover, SRI can only be applied to models where the small-strain tensor can be decomposed into volumetric and deviatoric parts. In addition, when modeling nonlinear effects in thin walled-structures, these formulations can present a lower computational performance due to the need of multiple layers along the thickness direction, in order to provide more integration points in this direction.The B-bar approach introduced by Hughes [13] was used to solve nearly incompressible problems. This method consists in splitting the strain–displacement matrix into the dilatational and deviatoric components. The former matrix is then replaced by another (under evaluated) matrix in order to reduce the contribution of the volumetric component. Simo and co-authors [14] showed that the B-bar method resulted from finite-element approximations constructed on the basis of a three-field variational formulation. The authors then formulated the mixed variational methods, where the goal was to construct an assumed-strain method in which only the dilatational part of the displacement gradient would be the independent variable. The formulation was developed in order to account for the incompressibility constraint which results from the plastic flow volume preservation [15].To overcome volumetric locking, de Souza Neto et al. [16] introduced the F-bar method. In this method, the standard internal force vector is modified by replacing the deformation gradient with a modified one, when computing the Cauchy stress tensor. This results in a constraint relaxation, alleviating volumetric locking pathologies in large strain hyperelastic and plastic problems. The F-bar method was later on further extended to the large strain analysis of nearly incompressible solids [17].As referred, in the classical finite element formulations, displacements are the primary variables of the system of equations to be solved. However, the formulations can also be derived based on two (or more) extra fields. These additional (non-physical) fields can then be eliminated – at the element level – using a static condensation procedure. One example of such approach is the Enhanced Assumed Strain (EAS) method, introduced by Simo and co-authors [18,19]. Starting from a three-field variational formulation, the strain field of each finite element can be enlarged with the inclusion of a set of enhancing internal variables, gathering a wider dimension for the deformation subspace of the finite element and, therefore, resulting in additional deformation modes. However, the use of a large number of enhancing variables leads to a computationally ineffective element. As examples of solid EAS-based finite elements, the 21-EAS variables element of Andelfinger and Ramm [20], 18-EAS 3D elements [21] and 12-EAS solid-shell [22] elements can be cited, among many others [23–28].In order to eliminate transverse shear locking, the assumed natural strain (ANS) method can also be employed. The methodology was first implemented by Hughes and Tezduyar [29] for Mindlin plates and, later, for shell element by Dvorkin and Bathe [30]. The ANS method consists in interpolating the strain field at a set of points, known as “tying points”, whose strain terms will replace the standard strain values coming from the quadrature points. This technique has been applied in the improvement of reduced integration shell elements [7] as well as to fully and reduced integration solid–shell elements, as can be seen in [31–35], to name only but a few.In the last years, many efforts have been put by several authors in the development of solid–shell elements which combine the advantages of both solid and shell elements. This kind of formulation is specially attractive when considering applications where multiple through-thickness integration points are required. Some of the advantages of this approach is the use of only displacement degrees-of-freedom and the possibility to automatically account for 3D material laws, when considering shell-like structures. Several solid–shell formulations can be found in the literature, such as in Refs. [22,33–40].When developing new EAS-based finite elements, it is important to take into account the number and type of enhancing parameters used. Many authors employed this methodology, but in some cases, the choice of the enhanced parameters are not fully justified and are mostly based on trial and error or inspection. Avoiding this, César de Sá and Owen [41] developed a framework of subspace of deformation and based on this concept concluded that volumetric locking occurs when a solution does not appear properly represented in the subspace of approximated incompressible deformations. The framework was successfully applied in the improvement of the performance of 2D quadrilateral elements [42], shell elements [43] and fully integrated 8-node three-dimensional elements in near incompressible problems [22].Despite the good results in the previous methodologies the subspace methodology was never applied in the analysis of the transverse shear locking phenomena in 3D solid elements. In order to fill this gap, the main goal of the current work is to expand the subspace framework in order to take into account the transverse shear components in three-dimensional solid finite elements.The work is organized as follows: in Section 2 the volumetric subspace analysis for volumetric locking is revisited, while in Section 3 the new subspace analysis for shear locking in solid elements is presented. In Section 4, the Reduced Enhanced Solid-Shell (RESS) element is improved using the developed subspace methodology and its performance is assessed in Section 5 using a set of classical linear and nonlinear benchmark problems. Finally, the main conclusions are presented in Section 6.Mathematically, a given finite element formulation has a characteristic space of admissible deformations with a dimension corresponding to the number of element degrees of freedom. However, different subspaces can be defined as a function of the constraints to be considered. This subspace defines the finite set of deformation modes that a single element can represent under general loading and boundary conditions. If the element undergoes a deformation pattern which cannot be reproduced by a given combination of the deformation modes from its subspace, then the element will suffer from locking effects. Regarding the type of constraints to be considered, this work focuses on volumetric and transverse shear locking. However, the analysis can be extended to other types of locking such as membrane and trapezoidal, to name a few [1].Considering a linear space of admissible solutions U, the idea of the subspace analysis methodology is to determine the displacement fielduthat minimizes the energy of the system. The displacement fieldumust be contained in a subspace of U. The constraint for isochoric deformations, necessary for instance to model plasticity or some rubber-like material(ν→0.5), defines a new subspace here denoted as I. This condition can be expressed asI⊂Ufor the space of incompressible deformations. Taking Uh, Ihanduhas finite element approximations of U, I andu, respectively, it is possible to state that(1)Quh=0,as a possible way to define the subspace of incompressible deformations Ih, such as(2)Ih={uh∈Uh:Quh=0}.To avoid the trivial solution(uh=0), the displacement fielduhshould belong to the subspace of incompressible deformations Ihor, in other words,uhshould lie in the nullspace ofQ. If this condition is satisfied, then the approximated displacementsuhwill be given by a linear combination of a given basis of Ihelements.If, under a set of external forces and/or boundary conditions, the solution does not belong to the subspace Ih, defined in the previous equation, volumetric locking will occur.When considering small strains, the incompressibility condition can be written in the 3D space as(3){ϵξξϵηηϵζζ}=∫V(δuδξ+δvδη+δwδζ)dV=0.By assuring that the integrand function in Eq. (3) is zero, the incompressibility condition is respected. After a finite element discretization, this condition results in(4)δuδξ+δvδη+δwδζ=[Ni,ξNi,ηNi,ζ]de=0,whereNi,jis the derivative of the shape function Niwith respect to j, whilederepresents the vector of element nodal displacements (discrete variables). The complete set of deformation modes is represented by mean of its degrees-of-freedom vector in Table A1 (Appendix).Following the reasoning presented in the previous section, in the subspace analysis of transverse shear locking the transverse shear strain energy must vanish for low thickness values, that is,(5)Huh=0,where the subspace of transverse shear deformation can be defined as Th, in the form(6)Th={uh∈Uh:Huh=0}.Eq. (5) is a simplified way of imposing that the out-of-plane deformation energy, approximated by the finite element method must tend to zero when the element thickness also tends to zero (i.e., Kirchhoff hypothesis). In its discrete form, Eq. (5) will lead to three sets of equations, that is(7){ϵξηϵξζ}=Hξuh=0,(8){ϵξηϵηζ}=Hηuh=0,(9){ϵξζϵηζ}=Hζuh=0,depending if the direction of the element thickness is aligned with theξ,ηorζdirection. Therefore, and as for the incompressible subspace detailed before, the displacement fielduhshould be contained in the nullspace ofHin order that the numerical solution can avoid transverse shear locking effects. Based on an analysis performed on shell elements [43], in order to avoid transverse shear locking effects the condition(10)12[0Ni,ξ+Ni,ζNi,η+Ni,ζ]de=0must be respected for theζdirection. This condition turns out to be also sufficient to avoid transverse shear locking for solid–shell elements, when the thickness orientation is alongζ.In an analogous way, the following conditions:(11)12[Ni,ξ+Ni,η0Ni,η+Ni,ζ]de=0(12)12[Ni,ξ+Ni,ηNi,ξ+Ni,ζ0]de=0can also be stated for theηandξdirections, respectively, which – combined – would apply to general purpose 3D finite elements. Therefore, a shear-locking free solid finite element (i.e., without a preferred thickness direction) can be formulated by assuring that the conditions in Eqs. (10)–(12) are simultaneously respected. For the sake of convenience, the corresponding nodal displacements for every deformation mode are given in the Appendix, in tabular form.In a trilinear 3D finite element, the space of admissible solutions has a maximum size of 24, which corresponds to the total number of degrees of freedom of the element. The above-mentioned deformation restrictions are applied at the integration point level, which means that different integration schemes will lead to different subspaces and, as a consequence, to different locking sensitivities. It must be taken into account that each presented subspace has a maximum dimension of 23 and that a given deformation mode may be represented in different subspaces. In order to eliminate locking, a given finite element formulation must be able to represent the 23 deformation modes of the corresponding subspace [21,42]. Moreover, it is important to mention that the union of the incompressible and transverse shear subspaces (Q∪Hξ∪Hη∪Hζ) is 23, which is the value of the maximum admissible subspace size for a low-order 3D finite element.The volumetric and transverse shear subspace analyses are now applied to different finite element formulations found in the literature and the main results obtained are summarized in Table 1. The entries Hex8 and Hex8R correspond to the conventional fully integrated and reduced integration 8-node solid elements, respectively.As can be seen, the 8-node element with reduced integration is free from volumetric and shear locking, however one should not forget about a deficiency of reduced integrated elements, since this element tends to suffer from the appearance of spurious deformation patterns, demanding the use of stabilization techniques [44]. As expected, the classical fully integrated solid element is not free from neither volumetric nor shear locking. According to the subspace analysis, the adequate number of EAS-parameters to solve both volumetric and shear locking is 18 (6 for the volumetric component and 12 for the shear component), as can be seen from the results obtained for the HCiS18 element. It can also be concluded that the HCiS12 solid–shell element is not free from shear locking.The two elements proposed by Andelfinger and Ramm [20] are also free from both volumetric and shear locking. However, as seen for the case of the HCiS18 element, the number of EAS parameters required is 18, leading to formulations that are computationally more expensive, especially in the case of the 3D.EAS-30 element, where a 30×30 matrix must be inverted during the static condensation procedure. One should also take into account that only the Enhanced Assumed Strain methodology is analyzed, although other techniques are available to alleviate the volumetric and/or shear locking pathologies.A detailed description of the EAS based formulation can be found in the literature, starting with the initial works of Simo and co-authors [18,19]. Details about the implementation of the EAS formulations, as well as the constitutive modeling can be found in [37,45].By means of the present subspace framework, the authors propose an improvement to the existing Reduced Enhanced Solid Shell (RESS) element [38,39]. The RESS formulation is based on a one-point quadrature scheme for an element with 8 physical nodes, allowing at the same time for the use of an arbitrary number of integration points through thickness direction. By using the in-plane one-point quadrature scheme the element is computationally effective. For a predefined thickness(ζ)direction, the element uses an enhancing variable in the volumetric component being expressed as(13)M¯αT=[00ζ000],which, according to the subspace analysis performed in the previous section, will be required to alleviate volumetric locking. The rank-deficiency caused by the in-plane reduced integration is alleviated by employing a cost effective stabilization technique. A more extensive description of the formulation can be found in [38,39].By employing the developed subspace analysis, it can be inferred that two additional enhanced parameters should be employed in order to alleviate the shear locking effects for a general 3D framework (no predefined thickness direction). In the present work, a new version of the RESS element is therefore proposed.The new formulation is obtained by considering the following enhanced displacement matrix:(14)M¯αnew=[000000ζ000000ζ000ζ],which keeps the enhancing parameter inζζcomponent of the strain, but add two additional parameters in the transverse shear fields.Furthermore, and taking into account the work of Li and Cescotto [46], the stabilization field proposed in [38,39] is further improved, in order to avoid the hourglass phenomena. This is carried out by considering that the shear parametersβijare given as(15)βxy=1.0,βxz=11000min(x¯,z¯)max(x¯,z¯)andβyz=11000min(y¯,z¯)max(y¯,z¯),with(16)x¯=14∑i=14|xdi|,y¯=14∑i=14|ydi|andz¯=14∑i=14|zdi|where diare the space diagonals of the hexahedral element along the coordinate axes x, y and z.In the current section, the performance of the developed formulation will be assessed. For comparison purposes, the following finite element formulations are considered:•New proposal:○Present—improved version of the RESS element, as proposed in Section 4 of the current paper.Reference formulations:○Hex8—standard fully integrated 3D solid element;HCiS18—fully integrated 8-node hexahedron with 18 internal parameters [21];HCiS12—fully integrated 8-node hexahedron with 12 internal parameters [22];RESS—in-plane reduced integrated element with stabilization of hourglass modes [38];Sch11—solid–shell formulation with in-plane reduced integration and stabilization, as proposed by Schwarze and Reese [34,35];Ree07—solid–shell with EAS parameters, proposed by Reese [36];Frd07—assumed strain element proposed by Fredriksson and Ottosen [47];MITC4—fully integrated and mixed interpolated bilinear element proposed by Dvorkin and Bathe [30], and as implemented by the authors;S4E6P7—shell element using enhanced transverse shear strain terms [43,45];C3D8—8-node, fully integrated, displacement based 3D finite element from Abaqus software [48];C3D8R—8-node displacement based 3D finite element with reduced integration and hourglass control from Abaqus software [48];C3D8I—8-node, fully integrated, displacement based 3D finite element with incompatible modes from Abaqus software [48];SC8R—8-node, fully integrated, continuum shell (solid–shell) element from Abaqus software [48].The present formulations were implemented in Abaqus software by means of a user subroutine (UEL) [48]. Unless otherwise stated, the simulations with the improved version of the RESS element were performed using three Gauss points through the thickness direction. Problems that include non-smooth (unstable) load–deflection paths were solved using the Riks method available in Abaqus. In this method, the load is taken as an unknown and the load and displacement are solved simultaneously. In order to measure the solution progress, the arc-length along the static equilibrium path in load–displacement space is used. For more details, the reader is referred to [48].The examples presented in the following sections are a set of benchmarks for assessment of volumetric and shear locking, the influence of mesh distortion as well as the unstable behavior of structures.In this example, the well-known Cook's membrane problem is considered. The geometry of the problem is depicted in Fig. 1. The thickness is taken as 1.0 and F=1.0. Young's modulus is set to 1.0 and Poisson's coefficient to 0.33. The convergence study for different finite element formulations can be seen in Fig. 2.As can be seen, the new formulation is able to improve the results obtained from the RESS formulation and presents a good convergence rate.In this problem, a bar composed of two elements is subjected to the load set depicted in Fig. 3. The element performance in a distorted mesh is evaluated by increasing the parameter e. In the current example, L=5,E=2.1×105,ν=0.0and F=10. The analytical solution is given as7.1429×10−3[47].The results are presented in Fig. 4. The results show that the present solution is able to successfully improve the results attained by the RESS formulation. However, the HCiS18 element (with more enhancing parameters and integration points) presents better results. The C3D8R element is not able to correctly predict the behavior of the structure, leading to largely overestimated results.The Timoshenko beam is a simple problem used to evaluate the occurrence of locking when the thickness of the beam tends to zero, as proposed by Echter and Bischoff [49]. A schematic representation of the beam can be seen in Fig. 5. The length of the beam is L=10.0 and the width w=1.0, while the thickness t is kept variable. Young's modulus is given asE=105and Poisson's coefficient isν=0.0. The beam is subjected to a sinusoidal distributed moment loading given by the expressionMz(x)=5sin(x/5)which imposes a state of pure bending with zero transverse shear strains and stresses, leading to the appearance of shear locking phenomena.The reference solution is obtained by considering a 10 shell element mesh, with thickness value of t=10.0. The reference solution is maintained when t is reduced if the load is scaled by a factor of t3. Therefore, by properly changing the thickness and load, it is possible to assess the element behavior when the thickness of the beam tends to zero.In Fig. 6, the normalized displacement is plotted against the slenderness(L/h)of the beam. The present formulation shows a good behavior even for high slenderness ratios, for the mesh shown in Fig. 5. The RESS, HCiS12 and the solid–shell SC8R elements became unstable for a slenderness ratio higher that 5000. The C3D8I element presents results similar to the presented formulation. As expected, the C3D8 element is severely affected by locking and the C3D8R element overestimates the beam response and becomes unstable for slenderness ratios above 4000. Consequently, the results for the latter are not presented in Fig. 6.In this example [50], a curved beam is subjected to an end shear as can be seen in Fig. 7. The inner radius is taken as r=5.0, the outer radius is R=10.0 and the end shear state is obtained by applying a uniform radial displacement u0=0.1 along the bottom edge. Boundary conditions are defined asu(0,y)=v(0,r)=0. The problem is considered to be under plane strain conditions [51]. Therefore, in the current 3D example, no displacement is allowed along the zz-direction. Young's modulus is set to be equal to E=9600.0 and Poisson's ratio toν=0.2. The exact value of the energy is taken as 2.964966844 [50]. Afterward, a second analysis is performed, consideringν=0.4995, in order to assess the element performance in near incompressible situations.In Figs. 8 and 9, the energy error is plotted against the element's characteristic dimension for the case ofν=0.2andν=0.4995, respectively. As can be seen, the present formulation presents low errors and a good convergence, even when considering near incompressibility conditions. The elements from the Abaqus library also present a good performance.In this example, the full spherical shell depicted in Fig. 10is analyzed. In this problem, the sphere with radius 10.0 and thickness 0.04 is subjected to a pair of opposite concentrated loads applied at antipodal points of the equator. The equator is considered to be free. Due to symmetry conditions, only one-quarter of the structure is modeled. The magnitude of the load is F=1.0 and the material parameters are given asE=6.825×103andν=0.3. The reference radial displacement at the loaded nodes is given as u=0.0924.In Fig. 11the normalized displacement versus elements per side is given. It can be seen that the proposed formulation attains good results and has a good convergence. It can also be seen that the C3D8 and C3D8R elements are severely affected by locking phenomena.In this example, the snap-through and snap-back load–displacement path of a cylindrical shell is analyzed. This problem was extensively analyzed in the literature, for example in [52–54,45,37,39] to name but a few. The structure is schematically represented in Fig. 12, in which L1=508.0, L2=507.15 and R=2540.0. The thickness value is equal to t=6.35 and the maximum attained load is considered to be equal toFtot=1000. In this example, three5×5×2meshes are considered: one structured and the other two are distorted, as shown in Fig. 13. The imposition of two elements along the thickness direction is closely related to the proper reproduction of the hinged support over the straight edges. The material is taken as elastic with E=3102.75 andν=0.3.The results for the z-displacement of points A and B are presented in Fig. 14, as well as a solution from Horrigmoe and Bergan [54] using shell elements for comparison purposes. It is noticeable that the present formulation is in good agreement with the reference solution, even when considering very distorted meshes.The spherical shell with an 18° hole of Fig. 15is analyzed considering geometric nonlinear conditions, following Refs. [55–58,35]. Due to symmetry, only one-quarter of the model is analyzed. The equator represents a free edge. The geometry is defined by the radius R=10.0, and thickness t=0.04. The hole is given by an angle of 18° from the vertical axis. In this example, Young's modulus isE=6.825×107and Poisson's coefficientν=0.3. The load was set to a maximum of F=100.0, applied in 10 equal time steps. A 16×16×1 mesh was considered.Fig. 16presents the load/displacement curves for points A and B, which are compared with a reference solution taken from Simo et al. [55]. As can be seen, the present formulation is in good agreement with the reference solution.In a second analysis, a linear isotropic plasticity behavior is introduced, where the yield stress is given asσ0=6.825×105and the isotropic hardening factor asH=6.825×106. Following the work of Masud and Tham [59], the maximum load level is now set to F=400.0. An 8×8 mesh is considered throughout the analysis.The results for the second analysis can be seen in Figs. 17 and 18for points A and B, respectively. As can be seen, the results for the present element are close to the reference solution. It can also be observed that the C3D8 element suffers from locking effects.In this example, a cylindrical shell is subjected to a pair of concentrated loads, which induce large displacements and large rotations. Previous publications dealing with this example are [59–62,45,37], to name but a few. A schematic view of the model can be seen in Fig. 19. The cylindrical shell has a length of L=10.35, radius R=4.953 and thickness t=0.094. The elastic material is characterized by Young's modulus ofE=10.5×106and Poisson's coefficientν=0.3125. No boundary conditions are applied to the free ends of the shell. Due to symmetry conditions, only one-eight of the problem is analyzed, using a 12×8×1 mesh. The maximum load level is set toFtot=40000.The deflections of the points A and B are depicted in Figs. 20 and 21, respectively. The solutions are compared with the ones obtained by Masud and Tham [59]. It can be seen that the results are acceptable and follow the tendency of the ones from the reference solution.In a second analysis, the plastic behavior of the material is introduced. An initial yield stress ofσy=1.05×105is considered, with a linear isotropic hardening model with tangent value equal toH=10.5×105, according to the work of Masud and Tham [59]. The results for points A and B can be seen in Figs. 22 and 23, respectively. Once again it is possible to see that the present formulation follows the tendency of the reference solution and attains good final results.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper the framework of subspace analysis for solid elements is expanded to take into account transverse shear locking effects in 3D solid elements. The new methodology is applied in the analysis of different well known finite element integration schemes for 8-node brick elements. As the fully integrated and the in-plane reduced schemes represent less deformation modes that the reduced integrated one, it is safe to assume that elements employing the former schemes may require enhancing parameters. This will allow the elements to represent additional deformation modes. From the obtained results, it can also be inferred that the optimal number of EAS-parameters for fully integrated 3D 8-node elements is 18 (6 for the volumetric component and 12 for the shear one). Afterward, the subspace framework was applied in order to improve the performance of the Reduced Enhanced Solid-Shell (RESS) element. Results showed that the proposed subspace formulation was able to improve the results of the original element.The authors consider that the improved subspace framework developed in the current work is a valuable tool in the development of new finite element formulations free of both volumetric and transverse shear locking. This mathematical analysis also allows for a more correct choice of the enhancing parameters that will lead to locking-free formulations. Future work will be related to the use of this systematic approach in the study of other locking pathologies.