@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Subject-based feature extraction by using fisher WPD-CSP in brain–computer interfaces

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A subject-based feature extraction method is discussed.The feature extraction method combines wavelet packet decomposition, common spatial patterns and fisher distance.The selection of sub-bands based on fisher distance tells apart those useless sub-bands and remain best sub-bands for each subject.The proposed method can extract suitable features for specific subject and achieve a higher classification accuracy than non-subject-based method.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Wavelet packet decomposition (WPD),Common spatial patterns (CSP),Fisher distance,Brain–computer interface (BCI),Electroencephalogram (EEG),Feature extraction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Background and objectiveFeature extraction of electroencephalogram (EEG) plays a vital role in brain–computer interfaces (BCIs). In recent years, common spatial pattern (CSP) has been proven to be an effective feature extraction method. However, the traditional CSP has disadvantages of requiring a lot of input channels and the lack of frequency information. In order to remedy the defects of CSP, wavelet packet decomposition (WPD) and CSP are combined to extract effective features. But WPD-CSP method considers less about extracting specific features that are fitted for the specific subject. So a subject-based feature extraction method using fisher WPD-CSP is proposed in this paper.MethodsThe idea of proposed method is to adapt fisher WPD-CSP to each subject separately. It mainly includes the following six steps: (1) original EEG signals from all channels are decomposed into a series of sub-bands using WPD; (2) average power values of obtained sub-bands are computed; (3) the specified sub-bands with larger values of fisher distance according to average power are selected for that particular subject; (4) each selected sub-band is reconstructed to be regarded as a new EEG channel; (5) all new EEG channels are used as input of the CSP and a six-dimensional feature vector is obtained by the CSP. The subject-based feature extraction model is so formed; (6) the probabilistic neural network (PNN) is used as the classifier and the classification accuracy is obtained.ResultsData from six subjects are processed by the subject-based fisher WPD-CSP, the non-subject-based fisher WPD-CSP and WPD-CSP, respectively. Compared with non-subject-based fisher WPD-CSP and WPD-CSP, the results show that the proposed method yields better performance (sensitivity: 88.7±0.9%, and specificity: 91±1%) and the classification accuracy from subject-based fisher WPD-CSP is increased by 6–12% and 14%, respectively.ConclusionsThe proposed subject-based fisher WPD-CSP method can not only remedy disadvantages of CSP by WPD but also discriminate helpless sub-bands for each subject and make remaining fewer sub-bands keep better separability by fisher distance, which leads to a higher classification accuracy than WPD-CSP method.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A brain–computer interfaces (BCIs) is usually defined as a direct communication pathway between the brain and a computer or a device [1]. And electroencephalogram (EEG) is the most commonly used brain signals for BCIs. Over the last 20 years, with the advances of signal processing, pattern recognition, and machine learning techniques, the BCI research has made great progress [2,3]. Through BCIs, people can directly control an external device just by using EEG signals generated from motor imagery, visual evoked potentials, or people's mental states. Motor imagery, a kind of spontaneous EEG, is now widely used in EEG-based BCIs because it is more natural than using an evoked EEG. However motor imagery EEG signals are different from person to person. The extensive subject training pose major challenges for the successful operation of a BCI. Research into feature extraction and pattern classification of motor imagery EEG are very important for BCI. To be able to classify motor imagery EEG signals with great accuracy, correct and significant features must be extracted from the EEG signals for classifier training [4–6]. The results of feature extraction directly influence the design and performance of pattern classification. So this paper focuses on the feature extraction.In recent years, common spatial pattern (CSP) has been proven to be an effective feature extraction method by many researchers and is widely used in BCIs [7–10]. However, the traditional CSP have disadvantages of requiring a lot of input channels and the lack of frequency information. Then there is much literature reporting on the use of different frequency bands to optimize the traditional CSP with frequency domain information [11–15]. In 2009, wavelet packet decomposition (WPD) and CSP are firstly applied to low-pass (0–64Hz) and bandpass (8–30Hz) filtered data to extract discriminative features [16]. In 2012, WPD and CSP are combined to extract effective features [15]. And, in 2014, WPD-CSP and Kernel Fisher Support Vector Machine (KF-SVM) is developed and used for EEG recognition in motor imagery BCIs [17], etc. All of above papers proved that WPD is an effective fast algorithm of time-frequency domain and can remedy the defects of CSP. However all these methods consider less about to extract specific features that are fitted for the specific subject. We all know that no two people are the same and so EEG signals vary between subjects. For instance, it is well known that there exists considerable variability in alpha or beta frequency between subjects [18–20]. We cannot expect all subjects have the same kind of features and these features depend on the same frequency bands for all of them. Hence, in this paper, a subject-based fisher WPD-CSP feature extraction method is presented to obtain suitable features for each subject.The proposed fisher WPD-CSP method decomposes original EEG signals into a series of sub-bands using WPD. Then fisher distance value of each sub-band is computed. Some sub-bands with larger values of fisher distance are selected and regarded as new EEG channels. Those selected sub-bands vary from subjects and they are reconstructed for further feature extraction of the CSP. Then the subject-based feature extraction model is so formed and used as the input of classifier. In this paper, several classification methods have been tested and the probabilistic neural network (PNN) is used as the classifier. Finally the experimental data from six subjects are analyzed and processed by two-fold cross-validation. In the end, the classification accuracy is obtained from the PNN.The remainder of the paper is organized into four sections. Section 2 discusses the frequency band selection based on the fisher WPD-CSP and its procedure. Section 3 contains details on the datasets and acquisition procedure. Results are presented and discussed in Section 4. In the end, Section 5 presents our conclusion.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
