@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Rough set based rule induction in decision making using credible classification and preference from medical application perspective

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Discover certain regularities at the primitive concept level.Improve the efficiency of the discovery process and express the user's preference.Develop high quality attribute-oriented and rule-based models.Find the causes for solitary pulmonary nodule and results of the long term treatment.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Rough set theory,Credible index,Rule induction,Medical prediction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a new heuristic algorithm for reduct selection based on credible index in the rough set theory (RST) applications. This algorithm is efficient and effective in selecting the decision rules particularly the problem to be solved in a large scale. This algorithm is capable to derive the rules with multi-outcomes and identify the most significant features simultaneously, which is unique and useful in solving predictive medical problems. The end results of the proposed approach are a set of decision rules that illustrates the causes for solitary pulmonary nodule and results of the long term treatment.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Information technology has become an integral part of the medical and health care systems in today's world. Clinicians (doctors, nurses, and allied health professionals) rely on mission critical systems to help them make correct judgments on diagnoses. These systems collect, store, and provide access to patients’ data. As patient's data and medical information continue to be accumulated, information overload becomes an issue. For example, data generated from medical diagnoses (e.g., patients’ blood pressure, body mass index, age, etc.) can be voluminous, making it difficult for doctors to judge the disease correctly. Large amount of medical information available on the Internet can easily overwhelm a patient who seeks to use such information, leading to undue anxiety or incorrect self-diagnosis [1]. Similarly, advances in scientific research have led to an exponential growth in medical and biomedical data that hinder understanding of the underlying phenomena.Automated decision support for clinicians has been proposed in recent years to assist medical diagnosis and to provide evidence-based patient care [2]. A study of 55,000 clinicians in public hospitals on how they use an online clinical information retrieval system shows that their use of online evidence increases significantly with patient admissions. This demonstrates the potential of automated decision support systems (DSS) in influencing clinical decisions. However, as Ruland et al. [2] point out, there has been little work devoted to the development of computer-supported systems that assists clinicians’ judgments and diagnoses [2]. In particular, data mining and machine learning, though widely used in businesses, are not commonly applied to automation of clinical decision support.As a generalization-based information modeling method, attribute-oriented induction provides an efficient way to extract different kinds of knowledge rules in decision making. The development of the attribute-oriented induction method for decision making is motivated by (1) certain regularities can be discovered and expressed at the primitive concept level; (2) the availability of certain background knowledge can improve the efficiency of the discovery process and express the user's preference. The knowledge discovery literature [3–5] indicates that attribute-oriented induction based discovery often generates too many rules without focus. Furthermore, conventional induction approaches cannot guarantee that the classification of a decision table is credible. In other words, an attribute-oriented induction based approach could be insufficient for extracting reliable knowledge from a data set. To resolve the problem, several techniques (concepts) should be employed cooperatively to support this application, such as a rough set approach, conceptual hierarchies, and condition constraints (e.g., weight functions). In this situation, an aggregated methodology for determining credible decision rules is important.The main reason for using the rough sets approach for rule induction is due to the qualitative nature of the data which makes them difficult to analyze by standard statistical techniques [6,7]. The applications of rough set model in a variety of problems have demonstrated its usefulness [7–10]. In addition, to improve the efficiency of the discovery process and the quality of classification, the availability of certain background knowledge, such as conceptual hierarchies should be involved in decision making. Concept hierarchies, not only improves the efficiency of the discovery process but also expresses the user's preference for guided generalization, which may lead to a desirable generalization process. The conventional rough set approach to induct attributes-oriented rules did not incorporate with the conceptual hierarchies [11] and the weight of each input attribute. It is desired to develop the measures to evaluate the induced rules, for example, the strength and length of the rule. Generally, discovering the shortest and strongest rules is of most interest in decision making.This paper focuses on how rough set theory, conceptual hierarchies, and condition constraints (e.g., weight functions) can be used cooperatively to develop high quality attribute-oriented and rule-based models in decision making. In this paper, several indices related to determining the optimal level of each attribute for credible classification and attribute preference are introduced. The issues involved in the determination of the reducts of attributes are discussed. A structural approach for the discovery of credible generalized and preference-based decision rules is developed. The discovery process is performed by the heuristic approaches. Evaluation of each credible generalized medical rule is illustrated and discussed.This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the related literatures in attribute-oriented induction and the rough set theory are reviewed. In Section 3, the solution approach is proposed. A hospital case study is presented to demonstrate the significance of the proposed approach in Section 4, and Section 5 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
