@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The landscape of research on smartphone medical apps: Coherent taxonomy, motivations, open challenges and recommendations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Mapping the research landscape of smartphone medical apps into a coherent taxonomy.Figure out the motivation of using smartphone apps in medicine & healthcare.Highlight the open challenges that hinder the utility of medical apps.Recommendations Lists to improve the acceptance of medical apps in the literature.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Smartphone apps,Medical and health apps,Mobile health,Survey,Taxonomy,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectiveTo survey researchers’ efforts in response to the new and disruptive technology of smartphone medical apps, mapping the research landscape form the literature into a coherent taxonomy, and finding out basic characteristics of this emerging field represented on: motivation of using smartphone apps in medicine and healthcare, open challenges that hinder the utility, and the recommendations to improve the acceptance and use of medical apps in the literature.MethodsWe performed a focused search for every article on (1) smartphone (2) medical or health-related (3) app, in four major databases: MEDLINE, Web of Science, ScienceDirect, and IEEE Xplore. Those databases are deemed broad enough to cover both medical and technical literature.ResultsThe final set included 133 articles. Most articles (68/133) are reviews and surveys that refer to actual apps or the literature to describe medical apps for a specific specialty, disease, or purpose; or to provide a general overview of the technology. Another group (43/133) carried various studies, from evaluation of apps to exploration of desired features when developing them. Few researchers (17/133) presented actual attempts to develop medical apps, or shared their experiences in doing so. The smallest portion (5/133) proposed general frameworks addressing the production or operation of apps.DiscussionSince 2010, researchers followed the trend of medical apps in several ways, though leaving areas or aspect for further attention. Regardless of their category, articles focus on the challenges that hinder the full utility of medical apps and do recommend mitigations to them.ConclusionsResearch on smartphone medical apps is active and various. We hope that this survey contribute to the understanding of the available options and gaps for other researchers to join this line of research.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Adoption of smartphones in the arsenal of healthcare is coming as no surprise. People have always used available facilities to enhance their most important activities and protect their most valuable assets; and no asset is more valuable than their own health. The utilization of information and communication technology in the practice of healthcare introduced the notion of eHealth [1,2], where telecommunications is enabling telemedicine, computers are processing health data, and the Internet is providing the infrastructure to exchange all sorts of medical information and services. When mobility became possible, telecommunications occurred through mobile phones, and computers moved along with people in the form of portable laptops and then handheld devices. The eHealth stretched to include mobile health (mHealth) [3]; but still, the phone was a phone and the computer was a computer; until both converged into a single unit known as a “smartphone”.Smartphones are mobile devices that are smarter than earlier generations of cellular phones, usually known as feature-phones [4]. This extra smartness is gained by virtue of closer resemblance to personal computers (PCs). Smartphones possess greater computing power, more connectivity options, sophisticated operating systems, full Internet access, and most importantly the ability to install and run third-party applications, often dubbed as “apps”. This last feature extended the smartphone's versatility into new functions unthought-of before, even by its designers. However, smartphones are not just scaled down versions of their PC relatives; they depart from traditional PCs in several ways. They are portable, even beyond the portability of laptops, and they are meant to be mobile and used on the move. This introduces the notion of context to smartphones, in terms of location, ambient, and user actions. Smartphones can measure these variables via onboard sensors, such as accelerometers and gyroscopes, which are unique to smartphone platforms. Smartphones also enjoy the ultimate connectivity among computing devices, with multiple wireless interfaces to cellular networks, WiFi access points, Bluetooth peripherals, up to the latest innovations of WiFi Direct and the Near Field Communication (NFC) technologies.Being this disruptive, smartphones are also the most personal computers so far. They are carried everywhere, and used to run all sort of functions, most of which are intimate to the users. In the context of healthcare, the trend of seeking health information from the internet is an obvious option on mobile platforms, but the real change came through the surge of apps written by developers to serve a wide variety of medical and healthcare scenarios, such as health education, intervention and adherence enhancement, as well as medication and diagnosis. Apps targeted both health professionals, patients, and the public, in the form of medical references, calculators, through the way to being attachments or alternatives to medical devices [3,5–7]. In essence, what physicians and patients had to access on stationary computers have been brought to them by apps right onto their hands/pockets, augmented by innovative use of the new sensing capabilities that required previously special equipment, external to the computing device.The unique characteristic of mHealth, and particularly that based on smartphone apps is that it has grown very fast, outpacing the governmental efforts in regulation, as well as the health informatics researchers in study and evaluation. It is not feasible to review, let alone evaluate, the 100,000 medical-related apps available online for the major smartphone platforms [8], but those apps are actually open in the wild for download and use by healthcare professionals as well as the public. In fact, legislation of these apps itself is still debateable [9]. Apps are stored centrally in web-based repositories called app stores, a one-stop-shop fashion for marketing apps. The most popular smartphones today, with a market share of 84.4% and 11.7%, respectively [10] are the Android [11] and iOS [12] supported-phones; their corresponding online markets are Google Play [13] and Apple Apps Store [14], respectively.Our main objective in this paper is to shed some light on researchers’ efforts in response to the new and disruptive technology, mapping the research landscape form the literature into a coherent taxonomy, finding out along the way few features that characterize this emerging line of research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A recent disruptive trend in mobile health is the wave of smartphone apps that address medical and health applications. Research on this trend is already active, though its shape and outlines are still not understood, and an insight on what is actually going on in this emerging line is needed at the current stage. This article aimed to contribute such an insight through surveying and taxonomizing the literature. Specific patterns can be drawn from the mass of works on medical apps, roughly classifying the research into four distinct categories: reviews/surveys, research studies on apps, development attempts and broad framework proposals. Some specialties received more attention from researchers (e.g. public health) as well as few functions (e.g. health reference materials). This typically reflects the types of available apps in the wild but gives a clear indication of where are the gaps in apps development and/or evaluation. Researchers have expressed their concerns in the literature, and many suggested recommendations to resolve the existing and anticipated challenges, the list of which opens many opportunities for research in this field. Similar to other emerging technologies, most of the studies initially focus on the functional aspects of the technology (usefulness of medical apps), leaving the non-functional requirements (e.g. their security) to a later stage.People will continue to adopt new technologies as they appear; therefore, for researchers to keep abreast of this race, they ought to look at the next thing. The next thing in mHealth seems to be the wearable gadgets connected to smartphones, managed by apps and enabled by the new wave of built-in biosensors. As of this point, no research is found on apps that control wearable devices or embedded biosensors; calling for an important line of research that might intersect with several other technological and scientific lines.This work is fully funded by the Bright Sparks Programme and the High Impact Research Grant from the University of Malaya under references BSP/APP/1531/2013 and UM.C/625/1/HIR/MOHE/FCSIT/12, respectively.None.