@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Investigation of factors affecting hypothermic pelvic tissue cooling using bio-heat simulation based on MRI-segmented anatomic models

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This study investigated the influence of different pelvic tissue types as well as the choice of thermal property parameters on the efficacy of endorectal cooling balloon (ECB).Prostate size and periprostatic venous plexus were two major factors affecting ECB cooling efficiency.Large prostate made the cooling difficult to propagate through the prostate.Patients with abundant periprostatic venous plexus required a longer time for neurovascular bundle (NVB) cooling.This feasibility study demonstrated that the simulation tool could potentially be used for adjusting the setting of ECB for hypothermic radical prostatectomy.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Endorectal cooling balloon,Magnetic resonance imaging,Prostate,Neurovascular bundle,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This study applied a simulation method to map the temperature distribution based on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of individual patients, and investigated the influence of different pelvic tissue types as well as the choice of thermal property parameters on the efficiency of endorectal cooling balloon (ECB). MR images of four subjects with different prostate sizes and pelvic tissue compositions, including fatty tissue and venous plexus, were analyzed. The MR images acquired using endorectal coil provided a realistic geometry of deformed prostate that resembled the anatomy in the presence of ECB. A single slice with the largest two-dimensional (2D) cross-sectional area of the prostate gland was selected for analysis. The rectal wall, prostate gland, peri-rectal fatty tissue, peri-prostatic fatty tissue, peri-prostatic venous plexus, and urinary bladder were manually segmented. Pennes’ bioheat thermal model was used to simulate the temperature distribution dynamics, by using an in-house finite element mesh based solver written in MATLAB. The results showed that prostate size and periprostatic venous plexus were two major factors affecting ECB cooling efficiency. For cases with negligible amount of venous plexus and small prostate, the average temperature in the prostate and neurovascular bundles could be cooled down to 25°C within 30min. For cases with abundant venous plexus and large prostate, the temperature could not reach 25°C at the end of 3h cooling. Large prostate made the cooling difficult to propagate through. The impact of fatty tissue on cooling effect was small. The filling of bladder with warm urine during the ECB cooling procedure did not affect the temperature in the prostate or NVB. In addition to the 2D simulation, in one case a 3D pelvic model was constructed for volumetric simulation. It was found that the 2D slice with the largest cross-sectional area of prostate had the most abundant venous plexus, and was the most difficult slice to cool, thus it may provide a conservative prediction of the cooling effect. This feasibility study demonstrated that the simulation tool could potentially be used for adjusting the setting of ECB for individual patients during hypothermic radical prostatectomy. Further studies using MR thermometry are required to validate the in silico results obtained using simulation.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The impact of radical prostatectomy on the quality of life, including the complications on the continence and sexual function, is the main concern for patients electing to receive surgery [1,2]. In patients receiving radical prostatectomy, the dissection of the bladder neck, mobilization of the neurovascular bundles (NVBs), and transection of the urethra–external sphincter complex, cause primary acute traumatic injury. The tissue damage is associated with the direct mechanical trauma of dissection, traction, as well as thermal energy that leads to neurapraxia or axonotmesis of pelvic autonomic nerves and muscle degeneration [3,4]. The tissue inflammation may lead to the secondary wave of damage. Radical prostatectomy undoubtedly causes direct trauma and inflammatory damage to surrounding neuromuscular tissues (i.e., bladder, urethra, and nerves) that may contribute to urinary incontinence and sexual dysfunction. The inflammatory cascade includes neutrophil and macrophage infiltration with subsequent release of proteolytic enzymes, activation of coagulation factors, proinflammatory cytokine formation, hypoxia, acidosis, free radical production, and apoptosis [5,6]. It has been shown that the use of local hypothermia during robot-assisted laparoscopic prostatectomy can attenuate this injury [7–10]. Preemptive hypothermia protects tissues from damage by lowering their metabolic rates and oxygen demands [11–16]. For each degree the temperature is decreased, a 5% reduction in oxygen consumption is achieved [11], which results in less lactate formation, preserved protein synthesis and cell signaling, and decreased inflammatory response [12].It has also been established that cooling using endorectal cooling balloon (ECB) can significantly reduce the recovery time to regain urinary continence and sexual function in men [1,2,4,17], presumably due to the profound effects in reducing an array of tissue damage coming from the direct trauma and the inflammatory reaction [11]. The ECB was fabricated using a 5″×2.5″ elliptical balloon fused to a 40cm, 24-french, three-way latex urethral catheter. The balloon, which was cycled continuously with 4°C saline, was inserted through anus and conformed to the rectal wall [18]. Previous studies have shown that among men 65 years or older, there was a significant shortening of time in regaining continence and sexual function with lower temperatures [18–23], thus the use of ECB may lead to a better surgical outcome with improved quality of life.Currently, the ECB procedure is done for all patients in a standard fashion. Anatomically, the ECB is designed to extend from the membranous urethra to the seminal vesicles. All patients are cooled using the same set-up, and there is no consideration for the different anatomy of individual patients to ensure effective cooling of the NVBs and the prostate gland [18,19]. For example, the size of the prostate, the amount of fat, and the presence of blood vessels in the pelvic regions may affect the cooling results significantly. An individualized temperature distribution map for each patient can be obtained using a thermal simulation model, by using the bioheat transfer equation based on the anatomical distribution of different tissues and their respective thermal properties in the pelvic region. The purposes of this exploratory simulation study are: (1) to investigate the effectiveness of ECB cooling by estimating the temperature that can be reached in NVB and the whole prostate in patients with different pelvic anatomies and tissue characteristics; (2) to evaluate how different tissue components will impact the effectiveness of ECB cooling. In particular, the amount of blood vessels, such as the peri-prostatic venous plexus, may be very different from patient to patient, and this “heat sink” effect will diminish the cooling effect, which can be investigated by comparing patients with and without extensive peri-prostatic venous plexus. The size of the prostate also varies among patients, and thus a patient with a large prostate may not be cooled efficiently. To investigate this effect, patients with large and small prostates are compared. In addition, the influence of the fat volume and the filling of bladder are considered.In this work the simulation was focused on a 2-dimensional (2D) transverse slice that had the largest cross-sectional area of the prostate. At the base of the prostate the venous plexus was the most abundant, thus representing the worse scenario in cooling; also the NVB was very close to the prostate at this location, and most likely to be damaged by the surgical procedure. Therefore, the simulation done on this 2D slice can provide important clinically relevant information. In one case, we also constructed a 3-dimensional (3D) model for simulation, and the obtained results were compared to those of the 2D model. Similar to the concept of developing individualized treatment planning tool for radiation therapy, the ultimate goal of this project is to develop a patient-specific hypothermia surgical planning tool.Four subjects with different pelvic tissue anatomy, including fatty tissue abundance, periprostatic venous abundance and prostate size were analyzed in this study. These subjects were clinically suspected to have prostate cancer due to elevated prostate specific antigen (PSA) levels [24] and received prostate MR imaging for diagnostic purposes. The MRI study was performed on a GE Signa-HDx 3T MR scanner (GE Healthcare, Milwaukee, WI) using an endorectal coil. The images acquired using the endorectal coil could provide a realistic geometry of deformed prostate that resembled the anatomy in the presence of endorectal cooling balloon.For each patient, two sets of images were used for tissue segmentation, non-fat-saturated T2 weighted images (NFS-T2WI) and fat-saturated T2 weighted images (FS-T2WI) [25], both acquired using the fast spin echo (FSE) sequences. The imaging parameters for NFS-T2WI were repetition time (TR)/echo time (TE)=[3950–5250]/[99–101] ms, echo train length=[16–21], slice thickness=4mm, matrix=256×224 or 288×192 and field of view (FOV)=180–200mm. The imaging parameters for FS-T2WI were TR/TE=5716/[103–109] ms, echo train length=21, slice thickness=4mm, matrix=288×192 and FOV=180–200mm. The images were acquired in axial (transverse) sections starting from above bilateral hip joints level down to symphysis pubis level. Regardless of the pelvic size of the subjects, a total of 22 slices were acquired for all patients. The range of 8.8cm was more than sufficient to cover the superior-inferior direction of the prostate and surrounding tissues. The pixel depth for the MR image was 16 bits. The segmented images were saved as 8 bits mask files.In this feasibility study, a 2D simulation was performed to simplify the segmentation procedure and reduce computational burden. Based on the size of the segmented prostate on each acquired transverse slice, the slice that showed the largest 2D cross-sectional area of the prostate gland was chosen for the analysis. Besides the prostate gland (P), the major pelvic tissue types were also segmented for thermal simulation. These included the rectal wall (RW), the peri-rectal fatty tissue (RF), the peri-prostatic fatty tissue (PF), the peri-prostatic venous plexus (PV), and the urinary bladder (B) (Fig. 1). These tissues were within the boundaries of anterior lower abdominal wall, bilateral pelvic walls, and sacrum. The manual segmentation was done using both NFS-T2WI and FS-T2WI prostate MR images, performed by an experienced radiologist (JHC) with 20 years of experience in interpreting body MRI. Since each pelvic tissue type normally covered several slices, a slice thickness of 4mm through the middle of the prostate would contain these tissues unless the amount was negligible in the entire pelvic region. Muscles in the pelvic wall, the anterior lower abdominal wall, and the gluteal area did not directly contact with the rectum or the prostate gland and therefore not included in the analysis. The peri-rectal fat, the peri-prostatic fat, the cooling balloon and the urinary bladder were segmented on NFS-T2WI, while the prostate, the rectal wall and the peri-prostatic venous plexus were segmented on FS-T2WI. The segmentation of the cooling balloon was based on the location of the endorectal MR coil. The NVB was located in the posterior-lateral margin of the prostate gland, but it could not be seen on either NFS-T2WI or FS-T2WI due to its similar signal intensity with the peripheral zone of the prostate and the peri-prostatic venous plexus. However, since its anatomic location was well predictable, a small region of interest (ROI) for NVB was drawn at this location, shown in Fig. 1, for computing the temperature in the NVB.The four cases analyzed in this study have different pelvic tissue compositions. A summary of the tissue volume for each case is given in Table 1. The area of each segmented tissue on the analyzed image is calculated by the number of pixels multiplied by the pixel size of 0.15mm2. Case #1 and Case #2 have relatively large prostate and abundant peri-prostatic venous plexus. In contrast, Case #3 and Case #4 have small prostate and negligible amount of peri-prostatic venous plexus. For these 2 cases, the peri-prostatic venous plexus is not visible on the selected slice, also not visible on four adjacent slices in both superior and inferior directions.The Pennes’ bioheat thermal model is used to describe the temperature distribution dynamics [19,26](1)ρc∂T(r→,t)∂t=∇(k∇⋅T(r→,t))+Q−cbωb(T(r→,t)−Ta)where density (g/mm3), specific heat (J/(g°C)) and thermal conductivity (W/(mm°C)) of the biological tissue are represented by ρ, c and κ. T is the temperature of the medium (°C), which is a function of time and space. The second term on the right hand side of Eq. (1) is the external power input deposition, which is neglected in this study due to the lack of external energy source such as focused ultrasound or laser irradiation. The last term on the right side of the equation represents the blood perfusion (heat sink) term where, ωb is the blood perfusion rate (g/(mm3s)), cb is the blood specific heat (J/(g°C)) and Ta is the supplying blood temperature (°C).Finite element model (FEM) has been used to solve bioheat transfer equation for various applications such as high-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU), conformal transurethral ultrasound therapy and laser ablation [27]. In this study, a FEM based solver is developed for modeling ECB cooling at pelvic region. To simplify the formation of the weak form of the heat transfer equation, we assume the blood flow temperature (Ta) and surrounding tissue temperature (Tf) to be body temperature 37°C. Let(2)T′=T−37°CThe weak form then can be expressed as:(3)∑n∫Ωdx→(ρc⋅φΦx)dUn(t)dt+∑n∫Ωdx→∇φ⋅(κ∇Φx)+∫Ωdx→cbωbφΦx+∫∂Ωds→hφΦxUn(t)=0where the solution of temperature is expanded in FEM basis as: T(r, t)=∑nUn(t)Φx. The test function, φ, is chosen to be piecewise linear function. The initial condition is set at 37°C body temperature homogeneously. Due to the use of patient-specific anatomic model, the boundary condition for heat transfer is very complex. In this study, we consider only heat convection at the boundary, which is:(4)−k∂T(r)∂n=h(T(r)−Tf)where h is the heat transfer coefficient (W/(mm2°C)), between the surface of the medium and the surrounding medium at temperature Tf (°C). The simulation time step was chosen to be 5s. We have tested different time steps, and found that when 5s were used, the change of temperature between two time points was smaller than 1%, and we could precisely determine the temperature-time course.The MRI segmentation and finite element mesh-based numerical solver were done using in-house programs written in MATLAB, and the analysis was carried out on a customized core 2 duo 3.0GHz single-board computer equipped with 8 Gigabytes of memory. The MRI images were uploaded in MATLAB and the segmentation for each tissue type was done using manual drawing. The image domain was then discretized into a homogeneous triangle mesh with 8321 nodes and 16,384 elements using MATLAB built-in partial differential equation toolbox, and the mesh resolution was approximately 2mm, which was considerably smaller compared to the organ size. The time step was discretized using implicit method, and thus with unconditional stability. The result from finite element solver was extrapolated back to the 512×512 image space, and the temperature for each pixel was obtained. The mean temperature in each analyzed ROI was calculated by averaging over all pixels contained within the ROI.The 2D simulation for one case took about 1.5h to complete. The thermal property of each tissue type is listed in Table 2. The thermal properties of rectal wall and prostate were considered the same as that of muscle, as the values were very similar in the literature [28–30]. The peri-rectal fat and peri-prostatic fat were assigned to the same value [30], as they were the same fat tissues at different anatomic locations. The cooling balloon and bladder were also considered to have the same thermal property as that of pure water. Lastly, the remaining un-segmented tissue was considered as homogeneous tissue with thermal property the same as that of muscle. The peri-prostatic venous plexus was regarded as slow flowing blood, and the blood perfusion rate was ωbcb=16.0×10−6J/(mm3s°C) [31–34]. The blood perfusion rates in all other tissues were considered the same as that of resting muscle ωbcb=0.6×10−6J/(mm3s°C) [26,33–35]. The value of thermal property for different tissue types varied, but it was not possible to measure them for each subject so we chose to use a reasonable estimation. In order to investigate the impact of different parameters, we have used different values for prostate thermal conductivity and venous blood flow rates in the temperate mapping.The use of local hypothermia should confer no additional risk to the patient, when set above the limits of what has been safely reported (4°C) for human use [31,43], even though cold saline below 4°C had been used on patients previously [18,19]. In our study, the cooling balloon temperature was set at 4°C. The temperature distribution was calculated every 5s, for a total duration of 3h. The temperature maps acquired at 0.5, 1, 2 and 3h after the initiation of cooling were obtained. At each time point, the reached temperature for the prostate and the NVB was calculated by averaging the simulated temperatures over the ROI. To demonstrate the cooling effect propagating through the prostate, the temperature at anterior boarder and posterior boarder for each time points were also presented. As the posterior prostate was the closest to the cooling balloon, and the anterior prostate was the farthest, their temperature results showed the range within the prostate.Lastly, in one case we constructed a 3D volumetric model using all segmented tissues from multiple slices for simulation, so the obtained results could be compared to those of 2D model. Briefly, the different tissue types as considered in the 2D model were segmented from all acquired imaging slices, and they were stacked together using the thickness of 4mm. The boundaries between the adjacent slices were smoothed using interpolation. The construction of 3D FEM formulation was following the same method described in Section 2.3. Tetrahedral mesh in a volume of 200mm×200mm×88mm was constructed. The in-plane resolution on each transverse slice was reduced to 128×128 pixels to accommodate the large difference between the in-plane spatial resolution (0.4mm for 512 pixel resolution) and the slice thickness (4mm). A total of 565,633 tetrahedral elements were generated for 3D modeling, and the computational time for a 3D model took about 72h to complete.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
