@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An augmented Lagrangian contact formulation for frictional discontinuities with the extended finite element method

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An Uzawa-type augmented Lagrangian X-FEM for modeling frictional contact.A symmetrized (nested) approach to implement a return mapping algorithm for Coulomb friction rule.Adapting the vital vertex algorithm to robustly impose the contact constraints in ALM framework.The accuracy of proposed model by simulation of straight, curved and wave-shaped discontinuities.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Frictional discontinuity,Nonlinear contact algorithm,Augmented Lagrangian,X-FEM method,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, an Uzawa-type augmented Lagrangian contact formulation is presented for modeling frictional discontinuities in the framework of the X-FEM technique. The kinematically nonlinear contact problem is resolved based on an active set strategy to fulfill the Kuhn–Tucker inequalities in the normal direction of contact. The Coulomb’s friction rule is employed to address the stick–slip behavior on the contact interface through a return mapping algorithm in conjunction with a symmetrized (nested) augmented Lagrangian approach. A stabilization algorithm is proposed for the robust imposition of the frictional contact constraints within the proposed augmented Lagrangian framework. Several numerical examples are presented to demonstrate various aspects of the proposed computational algorithm in simulation of the straight, curved and wave-shaped discontinuities.Initialize the solution:set(u¯,a¯)0=0,λ¯N0=λ¯T0=0andΓd0stick=ΓdcontLOOP over the augmentation iterationm(local convergence)LOOP over the Newton iterationi(global convergence)i. Solve system of Eq. (22).ii. For each active nodal pointxJof the contact interface,p=ϵNgNn+ϵ¯TgTmwhere{ϵ¯T=ϵTIFxJ∈Γdstickϵ¯T=0Otherwiseiii. Check for the global convergence, IFηglobali≤ηglobalaimthen END LOOPEND LOOP over the Newton iterationsCheck for the local convergence relation (26); IF true, then STOPLOOP over active nodal points of the interfacexJAugment Lagrange multipliers and updateΓdm+1stick:i.λ¯Nm+1=λ¯Nm+ϵNgNmii. IFλ¯Tm+ϵTgTm≤μλ¯Nm+1THENλ¯Tm+1=λ¯Tm+ϵTgTm,xJ∈Γdm+1stickELSEλ¯Tm+1=μλ¯Nm+1,xJ∉Γdm+1stickENDIFEND LOOP over active contact pointsEND LOOP over the augmentation iterations

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Numerical simulation of frictional contact behavior between two bodies has enormous applications in broad range of engineering areas. For instance, in the forming process relative movement between the tools and material produces normal and tangential contact forces, which have an important effect on various aspects of the process, such as the pressing forces, density distribution, crack nucleation, and residual stresses [1,2]. Moreover, in geo-mechanical problems the crack growth in compressive zone, such as fault rapture phenomenon, involves frictional sliding of the crack edges [3,4]. The shearing forces on crack faces are determinant in the computation of stress intensity factors, rate of propagation, and direction of propagation; and as a result can drastically affect the behavior of cracked media. Modeling of frictional contact in continuum mechanics produces complexity within the solution, in which two nested Kuhn–Tucker constraints should be satisfied, including: an outer constraint that accounts for the contact/separation mode, and an inner constraint that describes the stick/slip condition on contacting boundaries.In cases that the contact faces are well defined prior to beginning of the simulation, the finite element method provides a natural means for simulating frictional and frictionless contact problems, see e.g. [5–7]. However, there exist a large variety of applications where the contacting boundaries nucleate in an initially undamaged medium and evolve in an undetermined direction through the simulation, such as mode II and III crack propagation problems. The eXtended Finite Element Method pioneered by Moës et al. [8] circumvents the need for conforming the FE mesh to the evolving boundaries of the discontinuity by enriching the standard FE approximation with additional discontinuous interpolation functions on the basis of the partition of unity method [9,10]. The X-FEM requires no update in the mesh topology, and the only interaction between the FE mesh and the discontinuity involves selection of the nodal points that must be enriched [11,12]. A comprehensive review on X-FEM and its application in a variety of problems in continuum mechanics can be found in [13,14]. In particular, both primal and dual formulations have been pursued to model frictional contact within the context of X-FEM. As a pioneering work, Dolbow et al. [15] employed the LArge Time INcrement (LATIN) method to model frictional contact on embedded interfaces, in which the solution is decomposed into two global (linear) and local (possibly nonlinear) steps, see also [16]. The conventional penalty method has also been employed to model frictional contact problems with the X-FEM in the works of Khoei and Nikbakht [17] and Liu and Borja [18], and is then extended to large sliding-large deformation contact problems [19,20].It is well recognized that irrespective of whether one employs the penalty method or the Lagrangian approach, imposing the Dirichlet (or stiff Neumann) constraints on embedded interfaces, such as those arising in X-FEM modeling of frictional contact, may cause numerical instability in forms of spurious oscillation in the interfacial traction/flux fields and loss of convergence in local error norms [21–23]. Typically, these oscillations are more severe in the Lagrange multipliers method where contact constraints are imposed exactly, however, the penalty method exhibits the same effect when a high-stiff penalty number is employed to impose the constraints more accurately. In these circumstances, the key challenge is the verification of the so-called Ladyzhenskaya–Babuška–Brezzi condition [24,25], which ensures a proper choice of the discrete space for the Lagrange multipliers in order to avoid an over-constrained solution. Basically, the issue of verifying the LBB (or inf-sup) condition is related to the non-conformity of the X-FEM mesh to the Dirichlet boundaries and stems from the same challenges encountered when dealing with non-conforming Dirichlet boundaries in standard finite element frameworks [26,27]. Ji and Dolbow [21] emphasized that the most convenient choice of basis for the discrete Lagrange multipliers, those that naturally arise from the intersections of the interface with the bulk mesh, triggers oscillation in the Lagrange multipliers field and cause lack of convergence in local error norms.So far, both stable and stabilized approaches have been adapted to the X-FEM models of contact problems to restore stability of contact stress fields. In general, the discrete Lagrange multipliers space needs to be coarsened with respect to the underlying mesh to recover stable Lagrange multipliers on embedded interfaces. This can be achieved by constructing a stable discrete Lagrange multipliers space based on the vital vertex algorithm proposed by Moës et al. [22] and then improved by Bechet et al. [28] and Hautefeuille et al. [29], or through adopting a mortar-like technique which employs an independent mesh for the discontinuity as proposed by McDevitt and Laursen [30] and Kim et al. [31]. The former approach is also extended for large sliding contact by Nistor et al. [32] and Siavelis et al. [33]. Furthermore, a stable discrete space can be achieved by an additional enrichment of the displacement basis with bubble function as given in [23,34]. On the other hand, the stabilized techniques mostly rely on the Nitsche’s approach adopted to model frictional contact on embedded interfaces in [35–37]. It was shown by Stenberg [38] that the bubble stabilization method is closely related to Nitsche’s approach. There are also a number of stabilized global–local approaches which allow an independent discretization of the bulk and the crack interface, developed in conjunction with the LATIN strategy in non-planar frictional crack and fatigue crack growth [39–41]. A stabilized lower order formulation for frictional contact problems based on the polynomial pressure projection (PPP) method was proposed by Liu and Borja [42] that is applicable to both penalty and Lagrange multipliers methods.In the present study, an augmented Lagrangian formulation is presented to model frictional discontinuities on the basis of an extended finite element method. The main idea is to combine the penalty and Lagrange multipliers methods to inherit the advantages of both approaches, in order to decrease the ill-conditioning of governing equations and to satisfy the contact constraints more accurately with finite values of penalty parameters. The proposed variational formulation is used to incorporate the frictional contact behavior into the formulation. The finite element equations consist of two sets of equations; a standard FE equation without the discontinuity and an enhanced FE equation that captures the discontinuity and contact contribution via the enriched degrees of freedom. An active set strategy is employed to resolve the kinematically nonlinear equations in conjunction with the Newton–Raphson iterative solution strategy. In order to address the frictional behavior at the contact interface, the plasticity theory of friction is employed based on the Coulomb’s friction law, which is implemented via the standard return mapping algorithm on the basis of a symmetrized (nested) augmented Lagrangian approach. Finally, several numerical examples are simulated to demonstrate various aspects of proposed computational algorithm, including the combined opening–closing and sticking–slipping conditions in frictional straight, curved, and wave-shaped discontinuities.Consider a two-dimensional bodyΩbounded externally byΓ, in which the discontinuityΓdseparates the body intoΩ+andΩ−, as illustrated inFig. 1. The boundary value problem governing the static equilibrium equation of the body can be written as(1)∇.σ+b=0inΩ,u=u˜onΓu⊂Γ,σn¯=t˜onΓt⊂Γ,where∇is the gradient operator,σis the Cauchy stress tensor, b is the body force vector,u˜is the prescribed displacement onΓu, andt˜is the prescribed traction acting onΓtwhose unit outward normal vector is denoted byn¯. It is assumed thatΓu∪Γt=ΓandΓu∩Γt=∅.The notion of ‘slave’ and ‘master’ bodies of the classical contact mechanics can also be applied here, such that the master and slave bodies in the current case pertain to each side of the discontinuityΓd, whereΩ+is assigned to the slave side andΩ−to the master side. On account of the frictional contact condition along the discontinuity interfaceΓd, the above mentioned boundary value problem is augmented by the following condition on the surface of discontinuity(2)σn=tonΓd,wherenis the unit normal vector to the master side of the discontinuity surface, i.e. normal onΓdpointing towardΩ+, andtis the contact traction acting on the master side of the discontinuity. Note that the contact traction is continuous acrossΓd. In other words, the contact traction acting on the surface of the slave body is−t, essentially the same withtbut in opposite direction.The space of kinematically admissible displacement fields (trial functions)Uis defined as(3)U={u∈ℋ1|u=u˜onΓuandudiscontinuousonΓd},and the space of kinematically admissible to zero fieldsδU(test functions) as(4)δU={δu∈ℋ1|δu=0onΓuandδudiscontinuousonΓd},where the spaceℋ1is related to the regularity of the kinematic fields that basically allows for discontinuous functions across the discontinuity [43]. Treating the discontinuity as an external boundary forΩ+andΩ−, the variational formulation associated with the above mentioned contact boundary value problem can be expressed as follows; findu∈Usuch that(5)∫Ω∇sδu:σdΩ+∫Γd〚δu〛⋅tdΓ−∫Ωδu⋅bdΩ−∫Γtδu⋅t˜dΓ=0∀δu∈δU,where〚u〛=u+−u−is the jump of the displacement field across the interface, that is, the relative displacement vector of the slave and master sides alongΓd. Indeed, the notation〚⁎〛stands for the difference of variable⁎between the two faces of the discontinuity, i.e.〚⁎〛=⁎+−⁎−. Also, the notation∇sδudenotes the symmetric part of the spatial gradient ofδudefined as∇sδu=12(∇δu+∇Tδu).Note that the surface integral onΓdappearing in Eq. (5) accounts for the contribution of the frictional contact condition to the governing variational formulation. Basically, the frictional contact conditions should be imposed on the basis of two nested inequality contact constraints expressed in the form of the Kuhn–Tucker relations. The augmented Lagrangian treatment of the nonlinear frictional contact constraints will be discussed in the following section.The unilateral contact condition is imposed on the surface of the discontinuityΓdthrough the standard Kuhn–Tucker relations defined in the normal direction as(6)gN≥0,tN≤0,gNtN=0∀x∈Γd,withtN=t⋅ndenoting the normal contact stress andgN=〚u〛⋅nthe normal displacement jump of the interface. The above mentioned Kuhn–Tucker relations satisfy the gap condition ifgN>0andtN=0and the contact condition whengN=0andtN<0. ConsiderΓdcontdenotes the active contact surface of the discontinuityΓdwhere the contact condition occurs, i.e.gN=0onΓdcont⊂Γd. It is assumed thatΓdcontis known within an incremental solution step and the remaining of the discontinuity experiences an opening mode which is free of traction. In general, the active contact surface is not a priori known and needs to be determined on the basis of an active set strategy using an iterative solution procedure such as the Newton–Raphson algorithm.In the tangential direction of the contact surfaceΓdcont, two conditions of ‘stick’ and ‘slip’ are distinguished based on the Coulomb’s friction rule expressed as(7)Ff=|tT|−μf|tN|{=0slip<0stick,wheretNis the normal contact stress,μfis the Coulomb’s friction coefficient, andtT=t⋅mis the tangential contact stress, in whichm=tT/‖tT‖denotes the unit tangent vector in the sliding direction. Accordingly, the tangential stick/slip condition is imposed by a second layer of Kuhn–Tucker relations defined onΓdcontas(8)γ>0,Ff<0,γFf=0∀x∈Γdcont,whereγ=|gT|denotes the magnitude of the relative sliding of contacting boundaries. In the above relations, the stick condition pertains toγ=0andFf<0, whereas the slip condition is related toγ>0andFf=0. It must be emphasized that the stick–slip behavior is not relevant to problems involving simple opening–closing modes.In this section, an Uzawa-type augmented Lagrange multiplies technique [5–7] is presented to impose the frictional contact constraints defined through relations (6)–(8). Consider two bodies in contact, a master and a slave body, as shown inFig. 2. The normal contact stresstNprecludes penetration of the contacting bodies by imposinggN=0onΓdcont, whereas the frictional stresstTfollows the Coulomb’s rule such that the stick–slip constraints (8) are satisfied. So as to formulate the augmented Lagrange multipliers technique in the normal direction, the normal penetration between the contacting boundaries is introduced and the normal contact stresstNis decomposed into penalization and Lagrangian parts as(9)tN=ϵNgN+λN∀x∈Γdcont,in whichϵN≫1is a strictly positive normal penalization parameter andλNis the normal augmented Lagrange multiplier. Indeed, the above relation augments the penalizing contact stressϵNgNby an additional stressλN, yet unknown, to achieve an exact enforcement of the unilateral contact condition. In the tangential direction of contacting boundaries, an appropriate formulation of the augmented Lagrange multipliers method that accounts for both the stick and slip behaviors is written as(10)tT=ϵ¯TgT+λTwhere{ϵ¯T←ϵT≫1∀x∈Γdstickϵ¯T←0∀x∈Γdslip,in whichΓdstickandΓdslipare the sticking and slipping parts of the contact surfaceΓdcont, such that relationsΓdstick∪Γdslip=ΓdcontandΓdstick∩Γdslip=∅hold. In relation (10),ϵ¯Tis the algorithmic tangential penalization parameter that returns a strictly positive penalty numberϵT≫1alongΓdstickand zero alongΓdslip. Basically, the above relation represents an analogy with what mentioned for the normal direction. That is, the penalizing contact stressϵ¯TgTis augmented with the, yet unknown, tangential Lagrange multiplierλTto exactly impose the frictional contact constraints (8). The algorithmic penalization parameterϵ¯Tintroduced herein, however, implies that the penalization is active only along the sticking part of the contact interface and becomes null along the remaining slipping boundaries. Hence, in the case of slip condition the augmented Lagrange multiplierλTautomatically represents the total frictional stress, which should be determined by applying the slipping conditionFf=0.The procedure of the Uzawa-type augmented Lagrange multipliers method consists of a double loop algorithm in which the augmented Lagrange multipliersλNandλTare kept constant during an outer loop to solve the weak form in an inner loop [5,6]. An update algorithm is then used for the Lagrange multipliers within the outer iteration to achieve the convergence for the Lagrange multipliers. Accordingly, the formulation of Uzawa algorithm can be derived by constructing an ‘augmentation loop’, with the loop indexm, in which the variational formulation (5) is solved at each augmentation iteration for fixed known Lagrange multipliesλNmandλTmas follows; findum∈Usuch that(11)∫Ω∇sδu:σdΩ+∫Γd〚δu〛⋅(tNm+tTm)dΓ−∫Ωδu⋅bdΩ−∫Γtδu⋅t˜dΓ=0∀δum∈δU,in whichtNm=tNmnandtTm=tTmmare obtained according to relations (9) and (10), respectively, using the known valuesλNmandλTm. An update algorithm for the normal Lagrange multiplier with a first order of accuracy can be expressed as [5,6](12)λNm+1=λNm+ϵNgNmwithλN0=0,wheregNmis the normal opening at the end ofmthaugmentation. In the tangential direction of contact interface, an appropriate update algorithm can be expressed as(13)λTm+1=λTm+ϵTgTm∀x∈ΓdstickλTm+1=μf|tNm+1|∀x∈ΓdslipwithλT0=0,in which an update algorithm along the sticking surfaceΓdstickis performed in analogy to that of the normal direction, whereas the update algorithm along the slipping surfaceΓdslipis applied consistent with the Coulomb’s rule Eq. (7). Note thattNm+1=ϵNgNm+λNmrepresents the updated value of normal contact stress at the end ofmthaugmentation. Since relations (12) and (13) utilize a linear update algorithm for the Lagrange multipliers with the slope of the penalty number, a small penalty parameter delays the convergence of the update algorithm. The convergence of solution is, however, independent of the magnitude of the penalty parameter given that strictly positive penalty numbers are employed [7]. It should also be noted that when the convergence to a desired level of accuracy is achieved for the frictional contact constraints, the contact stresses associated with the penalty parameters are null and the Lagrange multipliers represent the actual contact stresses acting on the contact interface. The formulation presented here mimics the so called symmetrized or nested augmented Lagrange multipliers algorithm [5,7], in which the fulfillment of the Coulomb’s friction law is achieved within the outer augmentation loop rather than the inner nonlinear solver iteration.In order to numerically model the contact friction algorithm described in preceding section, the extended finite element method is employed in which the discontinuity surface is embedded within the finite element mesh by adding appropriate enrichment functions to the standard FE approximation. In this way, the X-FEM approximation of the displacement field is written based on an additive decomposition of the approximation into standard and enriched parts as(14)uh(x)=∑I∈NNIu¯I+∑I∈NenrN˜Ia¯I≡N(x)u¯+N˜(x)a¯x∈Ω,whereNis the set of all nodes of the finite element mesh,Nenris the set of nodes whose supports are cut by the discontinuity,NI(x)is the standard finite element shape function, andN˜I(x)is the shifted enriched shape function defined asN˜I=NI(H(x)−H(xI))withH(x)denoting the Heaviside enrichment function. In the above relation,u¯Iis the vector of standard nodal degrees of freedom anda¯Iis the vector of enrichment nodal degrees of freedom pertinent to the enriched FE nodes in the setNenr. Note that because of independent displacement fields at the two sides of the contact surface, the Heaviside jump function is an appropriate function for simulation of the contact problem. The Heaviside enrichment functionH(x)is defined as(15)H(x)={+1φ(x)≥00φ(x)<0,in whichφ(x)is the signed distance function defined based on the absolute value of the level set function as(16)φ(x)=min‖x−x⁎‖sign((x−x⁎)⋅n),wherex⁎is a point onΓdwhich has the closest distance from the pointx, andnis the normal vector to the contact surface at pointx⁎. It must be noted that although additional degrees of freedoma¯are global, their effect on the element enrichment is purely local and they only serve to interpolate the displacement jump onΓdas(17)〚uh(x)〛=uh(x+)−uh(x−)=(N˜(x+)−N˜(x−))a¯=N(x)a¯x∈Γd.The strain vectorεcorresponding to the approximate displacement field (14) can be written in terms of the standard and enriched nodal values as(18)εh(x)=∑I∈NBIu¯I+∑I∈NenrB˜Ia¯I≡B(x)u¯+B˜(x)a¯,whereB(x)≡SN(x)andB˜(x)≡SN˜(x)involve the spatial derivatives of the standard and enriched shape functions, respectively, withSdenoting the well-known strain differential operator. It should be mentioned that the test (virtual) displacement and strain fieldsδuh(x)andδεh(x)in the variational formulation (11) are approximated in analogy with the trial displacement and strain fieldsuh(x)andεh(x), respectively.In order to arrive at the discrete form of the variational formulation (11), the normal and tangential Lagrange multipliersλNandλTshould be approximated along the contact interface. This is achieved by means of discretization of the contact interface to a set of one-dimensional interface elements, in which the Lagrange multipliers are approximated using their nodal values via appropriate interpolating shape functions [5–7]. Within the context of the X-FEM, the nodal points of the interface elements can be determined by only the geometrical interaction of the discontinuity line and the underlying FE mesh. That is, the nodal points of the interface elements basically lie on the intersections of the discontinuity line with the edges of the finite elements [21,22]. Consider thatMdenotes the set of all nodes in the domain of discretized contact interface. The finite element approximations of the normal and tangential Lagrange multipliersλNhandλThcan be expressed in the general form as(19)λNh(x)=∑I∈MN⌢Iλ(x)λNI≡N⌢λ(x)λ¯NλTh(x)=∑I∈MN⌢Iλ(x)λTI≡N⌢λ(x)λ¯Tx∈Γdcont,in whichN⌢Iλ(x)is the interpolating shape function associated with the nodal values of normal and tangential Lagrange multipliersλNIandλTIat a generic nodeIin the domain of discretized contact interface. In the above definition,N⌢λ(x)is the matrix of shape functions and,λ¯Nandλ¯Tare the vectors of normal and tangential Lagrange multipliers nodal degrees of freedom, respectively. It should be mentioned that the proper choice of the discrete Lagrange multipliers space should satisfy a uniform inf-sup condition [21] to avoid the non-convergence and spurious oscillations in the local contact stress field. In this study, a technique is proposed for the stabilization of the augmented Lagrangian X-FEM formulation on the basis of the vital vertex algorithm[22,28,29], which will be presented in Section 4.2.The discrete form of the augmented Lagrangian X-FEM equations of the frictional contact problem can be obtained by substituting the approximate displacement and strain fields (14) and (18) and the associated variations into the variational Eq. (11), and satisfying the necessity that the weak form should hold for all arbitrary test functions. Hence, the discrete form of the augmented Lagrangian X-FEM equations can be expressed for themthaugmentation as(20)Ψmstd(u¯,a¯)=Fintstd−Fextstd=0,Ψmenr(u¯,a¯)=Fintenr−Fextenr+Pintcont+ℱmaug=0,where(21)Fintstd=∫ΩBTσdΩ,Fextstd=∫ΓtNTt˜dΓ+∫ΩNTbdΩ,Fintenr=∫ΩB˜TσdΩ,Fextenr=∫ΓtN˜Tt˜dΓ+∫ΩN˜TbdΩ,Pintcon=∫ΓdcontNTpdΓ,ℱmaug=(∫ΓdcontNTnN⌢λdΓ)λ¯Nm+(∫ΓdcontNTmN⌢λdΓ)λ¯Tm,in whichℱmaugrepresents the vector of augmentation forces that can be evaluated at each augmentation iteration using the known nodal valuesλ¯Nmandλ¯Tm. Also, the tractionpappeared in the force vectorPintcontrepresents the penalization contribution of the contact stress field that can be expressed byp=ϵNgNn+ϵ¯TgTm. The set of kinematically nonlinear Eq. (20) can now be solved at each augmentation iteration by means of consistent linearization using the Newton–Raphson iterative procedure. Noting that the augmentation force vectorℱmaugis fixed with respect to the linearization, the system of equations can be solved atithNewton iteration withinmthaugmentation as(22)KuuKuaKauKaa+Kcontidu¯mda¯mi+1=Fextstd−FintstdFextenr−Fintenr−Pintconi+0ℱmaug,in whichdu¯andda¯denote the increments of standard and enriched nodal displacements. In relation (22), the components of stiffness matrixKcan be obtained as(23)Kuu=∂Ψstd∂u¯=∫ΩBTDBdΩ,Kua=∂Ψstd∂a¯=∫ΩBTDB˜dΩ,Kau=∂Ψenr∂u¯=∫ΩB˜TDBdΩ,Kaa+Kcont=∂Ψenr∂a¯=∫ΩB˜TDB˜dΩ+∫ΓdcontNTCNdΓ,whereDdenotes the constitutive matrix of bulk material andCis the algorithmic penalization matrix of the contact interface expressed as(24)C=ϵNnnT+ϵ¯TmmT.As already pointed out before in Section 3, the formulation presented here is in resemblance with a symmetrized (nested) augmented Lagrangian solution strategy, in which the Coulomb’s friction law is enforced throughout the augmentation loop rather than the inner Newton–Raphson iteration. The symmetrized augmented Lagrange multipliers algorithm with an outer augmentation and inner Newton loop is presented inBox 1. As can be observed, the augmentation algorithm is used not only to augment the Lagrange multipliers, but also to apply an elastic predictor–plastic corrector return mapping scheme [17,18] to enforce the Coulomb’s law as well. In this way, within the inner solution the stick–slip condition along the contact surface is determined based on the previously-obtained estimation of the normal and tangential contact stressesλNmandλTm, which are taken fixed within the Newton–Raphson solution. This approach circumvents the need for linearization of the return mapping algorithm within the Newton iteration, and leads to a symmetric tangent stiffness matrixK, offering significant advantages from computational point of view.An important task in the algorithm shown in Box 1 is the determination of active contact surfaceΓdcont. To this end, the whole discontinuityΓdis first discretized to a mesh of interface elements. Throughout the solution, the active contact surface is defined as the set of interface nodal points whose normal contact stresstNis negative. The remaining nodal points of the interface are in opening mode and thus, their normal and tangential nodal Lagrange multipliers are set to zero. Within the outer augmentation solution, the return mapping algorithm can then be applied at each active node to determine, among all, the sticking and slipping subsetsΓdstickandΓdslip. This approach is in resemblance with the so called active set strategy developed in the finite element solution of nonlinear contact mechanics problems [7].Finally, the convergence of solution can be obtained based on the global and local error criteria. The global error criterion is defined on the basis of residual force vector of the Newton–Raphson iteration in an inner loop of the solution as(25)ηglobal=‖⟨Ψstd;Ψenr⟩‖‖Fext‖≤ηglobalaim.The local error criterion is related to the convergence of the augmentation iteration and is expressed based on the imposition of frictional contact constraints as(26)maxηlocalN,ηlocalT≤ηlocalaimandFf≤0∀x∈Γdcont,in which the normal and tangential local error indicators are defined, respectively, as(27)(ηlocal)N=1ℓ2∫Γdcont|gN|dΓ,(ηlocal)T=1ℓ2∫Γdstick|gT|dΓ,whereℓis a characteristic length of the contact problem and can be considered as the length of the contact surface, i.e.ℓ≡∫ΓdcontdΓ.Basically, each nodal point of the contact interface can be considered as a contact point where the contact constraints are enforced. In such case, the implementation of a naive discretization of the contact interface that is constructed by the intersections of the discontinuity with the underlying FE mesh usually yields to an over-constrained solution, since it encompasses too many vertices for all of them to define the discrete Lagrange multipliers space [21]. An over-constrained formulation may, in turn, result in non-physical spurious oscillations in the contact stresses and lack of convergence in the local fields. In order to achieve a stable contact traction field, the vital vertex algorithm introduced by Moës et al. [22] is employed here to identify, among all vertices emanated from the naive discretization of contact interface, a subset of vital vertices to which the nodal Lagrange multipliersλ¯Nandλ¯Tshould be assigned. In brief, the vital vertex algorithm determines the vital vertices of a discontinuity based on the following two main criteria:1)Two vital vertices should not belong to the edges of an element connected to a common nodal point;An element edge on which a non-vital vertex lies should be connected to at least one element edge holding a vital vertex.In fact, the vital vertex algorithm ensures that an over-constrained formulation is avoided on one hand (criterion 1) and an under-constrained formulation on the other hand (criterion 2). Further details on the algorithmic implementation of the vital vertex algorithm may be found in [29].Fig. 3(a) presents a schematic view of a portion of the domain mesh bisected by the discontinuity line together with the selected vital vertices. Without loss of generality of the formulation, it is assumed that the interface elements are defined by straight lines connecting two adjacent vital vertices, so a piecewise linear approximation is employed for the Lagrange multipliers using the standard basis functionsN⌢λ. Fig. 3(b) schematically presents the distribution of these basis functions along the contact interface. It is worthwhile mentioning that in three-dimensional case, computation of the shape functions of multipliers with this approach requires re-construction of the interface mesh using the selected vital vertices, which introduces additional complexities in the problem. For information on an alternative approach to construction of the Lagrange multipliers basis functions for more complex surfaces and three-dimensional problems, the reader is referred to [28,29].Furthermore, it must be noted that a proper quadrature choice for the numerical integration along contact interfaces is of crucial importance to achieve a stable contact stress field within the proposed augmented Lagrangian framework. As can be seen from Fig. 3(a), the vital vertex algorithm somehow coarsens the interface elements with respect to the interface segments delimited between the edges of the finite elements. In this manner, it is possible that an interface element encompasses several interface segments each of which belonging to different finite elements of the underlying FE mesh. Thus, a proper integration rule of the Lagrange multipliers field along the contact interface is necessary to obtain adequate integration points along each interface segment, since the vector of augmented Lagrangian contact forcesℱaugcontributes to different global degrees of freedom along each segment of an interface element. In this study, a two-point Gauss quadrature is employed along each interface segment to numerically integrateℱaug. On the other hand, the numerical integration of penalization contributionsPintcontandKcontshould be necessarily performed using a Trapezoidal rule with the integration points located at the nodal points of the interface elements. Indeed, the Trapezoidal rule ensures that the integration points coincide with the vital vertices of the interface where the contact constraints should be enforced. In this manner, the Trapezoidal integration rule can properly resolve the problem of an over-constrained system of equations within the inner solution of the proposed augmented Lagrangian formulation.In order to illustrate the accuracy and versatility of the proposed computational algorithm, several numerical examples are presented here in modeling frictional contact behavior of straight, curved and wave-shaped discontinuities. The numerical results are presented for both structured and unstructured four-noded quadrilateral meshes. For all numerical simulations, it is not persevered that the element edges be aligned with the contact interface. All problems are solved in plane-strain condition and the entire loading is applied in one computational step. In addition, the infinitesimal deformation is assumed, and the contact behavior is evaluated at the initial configuration of the body. The material behavior is considered to be linearly elastic with the Young modulus ofE=1×104MPaand Poisson’s ratio ofν=0.3, unless otherwise mentioned. In order to provide more meaningful discussions of the numerical results, a comparison is also performed between the obtained X-FEM simulation results and available numerical and/or analytical solutions.The first example is of an elastic square plate of1×1mwith a horizontal frictionless interface passing through the middle of plate. A uniform vertical compression ofuy=−0.1is imposed at the top of the plate while the bottom edge is fixed, such that the interface is in direct contact condition, as shown inFig. 4. This simple example is chosen, first, to illustrate the effect of the penalty parameter on the convergence of the Uzawa augmented Lagrangian algorithm and, second, to indicate the efficiency of proposed stabilization technique for a robust imposition of the unilateral contact condition in non-conforming meshes. The numerical simulations are performed using three meshes shown inFig. 5. The same problem was also studied previously by Liu and Borja [42] using the Polynomial Pressure Projection (PPP) stabilization technique and by Gravouil et al. [39] using the standard and Non-Locking LATIN (NLLA) methods.In order to extract the pure effect of normal penalty number on convergence properties of the proposed augmented Lagrangian X-FEM algorithm, the simulations are performed using mesh 1 in which the edges of finite elements are naturally aligned with the horizontal interface. In such condition, the proposed mesh configuration requires no stabilization technique for a robust imposition of the unilateral contact constraint, and eliminates the effect of an unstable Lagrange multipliers space on the convergence of solution.InTable 1, the convergence profiles of the augmentation iterations are presented for three values of the normal penalty parameter, i.e.ϵN(1)=5×107MN/m3,ϵN(2)=0.1ϵN(1)andϵN(3)=0.01ϵN(1). Note that the inner Newton–Raphson iteration converges in only one iteration since the contact interface is priori known. The results clearly indicate that the convergence of the augmented Lagrange multipliers method can be obtained independent of the penalty number and this parameter only influences the convergence rate of the algorithm. It must be noted that the solution of penalty method can be recovered from the solution of augmented Lagrange multipliers method at the first augmentation where the augmented Lagrange multiplier is zero and the normal contact constraint is enforced only approximately. However, the augmented Lagrange multipliers approach allows to achieve the normal contact constraint at a desired level of accuracy. This is even true when a relatively small penalty number is used, circumventing the difficulties associated with the ill-conditioning of the penalty formulation when a very large penalty number is employed to impose the contact constraint more accurately.In order to provide a comparative discussion on the presented results, the standard LATIN method [15] is also implemented here. An optimum value for the regularization parameter of the LATIN methodkcan be estimated classically using the ratio of the Young modulus to the crack length ask=1×104MN/m3[40].Table 2 presents the convergence profiles of the standard LAITN method using the above value of LATIN parameter. In this table, the global and local error indicators are obtained according to relations (25) and (27) through the LATIN iterations. Obviously, the rate of convergence obtained by the standard LATIN method is much slower than that obtained by the augmented Lagrange X-FEM algorithm. To remedy the problem of slow convergence rate of the standard LATIN method, Gravouil et al. [39] proposed the Non-Locking LATIN (NLLA) method. For the same example considered here, they reported a minimum of 40 iterations to achieve the desired level of accuracy, while only a few iterations is required by the augmented Lagrange multipliers algorithm proposed here.InFig. 6, the profile of normal contact stress along the horizontal interface obtained from the augmented Lagrangian X-FEM algorithm is compared with that reported by Liu and Borja [42]. It must be highlighted that the result of LATIN method is also identical to that of the augmented Lagrange multipliers method although it is not shown here for the clarity of presentation. Obviously, the results demonstrate an excellent agreement. Note that the augmented Lagrange multipliers method leads to identical normal contact traction field for all three penalty numbers proposed above, since convergence to machine precision is achieved for the local error criterion for all three penalty numbers.In order to illustrate the efficiency of the proposed stabilized augmented Lagrangian X-FEM algorithm, the problem is solved once again using meshes 2 and 3 shown in Fig. 5, where two unstructured FE meshes are employed. In this way, the edges of elements are not necessarily aligned with the contact interface passing through an arbitrary path within the elements. Before proceeding with illustration of the performance of stabilization strategy, the contours of vertical displacement obtained from mesh 3 using the stabilized and unstabilized algorithms are shown inFig. 7. Obviously, the displacement contours show almost identical results. These typical results clearly demonstrate that a naive discretization of the contact interface does not necessarily disturb the overall deformation of the plate; however, it will trigger spurious oscillations in the local contact stress field, as discussed below.InFig. 8, the profiles of normal contact stress are plotted along the horizontal interface for meshes 2 and 3 using the stabilized and unstabilized (naive discretization of the contact interface) strategies. A comparison is also performed with that obtained from the structured mesh 1. Obviously, a smooth contact stress field can be obtained for both meshes 2 and 3 when the stabilization strategy is applied. Note that the slight oscillations observed in the profiles of contact stress may be attributed to the uneven discretization of contact interface, and can be removed by refining the FE mesh. It can be clearly observed that the unstabilized algorithm with a naive discretization results in drastic oscillations in the contact stress field. Moreover, it is obvious that the trends of oscillations change with different mesh configurations; as a result, it can be highlighted that the oscillations emanate from the numerical instability rather than the physical response of the structure. For all cases, the numerical simulations are performed using the penalty number ofϵN=1×1010MN/m3with a maximum number of 10 augmentations that leads to a local error tolerance of1×10−12for both meshes 2 and 3 when the proposed stabilized strategy is employed.Finally, the profiles of contact stress along the horizontal interface are plotted inFig. 9 for two meshes 2 and 3 using different numerical integration schemes. Consistent with the argument made in Section 4.2, it is obvious that the numerical integration of penalization contributions of the augmented Lagrangian X-FEM formulation based on the two-point Gauss quadrature leads to an unstable contact stress field for both meshes 2 and 3 notwithstanding the adequate integration of the Lagrangian contributions. Similarly, the Trapezoidal rule is inadequate to precisely integrate the Lagrangian contributions of the formulation, and adversely affects the smooth profile of the contact stress field.The next example is chosen to illustrate the performance of proposed augmented Lagrangian X-FEM technique for modeling the straight interface with frictional stick–slip behavior considering three case studies of frictional contact behavior.The first case study refers to modeling a plate of1×1mcontaining an inclined frictional interface with an angleθ, which is subjected to a uniform prescribed vertical displacement ofuy=−0.1at the top edge, as shown inFig. 10. In this figure, the geometry and boundary conditions are shown together with the employed X-FEM mesh. Note that from the equilibrium condition, the slip condition is expected forμ<tanθand the stick condition forμ>tanθ, whereμis the frictional coefficient of contact interface. This benchmark example provides a simple test to evaluate the accuracy of proposed computational algorithm in modeling frictional contact behavior. Assumingtanθ=0.2, the stick and slip behavior are investigated for two Coulomb’s friction coefficients ofμ(1)=0.19andμ(2)=0.21. Accordingly, a slip behavior is expected forμ(1)and a stick behavior forμ(2). The same example was also investigated previously by Annavarapu et al. [37]. The level set functionφ(x)is defined byφ(x)=y−0.2x−0.4586, where the interfaceΓdis represented byφ(x)=0.InFig. 11, the contours of horizontal displacement are shown on the deformed configurations forμ(1)andμ(2). A comparison is also performed with those reported in [37]. As expected, the slipping condition is achieved when the friction coefficient is less than the inclination angle of the interfaceμ=0.19<tanθ, while the sticking condition is recovered forμ=0.21>tanθ. The discontinuity in the displacement field is obvious when the slip condition occurs. In both cases, the problem is solved usingϵN=ϵT=1×1012MN/m3leading to the machine precision accuracy for both the normal and tangential local error criteria within five augmentations. It should be mentioned that the inner loop of Newton–Raphson approach converges in only one iteration within each augmentation loop since the contact surface is priori known.The second case study is chosen to evaluate the performance of proposed computational algorithm in modeling of the frictional stick–slip behavior for a horizontal interface subjected to non-uniform compression. A square plate of1×1mcontaining a horizontal interface passing through the middle of the plate is modeled, as shown inFig. 12. The plate is subjected to a non-uniform vertical prescribed displacement ofuy=0.09x−0.1mand a uniform horizontal displacement ofux=0.05mon the top edge, while the bottom edge is restrained in both vertical and horizontal directions. In this study, two values of frictional coefficientμ(1)=0.1andμ(2)=0.4are employed to investigate the stick–slip behavior of the frictional interface. In both cases, the simulations are performed using three meshes considered in example 5.1, i.e. a structured uniform mesh of75×75quadrilateral elements, an unstructured ‘coarse’ mesh of 440 elements, and an unstructured ‘fine’ mesh of 3788 elements (see Fig. 5). For all numerical simulations, the normal and tangential penalty parameters are considered asϵN=ϵT=1×1010MN/m3, and the local error tolerance is set to1×10−12for both the normal and tangential directions.InFig. 13(a), the profiles of normal contact stress along the interface are plotted using three meshes for the frictional coefficientμ(1)=0.1. Also plotted in Fig. 13(b) are the evolutions of tangential relative displacement along the contact interface forμ(1)=0.1. A comparison is also performed with an available solution reported by Annavarapu et al. [37] using the Nitsche stabilized solution algorithm. Obviously, the results indicate a great agreement with those reported in [37]. Note that the structured mesh 1 requires no stabilization strategy to achieve a stable contact stress field since the element edges are aligned with the contact interface. However, the results of meshes 2 and 3 clearly indicate that the convergence is achieved in both normal and tangential directions notwithstanding the non-conformity of unstructured meshes to the contact interface. It must be noted that for the value of frictional coefficientμ(1)=0.1considered here, the frictional contact forces readily reach the slip limit along the entire length of the interface, so the contact interface is in slipping condition.The robustness of proposed augmented Lagrangian X-FEM algorithm is further illustrated in modeling of the mixed stick–slip condition along the contact interface when the frictional coefficient ofμ(2)=0.4is employed.Fig. 14 presents the evolutions of relative sliding together with the profiles of normal contact stress along the interface forμ(2)=0.4using three meshes. Since the computational approach presented in preceding sections treats the normal and tangential contact stresses in a decoupled manner, the profiles of normal contact stress obtained forμ(2)=0.4is basically identical to that obtained forμ(1)=0.1. However, two distinct regions of stick and slip behavior can be obviously distinguished according to results presented in Fig. 14. In the stick region, where the tangential contact stresses drop below the slip limit, no relative displacement occurs between the contacting boundaries, as shown in Fig. 14(a). As can be seen from the sticking region of Fig. 14(b), the frictional forces eventually reach the slip limit where the transition from sticking to slipping occurs. In the slipping region, the relative movement is allowed and the frictional stresses are obtained according to the Coulomb’s friction law between the contacting boundaries.The third case study is of an elastic square plate with an inclined crack at its center, as shown inFig. 15. The plate is1×1mthat contains a central crack of0.566mlength oriented atθ=π4, and is subjected to a uniform vertical displacement ofuy=−0.1mat the top edge while the bottom edge is fixed. The plate is modeled by a mesh of75×75quadrilateral elements. In order for the crack to not intersect with the FE nodal points, the crack tips are specified at coordinates of(0.29,0.28)and(0.72,0.71). The crack has a frictional behavior with the frictional coefficient ofμ=0.1. Due to the vertical displacement applied at the top edge, the crack faces may undergo relative tangential movement; however, it is assumed that the crack tips cannot propagate. This example is originally modeled by Dolbow et al. [15] and then simulated by Liu and Borja [18] using the standard penalty method.Fig. 16 displays the deformed configuration of the X-FEM mesh. Obviously, there is a tangential relative movement along the crack interface. InFig. 17, the contours of horizontal and vertical displacement fields are shown at the final stage of loading, which can be compared with those reported by Liu and Borja [18]. It should be mentioned that the numerical simulations are performed using the penalty numbersϵN=ϵT=1×1010MN/m3. In this way, the accuracy of machine precision was obtained for the local error criterion within only five augmentations, as opposed to the LATIN method which required in excess of one hundred iterations to achieve the desired level of accuracy [15]. The superiority of proposed computational algorithm comes forth on noting that the penalty method enforces the contact constraints only approximately while it requires nearly the same number of total iterations [18] with that required by the augmented Lagrange multiplies method. Note that since the Return mapping algorithm of the Coulomb’s rule is performed through the outer augmentation iterations, the inner solution phase is linear given the priori known contact surface and the Newton–Raphson iteration converges to machine precision in only one iteration within each augmentation loop.The last example is chosen to demonstrate the performance of proposed computational algorithm for a challenging problem, where a rectangular block with a wave-shaped frictional interface is modeled under shear loading, as shown inFig. 18. The wavy discontinuities in geological problems, such as natural joints, faults, flaws and bedding planes, are generally subjected to frictional contact condition. An appropriate modeling of such frictional discontinuities is of great importance in computational geosciences in order to efficiently assess the behavior of the cracked media [3,4]. In this example, a wave-shaped frictional interface embedded in a rectangular block of0.2mwide and0.1mhigh is modeled under pure shear loading by applying a horizontal displacement of3mmat the top edge while the bottom edge is fixed. The wave-shaped interface has a frictional behavior with the friction coefficient ofμ=0.25, and is characterized by a B-spline passing through the middle of the block with an amplitude of0.01m.The problem is modeled using three X-FEM meshes, as shown inFig. 19. In mesh 1, the edges of the elements through which the interface passes are intentionally aligned with the interface, which is called as the ‘aligned’ mesh. Because of the conformity of the ‘aligned’ mesh to the contact interface, no stabilization technique is required for this mesh to achieve a smooth contact stress field; that is, all the interface vertices are vital. However, meshes 2 and 3 consist of structured finite elements in which the contact interface passes through an arbitrary path within the elements, which are referred to mesh 2 as an ‘unaligned’ coarse mesh and to mesh 3 as an ‘unaligned’ fine mesh. In these ‘unaligned’ meshes, the wavy contact interface is defined by the straight line segments connecting two adjacent vital vertices of the interface. In all cases, the finite elements are refined in a vicinity of the interface path in order to achieve a smoother discretization of the curved contact surface. Nonetheless, the discretization of the curved interface results in a jump in the normal direction to the interface at each nodal point of the interface. Hence, the normal vectornis regularized at each nodal point of the interface asn=(ℓ1n1+ℓ2n2)/(ℓ1+ℓ2), in whichℓ1andℓ2refer to the length of two interface elements connected at that nodal point. The penalization parameters are chosen asϵN=ϵT=1×108MN/m3, and the local error indicator of1×10−10is obtained within a maximum of seven augmentations for all meshes. Although the contact interface is not priori known, the profiles of Newton iterations plotted inFig. 20 exhibit the asymptotic rate of quadratic convergence of the Newton method, such that the convergence is achieved in only four iterations for all X-FEM meshes. Note that the Newton algorithm converges in even less iterations within the subsequent augmentations since the contact surface obtained from the first augmentation makes the initial estimation of the contact surface quite close to the final solution. InFig. 21, the evolutions of normal opening displacement along the contact interface are plotted for three X-FEM meshes. As can be seen from this figure, the opening modes with traction free surfaces appear in roughly one-quarter of contact interface at the left and right regions, while the remaining zone at the middle of the interface is in direct frictional contact condition. Obviously, the normal opening displacement of the interface is nearly insensitive to the mesh refinement. Moreover, the results obtained by the ‘aligned’ and ‘unaligned’ X-FEM meshes are in great agreement, indicative of the robustness of proposed stabilized augmented Lagrange multipliers algorithm in modeling of curved contacting boundaries. InFig. 22, the contours of horizontal and vertical displacement are shown on the deformed configuration of the block for the ‘aligned’ X-FEM mesh, where an anti-symmetric response can be observed with respect to the contact interface.InFig. 23, a comparison of the normal contact stress is performed between the penalty X-FEM method and the augmented Lagrangian X-FEM technique. In Fig. 23(a), the evolution of normal contact stress is plotted using the standard penalty X-FEM method for the ‘aligned’ mesh. This graph is obtained using the normal penalty parameter ofkN=8×1010MN/m3to acquire a similar local convergence error ofηlocalaim=1×10−10, as considered for the augmented Lagrangian X-FEM technique. The integration of contact forces in the standard penalty method is performed using a two point Gauss quadrature rule for each interface element. Note that because of the conformity of the ‘aligned’ mesh to the interface, no special treatment is required in this mesh to achieve a stable contact stress field. However, the standard penalty X-FEM method results in severe oscillations in the normal contact stress field for the ‘aligned’ mesh (mesh 1), which is in opposition to the results reported in Fig. 23(b) using the augmented Lagrangian X-FEM technique for the ‘aligned’ and ‘unaligned’ X-FEM meshes. Indeed, the oscillations observed in Fig. 23(a) are mostly associated with the jump in normal direction to the curved interface at the interface nodal points. In this manner, the smooth contact stress profiles shown in Fig. 23(b) clearly indicate the robustness of the proposed augmented Lagrangian contact algorithm in X-FEM modeling of curved interfaces. It must also be noted that the slight oscillations observed in the contact stress field obtained from the augmented Lagrange multipliers method with the ‘unaligned’ meshes should not be considered as a major drawback since they do not affect the accuracy and convergence of the solution. Indeed, these oscillations emanate from the jump in normal direction to the interface and can be alleviated by refining the mesh, as can also be seen in Fig. 23(b).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
