@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A fast seed detection using local geometrical feature for automatic tracking of coronary arteries in CTA

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The seed points are detected for automatic coronary artery tracking from CCTA.The computational efficiency is improved using prior knowledge of vessel structure.Using proposed method, a particle filtering-based tracking algorithm is tested.ROC curve analysis shows the advantage of the proposed method.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Coronary computed tomographic angiography (CCTA),Coronary artery segmentation,Seed detection,Centerline tracking,ROC curve,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We propose a fast seed detection for automatic tracking of coronary arteries in coronary computed tomographic angiography (CCTA). To detect vessel regions, Hessian-based filtering is combined with a new local geometric feature that is based on the similarity of the consecutive cross-sections perpendicular to the vessel direction. It is in turn founded on the prior knowledge that a vessel segment is shaped like a cylinder in axial slices. To improve computational efficiency, an axial slice, which contains part of three main coronary arteries, is selected and regions of interest (ROIs) are extracted in the slice. Only for the voxels belonging to the ROIs, the proposed geometric feature is calculated. With the seed points, which are the centroids of the detected vessel regions, and their vessel directions, vessel tracking method can be used for artery extraction. Here a particle filtering-based tracking algorithm is tested. Using 19 clinical CCTA datasets, it is demonstrated that the proposed method detects seed points and can be used for full automatic coronary artery extraction. ROC (receiver operating characteristic) curve analysis shows the advantages of the proposed method.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
As a non-invasive technique for coronary artery imaging, coronary computed tomographic angiography (CCTA) has become a well-established method for the assessment of the heart disease, which is the leading cause of death in the USA [1]. It can provide not only anatomical information on the coronary arteries but also pathological information such as presence and extent of calcifications, plaque burden, stenoses and occlusions, which are useful in the diagnosis and treatment of coronary arteries diseases [2]. Three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction (i.e., segmentation and visualization) of the coronary arteries from CCTA would lead to higher accuracy and reproducibility in the diagnosis and to better precision in the quantification of severity of the coronary arteries diseases than two-dimensional (2D) angiography or 3D reconstitution using multiple 2D angiograms [3]. A robust centerline extraction of coronary arteries, especially three main coronary arteries (i.e., RCA, LAD, and LCX), is essential for the 3D reconstruction and post-processing tools such as curved multi-planar reformatted (MPR) images through the lumen of each coronary artery. Furthermore, it is also one of the prerequisite steps in subsequent analysis, such as detection of lesions [4] and image fusion [5,6].A significant amount of research has been done on the segmentation of vascular structures and of the coronary arteries in particular [7,8]. However, most of these vessel segmentation methods require user interaction: manual definition of the start and end points and vessel directions [9], or manual insertion of the intermediate points to bridge gaps [10–12]. Under these iterative segmentation methods, the accuracy of segmentation result is strongly dependent on the interaction from individual users. At the same time, a lack of reproducibility of the segmentation result is also a problem. A trade-off between robustness and automation has to be carried out whenever the segmentation algorithm is to be embedded in a commercial package for clinical applications. Moreover, a certain amount of interaction usually leads to the increment of the processing time.To overcome the above-mentioned difficulties, several approaches were proposed for automatically tracking the coronary arteries. Tek et al. [13] detected ostium locations on the surface of aorta and then started the multi-scale medialness-based vessel tracking from the ostium locations. Kitslaar et al. [14] first detected the aorta and the entire heart region and a region growing technique started in the aorta and stopped when it had reached coronary tree candidate components. Bauer et al. [15] presented an automatic approach that consists of generic methods for detection of tubular objects, extraction of their centerlines, and grouping of these centerlines into tree structures. Zambal et al. [16] calculated candidates for coronary artery seeds by approximating the position of the heart and then cylindrical sampling patterns were fitted for extracting the vessel tree of coronary arteries. Kitamura et al. [17] proposed a method to learn a classifier of a tubular 3D object with a dimension reduction approach using Hessian analysis. Zhou et al. [18] segmented the vascular structures within the heart region using a multi-scale coronary response and then tracked the coronary arteries by a 3D dynamic balloon tracking algorithm.Although these automatic methods tracked the centerlines of the coronary arteries, they did not take advantage of shape information of three main coronary arteries in CCTA as prior knowledge. In this paper, we propose a fast seed detection algorithm for fully automatic tracking of coronary arteries in CCTA based on the prior knowledge that the three main coronary arteries (i.e., RCA, LAD, and LCX) are running almost perpendicular to axial slices and appearing as circular cross-sections in the middle of the heart. We first select an axial slice through the middle of scan range. Vessels are usually seen as small brighter circles in the selected slice. In the slice, we extract regions of interest (ROIs) using the successive application of heart region detection, Sobel edge detection, morphological opening operation, contour tracing, and shape analysis. And then, we select the final seed points for coronary arteries and estimate the vessel direction at each seed point using Hessian-based vesselness filtering incorporated with a new local geometric feature.Frangi et al. [19] presented the Hessian-based vesselness filter, which measures the similarity to a tubular structure (F(x)) and obtains the vessel direction for each voxel. It has been widely used for the vessel enhancement in medical images. However, a major drawback of this filter is that the vesselness responses of voxels at the boundary of a non-vessel structure are as high as those of vessel voxels. Especially in CCTA, this response becomes more pronounced and may lead to a false extraction result, because cardiac chambers have similar CT density values to coronary arteries in CCTA [20]. To address this problem, Yang et al. [21] improved the Hessian-based vesselness filter using a local geometric feature (WF(x)), which is determined through ray-casting in a local sphere. However, their method requires connected component analysis, increasing the processing time. In this paper, we propose a new local geometric feature (GF(x)) by performing shape analysis of three continuous cross-sections, which are perpendicular to the vessel direction. The final seed points are determined as the centroids of individual detected vessel regions and the vessel direction at each seed point is obtained from eigenvectors of Hessian matrix at the voxel. Finally, with the detected seed points and their vessel direction vectors, a particle filtering-based tracking framework [9] is applied. Therefore, our proposed method can fully automatically extract the centerlines of the coronary arteries in CCTA.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
