@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Linking Tukey’s legacy to financial risk measurement

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We derive Value at Risk and expected shortfall for GTL-distributed random variables.GTL’s VaR and ES statistics differ significantly from other flexible distributions.We derive asymptotic properties of the ML estimator of the GTL parameters.We insert GTL and other flexible distributions in a GARCH model.A GTL-GARCH model may fit real data better than GARCH with other distributions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Generalized Tukey Lambda distribution,Skewness,Thick-tailed distribution,Maximum likelihood estimation,Asymptotic properties,Risk management,Value at Risk,Expected shortfall,GARCH model,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Financial data are often thick-tailed and exhibit skewness. The versatile Generalized Tukey Lambda (GTL) distribution is able to capture varying degrees of skewness in thin- or thick-tailed data. Such versatility makes the GTL distribution potentially useful in the area of financial risk measurement. Moreover, for GTL-distributed random variables, the familiar risk measures of Value at Risk (VaR) and Expected Shortfall (ES) may be expressed in simple analytical forms. It turns out that, both analytically and through Monte Carlo simulations, GTL’s VaR and ES differ significantly from other flexible distributions. The asymptotic properties of the maximum likelihood estimator of the GTL parameters are also examined. In order to study risk in financial data, the GTL distribution is inserted into a GARCH model. This GTL-GARCH model is estimated with data on daily returns of GE stock, demonstrating that, for certain data sets, GTL may capture risk measurements better than other distributions.11Online supplementary materials consist of appendices with proofs and additional Monte Carlo results, data used in this study, an R script for fitting GTL densities by maximum likelihood, and an R script for estimation of the GTL-GARCH model (see Appendix A).

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The global financial crisis of 2008–2009 was triggered by various factors. One of the primary culprits was the failure to correctly measure the risks of financial positions in many large firms (Lo, 2008). The inaccurate measurement of risk, together with a perverted incentive structure in the finance sector, led to the collapse of the housing mortgage market, triggering the global crisis and recession. Though many remedial legislative actions were taken after the crisis, an accurate and robust measurement of risk is still the striving goal of many in the business world. Thus, any new technique or model that may enhance the robustness of risk measurement will be a gain (Acharya et al., 2012; Brownless and Engle, in preparation).In finance, a risk measure is often used for specifying capital requirements in financial regulation (Francq and Zakoïan, 2010). Therefore, quantifying risk is crucial in financial risk management. Value-at-risk (VaR) and expected shortfall (ES) are the most widely used risk measures. Both of these are more accurate if the probability distribution used in the risk calculation matches closely to the true underlying data generating process. In particular, since these risk measures relate to the tail behavior, correct specification of the tail behavior is essential. Rachev et al. (2008) describe several desirable properties of an ideal risk measure. Given the multidimensional aspects of risk, they search for an ideal risk measure for a portfolio selection problem. Since the evidence on the skewness and kurtosis of financial time series data is well-documented (Engle and González-Rivera, 1991; Harvey and Siddique, 1999, 2000; Jondeau and Rockinger, 2003; Christoffersen et al., 2006; Grigoletto and Lisi, 2009), a robust risk measure should account for skewness and kurtosis in the data.There is an extensive literature on the estimation of VaR and ES, from fully parametric to semi-parametric and nonparametric approaches. The main advantage of the semi- and non-parametric approaches is that weak assumptions are imposed on the data generating process, but at the cost of more time-intensive estimation and lower efficiency (Bassett et al., 2004; Scaillet, 2004; Taylor, 2008a,b; Cai and Wang, 2008; Chen, 2008). Moreover and most importantly, as Komunjer (2007) points out, the difficulty of these approaches to risk measurement lies in their inability to estimate the expected shortfall variance. The parametric approach does not suffer from these issues, though it does require stronger assumptions about the data generating process: it imposes strong constraints on the shape of the density and, in particular, on tail behavior. For example, the familiar Student’stdistribution is often used to capture heavy tails, but is restricted by its symmetry; its extensions, i.e., the skewed-tand generalizedtdistributions, are able to capture skewness (Bali and Theodossiou, 2007; Hansen, 1994; Fernández and Steel, 1998; Branco and Dey, 2001; Azzalini and Capitanio, 2003). The generalized error distribution (GED) is known for its flexible tail decay property (Nelson, 1991); this symmetric distribution has been generalized in various ways to account for skewness as well (Fernández et al., 1995; Ayebo and Kozubowski, 2003; Komunjer, 2007). The generalized hyperbolic (GH) family of distributions is known for having semi-heavy tails that converge to zero more slowly than those of a normal distribution (Barndorff-Nielsen, 1977; Eberlein and Keller, 1995). Note that the literature contains various definitions for heavy tailedness (or fat-tailedness) (Embrechts et al., 1997; Sigman, 1999); also, see Barndorff-Nielsen and Shephard (2001) for a discussion on semi-heavy tailedness. One of the members of the GH family is the normal inverse gaussian (NIG) distribution, which has been used in financial applications where tails are not too heavy and skewness is evident (Barndorff-Nielsen, 1997; Eberlein and Keller, 1995; Eberlein et al., 1998; Prause, 1997, 1999; Rydberg, 1997; Lillestøl, 2000). However, estimation of the parameters of GH distributions is often hampered by the fact that maximum likelihood estimation typically requires very large sample sizes. Aas and Haff (2006) introduce the generalized hyperbolic skew Student’st-distribution to account for skewness.This paper explores the advantages of using the Generalized Tukey Lambda (GTL) distribution in financial risk measurement. The GTL distribution is a versatile distribution that is able to capture varying degrees of skewness in data that exhibit thick- or thin-tailed behavior. To the best of our knowledge, this distribution–the two-parameter version introduced by Pregibon (1980) and Freimer et al. (1988)–has never been applied to risk measurement. Very recently, the distribution was fitted to exchange rates in Corlu and Meterelliyoz (forthcoming) and Corlu and Corlu (forthcoming), and it is also used in binary choice modeling (Koenker and Yoon, 2009; Vijverberg and Vijverberg, forthcoming). A related extension of Tukey’s lambda distribution, known as the Generalized Lambda Distribution, did receive some attention in finance; see, for example, Corrado (2001), Tarsitano (2004), Chalabi et al. (2012), and Pfaff (2013). We contribute to the existing literature in the following ways. (i) We derive VaR and ES for a GTL-distributed random variable and compare them with those of other commonly used distributions. Since VaR and ES for GTL are available in closed form as functions of GTL parameters, numerical integration schemes are not needed. This is unlike some of the aforementioned distributions where the calculation of ES requires numerical integration, which may be difficult to implement successfully for particular parameter values. (ii) Whereas Su (2007) proposes the maximum likelihood estimator (MLE) of the GTL parameters only from an algorithmic perspective, we study the asymptotic properties of the MLE. In particular, we outline restrictions that must be placed on the range of the GTL parameters in order for the MLE to be consistent and asymptotically normal. These restrictions are inconsequential for the application of GTL in financial risk measurement, as they rule out members of the GTL family that have high truncated tails (e.g., the uniform distribution). (iii) We compare the relative risk measures of the GTL distribution with other distributions, first analytically in terms of skewness, kurtosis, VaR and ES, and then with an extensive Monte Carlo study in terms of the variability of VaR and ES. (iv) We show empirically that, for certain data sets, GTL may capture risk measures better than other distributions. We use GE stock to illustrate the performance of VaR and ES in a GARCH model of stock returns with GTL-distributed innovations and compare it to GARCH models based on the normal, skewed-t, skewed generalized error (SGE) and NIG distributions.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The characteristics of the GTL distribution will be discussed in Section  2.1. Section  2.2 develops the VaR and ES concepts under the GTL distribution. Section  3 addresses the maximum likelihood estimation of the GTL parameters. Section  4 inserts the GTL distribution into a GARCH(p,q) model. In reference to VaR and ES, Section  5 compares the GTL distribution with alternative distributions. Section  6 applies the GTL-GARCH(1, 1) model in a study of a financial time series and compares the estimates with GARCH(1, 1) estimates that rely on four other distributions. Section  7 concludes the paper.The Tukey-lambda distribution was introduced by Hastings et al. (1947) and Tukey (1960). Apart from a location and scale parameter, it relies on one parameter to generate distributions that vary in tail thickness. Pregibon (1980) and Freimer et al. (1988) generalized it as a two-parameter extension that also permits varying degrees of skewness. In its canonical form and following Pregibon’s notation, this Generalized Tukey Lambda (GTL) distribution is defined as follows.Definition 1ϵis GTL-distributed if, foru∈[0,1],(i)its link functionGis given by(1)ϵ=G(u;α,δ)=uα−δ−1α−δ−(1−u)α+δ−1α+δ,its cumulative distribution functionFis given byF=G−1, andwithu=G−1(ϵ;α,δ), its densityfis given by(2)f(ϵ)=∂G−1(ϵ)∂ϵ=1uα−δ−1+(1−u)α+δ−1.Freimer et al. (1988) present the link function asϵ=λ1+1λ2(uλ3−1λ3−(1−u)λ4−1λ4), and in this form, the distribution is known in the literature by the unwieldy name of GLD-FKML(λ1,λ2,λ3,λ4). Settingλ1=0,λ2=1,λ3=α−δ, andλ4=α+δyields Eq. (1).λ1andλ2are location and shape parameters that do not uniquely identify the distribution. The shape parametersλ3andλ4that do identify the distribution are difficult to interpret. On the other hand, the shape parametersαandδin Pregibon’s (1980) parameterization that is given in Eq. (1) are quite directly related to kurtosis and skewness, respectively. For these reasons, and because Pregibon was the first to propose this generalization of the Tukey-lambda distribution, we prefer to refer to the distribution as GTL(α,δ).The canonical form in Definition 1 is a natural and unique way of representing the GTL distribution. The canonical form of a distribution represents the essential functional form by which the distribution is characterized. Statistical distributions are often stated in a canonical form rather than in a standardized form; e.g.,t(ν), logistic,F(ν1,ν2),χ2(ν), Weibull. For example, letη∼χ2(ν).νis the shape parameter of the distribution, andE[η]=νandVar(η)=2ν. This also shows that, when the distribution is stated in a canonical form, the shape parameter may impact the moments of the distribution. A standardizedχ2(ν)-distributed variable follows directly:η̃=(2ν)−1/2(η−ν); the shape parameter is not impacted by this transformation but the mean equals 0 and the variance equals 1. Moreover, any general transformationr=τ1+τ2ηisχ2(ν)-distributed with a mean ofτ1+τ2νand a variance of2ντ22.The meanμϵand standard deviationσϵof a canonical GTL-distributedϵare functions ofαandδ:μϵ=−2δ/{(α−δ+1)(α+δ+1)}andσϵ2=Var(ϵ)=E[ϵ2]−E[ϵ]2, whereE[ϵ2]=2(λ1+1)(2λ1+1)−1λ1λ2(B(λ1+1,λ2+1)−1λ1+1−1λ2+1+1)+2(λ2+1)(2λ2+1), withλ1=α−δandλ2=α+δ, and whereB(⋅,⋅)is the Beta function. Whenα=δand/orα=−δ, l’Hôpital’s Rule may be applied to still compute a value forσϵ2; see Web Appendix A.μϵandσϵare not defined for all(α,δ)(see Lemma 1), which makes a general representation of a standardized GTL distribution infeasible. However, so long asμϵandσϵexist, a standardized GTL-distributed variableϵ̃is straightforwardly derived from a canonicalϵas(3)ϵ̃=ϵ−μϵσϵ.Similarly, a general GTL-distributed random variablerwith an arbitrary location and scale is a simple transformation of the canonical random variable:(4)r=τ1+τ2ϵ,whereτ1is a location parameter andτ2a scale parameter. Thus,E[r]=τ1+τ2μϵandVar(r)=τ22σϵ2, provided thatαandδare such thatμϵandσϵexist. For example, forα=−0.15andδ=0.30,ϵis canonical GTL-distributed with mean −0.95 and standard deviation 6.00.ϵ̃=(ϵ+0.95)/6is GTL-distributed with mean 0 and standard deviation 1. If in Eq. (4) we haveτ1=2andτ2=10,rhas a mean of −7.5 and a standard deviation of 60.Simulating random GTL variates is straightforward since the GTL distribution is formulated by way of a link function. Suppose thatrifori=1,…,nis to be distributed GTL(α,δ) with location parameterτ1and scale parameterτ2. To simulateri, letuibe uniform random variates on the interval[0,1]. Then,rifollows immediately from Eqs. (1) and (4).Information about the moments of the GTL(α,δ) distribution, the range ofϵthat is implied by the link function, and the behavior of the density function at the endpoints is provided in Lemmas 1–3.Lemma 1Thekth momentmkof a GTL(α,δ)-distributed random variableϵexists ifα−δ>−1kandα+δ>−1k, or stated otherwise, ifα>−1kand−α−1k<δ<α+1k.Lemma 2The range of a GTL(α,δ)-distributed random variableϵis[ϵL,ϵU], whereϵL=−1α−δifα−δ>0and=−∞ifα−δ≤0, andϵU=1α+δifα+δ>0and=∞ifα+δ≤0.Lemma 3(i)At the left endpoint,f(ϵL)>0ifα−δ≥1, andf(ϵL)=0ifα−δ<1. As for its slope,f′(ϵL)=0forα−δ<12;f′(ϵL)=12forα−δ=12; andf′(ϵL)=∞for12<α−δ<1.At the right endpoint,f(ϵU)>0ifα+δ≥1, andf(ϵU)=0ifα+δ<1. As for its slope,f′(ϵU)=0forα+δ<12;f′(ϵU)=−12forα+δ=12; andf′(ϵU)=−∞for12<α+δ<1.By Lemma 1, the mean ofϵ(m1≡μϵ) is defined only for parameter values for whichα>−1and−α−1<δ<α+1; the variancem2≡σϵ2exists only whenα>−12, and−α−12<δ<α+12; and so forth. In Fig. 1, these constraints are represented by the kinked lines: to the right of the line labeled M1 that intersects with the horizontal axis atα=−1,μϵis a finite number; to the leftμϵdoes not exist. Similarly, the variance is finite only to the right of the M2 line, and kurtosis is finite only to the right of the M4 line. Each moment has an asymptote of+∞or−∞at the boundary of its feasible parameter area. Thus, GTL(α,δ) provides a wide range of skewnessκ3ϵ≡m3σϵ3and kurtosisκ4ϵ≡m4σϵ4values:−∞<κ3ϵ<+∞, and1.75<κ4ϵ<+∞(Freimer et al., 1988, 3554).As a result of Lemma 2, we definef(ϵ)to equal 0 for allϵ∉[ϵL,ϵU]whenever the range is not infinite. For statistical reasons, we will focus on the parameter space ofα<12andα−12<δ<12−α; in Fig. 1 this area is found to the left of the gray line labeled AN. We shall see later (see Theorem 3) that this restriction is necessary to assert that parameter estimates are asymptotically normally distributed. Within this restricted parameter space, by Lemma 3, both the GTL density and its slope equal 0 at the endpoints; moreover,κ3ϵstill ranges from−∞to+∞, but the lowest value ofκ4ϵequals 2.08.With an appropriate selection of(α,δ), the GTL distribution can mimic distributions with widely varying degrees of skewness and kurtosis. For example, the normal distribution is closely approximated with(α,δ)=(0.1436,0);t(ν)distributions withv>1are approximated with−0.8416<α<0.1436andδ=0; and GTL(0.1422,0.2290) approximates the extreme value (or Gumbel) distribution (see  Vijverberg and Vijverberg, forthcoming).To illustrate the richness of the GTL distribution, Fig. 2shows two sets of GTL densities. For comparability, these densities are all standardized to have mean 0 and standard deviation 1. Whenδ=0, GTL densities are symmetric. The densities in Fig. 2(a) exhibit tails in increasing degrees of thickness due toαdecreasing from 0.45 (truncated tails) to −0.45 (thick tails). To get an idea of the tail thickness of these distributions, draws from a GTL(−0.15,0)tail beyond|ϵ̃|=4are 77 times more likely than draws from a standard normal distribution; draws from a GTL(−0.45,0)tail beyond|ϵ̃|=5are 4458 times more likely. Whenδ≠0, GTL densities are asymmetric: in Fig. 2(b), densities shift from symmetric to heavily left-skewed asδincreases from 0.00 to 0.45. As a reference, the GTL(0,0) density in Fig. 2(b) is the same as the logistic density in standardized form, which in turn is closely similar to at(ν)density withν=6.5.In order to avoid confusion, we note that GTL is distinct from the Generalized Lambda Distribution (GLD), another two-parameter extension designed by Ramberg and Schmeiser (1974). The GLD has received much more attention in the literature; for example, see Karian and Dudewicz (2000, 2011). One distinction between the GTL and GLD is that the logistic density is a special case of the GTL but can only be closely approximated by the GLD. Also, while GTL and GLD function specifications seem very similar, GTL and GLD parameter values that yield similar skewness in the approximated distributions differ substantially—and it is not clear that one family dominates the other in the closeness of the fit. Most importantly, the feasible parameter space of the GLD has gaps that are tedious to negotiate in the iterative search for the maximum likelihood estimates. To be specific, as demonstrated in Karian et al. (1996), the GLD is not defined in the following regions of the shape parametersλ3andλ4: (i)λ3≤0and0≤λ4≤1; (ii)−1≤λ3≤0andλ4>1and(1−λ3)1−λ3(λ4−1)λ4−1(λ4−λ3)λ3−λ4λ4≥−λ3; and (iii) symmetric regions relative to (i) and (ii) obtained by interchangingλ3andλ4. As a result, the feasible parameter space for(λ3,λ4)consists of four non-contiguous areas. Occasionally, the literature distinguishes the two extensions by the acronyms GLD-RS and GLD-FKML; we prefer the GTL label because the cousins are not brothers from the same family, as noted in Karian and Dudewicz (2000, p. 39).We will first summarize value at risk (VaR) and expected shortfall (ES) generically, in reference to both left and right tails, then homogenize the notation for statistical purposes, and finally apply these concepts to the GTL framework.Letrbe the percentage change in the value of the holding asset measured as the difference in the daily log price multiplied by 100, and letFbe the cumulative distribution function (CDF) ofr. Typically, VaR is defined as the smallest loss incurred with probabilityp, and ES is the average loss given a VaR violation. For firms with a long position, a drop in the price of an asset (i.e.,r<0) implies a loss. For them, VaR is computed through the implicit equationp=Prob(r≤VaR)=F(VaR), and ES is found asES=E[r|r≤VaR]. Holders of a long position are interested in the left tail of the CDF ofr. In contrast, holders of a short position are interested in the right tail of the CDF ofrbecause for them a rise in the price of an asset (i.e.,r>0) implies a loss. Thus, for them, VaR is defined throughp=Prob(r≥VaR)=1−F(VaR)or, restated, through1−p=F(VaR)for values ofpclose to 0. ES is defined asES=E[r|r≥VaR].The asymmetry in the definition of VaR in the left and right tail is inconvenient. Since VaR merely measures the quantile of a distribution, we modify the notation such that VaR is simply the quantile at probabilityp(i.e.,p=F(VaR)), noting that holders of long positions are interested inVaRforpclose to 0 and holders of short positions inVaRforpclose to 1.As shown in Lemma 4, the VaR of a GTL random variable can be straightforwardly computed.Lemma 4Letα−δ>−1andα+δ>−1. For a random variablerdefined asr=τ1+τ2ϵ, whereϵis distributed GTL(α,δ), the VaR ofr(i.e.,VaRr) equals(5)VaRr=τ1+τ2VaRϵfor a specificp,whereVaRϵcan be obtained from Eq.   (1)   by substitutingpforu.As for the expected shortfall of a GTL-distributed variable, we have the following theorem.Theorem 1Letα−δ>−1andα+δ>−1. For a random variablerdefined asr=τ1+τ2ϵ, whereϵis distributed GTL(α,δ), the expected shortfall equals(6)ESr=τ1+τ2ESϵfor a specificp,where for a givenpwithp≤0.5(a long position)(7)ESϵ=E(ϵ|ϵ≤VaRϵ)=−2δα2−δ2+pα−δ(α−δ)(α−δ+1)+(1−p)α+δ+1−1p(α+δ)(α+δ+1)and for a givenpwithp≥0.5(a short position)(8)ESϵ=E(ϵ|ϵ≥VaRϵ)=−2δα2−δ2+1−pα−δ+1(1−p)(α−δ)(α−δ+1)−(1−p)α+δ(α+δ)(α+δ+1),whereVaRϵ=VaRr−τ1τ2.The stated conditions (α−δ>−1andα+δ>−1) are necessary since the conditional expectations cannot be computed otherwise. In the case thatα=δand/orα=−δ, l’Hôpital’s rule must be applied to Eqs. (7) and (8). Specifically, forα=δ≠0, l’Hôpital’s rule yieldsE(ϵ|ϵ≤VaRϵ)=12α+lnp−1+(1−p)2α+1−12pα(2α+1),andE(ϵ|ϵ≥VaRϵ)=12α−p1−plnp−1−(1−p)2α2α(2α+1).Forα=−δ≠0, l’Hôpital’s rule yieldsE(ϵ|ϵ≤VaRϵ)=−12α+1−ppln(1−p)+1+p2α2α(2α+1),andE(ϵ|ϵ≥VaRϵ)=−12α−ln(1−p)+1−p2α+1−12(1−p)α(2α+1).Finally, forα=δ=0, l’Hôpital’s rule yieldsE(ϵ|ϵ≤VaRϵ)=1p(plnp+(1−p)ln(1−p)),andE(ϵ|ϵ≥VaRϵ)=−11−p(plnp+(1−p)ln(1−p)).To standardize a canonical GTL random variable, useτ2=1/σϵandτ1=−μϵ/σϵ, whereμϵandσϵare functions ofαandδas described in Section  2.1. A general GTL random variablermay be written in terms of a standardized GTL random variableϵ̃asr=μ+σϵ̃, such thatE[r]=μandVar(r)=σ2. Simple substitutions relate the VaR and ES ofrtoVaRϵandESϵ(see Lemma 4 and Eqs. (7) and (8)):VaRr=μ−σμϵσϵ+σσϵVaRϵandESr=μ−σμϵσϵ+σσϵESϵ.For a standardized GTL random variable, Table 1computes the VaR and ES for different values of(α,δ)for representative probability values, both for the long position (left tail) and the short position (right tail). The values of(α,δ)are selected such that they traverse inside the upper bounds (AN and M2) in the first and second quadrants of Fig. 1, with(α,δ)=(0,0)as a central reference point. GTL(α,δ)=(0,0)is the same as the logistic distribution, which is closely similar to at(ν)distribution withν=6.5.For various(α,δ)-combinations, Fig. 3shows expected shortfall over the full range ofp: to the left ofp=0.50, the expected shortfall is for holders of long positions; and to the right ofp=0.50, it is for holders of short positions. The effect of skewness(δ≠0)injects clear asymmetry; more negative values ofαincrease the expected shortfalls more sharply in the tails.As shown in Section  2.1, generating random variates from a GTL distribution with known parameters is straightforward. However, estimating the GTL parameters(τ1,τ2,α,δ)from a sample of data is more involved. The literature of statistical data analysis offers several methods to fit the GTL distribution (or its cousin, the GLD distribution) to data. Ramberg et al. (1979) propose to estimate the distribution’s parameters by the method of moments using the first four moments. Öztürk and Dale (1985) suggest a least squares estimation method. King and MacGillivray (1999) fit the GTL distribution to the data by the “starship” method, which is a computationally intensive grid-search, while Karian and Dudewicz (1999) and Su (2011) derive parameter estimates by quantile matching, and Karvanen and Nuutinen (2008) do the same from L-moments. Su (2007) proposes an algorithm that combines a random grid search with maximum likelihood estimation, but he only examines the bias and variance of this estimator by simulation—and in this simulation he uses parameter values for which asymptotic normality cannot be asserted according to Theorem 3. In the following, we describe the statistical properties of the maximum likelihood estimator, in both large-sample and small-sample contexts.To describe the maximum likelihood estimator (MLE), defineθ=(τ1,τ2,α,δ)′,λ1=α−δ, andλ2=α+δ. Letθ0denote the true parameter vector. Letr=(r1,…,rn)representndraws from a general GTL(θ0) distribution. The MLE estimatorθˆnmaximizes the following log-likelihood function:(9)Ln(θ;r)=−nlnτ2−∑i=1nlnG′(ui)=−nlnτ2−∑i=1nln(uiλ1−1+(1−ui)λ2−1)≡∑i=1nℓi(θ),whereui=G−1(1τ2(ri−τ1))andGis the link function defined in Eq. (1). Calculation of the ML estimate is computationally intensive because the log-likelihood function is highly nonlinear inθandG−1must be numerically evaluated since for general values ofαandδthe analytical inverse ofGdoes not exist.LetΘbe the parameter space. We assumeΘis compact; clearly, the scale parameterτ2must be positive and finite, but in order to establish large sample properties,Θmust be restricted further, as is indicated by the following two theorems, of which the proofs are provided in Appendix C.Theorem 2θˆnis a consistent estimator ofθ0for allθ0∈Θexcept for thoseθ0for which(α0,δ0)=(1,0)or(α0,δ0)=(2,0).Theorem 3LetΘbe the compact parameter set such thatτ2>0,λ1<12andλ2<12. Letθ0∈Θo, whereΘodenotes the interior of the compact parameter spaceΘ. Thenθˆnis asymptotically normally distributedN(θ,V0), where(10)V0=−(∑i=1n∇θθlnℓi(θ0))−1.In Theorem 2, the exceptions stem from the fact that the GTL density simplifies to a uniform density for both of the stated(α,δ)values. However, the exceptions are less problematic than they seem: in Theorem 3, not just one of these but both values are removed from the feasible parameter space. The reason for this is the following. Define the range ofϵasE(θ), which may depend on(α,δ)as was indicated in Section  2.1. Accordingly, let the range ofrbe given byR(θ), which isE(θ)shifted byτ1and scaled byτ2. The dependence ofR(θ)onθis usually problematic because proofs of asymptotic normality rely on the interchange of differentiation and integration, and the dependence of the bounds ofronθmay prevent that. In our case, provided thatλ1<12andλ2<12, the interchange of differentiation and integration is permitted (Lemma 7 in Web Appendix C).These conditions onλ1andλ2translate into restrictions onαandδ:(α,δ)must be such that−12+α<δ<12−α. In Fig. 1, this area is to the left of the gray kinked line that intersects the horizontal axis atα=12. By Lemma 3, this restriction implies that GTL densities with finite endpoints are feasible only if at the finite endpoint the density equals 0 and is tangent to the horizontal axis. (At an endpoint that is infinite, the GTL density always approaches the horizontal axis asymptotically.) Practically speaking, this implies that draws from feasible GTL distributions near the endpoint are rare; there is no probability mass at the endpoint. In estimation, we enforce this restriction with a mild regularity penalty function.GARCH models are commonly used to study the behavior of financial time series and to derive measures of risk associated with financial positions. In this section, we introduce GTL-distributed innovations into a GARCH model.Even if innovations are non-normally distributed, one could still assume, and fit a GARCH model with, a normal distribution. This Gaussian quasi MLE (QMLE) is consistent and asymptotically normal (White, 1982; Wooldridge, 2002), but it is unlikely to adequately account for the potential skewness and heavy-tailedness in financial time series data. Therefore, other flexible densities for the maximum likelihood estimation of conditionally heteroskedastic models have been considered in the literature. See, for example, Bollerslev (1987) for a model with thetdensity, Engle and González-Rivera (1991) with the gamma, Nelson (1991) with the generalized error, Hansen (1994) with the skewed-t, Liu and Brorsen (1995) with the stable, Harvey and Siddique (1999) with the non-central-t, Premaratne and Bera (2000) with the Pearson Type IV, Jondeau and Rockinger (2001) with the Gram–Charlier, Bai et al. (2003) with the normal mixture, and Komunjer (2007) with the asymmetric power density.We consider the following GTL-GARCH(p,q) process:(11)rt=μ+σtϵ̃t,(12)σt2=ω+∑i=1qηi(rt−i−μ)2+∑j=1pβjσt−j2,t∈Z={0,±1,…}whereω>0,ηi≥0fori=1,…,q,βj≥0forj=1,…,pare constants andϵ̃tis a standardized GTL(α,δ)random variable. Recently, Su (2015) describes regular and quantile regression of models with GTL or GLD disturbances, however without GARCH features. (The GLDreg package in R may be used for estimation of such models.) Here, note again thatαandδcontrol the shape (through tail-thickness and skewness, respectively) of the GTL density. The restrictions on the parameters are imposed to satisfy stationarity and invertibility conditions. Bougerol and Picard (1992) derive the necessary and sufficient condition for the existence of a unique non-anticipative strictly stationary solution for GARCH(p,q) process. Berkes et al. (2003, Lemma 2.3) show the further implications of this condition.Letξ=(μ,ω,η1,…,ηq,β1,…,βp)′∈(−∞,+∞)×(0,+∞)×[0,+∞)p+q. The parameter space for the nuisance parameters(α,δ)′is a compact subset ofR2. We will denote the full parameter vector(ξ′,α,δ)′withθ, which is an element of the parameter spaceΘ. Then, conditionally on initial valuesr̆0,…,r̆1−q,σ̆02,…,σ̆1−p2, the GTL-GARCH likelihood is written as(13)L̆n(θ)=∏t=1n1σ̆tg(ϵ̃t;θ),whereg(ϵ̃t;θ)=σϵ(utα−δ−1+(1−ut)α+δ−1)−1, withut=G−1(μϵ+σϵϵ̃t;α,δ), is the conditional density ofϵ̃t, and whereσ̆t2is the variance at timetcomputed from Eq. (12) conditional on those initial values. (Note thatG,μϵandσϵwere defined in Section  2.1.) The initial values for the estimation may be chosen as(r̆l−μ)2=σ̆k2=ω/(1−∑i=1qηi−∑j=1pβj)forl=0,…,(q−1)andk=0,…,(p−1), which is the long run variance of the GARCH process. Letℓ̆t≡(lng(ϵ̃t;θ)−12lnσ̆t2). The MLE ofθis defined as any measurable solutionθˆn=arg maxθ∈ΘlnL̆n(θ)=arg maxθ∈Θ∑t=1nℓ̆t.For the discussion of the large sample properties ofθˆn, let us defineA(z)=∑i=1qηiziandB(z)=1−∑j=1pβjzj, withA(z)=0ifq=0andB(z)=1ifp=0. Letθ0denote the true parameter vector. The following assumptions are needed to establish large sample properties ofθˆn.(A.1)ϵtis i.i.d. GTL(α,δ) withα>−12and−α−12<δ<α+12.(α0,δ0)≠(1,0)or(2,0).{rt}is strictly stationary atθ0, and∑j=1pβj<1for allθ∈Θ.Ifp>0,A(z)andB(z)have no common root,A(1)≠0,ηq+βp≠0.θ0∈Θ, andΘis compact.Furthermore, we have:(A.6)α>−14and−α+14<δ<α+14.α<12andα−12<δ<−α+12.J≡E(∂2lt(θ0)∂θ∂θ′)exists and is negative definite.θ0is contained in the interior ofΘ.Note that the main drawback of the MLEs employing non-Gaussian densities is that they are inconsistent under any distributional misspecification (Straumann, 2005, Theorem 6.2.1.), although such concerns should be lessened when the assumed distribution is highly flexible. Even so, QMLEs employing non-Gaussian distributions have recently received some attention. For example, Berkes and Horváth (2004) consider the QMLE with the Laplace distribution, and Fan et al. (2014) introduce the generalized non-Gaussian QMLE and establish its properties. However, these two estimators cannot account for skewness in financial time series. Recently, Zhu and Li (forthcoming) proposed a QMLE with the Pearson Type IV distribution to capture both skewness and heavy-tailedness. Along the same lines, the quasi maximum likelihood methodology employing the GTL density in the estimation of GARCH models can be further investigated. However, the conditions for the large sample properties of the non-Gaussian QMLE are tedious to derive and therefore we do not pursue this avenue here.When data give evidence of thick tails, researchers often specify a model with atdistribution. When data are skewed, popular alternatives are the skewed-t, skewed generalized error (SGE), and normal inverse gaussian (NIG) distributions. (See Web Appendix B for information on these distributions.) We now compare the GTL distribution with these alternatives, both analytically and by means of Monte Carlo experiments. Other alternatives, like the Hyperbolic and Generalized Hyperbolic distributions, were dropped from consideration as we encountered frequent convergence problems with these when data are thin-tailed.How much does GTL differ from popular alternative distributions? We examine differences according to five dimensions: the gap between the densities, and the difference in skewness, kurtosis, VaR, and ES. In this comparison, we limit the comparison to the set of GTL functions with finite fourth moments. In Fig. 1, this corresponds to values of(α,δ)between the M4-boundary and the AN-boundary; we include the boundaries in order to span the whole space. From this area, we select a dense diamond-shaped grid of 961 equidistant points such thatα−δ=−0.25,−0.225,−0.20…,0.50and the same forα+δ.(α,δ)-values within this area permit standardization, which facilitates the comparisons.For each of these 961 GTL densities, the gap with an alternative density is defined as follows. Let the standardized GTL(α,δ)density be denoted asf̃(ϵ̃;α,δ)and the density of the alternative distribution asg̃(ϵ̃;ζ). Relative tof̃, we find the closest-fittingg̃by minimizing theL1-norm of the difference of the two densities:(14)L1(f̃,g̃)=∫|f̃(ϵ̃;α,δ)−g̃(ϵ̃;ζ)|dϵ̃≡l(ζ;α,δ).As a practical matter, this integral is computed by numerical integration over the range of(−20,20), which is sufficiently wide given thatϵ̃is a standardized random variable. Note that another distance criterion is the Kullback–Leibler entropy measure, see Appendix D for a parallel analysis and a discussion of the relative merits of theL1-norm and the Kullback–Leibler measure. Here,L1is a distance measure: whenf̃(ϵ̃;α,δ)=g̃(ϵ̃;ζ)for allϵ̃, it follows thatL1(f̃,g̃)equals 0; on the other hand, any difference betweenf̃andg̃yieldsL1(f̃,g̃)>0. To interpret values ofL1, recall that the integral of eitherf̃(ϵ̃)org̃(ϵ̃)equals 1: thus, if for examplel(ζ;α,δ)=0.02, the total area of the gap between thef̃andg̃curves amounts to 2% of the area underneath either curve.In writingL1(f̃,g̃)≡l(ζ;α,δ), we express the idea that through the choice of(α,δ)the GTL density is given but thatζmay be chosen optimally so as to minimize the distance between the densities. For example, the normal density that is closest to a GTL(0,−0.15)density hasζ′=(μ,σ)=(−0.156,0.794)as its parameters. Similarly, optimal parameters are selected for every alternative density function. Thus, for GTL(0,−0.15), theL1values turn out to be equal to 0.1173 (normal), 0.1033 (t), 0.0393 (skewed-t), 0.0492 (SGE), and 0.0222 (NIG), such that NIG proves to be the closest-fitting density. But while forp=0.01andp=0.99GTL yields ES values of −2.06 and 4.40, NIG suggests ESs of −2.34 and 3.46: even the small gap between NIG and GTL yields sizeable errors in the computed VaR and ES. This process of calculating various measures (i.e., skewness, kurtosis, VaR and ES) for various distributions is repeated for all of the 961 selected GTL(α,δ)distributions.Table 2summarizes the 961 comparisons, starting off in Panel A with theL1norm. The minimum ofL1is nearly 0 for all distributions. This is because the(α,δ)-area contains the value(0.1436,0)with which GTL closely approximates the normal distributions, and all other distributions are able to fit normality closely (or perfectly) as well. In general, however, normal densities fit GTL densities poorly, and thetwith its thicker tails does not do well either because 930 of these 961 GTL densities exhibit skewness. Among the three distributions that are able to capture skewness, NIG fits the best over a large range of(α,δ)-values, with a median deviation of 0.0271, but it also yields some of the worst fits. The worst fits of the SGE are better than those of skewed-tand NIG.Panels B and C show the difference in the skewness (κ3) and kurtosis (κ4) statistics. As a reference,κ3,GTLranges from −4.85 to 4.85, andκ4,GTLranges from 2.08 to 87.89 (apart from a value ofκ4,GTL=∞for(α,δ)-values on the M4-boundary, which are therefore omitted from the description). Note that since the(α,δ)-area is symmetric around the horizontal (α) axis, the difference in skewness should be symmetric around 0. Variations of this in Panel B are due to numerical imprecision in the process of distribution fitting. The last row of each panel shows the correlation of the GTL statistic and the same statistic of the alternative distribution. Generally, the skewness and kurtosis of the skewed-t, SGE, and NIG correlates quite well with GTL’s, but stark differences in both skewness and kurtosis exist for some GTL configurations.The differences become more pronounced when we inspect VaR and ES values. Panels D and E describe the differences in the left tail atp=0.01; symmetry in the design produces the same descriptive right-tail values (with an opposite sign). Because the GTL distribution that each alternative is approximating is standardized, the units in which these VaR and ES differences are expressed are standard deviations of the potential underlying data. Thus, for example forp=0.01, the worst overstatement of the Value at Risk of the skewed-tdistribution equals 0.75 standard deviations; the worst understatement is 0.52 standard deviations; the Expected Shortfall for this long position varies from a 1.33 overstatement to a 0.95 understatement. While skewed-tyields larger overstatements than understatements, SGE and NIG show the opposite: relative to GTL, their understatements are worse than their overstatements. Thus, relative to GTL, skewed-tmay more often generate tails that are too thick, and SGE and NIG yield tails that are too thin (consistent with also Panel C).The direction and magnitudes of such errors depend on the skewness and kurtosis of the GTL data configuration. Detailed inspection of the results of the fitting exercise shows that the normal distribution produces the largest understatements of long (short) positions when the GTL distribution is thick-tailed and left- (right-)skewed. The magnitude of the errors is two or more standard deviations. For these same data configurations, symmetrictdistributions are estimated with thicker tails, which yield both an understatement of the risks of a short position and an overstatement in the case of a long position when the GTL distribution is left-skewed and vice versa when right-skewed. By accounting for skewness, the skewed-tdistribution is able to substantially reduce these errors; the largest errors still occur under thick-tailed GTL data configurations, where long (short) positions are overstated with left- (right-)skewed data. In contrast, SGE distributions can produce errors of several standard deviations for long (short) position with thick-tailed left (right-)skewed data; NIG distributions do so likewise. Data configurations with short tails consistently yield overstated ES values for NIG, regardless of skewness; the skewed-tdistribution typically overstates the long (short) ES when data are right- (left-)skewed. SGE is relatively closest to GTL when data configurations have short tails.Analytical differences may be outweighed by imprecision in the estimates. When these models are applied to data, the estimated VaR and ES may not be so different, even if in theory only one of the estimators is unbiased. On the other hand, analytical similarities may also be outweighed by precision: small biases may prove to be discernible and significant when estimates are precise. Thus, we ought to examine the bias also with a Monte Carlo analysis. We first generate data with the GTL distribution and fit each candidate distribution to these data. Then, we reverse the process and fit the GTL distribution to data generated by an alternative distribution. In each case, we focus our comparison on the risk measures of VaR and ES and ask whether VaR and ES of misspecified distributions–even if biased–are still reasonably accurate relative to those of a correctly specified model.In the Monte Carlo investigation, we select six cases with (α,δ)-values that maximize the variation between the experiments: (A)(−0.2,0.0)yields a heavy-tailed but symmetric distribution; (B)(−0.05,−0.15)implies fairly heavy, asymmetric tails; (C)(0.1,−0.3)generates strongly asymmetric tails; (D)(0.25,−0.15)yields thin (truncated), asymmetric tails; (E)(0.4,0.0)has symmetric, truncated tails; and (F)(0.1,0.0)is nearly the same as a normal distribution, which is symmetric. Similar to Section  5.1, these values are representative of the area in Fig. 1 between the M4 and AN boundaries. In these experiments, asymmetry is in the form of a right skew.To compare with GTL, we again select the following five distributions: the normal distribution, thetdistribution with a free degrees of freedom parameter, the skewed-t, SGE, and NIG. For each (α,δ), we generate 1000 data sets withn=1000standardized GTL draws according to Eq. (3). On each data set, we fit each distribution by means of the maximum likelihood estimator, and we calculate the respective estimated VaR and ES forp=0.01and 0.05 in the long position andp=0.95and 0.99 in the short position. The variation of the 1000 simulated values of VaR and ES for differentpprovides the information by which the performance of each distribution is evaluated.The GTL density is estimated with the optim package of the R programming software and a script to compute the log-likelihood function that is provided as an online supplementary resource (see Appendix A). For all other distributions, estimation was done with the rugarch package of the R programming software (Ghalanos, 2012). The NIG distribution proved to be difficult to estimate when data are short-tailed (α≥0.25) because such data are very incompatible with a NIG distribution. However, we also discovered that when the iterative search did not formally converge but did report the parameter vector at the final iteration, this parameter vector produced VaR and ES values that usually were no different in any meaningful statistical sense from other replications that did yield converged estimates. Thus, we compile summary statistics for all reported parameter vectors, whether replications formally converged or not. Another computational issue arose with respect to the calculation of ES: with the exception of the GTL distribution, this was done by means of numerical integration. We used the integrate function in the stats package of R to perform the numerical integration. For a few of the NIG estimates, this numerical integration failed. Such cases are omitted from the summary statistics in the tables that follow.To conserve space, Tables 3 and 4show abridged results forp=0.01, and 0.99 and cases A, C, and E, which represent the cases with the thickest tails (A), the most skewness (C), and the most truncated tails (E). Tables E.1 to E.4 of Web Appendix E provide the full summary of the simulation results for all six cases A–F. The first line in each panel records the analytical values of VaR and ES of the distribution that generated the data. For example, for(α,δ)=(−0.2,0.0)andp=0.01, the analytical VaR and ES values are −2.76 and −3.91. The remaining six rows of each panel characterize the distribution of the estimates of VaR and ES for each distributional specification, as evidenced in the 1000 simulated values. In particular, we report their average value under the heading of “mean” and their 5th, 25th, 50th, 75th, 95th percentiles (i.e., “P5”, “P25”, and so on; P25 and P75 are omitted from the abridged tables). These percentiles give more insight into the shape of the sampling distribution than the standard deviation that is commonly reported as a summary of Monte Carlo results. For each distribution, the difference between recorded mean and the analytical value represents bias. For example, for(α,δ)=(−0.2,0.0)andp=0.01, the normal distribution exhibits a bias in VaR of−2.32−(−2.76)=0.44. To illustrate the seriousness of the bias, we examine where the true analytical value falls within the range of simulated values: we add two superscripted stars (“**”) if the analytical value falls between P25 and P75, or one star if the analytical value is farther out in the tails between P5 and P25 or between P75 and P95. If no star is indicated, the analytical value falls outside the range from P5 to P95. This implies that the sampling distribution is hardly indicative of the analytical value, and the estimator under the stated distributional assumption proves to be decisively biased.Tables 3 and 4 indicate that maximum likelihood estimates of GTL-based VaR and ES are nearly unbiased for all(α,δ)for both long and short positions, but that other distributions yield biased estimates for some or all(α,δ). Specifically, for a long position withp=0.01, the normal distribution performs poorly in all cases, even when the data are generated with(α,δ)=(0.1,0.0)(see Table E.1), which supposedly is similar to normality. The symmetrictdistribution fails badly whenδis non-zero and the GTL-distributed data are skewed. The skewed-tdistribution handles skewness in the data better than thetdistribution but still exhibits substantial biases when data are symmetric with very short-tails(α,δ)=(0.4,0.0). The SGE distribution performs poorly when data have heavy tails(α,δ)=(−0.2,0.0)or are heavily skewed(α,δ)=(−0.05,−0.15)(see Table E.1) or(0.10,−0.30)but does well by comparison when tails are short(α,δ)=(0.4,0.0). The NIG distribution overestimates the VaR and ES when data are symmetric short-tailed(α,δ)=(0.4,0.0)and underestimates the ES of data with(α,δ)=(−0.2,0). Note that GTL, NIG, SGE and skewed-tuse four parameters; thetdistribution has three parameters, and the normal distribution has only two parameters. Even so, in the context of risk management, an underestimated (overestimated) ES implies an underestimated (overestimated) risk. Any kind of biased ES estimate is undesirable.Table 4 describes short positions withp=0.99. When the underlying distribution is symmetric (δ=0), results are similar to those in Table 3: once again, the other distributions fit poorly when tails are short. As for the asymmetric experiments (here,δ>0), skewed-t, SGE, and NIG overstate risk in the left tail and understate risk in the right tail. This suggests that GTL can model asymmetric thick tails better than the other distributions.As mentioned, we also compare the estimates of VaR and ES for all these distributions for the cases ofp=0.05and 0.95 (see Web Appendix E). In general, GTL-based estimates of VaR and ES outperform those of other distributions, and the VaR and ES biases become smaller as the value ofpmoves closer to 0.5.Skewness in the sampling distributions may be evaluated by comparing the distance from the median (P50) to the outlying percentiles. For example, for the normal-based sampling distribution of ES forp=0.01and(α,δ)=(−0.2,0.0), the distance between P25 and P50 equals 0.11 and that between P50 and P75 equals 0.07: this sampling distribution is left-skewed. The sampling distributions of normal- andt-based estimators show the most evidence of skewness, in particular when the GTL data are heavy-tailed and asymmetric.The differences between the various models are clearer when they are made visual. Fig. 4shows boxplots of ES values forp=0.01andp=0.99for all employed distributions with GTL-generated data. In Panel A, data are generated with GTL(−0.2,−0.025), which is thick-tailed and slightly right-skewed (κ3ϵ=0.85andκ4ϵ=35.5). The variation in the ES estimates is naturally quite large since, by definition, these estimates pertain to the conditional mean in the tail area. Given the analytical ES values of −3.59 and 4.23, the GTL-based estimator of ES clearly outperforms those based on other distributions. Among the distributions that accommodate skewness, SGE and NIG have tighter confidence intervals than skewed-t, but they also understate ES in both tails. The interval of skewed-tis about as wide as that of GTL, but it overstates ES. The normal distribution is way off, andtis not as accurate as skewed-tbecause of the skewness in the data generating process. Data in Panel B are generated with GTL(0.1,−0.3), which is heavily right-skewed (κ3ϵ=2.87). Its left tail is truncated at −1.517 and its right tail stretches to infinity, leading to a high kurtosis value (κ4ϵ=35.4). The left truncation yields a precisely estimated long ES, which NIG approximates well; SGE and Skewed-tyield long ES values beyond the truncation point. GTL estimates of short ES values in the extended right tail of the right-skewed GTL(0.1,−0.3)distribution are estimated with substantial imprecision, but all distributions other than GTL yield serious errors in estimating the short ES.This comparison of GTL with other distributions highlights the differences between the various distributions. The results indicate that, for certain data sets, GTL can capture VaR and ES more precisely than other distributions.One may contend that using GTL in the data generating process and fitting alternative distributions gives an unfair advantage to the GTL model. Therefore, we now reverse the process: we use one of the other distributions (skewed-t, SGE, or NIG) in the data generating process and compare the fit of GTL and this other distribution in terms of VaR and ES. Providing further structure to this comparison, we again use the previous section’s six cases, which show tails of various thickness both with and without skewness. For example, consider the skewed-tdistribution. It is already clear from the tables above that for some(α,δ)skewed-tis unable to represent GTL-generated data accurately. Then, suppose instead that the data are actually generated with a skewed-tdistribution: is the GTL family of densities flexible enough to measure this skewed-tdistribution’s VaR and ES well enough?Therefore, we find six skewed-tdensitiesg̃(ϵ̃;ζ)that, measured by theL1-norm, best represent the six GTL densitiesf̃(ϵ̃;α,δ)(as in Eq. (14) in Section  5.1); this yields six parameter vectorsζ. We then use skewed-tdistributions represented by the sixζs in the data generating process. We do the same for SGE and NIG.For clarity, Fig. 5shows the results in graphical form only for cases A, C and E; Tables E.6, E.8, and E.10 of Web Appendix E contain the detailed statistics for the three distributions that generate the data in these scenarios. (Other tables in this Appendix contain similar statistics forp=0.05andp=0.95.) With three cases and with data generated by three distributions (skewed-t, SGE, and NIG), this generates nine scenarios. For each scenario, Panel A shows five different percentile values (i.e., P5, P25, etc.) of VaR forp=0.01andp=0.99estimated under the erroneous assumption that the distribution is GTL, as well as the true (analytical) VaR which is represented by a solid dot. Panel B does the same for ES. If the solid dot falls between the two squares, the analytical value falls between the 25th and 75th percentile of the estimated GTL values and the distributional misspecification bias is quite unimportant; if the solid dot falls between a square and a circle, the analytical value falls between the 5th and 25th (or between the 75th and 95th) percentiles of the estimated GTL values and the bias is becoming more substantial; and if the solid dot falls outside the circles, the analytical value falls in the tails of the estimated GTL values and the bias is serious. The latter situation never happens. In fact, the analytical value often falls between the 25th and 75th percentile.In particular, when fitting skewed-tdata with the GTL and considering all six cases A–F, the analytical values fall between the 25th and 75th percentile in 20 of the 24 scenarios (i.e., across six cases;p=0.01and 0.99; and VaR and ES). For the other four scenarios, the analytical values fall between the 5th and 25th percentile. When data are generated with SGE, there are only three scenarios where the analytical values fall between the 5th and 25th percentile; all the others capture the true analytical values in the 25th–75th percentile range. Finally, when NIG generates the underlying data, there are two scenarios where the analytical values of ES forp=0.99fall between the 5th and 25th percentile range; in all other scenarios, the true analytical values fall comfortably in the 25th and 75th percentile range. Thus, in general, the bias in GTL’s VaR and ES is small in most scenarios. By implication, if the true distribution of the data generating process is unknown, we may have confidence that the GTL distribution can represent this unknown distribution fairly well.To demonstrate that, for certain data sets, the GTL may capture risk measurement better than other distributions, we test our GTL-GARCH model empirically using daily data on the stock price of GE from the yahoo.com historical price section. These data begin on 8 May 2000 (right after a stock split) and continue until 31 December 2012.GE’s rate of return is calculated as the daily log price difference, multiplied by 100. The first column of Table 5shows the descriptive statistics of these returns. This series has heavy tails, illustrated by a large kurtosis value: 10.664.These data exhibit distinct GARCH-type fluctuations. Thus, Section  6.1 reports the estimates of a GTL-GARCH(1, 1) model. We use the whole sample period to estimate the parameters of the model and to examine the corresponding VaR and ES. As for out-of-sample forecasting (Section  6.2), we use a rolling window scheme for parameter estimation. The window is set to 1500 observations. We then calculate one-step ahead forecasts of VaR and ES. We estimate the model by assuming that the error terms are GTL, normal, skewed-t, NIG, or SGE; we omit estimation of models with thetdistribution as skewed-tneststand performed better thantin the simulations reported in Section  5. In each case, we do VaR and ES tests to check the validity of the distribution’s representation of the tails.For our application, we specify a simple GTL-GARCH(1, 1) model. In order to determine the proper lag lengths, we explored alternative GARCH models under a MLE scheme with normal and skewed-tdistributions. The third-order parameter of a GARCH(1, 3) model is marginally significant only with skewed-tdisturbances, and the second-order parameter (βˆ2) of either a GARCH(1, 3) or GARCH(1, 2) model is tiny (less than 0.0001) and never statistically significant. Moreover, the Akaike Information Criterion is lowest for a GARCH(1, 1) model. We also examined the assumption that the mean is constant rather than an AR(1) process. This assumption proved to be clearly appropriate for these data; moreover, the other parameters are stable relative to the inclusion or exclusion of an autoregressive structure in the mean. Thus, we adopt a GTL-GARCH(1, 1) model.The GTL-GARCH model is estimated with the optim package of the R programming software and a script to compute the log-likelihood function that is provided as an online supplementary resource (see Appendix A). The estimates are given in Table 6. In regard to the GARCH parameters, the estimate of the persistence parameterβis 0.942, andηˆis quite small. The estimate ofαis −0.218. Since an approximately normal GTL distribution requires(α,δ)=(0.1436,0), the estimated GTL distribution is decidedly non-normal. The estimate ofδis insignificantly different from 0, indicating a symmetric distribution.Ifaˆt=rt−μˆdenotes residuals,ϵ̃ˆt=aˆt/σˆtrepresents standardized residuals that are asymptotically i.i.d. The second column of Table 5 provides descriptive statistics ofϵ̃ˆ. The sample mean ofϵ̃ˆis closer to zero than that ofr, and its standard deviation falls short of 1, which means that the estimatedσtˆusually overcorrects. The GARCH(1, 1) transformation removes some of the kurtosis from the data and, at the same time, adds skewness to the data: the distribution ofϵ̃ˆhas a lower kurtosis, but a slightly higher skewness, than the distribution ofr. Yet,ϵ̃ˆremains more thick-tailed than normality, which parallels the finding that GTL’s (αˆ,δˆ) deviate from (0.1436,0), which represents an approximately normal distribution. On the other hand, a Kolmogorov–Smirnov test yields ap-value of 0.185 and does not reject the GTL distribution.Table 6 also reports several implied results.σˆ̄measures the “long-term” standard deviation of the disturbances, computed as the average ofσˆtover the entire sample period. In addition to this long-term volatility(σˆ̄), the table also reports long-term VaR and ES values of daily returns for a long position(p=0.05)and a short position(p=0.95). Relative tail thickness may be measured byT=|ES−VaR|/σˆ̄, which expresses the ES-VaR distance in standard deviations. Because of skewness,Tdiffers between the left and right tail. Left- and right-tail values ofTare 0.883 and 0.849. Thus, the tails of GE stock returns are almost symmetric:Ttranslates the variations in (αˆ,δˆ) into terms relevant for financial risk management.With these estimates, we are also able to compute dynamic VaR and ES values over the length of the sample. In Fig. 6, the top panel shows ES of a short position withp=0.95; the bottom panel shows the same for a long position withp=0.05. The financial crisis in 2008 had an obvious impact on these variables.We now turn to the out-of-sample performance of the GTL-GARCH model in comparison with GARCH models that are based on other distributions (normal, skewed-t, NIG and SGE). We use a rolling window scheme for parameter estimation. The length of the estimation window is set to 1500 observations. After we obtain the estimates, we calculate one-step-ahead forecasts of VaR and ES, which form the basis of our evaluation of the suitability of each distribution: thus, we have 1594 forecasts in the case of GE.To aid in this evaluation, Table 7reports three summary statistics and five test results for each distribution and for each long (pequal to 0.01 and 0.05) and short (pequal to 0.90 and 0.95) position. “mu.VaR” and “mu.ES” are the averages of these one-step-ahead forecasted VaR and ES values. “cv” represents the coverage ratio, indicating the frequency of VaR violations for a givenp: this frequency should be close topfor a long position and1−pfor a short position, if the innovation distribution is assumed correctly.As for the test statistics, we report thep-values of the tests only: lowp-values indicate that the specified distribution offers a poor fit of the data. To evaluate VaR forecasts, we implement the unconditional coverage test (Kupiec, 1995) and the conditional coverage ratio test (Christoffersen et al., 2001). The unconditional coverage test assumes that the number of exceedances of the VaR value follows a binomial distribution. Under the null hypothesis of a correctly specified model, the assumed probability (p) of exceedance should be consistent with the estimated exceedance under the binomial process. This test, however, ignores the fact that exceedances in a binomial process are assumed to be independent, which is a testable assumption. Accordingly, the conditional coverage test examines the frequency of the exceedances as well as their independence jointly. In the tables, thep-values of these two tests are denoted as p.uc and p.cc respectively.To evaluate ES forecasts, the test of McNeil and Frey (2000) evaluates the mean of the shortfall violations, which should be equal to the mean of the specified distribution under the null hypothesis when the model is correctly specified. Thep-value of this test is denoted as p.MF. We also implement both unconditional and conditional Berkowitz tests. Diebold et al. (1998) showed that, under a given hypothesized distribution, the forecasted ES values may be converted into draws from a uniform distribution on the[0,1]interval that should be independently and identically distributed if the underlying distribution is correctly hypothesized. Berkowitz (2001) went a step further by transforming these uniformly distributed values with the inverse of standard normal distribution. If the hypothesized distribution coincides with the true underlying distribution, then the transformed values should be independently and identically standard normal. Here, the unconditional Berkowitz test focuses on the overall shape of the distribution, whereas the conditional test evaluates the performance in the tails. Theirp-values are denoted as p.Bu and p.Bc, respectively.The results in Table 7 show that GTL performs relatively well in the coverage ratio, compared to other distributions. When the tail region is 1% (i.e.,p=0.01andp=0.99), VaR tests represented by p.uc and p.cc indicate that normal distribution does not fit GE data well for both left and right tails; SGE barely fits the right tail at the 5% significance level (i.e.,p.uc=0.061). For the tail region of 5% (i.e.,p=0.05andp=0.95), VaR tests show that skewed-tand NIG do not fit the data on the left tail; while all distributions fit GE data well in the right tail. As for the ES tests, all three tests indicate that the normal distribution does not fit the data well in both right and left tails, regardless of the tail region. Of these three tests, p.Bc tends to find lowerp-values for various distributions. When the tail region is 1%, for the left tail of the GE data, normal and SGE do not fit and NIG barely fits the data at the 5% significance level; for the right tail of the GE data, GTL and SGE barely fit at 5% significance level. In the case of 5% tail region, none, except GTL, fits GE data well on the left; both normal and SGE do not fit the data on the right. Thus, for GE, based on these different evaluation measures, the overall performance of GTL is relatively most satisfactory.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
