@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Lessons learned from the implementation of remote control for the interoperability standard ISO/IEEE11073-20601 in a standard weighing scale

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The authors are working on a remote command and control extension package for the X73PHD stack.The extension package allows the manager to remotely modify agent's settings.A proof-of-concept implementation of this extension package applied to a X73-10415 compliant agent is presented.The proof-of-concept shows the implications in terms of footprint and development time.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Extension package,Remote control,Interoperability,ISO/IEEE11073,Standard,Personal health device (PHD),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The Point of Care (PoC) version of the interoperability standard ISO/IEEE11073 (X73) provided a mechanism to control remotely agents through documents X73-10201 and X73-20301. The newer version of X73 oriented to Personal Health Devices (PHD) has no mechanisms to do such a thing. The authors are working toward a common proposal with the PHD Working Group (PHD-WG) in order to adapt the remote control capabilities from X73PoC to X73PHD. However, this theoretical adaptation has to be implemented and tested to evaluate whether or not its inclusion entails an acceptable overhead and extra cost. Such proof-of-concept assessment is the main objective of this paper. For the sake of simplicity, a weighing scale with a configurable operation was chosen as use case. First, in a previous stage of the research – the model was defined. Second, the implementation methodology – both in terms of hardware and software – was defined and executed. Third, an evaluation methodology to test the remote control features was defined. Then, a thorough comparison between a weighing scale with and without remote control was performed. The results obtained indicate that, when implementing remote control in a weighing scale, the relative weight of such feature represents an overhead of as much as 53%, whereas the number of Implementation Conformance Statements (ICSs) to be satisfied by the manufacturer represent as much as 34% regarding the implementation without remote control. The new feature facilitates remote control of PHDs but, at the same time, increases overhead and costs, and, therefore, manufacturers need to weigh this trade-off. As a conclusion, this proof-of-concept helps in fostering the evolution of the remote control proposal to extend X73PHD and promotes its inclusion as part of the standard, as well as it illustrates the methodological steps for its extrapolation to other specializations.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Technological advances in clinical environments during the last decades have led to the development of a variety of medical devices at the Point of Care (PoC) [1–4]. Most manufacturers developed medical devices with proprietary hardware and software solutions for the acquisition of data related to different pathologies. This heterogeneity however, led to compatibility and interoperability issues, largely due to the different models of communication implemented by each manufacturer [5,6]. Hence, the ISO/IEEE11073 family of standards (also referred to as X73) was initially defined to enable the interoperable exchange of vital signs between medical devices (agents) and central equipment (managers) at the PoC (X73PoC) [7–9].More recently, the increase of people in adulthood who are requiring homecare as well as the recent advances in the development of medical devices – which opened the way for the integration of wireless technologies into medical devices – have fostered the spread of new personal health environments. Likewise, the personal health device (PHD) market was initially promoted by different manufacturers, causing a lack of interoperability. Therefore, it was necessary to develop standards that allowed interoperability between PHDs. The standardization effort driven by the Personal Health Device Working Group (PHD-WG) [10] brought many improvements to the ISO/IEEE11073 set of standards, such as an adaptation for Personal Health Devices (also referred to as X73PHD) [11,12]. This new version is mainly defined within the Optimized Exchange Protocol (ISO/IEEE11073-20601) and the pertinent device specializations (ISO/IEEE11073-104xx).The scope of X73PHD covers areas such as health and fitness monitoring, independent living, and disease management. Traditionally, X73PHD-compliant devices were designed as simple pieces of equipment requiring little, if any, configuration. Currently, new scenarios demanding wide-ranging configuration options for devices have been introduced in the X73 ecosystem. Some examples are the Basic Electrocardiograph (X73-10406), the Sleep Apnea Breathing Therapy Equipment (X73-10424), and the Medication Monitor (X73-10472) specializations. These novel use cases expose the requirement of a service for configuration and remote control, which would allow modifying PHD parameters remotely [13]. In existing scenarios – such as e.g. home telemonitoring – remote control and configuration could improve the performance and usefulness of agents, by adjusting their parameters as a function of the dynamics of the patient's condition. Additionally, this could also extend the scope of X73PHD to other scenarios like sports, where PHDs could monitor the performance of athletes and, at the same time, receive orders on how to modify the desired parameters by remote control for each agent in particular. The possibilities that command and control offers could help to decrease costs associated to traditional telemedicine systems (e.g. when agents need a specialist to reconfigure them, remote command and control functionalities may help to decrease costs by avoiding the need of time to travel to the locations where the agent is operating).To include remote control features, the X73PoC standardization group developed a communication profile (IEEE P11073-20301) to allow remote configuration of X73PoC agents. Several definitions of this drafted profile were already included in the ISO/IEEE 11073-10201 document. However, given that the X73PoC standard does not cover the needs of PHDs, there has been effort aimed at integrating remote control and command into PHDs [14,15]. In [14], a meta-model for describing medical devices and a communication protocol enabling remote control is proposed. In [15], a mobile transport vehicle implementing an ISO/IEEE 11073-20601 compliant communication interface is designed and the remote set features (which are not fully supported in ISO/IEEE 11073-20601) are discussed. However, none of these proposals above has been integrated into the X73PHD family, possibly because such proposals were not presented to, nor discussed with, the PHD-WG, which would have helped them to reach enough maturity, or because there was not enough consensus to continue the process. Therefore, it is highly convenient to work with the support of the PHD-WG.During the last months, the authors have been working along with the PHD-WG in order to fully integrate remote control into the X73PHD family. The current proposal is an adaptation of the previously developed documents X73-10201 and X73-20301 of X73PoC version to the X73PHD version of the standard. The PoC devices were usually connected to the power line and therefore could implement heavy processing routines without battery drainage. This is not the case of PHD devices, which are usually powered by batteries. To that end, it is necessary to systematically examine the process and ensure that its implementation does not entail an unacceptable extra processing load. Such situation may discourage manufacturers from implementing the command and control feature, in view of the changes that it would require (such as, for instance, the microcontroller used, the battery capacity, etc.). A command and control implementation with an assumable processing load should stay within the same order of magnitude as current implementations of the X73PHD stack – which do not implement remote control. Thus, as mentioned above, the authors are working actively toward a common proposal along with the PHD-WG [13]. This proposal is based on a study on remote-control-related use cases, which helped in identifying the requirements [16]. Based on those requirements, the authors have drafted a new remote control package that was initially presented to the PHD-WG, and continues its evolution to publication [17,18]. Before the final publication, it is important to thoroughly test and evaluate the command and control proposal by implementing some of the use cases requiring remote control functionalities. Hence, members of the PHD-WG and other external researchers should be able to reproduce the results, which would allow checking that the additions to the standard are properly defined and detecting possible open points to discuss within the PHD-WG. Moreover, the implementation offers the possibility of making interoperability tests, connecting our agent to other manager implementations or vice versa. Therefore, this paper presents the development and evaluation of the proposed command and control package applied to a weighing scale (ISO/IEEE11073-10415) as a proof of concept. The remote control use case consists of being able to change its units of measure from kilograms to pounds and vice versa directly from the manager, which could be, for example, a smartphone in personal health scenarios or a compute engine in nursing units. The evaluation is based on the impact that the implementation of remote control features would have on developers and devices – protocol overhead, bandwidth, etc. – as well as on manufacturers – this impact will be measured in terms of the number of statements a manufacturer declares on a specific agent by means of Implementation Conformance Statements (ICSs), which are a form of data sheets that disclose details of a specific implementation and specify the features provided by the device.This paper is organized as follows: first of all, the methodology (Section 2) covers three different methodological aspects, namely, the theoretical methodology (Section 2.1), the implementation methodology (Section 2.2), and the evaluation methodology (Section 2.3). Secondly, the results of implementing and evaluating the theoretical proposal – in terms of X73PHD protocol overhead and ICSs – are shown in Section 3.1 number of noteworthy points arising from the implementation of this proposal – along with future lines related to this proposal – are discussed in Section 4. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section 5. It is worth noting that the kernel of the theoretical proposal (Section 2.1) was already presented in [17], but this manuscript describes it more thoroughly, so that readers can benefit from an overall approach to the problem. The implementation and the evaluation of the proposal – that is to say, the remaining of the methodology section, as well as the results and the discussion sections – are published herein for the first time.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
