@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Nonlinear finite element modeling of reinforced masonry shear walls for bidirectional loading response

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We used nonlinear finite element approach to model the bidirectional behavior of reinforced masonry.3D finite element models were used for this purpose for the first time.The finite element models were correlated with the experimental results.Out-of-plane drifts reduce the in-plane capacity of masonry shear walls.This is not addressed by any of the existing masonry design codes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Finite element,Nonlinear analysis,Masonry,Shear wall,Bidirectional,Parametric study,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The objective of this paper is to analytically establish the effects of bidirectional loading on the response of reinforced masonry shear walls. To accomplish this, an efficient nonlinear 3D finite element modeling approach was used and proved capable of simulating the capacity (within 10%), failure modes and hysteretic response of both partially-grouted (PG) and fully-grouted (FG) masonry shear walls. This modeling approach was also validated for the prediction of out-of-plane response, and then used to examine the influence of bi-directional loading through a series of parametric studies with out-of-plane drift, wall aspect ratio and vertical stress as variables. Results from this study indicate that out-of-plane drifts corresponding to the collapse prevention limit state reduce the in-plane capacity of PG walls by more than 20%. Further, this study indicates that the sensitivity to out-of-plane drift is increased as the aspect ratio increases and as the vertical stress decreases. Although the capacity of PG walls is influenced by out-of-plane drifts, their hysteretic responses, and in particular, energy dissipation capacities as well as their ductility remain nearly unchanged. As a result, the seismic response of PG masonry walls is likely nominally affected by bi-directional ground motions.Damage variable in compression (0<dc<1)Damage variable in tension (0<dt<1)Un-damaged modulus of elasticity, MPa (psi)Tensile strength of masonry, MPa (psi)Dilation angle, degreesBidirectional compressive strength of masonry, MPa (psi)Unidirectional compressive strength of masonry, MPa (psi)Modulus of elasticity for masonry, MPa (psi)Effective wall height equivalent for an equivalent fixed-fixed boundary condition, mm (in.)Length of masonry wall, mm (in.)

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Since the mid-20th century, contemporary reinforced masonry bearing wall buildings have been constructed throughout the U.S. and they currently represent a large share of the U.S. building stock. While such systems are generally considered to provide good seismic performance, there are significant knowledge gaps related to their seismic behavior.Although, numerous research programs have been conducted on Finite Element (FE) modeling techniques for masonry, the literature lacks a practical modeling approach for block masonry which can be used to investigate the three dimensional behavior of masonry shear walls, including the influence of bidirectional loading.Many models with discrete or smeared distribution of nonlinearities have been proposed by the past research for modeling of both reinforced and unreinforced masonry in which the masonry constituent materials (block, mortar, grout, and reinforcement) can be modeled explicitly or as smeared materials.Ewing et al. [1], Lourenco and Rots [2], and Zhuge and Thambiratnam [3] suggested smeared constituent materials with smeared nonlinearities for masonry. In these models different formulations for a smeared material called “masonry” is proposed. Lotfi and Shing [4], also, developed a model in which the constituent materials are modeled explicitly with smeared nonlinearities. Zhuge and Hunt [5], Casolo and Petrini [6], and Shing et al. [7] suggested discrete models for masonry in which rigid bodies are connected using nonlinear springs simulating nonlinear properties of mortar joints. The most accurate, yet very time consuming approach to model masonry is using discrete distribution of nonlinearities for explicit constituent material properties. In this approach mortar, blocks and their interfaces are characterized separately by adopting suitable constitutive laws for each component, which take into account their different mechanical behavior. Sutcliffe et al. [8], Sayed-Ahmed and Shrive [9], Shing et al. [10], Lourenco [11], and Gambarotta and Lagomarsino [12] have suggested different models for masonry using this approach.None of the abovementioned models have addressed the three dimensional behavior of block masonry. To bridge this knowledge gap, a new approach in which the properties of masonry blocks and mortar joints are smeared but grout and reinforcement are modeled explicitly is presented in this paper. Moreover, the geometry of the block is modeled in three dimensions using shell elements. As it will be described later in this paper, the model is evaluated for its linear response, and then its nonlinear response is correlated with the experimental results from the past research. For this purpose, the experimental results used for correlation of the analytical model are presented herein.Fig. 1 illustrates the flowchart for this approach.The major structural elements of a load-bearing building are the load bearing walls, the floors and roofs, and the foundation. To date, several simplifying assumptions have been employed for convenience when designing such buildings under seismic loads. These include (1) the assumption that the ground motion is unidirectional, (2) that the in-plane and out-of-plane behavior of walls are uncoupled, (3) the assumption that the influence of the vertical components of ground motions are negligible, and (4) the assumption that system-level mechanisms due to overturning moment and the interactions between in-plane and out-of-plane walls are negligible.These assumptions create uncertainties related to the design of shear walls. To better understand these uncertainties, this paper focused on the system-level behavior of shear walls which takes into account multi-directional loading on the building. In this case, a shear wall may experience bidirectional loading due to multi-directional seismic loads, displacement of diaphragm, torsional deformation of the diaphragm, and displacement of adjacent orthogonal shear wall.Based on a review of the literature, it appears that there is currently no practical 3D finite element modeling approach which has been proven capable of simultaneously capturing both the in-plane and out-of-plane response of reinforced masonry walls. Hence, this type of model was needed to study the nonlinear behavior of shear walls subjected to bidirectional loading and to establish the influence of out-of-plane loading on the in-plane response of these walls. The following sections describe the FE modeling approach selected for this study.The appropriate geometric resolution with which masonry should be modeled varies greatly depending on the objective of the modeling effort. For example, some may choose to explicitly model each of the constituent materials and precisely replicate the geometry of the element. Others may smear all constituent materials into a single material and employ a 2D planar model. The model chosen in this study aims to achieve a balance between these two approaches and to provide an efficient model capable of capturing the macro-level in-plane and out-of-plane response of reinforced masonry shear walls.Due to the requirement of capturing both in-plane and out-of-plane responses, a 3D model was selected, with (a) the face shells and webs of the blocks and mortar joints modeled using shell elements, (b) the grouted cells modeled with 3D solid elements, and (c) the reinforcement modeled with 1D beam elements.Fig. 2 shows an assembled partially grouted reinforced masonry shear wall and its equivalent finite element model.To simulate the nonlinear response of the blocks, mortar and grout, the Concrete Damaged Plasticity Model (CDP Model) available in the finite element modeling software ABAQUS [13] was used. This model is primarily intended to provide a general capability for the analysis of concrete structures under cyclic and/or dynamic loading. This model was first developed by Lubliner et al. [14] to simulate the monotonic response of concrete, and later extended by Lee and Fenves [15] to simulate nonlinear cyclic response of concrete.The general approach taken by this model is to employ two damage variables, dcand dt, which track the level of damage in compression and tension, respectively. These damage variables vary between 0.0 (undamaged) to 1.0 (fully damaged), and are used to modify both the stiffness properties and yield surface of concrete. The primary advantage of this approach is that it allows tension and compression damage (from micro to macro-cracking) to be tracked separately, and thus can account for the very different influences these damage states have on the stiffness and strength properties of concrete.To simulate the cyclic response of concrete, and to account for the influence of tensile and compression damage on this response, a series of rules are defined to modify the variable stiffnesses of concrete. Moreover, in this model two parameters are defined to account for stiffness recovery due to change in loading direction.Fig. 3 shows a single, uniaxial tensile-compressive loading cycle with the various stiffnesses annotated along with how they are computed. Although defining this behavior is difficult in an a priori sense, the damage variables, and their direct influence on the hysteretic response of concrete, offer a flexible means to calibrate simulation results with experimental observations.Given the dependence of concrete strength (both tensile and compressive) on its biaxial state of stress, the model employs a yield surface to define strength properties.Fig. 4 illustrates the yield surface proposed by Lubliner et al. [14], which is included within the CDP model provided by ABAQUS. Similar to the stiffness properties, the strength properties of concrete change as damage accumulates, and thus this surface is not fixed.Similar to stiffness degradation, while the general approach of modifying the yield surface with the damage variables appears reasonable, identifying the specific definition of this relationship is quite complex. That is, it is not straightforward to define the damage variables in such a way that one ensures that the strength properties of concrete evolve in a realistic manner. As a result, like in the case of stiffness degradation, it seems that the definition of damage variables requires comparison with experimental studies.To properly simulate the nonlinear deformation of concrete, the increase in volume as damage accumulates must be properly captured. This phenomenon, from a conceptual standpoint is well-established and is commonly referred to as “aggregate interlock”. As two sides of a crack try to slide past each other, the rough crack surface forces the sides further apart; this results in an increase in the “apparent” volume of the material. This increased volume alters the stress state of the surrounding concrete and engages reinforcement that crosses cracks. To account for this behavior, the CDP model employs a dilation angle (ψ), which defines the ratio between volumetric change and shear strain [16,17]. While the need for such a relationship and the underlying phenomenon is well-established, identifying the proper value for this parameter is difficult in an a priori sense. Based on the available literature, this value is typically taken between 12° and 40°, and is often selected to best match experimental results [18].ABAQUS/Explicit computation approach is chosen for the analysis. An explicit dynamic procedure is different in nature from direct-integration dynamic analysis procedure (available in ABAQUS/Standard). The reason comes from the fact that the explicit dynamic procedure performs a large number of small time increments, and unlike direct-integration procedures there is no need to solve a set of simultaneous equations. Also, ABAQUS/Explicit is computationally efficient for the analysis of large models with extremely discontinuous processes.Any simulation model must be correlated with experimental results prior to being employed to examine or establish various responses through parametric studies of sensitivity analyses. This is particularly true in this case, as there are several parameters within the CDP model that cannot be reliably defined without comparison with the experimental results. This section summarizes the correlation of the model described in the previous section for the elastic and nonlinear prediction of both the in-plane and out-of-plane responses of reinforced masonry walls.As a first step, the ability of the model to predict elastic characteristics of the specimens was investigated. Towards that end, three sets of specimens were analyzed, to allow for flexural, shear, and combined flexural/shear deformations to be assessed. These models were 1220mm (48in.) (L) by 3860mm (152in.) (H), 3860mm (152in.) (L) by 1220mm (48in.) (H), and 3860mm (152in.) (L) by 3860mm (152in.) (H), vertical cantilever models, respectively, to better represent realistic models. A comparison between the analytical solutions and the simulated deformation at the tip of the cantilever for these models showed less than 5% difference, for quadratic elements, and less than 12% difference, for linear elements (for definition of quadratic and linear elements please refer to ABAQUS User Manual [13]). It is suggested that, among the various factors, the combination between shell, solid and frame elements, which required utilizing different types of constraints may have contributed to the level of error. Both of these results are considered acceptable in the realm of engineering design, which is important as the use of linear elements is more computationally efficient and will allow ABAQUS/Explicit to be employed.To investigate mesh dependency, three different mesh sizes with nominal size of 200mm (8in.), 100mm (4in.), and 25mm (1in.) were chosen and models with these mesh sizes were analyzed.Fig. 5 shows the variation in simulation results for the various mesh sizes examined for linear elements. In these charts, the horizontal axis shows the number of elements in the model and the vertical axis the error, as defined the difference between deformation at the tip of the cantilever models from the analysis results and the deformation calculated according to Eq. (1).(1)δ=δf+δs=PH3/3EI+PH/GAvwhere P is the lateral load, H is the height, EI is the flexural stiffness, GAvis the shear stiffness, and Avis the shear area in the direction of the lateral load. Determination of the shear area for each assemblage was computed based on the Principle of Virtual Force (PVF) method.It should be noted that the mesh sensitivity was also checked for nonlinear models, but due to the size of models, reducing mesh size and thus increasing the number of elements, significantly added to the analysis time, making the analyses impractical. Therefore, since the results showed only minor dependency on mesh size in linear analyses, and considering significant increase in computational costs for finer mesh sizes, the nominal 200mm (8in.) mesh size was selected for nonlinear analyses.After the elastic response of the model was examined, its nonlinear behavior was compared with the results from in-plane and out-of-plane tests of reinforced masonry walls. To correlate the nonlinear out-of-plane response of reinforced masonry walls, the results from Abboud et al. [19] and for in-plane response the results from Minaie [20,21] and Minaie et al. [22] were employed. In this section, first the experimental results used in the nonlinear correlation are summarized, and then a summary of strength and stiffness parameters used in the models are presented followed by the correlation results.A comprehensive experimental study on the behavior of partially- and fully-grouted reinforced masonry shear walls was conducted at structural testing laboratory of Drexel University in 2009. The complete details and results of this research program are presented elsewhere [20–22]. The shear wall specimens discussed in this section are part of that research program.For the sake of comparison, the results for one partially grouted wall (PG-1) and one fully grouted reinforced concrete shear wall (FG-1) are presented herein. For the partially grouted wall (PG-1) the level of axial stress was selected as 0.7MPa (100psi) (based on net area [23]), while for the fully grouted (FG-1) wall this value was 0.3MPa (43psi) (based on gross area [23]), which represent reasonable stress levels for most bearing wall buildings under gravity load. The boundary condition at the top of both PG and FG walls was selected as cantilever (i.e. no restraint against the rotation at the top of the wall). The reinforcement for each wall consisted of #6 bars at 1220mm (48in.) on center in each direction.Fig. 6 shows a schematic of the test setup utilized. The tests were done by imposing cyclic horizontal displacement with increasing value at the top of the wall to reach different levels of lateral drift indices, specially different performance levels defined by ATC 2000 (FEMA 356 code) [24] (i.e. Immediate Occupancy (IO), Life Safety (LS), and Collapse Prevention (CP) performance levels).Wall PG-1 behaved elastically up to a drift index of about 0.05% and no visual cracks were observed. After this cycle, diagonal stair-stepped cracks started to form within the hollow panels between the grouted cells (Fig. 7(a)). The reduced shear stiffness caused by these cracks rendered the hollow panels unable to couple the vertical reinforcement. As displacements increased, the grouted and reinforced cells and courses of the wall deformed through frame-action, with the hollow panels acting as an infill. In this case, the increased vertical stress and cantilever boundary conditions resulted in toe-crushing along the corners at drifts above 0.6%. Fig. 12(a) shows the hysteresis loops for this wall with significant post peak degradation which is typical for a shear mode of failure.Wall FG-1 had a flexural mode of deformation. This can be observed from the crack patterns illustrated in Fig. 7(b) and hysteresis loops shown in Fig. 12(b). This wall showed fairly stable hysteresis loops which are characteristics of flexural mode of failure. Moreover, wall FG-1 showed a rocking behavior after flexural cracks happened which caused toe crushing in compression toes. This wall experienced bed-joint sliding at the bottom and pinching in its hysteresis loops.Abboud et al. [19] investigated the effect of mortar-type on the out-of-plane response of partially grouted masonry walls. The experimental program consisted of three four-point bending tests on vertically spanning partially grouted masonry walls. The three walls were constructed of face-shell mortar bedded 150mm (6in.) 2-core hollow CMU and Type S mortar. The test walls were 1220mm (48in.) wide and 2640mm (104in.) high. The walls spanned vertically and were pin-supported at the base and roller-supported along the top. The walls were reinforced with #5 bars vertically at 600mm (24in.) on center and #3 bars horizontally at 810mm (32in.) on center. All tests were performed in displacement control with the walls beings loaded monotonically. The failures of these walls were typical flexural modes with flexural cracks located at the mortar-block interface of the bed-joints in tension side and spalling of the face shell in compression side.Fig. 8 shows the test setup and the typical crack patterns.The primary strength parameters that govern the nonlinear response of the FE model are the uniaxial compression (fco) and tensile strength of grout and masonry, which are taken as 3MPa (430psi) and 27.6MPa (4000psi) for grout, and 1.65MPa (240psi) and 17.2MPA (2500psi) for masonry, respectively. The strength parameters that relate to the yield surface under bi-directional stress (namely the bidirectional compressive strength of masonry and grout, fbo) could not be directly measured during the experimental program and so its effect was examined through a parametric study. Specifically, α, which is a function of fbowas varied within its practical bounds of 0.08 and 0.12 [14]. This revealed, that for the walls examined, this parameter had negligible influence on the results, which is likely due to the fact that failure modes observed in the experimental studies all were largely governed by tensile damage, and thus not dependent on bi-directional compressive strength. For further analyses, the default value of α (0.12) was used which corresponds to fbo/fco=1.16.Fig. 9 illustrates the uniaxial stress–strain behavior used for concrete masonry. In this figure, Emis the modulus of elasticity for masonry, superscript d shows the damaged state, and dcand dtare the damage indices in compression and tension, respectively. The modulus of elasticity for masonry and grout were taken as 4140MPa (600,000psi) and 24,800MPa (3,600,000psi), respectively. While the elastic modulus used for masonry is admittedly low, this value was selected to match the initial slope of the experimental hysteresis plots. The need for such a low stiffness may be due to factors such as the presence of initial cracks, or the larger elastic stiffness displayed by the model due to the use of linear elements. In any case, the value of elastic modulus for masonry did not impact the strength or overall hysteretic behavior of the models. These curves were adopted based on the tensile and compression strength test results, and were find-tuned through parametric studies to match the analytical results with the experimental ones. It should also be noted that part of the compression stress–strain curve (Fig. 9(b)) which proceeds to zero stress is not presented herein, mainly because the specimens failed in tension and that part of the compression curve was not necessary.The key parameters to be defined for CDP model are the damage variables dcand dt, which exert significant influence over the evolution of loading and unloading stiffnesses. Through a parametric study that varied these damage variables within their bounds, they were observed to have significant influence over the degradation of the hysteretic response, but had negligible influence on the maximum strength.Fig. 10(a) illustrates the bounds of this influence by showing the simulation results for when the damage variables (a) are set to zero, and (b) are taken as their maximum value for each level of plastic strain. The maximum values of the damage variables were selected so that the hysteresis loops do not cross back on themselves in any quadrant. That is, if the damage variables increase too sharply, then the unloading stiffness drops significantly and the hysteresis plot crosses itself. Based on the results of this parametric study, the best fit with the experimental results was achieved when the damage variables were set to their maximum value for each level of plastic strain. Physically, this indicates that the cracking observed significantly reduced the stiffness properties of the specimens.The key nonlinear parameter that governs the plastic response is the dilation angle. This parameter relates the shear strain to volumetric strain and thus accounts for the expansion of concrete for increased damage levels [16,17]. To investigate the influence of dilation angle, a parametric study was carried out in which the dilation angle was varied from 20° to 40°. For illustrative purposes, Fig. 10(b) shows the hysteresis response of the walls when dilation angle is taken as 20° and 40°. Results of this study indicated that the dilation angle has a significant influence on the shape of the hysteresis loops and the numerical stability of the simulations. Through comparison with the experimental hysteresis loops, a value of 38° was selected to provide the best fit which is very close to the suggested value for masonry by Dhanasekar and Haider [25]. Also, this value is within the bounds of 12 and 40, typically reported for concrete [18].As an example of finite element models used in this study,Fig. 11 shows the finite element model for the experimental partially-grouted wall shown in Fig. 6. This model has incorporated the foundation in the finite element model as well. The FE model employed (1) element S4R which is a 4-node curved thin or thick shell with reduced integration and finite membrane strains, (2) element C3D8R, which is a linear 8-node solid element with reduced integration, and (3) element B31, which is a 2 node linear plane frame element [13].Fig. 12 shows a comparison of the FE model results with the PG and FG shear in-plane wall tests described earlier in this paper.Fig. 13 illustrates a comparison between the experimental [19] and analytical out-of-plane force-displacement response for reinforced masonry walls. Based on these two sets of comparisons, it is concluded that the model is capable of effectively simulating in-plane strength and hysteretic response of reinforced masonry systems as well as out-of-plane monotonic response. Although the model failed to fully replicate the pinching response of the fully grouted walls, it captured both capacity and failure mode well.In addition to the maximum strength and hysteresis loops, the crack patterns and failure modes from the analytical models showed a good match with their counterparts from experimental tests for both in-plane and out-of-plane models. For example,Fig. 14 illustrates the crack patterns from analytical models for partially- and fully-grouted walls for in-plane loading at collapse prevention (CP) limit state (at drift index of displacement/height of wall equaling 0.75%) where cracks for both pull and push directions are overlapped on top of each other for illustration purposes. These crack patterns can be compared with the ones presented in Fig. 7(a) and (b) for partially- and fully-grouted test specimens, respectively. It should be noted that the masonry material, including masonry blocks and masonry joints were modeled using a material that smeared the properties of the two constituent materials utilizing CPD model in ABAQUS, as described in the previous sections. ABAQUS does not directly show the crack patterns for CDP. This could be done indirectly by plotting the maximum principal plastic deformation at the integration points and therefore the crack patterns are less localized than the actual cracks in the experimental models. The cracks in the model are through the thickness of the elements for both shell and solid elements. The purpose of the nonlinear modeling of these specimens using smeared material properties utilizing CDP for masonry was to capture the maximum capacity and failure modes. Consequently, localized cracks were not of interest in the scope of work.This section describes the results of a parametric study carried out using the model discussed in the previous sections to investigate the vulnerability of PG reinforced masonry shear walls to bidirectional seismic loading. One of the studies that motivated the parametric study in this research program is the research carried out by Huria et al. [26] to study the 3-D characteristics of RC wall response by utilizing hypo-elastic fiber modeling. In that study, they verified the model by correlating simulated results and reported experimental responses of RC columns subjected to biaxial flexure. Subsequently, a sensitivity study considering three analytical shear wall test specimens in which the shape (L and barbell shape) and flexural reinforcement amount varied was carried out. They concluded that the response characteristics of an L-shaped wall may change significantly along different directions of a bilateral displacement path. The effective flexural reinforcement of such walls as they respond along certain bilateral displacement paths may lead to undesirable failure characteristics. Thus, to investigate the effects of bidirectional loading on the response of PG shear walls, this study employed out-of-plane drift, level of vertical stress (based on net area), and wall aspect ratio (Hm_eff/L, based on the effective height equivalent for an equivalent fixed–fixed boundary condition) as the primary variables. Specifically, out-of-plane drift was varied from 0% to 2.0%; vertical stress was varied from 0.35MPa (50psi) to 1MPa (150psi), and the effective aspect ratio was varied between 1.33 and 4.0. The adopted ranges for aspect ratio and axial stress represent common values for low-rise masonry buildings.For all the walls analyzed in the study the height was kept constant, as 2640mm (104in.), and length of the wall was varied to get the effective aspect ratios of 4.0, 2.0 and 1.34 (Hm_eff/L) based on the definition by Moon et al. [27].Table 1 presents the values of out-of-plane drift applied at the top of the walls for different cases. The loading history employed imposed constant out-of-plane drift (Table 1), followed by reversed cyclic in-plane drift (with increasing value), both at the top of the wall.A total of 72 cases (8 levels of out-of-plane drift, 3 aspect ratios, and 3 levels of vertical stress) were examined. To reduce the results, each of the hysteretic responses was used to develop hysteresis envelope curves, which were then examined for various response properties. To present the results, the various response quantities were normalized based on the response of equivalent walls with no out-of-plane drift.Fig. 15 plots the percent reduction in the in-plane capacity of PG masonry shear walls versus out-of-plane drift for different levels of axial stress and effective aspect ratio, respectively.It can be observed from these graphs that the capacity of the shear wall is affected by the applied out-of-plane displacement. Furthermore, this influence increases for decreasing levels of vertical stress and for increasing effective aspect ratios. In addition to this general trend, all plots show a decrease in sensitivity after around 0.75% drift (which corresponds to the collapse prevention performance limit state). Examining the results, and the failure modes for various walls, it appears that this out-of-plane drift level causes the tension face shell of masonry and part of the grouted cells to crack. The reduced sensitivity following this drift level is due to the fact that only one face shell (with increased compressive stress) is resisting the in-plane shear, and thus the response is less impacted by the addition of out-of-plane drift.Although, out-of-plane drift clearly influences the in-plane capacity of PG shear walls, irrespective of the aspect ratio or level of vertical stress, it may not, in fact, result in an increase in the seismic vulnerability of such walls.Fig. 16 shows a series of hysteresis envelope curves for a wall with effective aspect ratio of 1.34 and axial stress of 0.7MPa (100psi). As apparent from these curves, the area under the envelope curve and the ductility of the walls is only slightly influenced by increasing the out-of-plane drift. As a result, it appears that while out-of-plane drift may cause early cracking (which reduces peak capacity), it does not appreciably influence the nonlinear hysteretic response of PG masonry shear walls, and thus does not likely influence their seismic performance. However, the bidirectional loading has shown a noticeable influence on the bidirectional response of RC L-shaped shear walls [26]. The reason can be found in the difference between the behavior of PG masonry and RC shear walls studied by Huria et al. [26], where the former is weak in shear and the latter in flexure.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
An efficient nonlinear 3D finite element modeling approach was presented, correlated with experimental results, and proved capable of simulating the capacity (within 10%), failure modes and hysteretic response of both partially-grouted (PG) and fully-grouted (FG) masonry shear walls, in order to establish the influence of bidirectional loading on the in-plane behavior of reinforced masonry shear walls. This modeling approach was also validated for the prediction of both in-plane and out-of-plane responses. The model was then used to examine the influence of bi-directional loading through a series of parametric studies with out-of-plane drift, wall aspect ratio and vertical stress as variables. The following conclusions are drawn based on the results of this study:•The Concrete Damage Plasticity (CDP) model is well-suited to simulate the nonlinear cyclic response of masonry. To specialize this model for the analysis of such walls, the dilation angle should be taken around 38° and the damage variables should be set to their maximum possible values for each level of plastic strain.The results of the parametric study indicated that the in-plane capacity of PG masonry shear walls with cantilever boundary condition can be reduced by up to 20% due to the presence of out-of-plane drift applied at the top of the walls. This influence increases with a decreasing level of axial stress and an increasing effective aspect ratio. This finding indicates that the bi-directional input that masonry shear walls experience during earthquakes influences the in-plane capacity of the walls. This phenomenon is not currently addressed by the building codes.The sensitivity of the capacity of masonry shear walls to out-of-plane drifts is much more abrupt up to the point where such drifts cause the PG masonry walls to crack. Although out-of-plane drift causes early cracking of PG masonry shear walls (which reduces peak capacity), it does not appreciably influence the nonlinear hysteretic response of PG masonry shear walls, and thus likely does not appreciably influence the overall seismic performance of such walls.