@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A body-force formulation for analyzing adhesive interactions with special considerations for handling symmetry

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A body-force formulation for FEA of adhesive interactions is presented.Special considerations like handling symmetry are discussed.Axisymmetric formulation developed gives significant computational advantages.The formulation is validated by comparing with analytical solutions.Case studies illustrating salient features of the formulation are presented.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Adhesion,Finite element method,Body force formulation,Elastic particles,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Adhesive interactions between particles are important in situations ranging from technological applications like atomic force microscopy to the initial stages of planet formation. In this work, we present a body force formulation with first-order convergence rate for the finite element analysis of adhesive interactions due to van der Waals force, which overcomes the restrictions of the commonly used surface force formulation. Though the classical Newton–Raphson method offers second-order convergence, substantial reduction in the computational cost per iteration justifies the use of present method in this case. First we discuss the general formulation, which is later modified for special cases like handling symmetry. We present a convenient implementation for reflective symmetry formulation, which can be easily extended to problems with any number of planes of symmetry. The axisymmetric formulation developed in this work provides significant computational benefits compared to a full three-dimensional formulation. The comparison of the results of our analyses with analytical solutions is provided for a number of benchmark problems. We also provide a comparison among general, reflective-symmetry and axisymmetric formulations in terms of accuracy and computational speed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Adhesion due to van der Waals interaction is of special interest in studies ranging from technological applications like atomic force microscopy [2] to the initial phase of planet formation [10]. It manifests in the origin of friction and wear [44] as well as in various biological processes including locomotion [31]. Such a wide-ranging significance has attracted extensive research on adhesive interactions in the form of theoretical [25], experimental [18], and computational [26,45] studies. Computational studies can help to bridge the gap between theoretical predictions and experimental observations by reducing the simplifications required for developing theoretical models, while not having all the complexities associated with experiments. In this work, we present a computational model for analyzing the adhesive interactions between two elastic particles.Computational studies on adhesive contact mechanics commonly use finite element method for the analysis [26,45]. Such studies usually assume van der Waals force causing adhesion to be a surface force due to its steep gradient. This results in considerable computational advantages. For example, even commercial finite element software can be used for the analysis by suitably modifying the contact or other existing elements [26,12]. Sauer and Li [39,41] have developed an improved surface force formulation based on volumetric integration, various aspects of which are discussed in detail by Sauer and coworkers later [42,14]. They demonstrated its applicability by studying interaction between asperities for understanding the origin of friction [41,37] and many other important problems. However, when the size of the particles becomes very small or the adhesion becomes very strong, the surface force approximation becomes inaccurate. In addition, the inherent assumptions like uniform density assumption involved in developing a surface force model are not strictly valid when the deformation is large [42]. In all such situations, it is necessary to use a body force model considering the van der Waals force to be distributed over the volume of interacting particles [9,4].Cho and Park [9] were the first to use the body force formulation for the finite element analysis of adhesive contact problems. They studied the interaction between an elastic body and rigid half-space in a quasi-static setting by making suitable modifications in Abaqus. Sauer and Li [40] extended the concept, and proposed a general framework for multiscale contact mechanics based on atomic interactions. The same researchers [36,38,39] developed the complete Newton–Raphson formulation of the body force model of adhesive interaction between elastic bodies. Even though this formulation offers quadratic convergence, it was observed that the implementation is computationally very costly due to the need for six levels of integration in analysis of a three-dimensional problem and the loss of sparsity of stiffness matrix, in addition to the involved numerical computations required for finding each elemental stiffness matrix term. Hence, the emphasis of those studies was on developing an improved surface force model suitable for moderately large problems. Fan et al. [11] have compared the body force and surface force models and concluded that the computational efficiency and coarse-mesh accuracy of the surface force model are better than those of the body force model. However, in cases like problems dealing with small particles or strong adhesion, it is necessary to use a body force model [42] employing a fine mesh.In this paper, we present a formulation with first-order convergence rate for the finite element analysis of adhesive interactions between two elastic particles. Both the van der Waals and the short-range steric repulsion forces are modeled as body forces in this formulation. Due to the computational reasons mentioned above, we do not attempt to use the classical Newton–Raphson approach. Though our scheme with first-order convergence rate results in an increase in the number of iterations required, the reduction in computational cost per iteration justifies the use of such a formulation. We have discussed the development of the general formulation first and then the special cases like symmetry considerations. We present a convenient approach for handling reflective symmetry, which can be extended to any number of planes of symmetry as well as to repetitive symmetry situations. The axisymmetric formulation developed in this work offers significant computational advantages over the three-dimensional formulation. For the sake of completeness and consistency of notations, the outline of the entire formulation is given, though the general formulation is derivable from previous studies [36,38]. The formulation is implemented in a large deformation finite element code, incorporating stress–displacement hybrid elements [22]. A number of case studies are presented to validate and demonstrate the use of this formulation, and the computational aspects are also discussed.Let the potential of interaction between a pair of atoms in the interacting solids is represented by the n−6 Lennard–Jones potential:(1)V=−Cr6+Drnwhere r is the distance between the atoms and C and D are material constants. The first term in the above equation represents the attractive van der Waals force and second term is an approximation to the short-range steric repulsion. By adding potential of interaction between all pairs of constituent atoms (pairwise addition), we get the potential of interaction between two volume elements in the solid bodies:(2)Vvol=(−Cr6+Drn)β1β2dΩ1dΩ2where β1 and β2 represent the number of atoms in first and second volume elements (dΩ1anddΩ2) respectively. The magnitude and sign of the force between two elemental volumes as shown in Fig. 1is obtained by taking the gradient of the volumetric potential with the separation:(3)fint=−∂Vvol∂r=(−6Cr7+nDrn+1)β1β2dΩ1dΩ2This force has a line of action connecting the two volume elements as shown in the figure. Utilizing the Hamaker constant defined asAH=π2Cβ1β2[6,19] and a repulsion constantAR=π2Dβ1β2[46] we get(4)fint=(−6AHπ2r7+nARπ2rn+1)dΩ1dΩ2The body force per unit volume at any point in one body can be obtained by an integration over the other body. It may be noted that both the magnitude and the direction of interaction force depend on the locations of the volume elements, and hence vary during the integration. This integration is performed numerically within the finite element program as explained in the next section.The Hamaker constant can be obtained from dielectric constants of the materials, and the values for interaction between various materials have been measured or estimated [6]. Hence the use of Hamaker constant in the above formulation helps to get rid of the inaccuracies associated with the pairwise additivity assumption. Given the value of n and equilibrium interatomic separation r0,ARandAHcan be related as [20](5)AR=AHDC=6AH(r0)n−6nThe work of adhesion per unit area (w) can be expressed in terms of the Hamaker constant and the repulsion constant as [29,3,21](6)w=(n−6)AH12(n−4)πz02where z0 is the equilibrium separation between two infinite plates without any external loads:(7)z0=(12AR(n−2)(n−3)AH)1/6The body force at a point in body 1 due to a volume element in body 2 is obtained as given in Eq. (4). Hence the total body force vector atdΩ1due to body 2 can be obtained by summing up the contributions from all the finite elements in body 2, where the contribution from each finite element is obtained by numerical integration using Gauss quadrature method. The body force at any point in body 2 due to body 1 also can be obtained similarly. These body forces can be incorporated directly in the finite element formulation. It was done both for the isoparametric displacement-based elements [48] and stress–displacement hybrid elements [33]. These hybrid elements are developed based on two-field variational statements [23]:(8)∫Ωρ0uδ·∂v∂tdΩ+∫ΩS:EδdΩ=∫Ωρ0uδ·b0dΩ+∫Γtuδ·t0dΓ,∀uδ∈Vu(9)∫ΩSδ:[E(u)−E(S)]dΩ=0,∀Sδ∈VSwhere ρ0 is the density in the reference configuration,uandvare the displacement and velocity vectors, respectively,SandEare the second Piola–Kirchhoff stress and Lagrangian strain tensors, respectively, andbandtare the body force and surface traction vectors, respectively. Subscript δ indicates a variation in corresponding quantities and superscript ‘0’ indicates that the corresponding quantities are evaluated in the reference configuration. The details of the development of the finite element formulation based on these variational statements are given in [23]. The interaction force affects the body force term in Eq. (8). At any point in body 1, the body force is obtained as(10)(ρ0b0)1=∫Ω2fintdΩThe body force at a point in the second body can be obtained by a similar integration over body 1. The integration in the above equation is performed over each of the finite elements in body 2 by Gauss quadrature method of the same order as used for other quantities, and summed up to get the total body force at any point in body 1.The contribution to body force at a Gauss point in body 1 specified by the coordinatexin the deformed configuration due to the volume associated with a Gauss pointx′in body 2 (per unit volume) is(11)fint=(−6AHπ2|x−x′|7+nARπ2|x−x′|n+1)x−x′|x−x′|where|x−x′|indicates the magnitude of the vectorx−x′. By substituting the coordinates (XandX′) in the undeformed configuration and displacements (uandu′) from previous iteration, we get(12)fint=−6AH(X+u−X′−u′)π2|X+u−X′−u′|8+nAR(X+u−X′−u′)π2|X+u−X′−u′|n+2=−6AHrπ2r8+nARrπ2rn+2Considering the Gauss points atxandx′to have associated undeformed volumes [15]ΩG(ΩG=wGdetJ, where wGis the weight anddetJis the determinant of the Jacobian matrix for the Gauss point atx) andΩG′respectively, the contribution due to the above interaction force to the force vector of the finite element containing the Gauss point atxis(13)f^int=∑G′NTfintΩGΩG′whereNis the shape function matrix evaluated at the Gauss pointxand the summation is over all the Gauss points in body 2. This results in a formulation with linear convergence. This formulation is similar to those presented by Sauer and Li [39], except that they have used the complete Newton–Raphson formulation giving a second-order convergence. However, trying to obtain a formulation with second-order convergence by using Newton–Raphson method would make the stiffness matrix much more denser, in addition to the significant increase in computations involved. Hence, the present formulation is computationally efficient.In computationally intensive problems like the present one, it is essential to exploit symmetry whenever possible. In this section, formulations for reflective symmetry and axisymmetry are developed with emphasis on special considerations necessary to properly account for the interaction forces from parts not included in the model.Sauer [36] and Sauer and Li [38] have discussed the modifications necessary for handling reflective symmetry in a body force model for adhesive interactions, and developed the modified formulation. Here we present a convenient way of implementing the reflective symmetry formulation, which is easily extendable to cases with more number of planes of symmetry. There could be any number of planes of symmetry, but the formulations are presented here for two particularly important cases: half-symmetry with one plane of symmetry and quarter symmetry with two mutually perpendicular planes of symmetry. Symmetry boundary conditions must be applied at the planes of symmetry in any analysis; additional considerations are needed for interaction force calculation in the present case.Fig. 2shows the interaction between two elastic bodies, where there is a plane of symmetry. Hence, only half of the model needs to be considered in the analysis, like the right half of the system. However, as shown in the figure, the interaction force at a point is not calculated correctly, if the left halves of the bodies are ignored [36]. For example, the force on the volume elementdΩ1due todΩ2is calculated, but that due todΩ2′is not included. This can be taken care-off by considering image elements obtained by the reflecting the finite elements about the plane of symmetry. In other words, the force at any Gauss point should be obtained by the summation over not only the Gauss points in the half-symmetric model of the other body, but also over their images obtained by reflecting about the plane of symmetry. Therefore, the contribution to body force on Gauss point atx1by the Gauss point atx2in the other body is given by(14)fint+fint′=(−6AHπ2|x1−x2|8+nARπ2|x1−x2|n+2)(x1−x2)+(−6AHπ2|x1−x2′|8+nARπ2|x1−x2′|n+2)(x1−x2′)wherex2′is obtained by reflectingx2about the plane of symmetry. This method is similar to the use of image dislocations in dislocation dynamics simulations for handling free surface effects [27].The quarter-symmetry model, with two orthogonal planes of symmetry, also can be handled similarly. However, in this case three image elements should be used as shown in Fig. 3. The images to the Gauss points are obtained by reflecting about the planes of symmetry. This procedure may be extended to problems with larger number of planes of symmetry and repetitive symmetry cases by suitably choosing the image elements to obtain the correct interaction force.Axisymmetric models can be used when both the geometry and loading are independent of the circumferential coordinate. Sauer [36] recognized the possibility of developing an axisymmetric body force formulation for analyzing the adhesive interactions. In this section, we develop details of the axisymmetric formulation. It allows the use of a two-dimensional model to represent the three-dimensional axisymmetric structure resulting in significant computational advantage.In an axisymmetric model, each area element represents a ring of material as shown in Fig. 4, wheree1ande2represent the radial and axial directions respectively. Hence, the interaction force at any point due to an area element in the other body should be calculated using the corresponding ring of material. The symmetry about thee1–e2plane ensures that this interaction force does not have a component in the circumferential direction, and hence the problem remains axisymmetric. Referring to Fig. 4, the force per unit volume at a pointx=X+uin body 1, due to an area elementΩG′atx′=X′+u′in body 2 is to be obtained by integrating the interaction force due to the volume element with undeformed volumeΩG′X1′dθover the circumference (θ=0toθ=2π). The distance r fromxto this volume element (in the deformed configuration) is given by(15)r2=(r′)2+(x2−x2′)2=(r′)2+h2wherer′is the distance measured in the plane perpendicular to X2 direction, as shown in Fig. 5. We have(16)r′sinα=x1′sinθ(17)r′cosα=x1′cosθ−x1Squaring and adding gives(18)(r′)2=x12+(x1′)2−2x1x1′cosθTherefore the force per unit volume atxdue to this volume element is(19)dfint=−6AHX1′ΩG′dθπ2r7+nARX1′ΩG′dθπ2rn+1This force is acting along the line connectingxto the volume element. Therefore, the integration in circumferential direction to obtain the interaction force per unit volume on the Gauss point atxdue to the ring of material represented byΩG′is to be carried out by taking care of the direction of elemental forces. The radial component of this force is(20)f1=2X1′ΩG′π2∫0π(−6AH(x1−x1′cosθ)r8+nAR(x1−x1′cosθ)rn+2)dθand the axial component is(21)f2=2X1′ΩG′hπ2∫0π(−6AHr8+nARrn+2)dθwhere r is given by(22)r2=x12+(x1′)2+(x2−x2′)2−2x1x1′cosθand the coordinatesx=X+uandx′=X′+u′, withuandu′being the displacements from the previous iteration. The interaction force acting on the Gauss point atxwith an associated area ΩGin body 1 due to that atx′with an associated areaΩG′in body 2 is given as(23)fint=X1ΩG(f1e1+f2e2)which can be added to the elemental force vector by using the shape function matrix. Therefore, the contribution from the Gauss point atxto the elemental force vector is(24)f^int=∑G′NTfint.These integrals are difficult to be evaluated for the general case of the repulsion exponent n, except numerically. In order to get analytical expressions for the force, both due to computational and accuracy reasons, we specialize the value of n to 12 as in the classical Lennard-Jones potential. The integrals thus obtained were evaluated using Mathematica software [47], and the results are given in Appendix A. Similar considerations are necessary when a plane-strain formulation is used to model adhesive-interaction between bodies which are very long in the third dimension [36], for example, like the case of a long cylinder lying on a flat surface.A special case of the present formulation is applicable for the conceptually interesting problem of adhesive interaction between an elastic body and a rigid half-space [9,20,21]. In this case the interaction force at any point in the elastic body due to the half-space is completely known: the magnitude is a function of the distance from the half-space and the direction is normal to the half-space surface. Therefore the formulation is considerably simplified, both mathematically and computationally. There is no need for special algorithms for handling symmetry. Further, Newton–Raphson formulation can be conveniently used as it does not lead to the loss of sparsity of the stiffness matrices. The details of such a formulation were presented elsewhere [20,21].In this section, we present the results of studies on adhesive interaction between two elastic rods. The emphasis of this case study is on comparison of various symmetry reductions discussed in the previous section, and the effect of finite cross-sectional dimensions which are comparable to separation between the interacting bodies.We consider the interaction between two identical cylindrical rods of 10nm length and 2nm radius at an initial separation of 1nm for studying the symmetry formulations. Other important parameters have the following values:AH=2×10−19J,AR=0, E=200GPa, andν=0.3. All three-dimensional models use 27-noded hybrid elements, while axisymmetric models use 9-noded hybrid elements. All models have the similar mesh in a longitudinal section (Fig. 6).Comparison of the performance of different models (full, half-symmetric, quarter-symmetric, and axisymmetric) are given in Table 1. It can be seen that all the formulations produce same result (differences are less than 0.02%). However, the time taken for analysis in each case is significantly different. In three-dimensional case, each symmetry model reduction increases the speed of analysis by about 2.5 times. It is observed from our computational studies on elastic-to-elastic interaction cases that doubling the number of elements, keeping all other parameters same, increases the time for analysis by nearly four times. However, while using symmetric models, four times speed-up is not obtained due to the increase in computations required for handling the symmetry. Additionally, using symmetry boundary conditions improves the convergence properties of the analyses. Utilizing axisymmetric models, more than three orders of magnitude speed-up is obtained compared to a full three-dimensional model due to the huge reduction in number of elements and nodes, and the reduction in nodal degrees-of-freedom from three to two. In addition, considerable simplification is obtained in all stages of analysis from pre-processing for creating the model to post-processing of results by using an axisymmetric model.Table 1 also shows the improvement obtained by parallelizing only the force calculation and solver modules using OpenMP [7]. Close to linear speed-up is obtained due to parallelization in three-dimensional analyses, indicating that most of the computational time is spent in load calculation and solution of the final algebraic equation, which utilizes WSMP solver from IBM Corporation [16]. However, there is no significant improvement in case of axisymmetric analysis due to parallelization, which implies that the computational time is mainly used in other parts of the code, and for data transfer.Analytical models are available in the literature [30] for two limiting cases of cross-sectional dimensions in comparison to the separation between the interacting rods. For longitudinal interaction between two rods of identical cross-sections, the flat-plate model (FPM) giving the interaction force per unit area for two infinite plates,(25)F=−AHa6πh3where h is the separation between the rods and a is the area of cross-section of the rods, can be used when cross-sectional dimensions are significantly larger than separation. At the other extreme, when cross-sectional dimensions are much smaller than separation, a thin-rod model (TRM) given as(26)F=−AHa25π2h5can be used. Both these equations are for interaction between rods of infinite length, which work well if the lengths are more than a few nanometers. The equations for the force in case of rods of finite length also are available in the literature [30]. We use our formulation to study the effect of changing the cross-sectional dimensions for the complete range between these extremes, for rods of square and circular cross-sections. It may be noted that a surface force model using Derjaguin approximation [19,6] cannot capture this effect as it is derived based on a flat-plate model.Fig. 7shows the comparison of the interaction force with change in cross-sectional area of the interacting rods. The force is normalized using that corresponding to FPM, while the cross-sectional area is normalized by dividing with the square of separation. With these normalizations, FPM becomes a horizontal line with a value of one for all values of cross-sectional area and separation, while TRM becomes a linear function of cross-sectional area. The separation is chosen so that deformation does not change it significantly (d≈h). Square rods are modeled using 27-noded hybrid elements using quarter-symmetric formulation, while the cylindrical rods are modeled using 9-noded axisymmetric hybrid elements. It can be seen that the force varies smoothly from that given by TRM at small cross-sectional areas to that by FPM at large cross-sectional areas. The difference between the interaction forces for rods with square and circular cross-sections is not seen to be significant.In case of the interaction between two elastic spheres with different material properties and radii, the concepts of reduced Young׳s modulus (E*):(27)1E*=1−ν12E1+1−ν22E2and the reduced radius (R*):(28)1R*=1R1+1R2.where E is Young׳s modulus, ν is Poisson׳s ratio, R is the sphere radius, and the subscripts represent the corresponding quantities for individual spheres are used to compare various contact parameters [19,6,24]. At an extreme, by substituting R1 and E1 as infinity, we get the interaction between an elastic sphere and a rigid half-space. In this section we compare the results from our analyses for cases with the same reduced modulus and reduced radius, but with different values of E and R for the two spheres.Fig. 8shows the schematic diagram for interaction between two elastic spheres. We have used nine-noded axisymmetric elements to model both the spheres. The initial separation is chosen to be 1nm in all cases, which ensures that the deformation does not change the interaction force significantly.Fig. 9shows the variation interaction force with the reduced radius for three different cases: interaction between an elastic sphere and rigid half-space(R1=∞), interaction between two identical elastic spheres(R1=R2), and for the case withR1=2R2. In all the cases, reduced Young׳s modulus is maintained asE*=109.9GPa. Theoretical model [19,6] is also shown for comparison. It can be seen that the results in all cases match well with the theoretical model. However, the differences become more noticeable for very small radii since the theoretical model is developed based on a surface force approximation assuming significantly larger radius of curvature compared to separation.The interaction force will be the same for all values of Young׳s modulus, except for the small differences caused by the deformation. Hence, we compare the variation in final separation with reduced modulus, for different ratios of Young׳s moduli of the interacting spheres. The final separation is obtained by subtracting the displacement at the tip of the sphere (point of closest approach) from the initial separation. Based on the expression derived by Pethica and Sutton [32], an approximation for the displacement of the tip of the sphere can be obtained as [49](29)u=AHR82E*d2.5The variation of final separation with the reduced Young׳s modulus is given in Fig. 10. All the values are for an initial separation of 1nm andR*=50nm. It can be seen that the results compare well with the theoretical model for all cases. However, such a match can be obtained only at large separations, where the influence on deformation on the interaction force is small. When the spheres are close to each other, the deformation significantly modifies the interaction force, which in turn changes the deformation. The final deformation and the interaction force should be consistent with each other, which can only be obtained by non-linear analyses like the present study.In this example, we study the interaction between a relatively rigid spherical nanoparticle (E=200GPa,ν=0.3) and a compliant flat substrate (E=2GPa,ν=0.49). The geometry and the boundary conditions used in the study are illustrated in Fig. 11. We first analyzed a case where center of the sphere is held at a distance of 10.35nm from the undeformed substrate surface (i.e., an initial separation of 0.35nm from the surface, without considering the deformations due to interaction forces). Interaction between the spherical particle and substrate is purely attractive in this case, and hence can be considered to be near contact. Then, a quasi-static approach of the particle from an initial separation of 0.25nm to the substrate surface is studied. The objective of this case study is to find the stress and deformation profiles corresponding to the equilibrium configuration where no external force is applied, for the interaction between the spherical particle and surface. These are significant parameters for comparisons with published results [43,41]. At 0.25nm initial separation, the net interaction force is tensile, though repulsive interactions occur near the axis. Hence, the particle and substrate are just in contact. From there, it is brought closer to the surface quasi-statically, till the total interaction force starts to become repulsive. The axisymmetric formulation developed in the present work is suitable for this case study as it significantly reduces the computational effort in comparison to a three-dimensional formulation required otherwise.Both the materials are assumed to obey St. Venant Kirchhoff material model. The values of interaction force parameters areAH=2×10−20J andAR=5×10−77Jm6. These correspond to a value of Tabor parameter,μ=0.14, which implies a behavior falling in the Maugis–Dugdale regime in the adhesion map [25]. The adhesion used here is weaker than that in the earlier case studies to be consistent with those expected in an interaction for non-metallic materials [6], which improves the convergence behavior also. The particle is modeled using 1149 nine-noded axisymmetric hybrid elements [23,22], while the substrate is modeled using 4160 nine-noded axisymmetric hybrid elements. Totally there are 21622 nodes in the model, with highly refined mesh (with element sizes of the order of 0.1nm) used near the interaction zone.The axial stress profiles near the interaction zone in spherical particle and substrate are given in Fig. 12. Fig. 12a shows the axial stress profile when the spherical particle and the substrate are near contact. Since the interaction force between the particle and the substrate is purely tensile in this configuration, the stresses are entirely tensile, with the stress magnitude being the highest along the axis as the points with minimum separation lie on the axis. Since the adhesive force is distributed over the volume and has a range comparable with the particle radius, it can be seen that the maximum tensile stresses are occurring at a sub-surface location and the surface stresses are very small. In case of a surface force model, the axial stresses will be very high on the surface. Fig. 12b shows the axial stresses for an in-contact condition, corresponding to an initial separation of 0.25nm. It can be seen that the net interaction force between the two bodies is tensile in this configuration also, causing the compressive stresses to be distributed over a much smaller region, though the magnitudes of both tensile and compressive stresses are comparable. Since the repulsion force has a much steeper gradient, the compressive stresses concentrate near the surface, moving closer to the behavior seen in a surface force model. Fig. 12c shows the axial stress profile corresponding to the equilibrium configuration where the total interaction force between the spherical particle and the substrate is zero. This occurs for a displacement of about 0.094nm from the initial separation of 0.25nm (i.e., the equilibrium initial separation is 0.156nm). The geometry of the interaction zone gets modified, so that the closest approach (minimum separation) between the sphere and substrate is 0.2277nm, and the contact zone becomes nearly conforming. Such a change in geometry, and the associated changes in forces and stress profile, can be elucidated only by a non-linear, large-deformation analysis.In both Figs. 12b and c, it can be seen that there are compressive stresses near the axis, while tensile stresses occur near the outer periphery of the interaction zone. However, the contact radius cannot be precisely determined as the repulsive force also is assumed to have a finite range. An approximate value of contact radius from the analysis, calculated based on the transition from compressive to tensile axial stress, is 1.4nm, which falls between the DMT contact radius of 1.01nm and JKR contact radius of 1.46nm for the zero external load condition [43]. Since the compressive stresses are highly localized, their magnitudes are significantly higher than the tensile stresses so as to achieve the equilibrium between repulsive and adhesive forces. The stress profiles can be seen to be comparable with those obtained by Sauer and Li [41], though the configuration they studied is the interaction between a cylinder and a flat surface. An important difference between body force and surface force formulations can be seen in all these figures: the surfaces have very small stresses in a body force model, as they are free surfaces, as compared to the very high values of axial stress expected at the surface in case of a surface force model.Compared to the previous case studies, convergence requires more number of iterations in this problem. On increasing the strength of adhesion or compliance of the substrate, number of equilibrium iterations needed for convergence increases. This is mainly because of the highly nonlinear nature of the interaction forces – especially the steep gradient of repulsion force – and additionally due to the first-order convergence rate of the proposed algorithm. For the parameters considered, the particle needs to be brought close to the half-space very slowly (1pm/step), and each step requires about 10–50 iterations to converge. Solutions presented here are obtained by using an under-relaxation factor of 0.2, which is activated when the rate of convergence becomes small during the solution. However, the computational resources needed per iteration is very small compared to a full Newton–Raphson scheme due to the significant reduction in operations required and prevention of loss of sparsity of the stiffness matrix. Further, when significant adhesion-induced instabilities are present [32,4], even a Newton–Raphson approach is not expected to converge, unless artificial changes to the displacement vector are made [36]. Hence, it is preferable to approach such challenging problems by using a transient code, providing the quasi-static solution as the large-time limit [23]. Such an approach will be capable of studying the time-dependence of adhesion phenomenon as well [19].This analysis is a first step towards the computational simulation of the particle engulfment problem, wherein rigid, sub-micron-sized particles are absorbed by soft substrates solely due to the force of adhesion [34,35]. The conforming contact occurring in such cases might significantly increase the minimum radius of curvature up to which a surface force formulation can be used. Additionally, engulfment of nanoparticles by biological membranes has high practical relevance in the fields of biology and medicine for studying problems like drug delivery, biomedical imaging, attack of living cells by viruses and nanotoxicity [1,28,8], which requires the use of a body force formulation, especially in case of thin membranes like those of many biological cells. These biological membranes are usually multilayered, which can easily be incorporated in a body force formulation. Hence, finite-strain problems like particle engulfment can be studied using material models like Neo-Hookean or Ogden material models [5] in a transient analysis framework using the present formulation.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We have presented a body force model with first-order convergence rate for the finite element analysis of adhesive interactions between elastic particles. The general formulation and various special cases are derived. The model is validated by comparing with the analytical solutions for standard benchmark problems. The computational advantage of symmetric and axisymmetric formulations over the general formulation is discussed.The body force model used here overcomes the restrictive assumptions in the commonly used surface force model, like requirement for sufficiently large radius of curvature. A further advantage of body force model is that it can easily be extended to other types of interactions, like gravitational force between two objects of comparable size, by suitably modifying the interaction force. However, the computational complexity of the formulation would necessitate a special attention to algorithms for improving the computational speed, like parallel programming.The formulation presented here is suitable for studying various interesting applications like the effect of adhesion on the dynamics of an AFM cantilever [13,17]. The axisymmetric formulation is especially suitable for studying particle engulfment problems [34], which is being pursued at present. The models presented here can easily be extended to transient analyses using a method similar to that adopted in Jayadeep et al. [20,21]. This provides an interesting possibility to overcome adhesion-induced instability issues associated with static analyses [4], wherein the steady-state configuration can be obtained as a limiting case of a transient problem [23].The radial and axial forces in axisymmetric formulation of interaction between two elastic bodies given by Eqs. (20) and (21) in Section 2.3.2 can be written as(30)f1=−C1∫0π(c−dcosθ)dθ(a−bcosθ)4+C2∫0π(c−dcosθ)dθ(a−bcosθ)7(31)f2=−C3∫0πdθ(a−bcosθ)4+C4∫0πdθ(a−bcosθ)7for the special case when the repulsion index n=12, where C1, C2, C3, and C4 are constants. These integrals are evaluated using Mathematica software [47], and the expressions obtained are given below:(32)∫0πdθ(a−bcosθ)4=a(2a2+3b2)π2(a2−b2)7/2,a>b;b>0;a,b∈R(33)∫0πdθ(a−bcosθ)7=(16a6+120a4b2+90a2b4+5b6)π16(a2−b2)13/2,a>b;b>0;a,b∈R(34)∫0π(c−dcosθ)dθ(a−bcosθ)4=(2a3c+3ab2c−4a2bd−b3d)π2(a2−b2)7/2,a>b;b,c,d>0;a,b,c,d∈R(35)∫0π(c−dcosθ)dθ(a−bcosθ)7=(16a6c+120a4b2c+90a2b4c+5b6c−56a5bd−140a3b3d−35ab5d)π16(a2−b2)13/2,a>b;b,c,d>0;a,b,c,d∈R