@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Numerical simulation of CAD thin structures using the eXtended Finite Element Method and Level Sets

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Propose a pragmatic approach for simulating complex industrial parts.Meshing issues avoided thanks to the X-FEM.Conversion of the CAD into a Level-Set function.Use solid elements in order to treat both slender and massive parts.Encouraging results are shown.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Partition of unity,X-FEM,Thin structures,Level-Sets,CAD,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
An efficient approach is proposed in order to predict the mechanical response of complex industrial parts. As these structures are usually composed of massive and thin parts, different models have to be mixed together (plate, shells, solid). The transition between these different kinematic assumptions can be problematic and non-linear models cannot be employed depending on the plate model that is considered. Moreover, Finite Element analysis in the case of large and complex assemblies implies tedious meshing steps. The idealization and simplification of these structures into a mix of 2D and 3D Finite Elements usually takes therefore significantly more time than the analysis itself. The objective of the present contribution is to explore a calculation process that enables a simple automation of the meshing steps. Even though potentially computationally more expensive, the meshing automation may lead to drastic time reduction for the CAD to mesh process and a much tighter link between CAD and calculated assembly. Finally, easier and faster design explorations would be allowed. This strategy relies on the use of a non-conforming quadratic approximation that is defined on a sufficiently fine mesh. The eXtended Finite Element Method is used in order to alleviate meshing issues. The mesh and Level-Set function are built from the CAD input, by means of an automated approach. The strategy is verified against analytical solutions and real aerospace substructures.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The assessment of the mechanical behaviour of complex industrial parts is still an issue nowadays. Usually, these parts are composed of both thin and massive areas that are assembled together along junctions. The mechanical behaviour of these massive and thin areas is different, so that different models are usually considered. The usual path for such analysis begins with the CAD representation of the structure: both thin and thick areas are represented as three-dimensional volumes which are described by their outer boundary (BREP). This volumetric representation is converted into plates or shells by means of the extraction of the mid-plane of the part. Extracting this mid-plane cannot always be automatized for complex shapes, leading to some tedious and time consuming issues (difficulties to obtain continuous mid-planes with part assembly). However, the constitutive equations must also be rewritten for plate and shell models, which can be problematic for non-linear problems. Moreover, a special care has to be taken on the junction between these 2D zones and the 3D massive parts. Usually, the kinematic link between the two areas induces stress concentrations. This is why in some highly secured applications, solid modelizations have to be considered for certification purpose [1]. In addition, such a kinematic hypothesis decreases the accuracy of the model near junctions. In order to overcome these issues, either solid elements can be used or special “solid shell” elements can be considered. Using low order solid elements requires a large number of degrees of freedom in order to be able to represent the mechanical fields in the parts. This is also due to the bad behaviour of such elements when their aspect ratio increases. The use of high order finite elements, as advocated in [2], allows to get rid of these issues. Using solid shell elements allows one to represent plate-like behaviour by means of displacement-only finite elements. Usually, these elements involve incompatible modes [3,4] and selective integration [5–7] in order to be computationally efficient. In addition, the constitutive equation has still to be rewritten for some of these elements. Note also that equivalent mid-planes have to be defined as the integration is done along this preferential direction. Alternatively, the transition between thin and solid parts can be represented by means of the Arlequin method [8]. This method allows to couple models involving different physics, and relies on the partition of the energy in the transition zone between solid and shell.Albeit these modelization issue, the use of state-of-the-art industrial simulation tools such as FEM usually implies tedious meshing steps in the case of large and complex assemblies, with complex and manual meshing steps. The idealization and simplification of these structures into a mix of 2D and 3D Finite Elements usually takes significantly more time than the analysis itself. This is a major drawback if many complex designs are to be explored: the meshing parametrization may have to be done separately from the CAD parametrization or with complex coding of case-dependent meshing rules. This is why an alternative and pragmatic path is proposed here for the simulation of thin structures. This strategy relies on two main ingredients: (i) the eXtended Finite Element Method (X-FEM) [9] and (ii) the Level-Set method [10]. The eXtended Finite Element Method specificities are used to explore a calculation process that enables a simple automation of the meshing steps. Even though potentially computationally more expensive, the meshing automation allowed by the X-FEM may lead to drastic time reduction of the CAD to mesh process and a much tighter link between CAD and calculated assembly. This process may therefore allow easier and faster design explorations in an industrial context.The X-FEM belongs to the class of the partition of unity finite element methods [11]. It was first proposed in the context of fracture mechanics as a mean to avoid remeshing issues. Since this first work, the X-FEM has been applied to a large number of applications (see [12,13] for reviews on this subject), all trying to avoid or limit remeshing. In particular, the X-FEM allows to solve mechanical problems on meshes that are independent of the geometry (like advocated in fictitious domain approaches [14]). Usually, part or discontinuity surfaces are represented by means of the Level-Set method [10]. The Level-Set method allows one to define implicit surfaces as the iso-zero of a scalar function that is usually taken as the signed distance function to the surface. The Level-Set function is evaluated at some grid points, then interpolated on the domain. The iso-zero of the Level-Set is usually located inside elements, which leads to the necessity to use non- conforming methods such as the X-FEM for the simulation over Level-Set domains.The strategy proposed here consists in translating the explicit CAD representation of the domain into a Level-Set and a mesh that can be used in order to simulate the behaviour of mechanical parts, using the X-FEM. This method has to be tolerant with damaged CAD files and accurate. The accuracy is obtained thanks to the use of quadratic elements that have been reported to represent a good compromise between accuracy and computational cost for modelling thin structures with solid elements [15,16].The paper is organized as follows: First, the strategy for efficient mesh and Level-Set creation from a CAD file is presented and illustrated on some real geometries. Then, the X-FEM is recalled. In a third section, the use of solid elements is assessed in the case of thin and moderately thin structures, both for FEM and X-FEM. Finally, numerical examples are proposed in order to illustrate the use of the proposed approach for real structures, before concluding.In the eXtended Finite Element Method context, the geometrical features are taken into account using the Level-Set approach. In this case, the geometry is represented implicitly as the iso-zero of a scalar function called Level-Set functionϕ(x). This function is usually chosen as the signed distance to the curve (resp. surface) of the object so that its gradient has unit norm. Level-Set primitives can be defined for simple geometries such as planes, cylinders, spheres together with Boolean operations. This allows to define geometrical objects of quite complex shape, but not in the case of spline and nurbs-based geometries which are common in CAD parts. An approach has been proposed recently by Moumnassi et al. [17] in order to construct the Level-Set corresponding to such surfaces with a given geometrical accuracy. This approach gives the opportunity to translate the CAD representation of parts into a Level-Set field and its mesh support. However it is not clear how does the approach behaves when faced with damaged CAD with holes, superimposition between surfaces, or in the case of parts involving numerous surfaces (in terms of processing computational time). In this paper, a pragmatic alternative is considered: it is proposed to rely directly on the knowledge of the explicit surface of the part, then to compute the signed distance to this surface. Albeit being less accurate than the aforementioned strategy, the proposed approach is computationally efficient and tolerant to damaged CAD geometries. This strategy is based on the opensource software Gmsh [18] that can load CAD parts thanks to the integration of the OpenCASCADE [19], opensource CAD engine. The input of the process is the definition of the geometry as a CAD file format such as IGES or STEP. Then, the procedure is defined in three steps illustrated in Fig. 1:1.Immerse the CAD part in a regular mesh based on the bounding-box of the geometry.Keep only the elements that contain some matter.Compute the distance from the nodes of this minimal mesh to the surface of the part.As the approach is dedicated to plate-like structures, the algorithm takes advantage of the characteristic features of such structures, so that the input of the procedure relies on a small set of parameters:1.The size of the elements.The maximum thickness of the part.The number of sub-grids that have to be generated.Create the STL discretization of the part (to obtain, from a prescribed geometrical accuracy a discretization of the surface of the part).•Create a cloud of points on the STL discretization. This cloud is such that the minimal distance between two points is less than the elements size.Create a cloud of points on the edges of the model. This cloud is such that the minimal distance between two points is less than the elements size.Compute the bounding-box of the STL discretization and enlarge it.Activate level 0 cells containing at least one point of the surface cloud (i.e. crossed by the interface).Activate level 0 cells sufficiently close to the surface (distance smaller than the thickness of the part).Level0 mesh is built.Activate level>0cells containing at least one point of the edge cloud (i.e. crossed by one edge), or sufficiently close (distance smaller than the thickness of the part divided by2level−1). Note that invalid cells may be introduced at this point (i.e. cells that are not completely filled by their sons). These cells are depicted in red in Fig. 3(g)).Cancel invalid cells (see Algorithm 2).Compute the distance from all active cells to the STL faces of the model.Cancel cells out of the domain.Find hanging nodes.Computation of the Level-Set. Step (i) is referring to Fig. 3.Input: CAD definition, Element size (Level 0) Lx, Ly, Lz, maximal thickness Rmax, number of levels LevelsDeducted parameters:resolution=min(Lx,Ly,Lz)andRtube=2max(Lx,Ly,Lz).Step (a) Create the STL discretization of the part.Step (b)foreachFace fdo|BasedontheSTLdiscretizationofthegeometry,createacloudofpointsonthepart’ssurface,suchasthemaximumdistancebetweeneverypointsissmallerthanresolution.endifLevels>1then|foreachEdgeedo|Createacloudofpointsonthepart’sedges,suchasthemaximumdistancebetweeneverypointsissmallerthanresolution.endendStep (c)Compute the bounding-box of the cloud of nodesEnlarge the bounding-boxCompute Nx, Nyand Nz(number of elements alongx,yand z) thanks to the knowledge of Lx, Ly, Lzand the bounding-boxCreate a regularNx×Ny×Nzgrid of cubic elementsStep (d), (e), (f)foreachPointponthefacespointclouddo|Activatelevel0cellscontainingporsufficientlyclosetop(maxdistance±Rmaxalongx,yandz)endStep(g) forLevelCurrentLevel=1to Levelsdo|foreachPointpontheedgespointclouddo|ActivatelevelCurrentLevelcellscontainingporsufficientlyclosetop(maxdistance±Rtube/2Levels−CurrentLevel−1alongx,yandz)endendStep (h) Cancel invalid son cells (see Algorithm 2)Step (i)Computationofthe Level Set:foreach CAD Surface fdo|foreachSTLfacefstldo|ComputethedistancefromallactivenodestofacefstlendendStep (j) Cancel cells out of the domain (positive Level-Set for all nodes).Step (k) Find orphan (hanging) nodesOutput: Mesh containing the CAD + Level Set + hanging nodes dataElimination of the invalid cells.Input: Hierarchy of Cartesian gridsforCurrentLevel=1to Levelsdo|foreachActivecellcinGridoflevelCurrentLeveldo|GetsonsofcinGridoflevelCurrentLevel+1ifAtleastonesonisactiveandnotAllsonactivethen|(Onlyconsiderpartiallyfilledcells)Deactivateactivesons;endendendOutput: Cartesian grids without invalid sonsThe strategy presented above is now illustrated on some CAD parts. The idealized CAD parts (see Fig. 4) were provided by EADS IW, and are representative of substructures that are commonly found in the aerospace industry. The first one (Fig. 4(a)) represents a plate containing a hole at its centre, the second one (Fig. 4(b)) a glued junction and the third one (Fig. 4(c)) a stiffened panel. In particular, we will study the influence of the number of levels and the size of level 0 elements. Note that in all these examples, we will consider level 0 elements whose size is close to the thickness of the part (typically close to one-half of the thickness): the use of such mesh density will be justified in Section 4.The geometry of the plate is 30×90×2mm. Two types of level 0 meshes are considered: (i)Lx=Ly=Lz=1.2mmandLx=Ly=Lz=0.6mm. These meshes are relatively coarse with respect to the thickness of the plate. The influence of the number of sub-grid levels is studied in Figs. 5 and 6for meshLx=Ly=Lz=1.2mmand Figs. 7 and 8for meshLx=Ly=Lz=0.6mm. In these figures, one can see the number of nodes, elements and the computational time required to create the mesh and the Level Set (on a Quad-Core AMD Opteron Processor 2376, with only one core used). The influence of the refinement near the edges of the model is clearly visible in Figs. 6 and 8. One can also see that the processing time for a very accurate geometrical accuracy (292,100 elements) took only 10s. The error in the volume of the part is given in Table 1: it can be seen that the initial volume error is decreased by about 25% when increasing the number of sub-grids.Consider now the glued junction depicted in Fig. 4(b). The geometry of the part is now close to panel structures that can be found in the aerospace industry. Moreover, it involves different thicknesses and sharp edges. The size of the bounding-box of the part is 500×272×1200mm, and the maximum and minimum thicknesses are respectively 30 and 10mm. Level 0 mesh is composed ofLx=Ly=Lz=6mmelements (which is quite coarse, greater than one-half of the minimum thickness), see Fig. 9. The influence of the addition of new levels is clearly visible in Fig. 10: it enables to obtain a good geometrical approximation with a local addition of elements. Looking at the error on the volume of the domain (Table 2), one can see that it remains very small (less than 1%) in all cases although the geometrical description of the sharp features can be quite poor. Concerning the computational time, Level Sets on extremely fine meshes (typically 1.5 millions of elements) can be generated in less than 2min.Finally, consider the stiffened panel depicted in Fig. 4(c). The geometry of the part is also close to structures that can be found in the aerospace industry. The size of the bounding-box of the part is 38.7×600×1000mm, and the maximum and minimum thickness are respectively 6 and 2.94mm. Level 0 mesh is composed ofLx=Ly=Lz=1.5mmelements (about one-half of the minimum thickness). By imposing this size for the elements, one can see in Fig. 11that only one level of grid ensures a good geometrical approximation (see Fig. 12). In this example, it is also possible to keep the same geometrical accuracy by taking into account the particular geometry of the part: it is extruded along thezdirection. Thus, it is appealing to choose bigger elements in this direction: anLx=Ly=1.5mm,Lz=4mmlevel 0 grid is considered. The resulting mesh is depicted in Fig. 13, and the corresponding Level-Set in Fig. 14. The size of the mesh is drastically reduced without sacrificing the geometrical description. Note however that finding preferential directions can be difficult in practice, as these directions are usually associated to local axes of the part: these axes are usually not aligned with the global axis of the computational domain. The processing time is longer in this example (6140s), because of the size of the point cloud (61,244,302 points): this is linked to the thickness that is extremely small with respect to the size of the structure.To conclude this section, we have proposed a systematic and pragmatic approach for the construction of the implicit representation of complex CAD structures. The computational efficiency of the approach was demonstrated. One can note that such a strategy can easily be parallelized in order to further improve its performances (the faces of the model and the nodes of the cloud can be scattered on different processes). Moreover, note that the strategy can also be applied to massive parts, although a loss of efficiency may occur due to the introduction of a large number of cells out of the part (as the “thickness” parameter is large in this case).The X-FEM is an extension of the finite element method (FEM) that was developed from the need to improve the FEM approach for problems with complex and evolving geometries. In contrast to classical finite elements, the X-FEM does not require the mesh to conform the geometry [21,22]. Instead, one can consider a regular mesh that defines the domain of interest without describing geometrical features such as cracks, inclusions or free surfaces. Then, the approximation is enriched by means of suitable functions to take into account these features. More precisely, the X-FEM approximation of the displacement field,u, over an element is given by(1)u(x)|Ωe=∑α=1nNα(uα+∑β=1neaβαφβ(x))where the approximation can be divided into a classical one that depends only on the shape functionsNα(x)and classical degrees of freedom (dofs in the following)uα, and an enriched one that depends on enrichment functionsφβ(x)and enriched dofsaβα. Those functions allow to take the non-conforming geometrical features into account in the approximation. The additional degrees of freedom are only added to the nodes whose support is split by the interface, which means that typically only a few of them are added. In the case of free surfaces, as in this contribution, no enrichment has to be considered: only the matter part of the domain is considered when integrating the weak form, and no enriched dofs are introduced [21]. Because of the non-conforming geometry, the integration process is conducted using a modified Gauss quadrature scheme, as described in [9]. The number of integration points over each subdomain is chosen so that the integration is “exact”. In the present contribution, quadratic approximations will be considered in order to model the mechanical fields that occur in plate structures with a minimum number of elements. As presented in the previous section, the geometry on the structure is defined implicitly on nested meshes. This type of mesh produces so-called hanging nodes that have to be treated properly in order to ensure the conformity of the approximation. Some strategies have been proposed in order to overcome this issue [23–25]: in the present contribution, the approach proposed by Legrain et al. [24] will be considered. It is now necessary to characterize the approximation that is used in the approach. Numerous contributions studied the simulation of thin structures with finite elements. If low order elements are used, their bad approximation of the physical behaviour of such structures leads to locking phenomena. This phenomenon can appear for both 3D and 2D modelling of plates and shells. In both cases dedicated formulations have to be taken into account. If the plate is idealized by its mid-plane, a 2D model can be considered. However, mixed formulations [26–30] or reduced integration approaches [5–7] must be used in order to avoid locking issues. Mixed formulations are based on the introduction of rotational degrees of freedom in the approximation. In contrast, under-integrated elements allow to use a displacement based formulation. Unfortunately, selective reduced integration causes zero energy modes that have to be eliminated [31]. Moreover, the material law has to be modified for these models, which can be difficult for non-linear constitutive laws. In addition, the transition between such bidimensional areas to massive one can lead to stress concentrations if a rigid link is prescribed between the two models. Richer approaches have thus to be considered, but they lead to a computational overhead, especially for complex structures. An alternative consists of the use of three-dimensional elements. It is known that displacement-based low order elements are not able to represent the behaviour of slender structures, as locking occurs for both thick and thin plates. This is why so-called solid–shell elements have been proposed in the literature. Two main approaches arise: the first one is based on the use of low order finite elements whose behaviour has to be enhanced in order to represent the kinematics of shells [32–34]. The numerical efficiency of those elements is usually achieved using selective integration approaches [35–37,31], which can also lead to hourglass modes. The last possibility was advocated recently by Duster et al. [2]: the authors proposed to use very large conforming elements, but with a high polynomial order. This approach was shown not to be sensitive to locking issues if sufficiently high order polynomial basis functions are used (typically order 6–8). The authors applied this strategy to both Reisner–Mindlin plates (using 2D p-FEM) [38] and three-dimensional curved structures (using 3D p-FEM) [2].An intermediate possibility for the use of solid elements was proposed by Lee and Xu [39,1] for applications in offshore structures where both thin and thick plates coexist. Performing a cost study for quadratic and cubic approximations, the authors deduced that quadratic elements were a good compromise between computational cost and accuracy [15,16]. Moreover, they showed that it was more efficient to refine the computational mesh first in the plane of the plate then in the thickness. This is the strategy that we will pursue here. A non-conforming 3D quadratic mesh will be considered for both approximation and geometrical representation. In order to be able to describe implicitly the typical geometry of thin structures with Level-Sets, the size of the mesh must be close to the minimal thickness of the part. This geometrical requirement guided the geometrical examples presented in the last section. The objective of the next examples is to assess this strategy on some model problems.Consider a clamped square plate shown in Fig. 15. The length of the plate is 6mm and its thickness h is set to 0.023438mm so that the Kirchhoff theory can be considered. If the external load is denoted f, the deflection at the centre of the plate can be approximated by the following expression:(2)uc=0.00126fL4Dwhere D is called “plate stiffness”:(3)D=Eh312(1−ν2)with E andνrespectively Young's modulus and Poisson's ratio of the material. If we select E=1MPa andν=0.3, thenuc=1.3850×106mm.First, consider the case where the geometry is exact (the Level-Set is taken analytically), so that only the approximation induces errors. In addition, the mesh is aligned with the plate. A reference shell computation (18,726 dofs) involving 60×60 abaqus S4R5114-Node thin shell, reduced integration with hourglass control, using five degrees of freedom per node (two rotations and three displacements).elements is considered for comparison with the analytical solution and to define a reference in-plane shear stress field. The discrepancy between this shell solution and the analytical one is 0.433% (uc=1.391×106mmin this case). The amplitude of the corresponding reference in-plane shear stress is±3356MPa(see Fig. 16).Next, three solid modelizations with one element in the thickness are considered: (i) unit aspect ratio (0.023438×0.023438×0.023438mm elements); (ii) aspect ratio=8 (0.1875×0.1875×0.023438mm elements) and (iii) aspect ratio=16 (0.375×0.375×0.023438mm elements) (see Figs. 17 and 18).The results are summarized in Table 3: it can be seen that the mesh with a unit aspect ratio induces a 0.31% error on the deflection and 0.02% for the in-plane shear stress. Increasing the aspect ratio to 8 increases moderately the errors, while with a 16 aspect ratio begins to exhibit large errors. If tetrahedral elements are considered, then the influence of the aspect ratio is much more pronounced. This illustrates the fact that tetrahedral elements are more sensitive to distortions than hexahedral elements.For X-FEM and using similar elements (see for example Fig. 19), the error on the deflection is consistent with the finite element case (2.16%), while the error on the shear stress is lower than the finite element counterpart (0.13%). The difference stems from the fact that two half elements are used in the thickness of the plate, so that the approximation space is not exactly the same as the finite element one. However, this validates the fact that using the X-FEM do not modify the performance of the underlying finite element approach. Note also that, as explained in [1], the large increase of the error in the case of a 16 aspect ratio with tetrahedrons is due to an insufficient discretization in the plane of the plate.This small verification shows that thin structures can be accurately simulated with X-FEM using low order solid elements, provided that a sufficient number of elements are generated in the plane. This minimum number of elements is obtained naturally within the proposed strategy, as the two surfaces of the plate cannot pass through a unique element.The same tests can be applied on a thick plate whose dimensions are 6×6×0.3mm (aspect ratio=20). The results obtained with different discretizations are presented in Table 4and are compared to a reference solution which was computed using 120×120 abaqus S8R6228 Nodes doubly curved thick shell with reduced integration, using six degrees of freedom per node (three rotations and three displacements).elements (deflection6.957×102mm,σ12Max=19.993MPa). In these examples, variations of both aspect ratio and element size were considered. From these results, one can see that a good accuracy can be obtained using solid elements of size comparable to the thickness of the plate (less than 1% of discrepancy with respect to the reference solution). Obviously, using smaller elements improves the accuracy. Using flattened elements increases the error above to about 2%, but this also stems from the fact that the number of dofs has dropped. As in the thin case, tetrahedral elements are shown to be a bit more sensitive to distortions.In the X-FEM case (see Fig. 20for a typical mesh), the conclusions are similar than in the case of thin plates (see Table 6): the use of the X-FEM does not modify the behaviour of the elements. Nevertheless, some discrepancies can appear, due to the fact that the approximation space obtained after cutting the elements is different from the one obtained with a conforming mesh.Now, the complete strategy proposed above is applied with the example of the clamped plate. Both thick and thin cases are considered. In the two cases, a CAD file representing the plate is defined. Then, this file is taken as an input of the mesh-generation routine. The boundary conditions are imposed by means of a penalty method. Note that Lagrange multiplier method [40,41] or Nitsche's method [42] could be equally used. As the process tends to smooth geometrical angles, an approximation is introduced in the boundary conditions. In practice, the elements of the iso-zero are selected for the boundary conditions when the distance of their centroid to a given plane is lower than a prescribed threshold. The higher this threshold, the higher the number of elements whose displacement is prescribed, and thus the stiffer the behaviour of the plate in this particular case. This is illustrated in Fig. 21where the actual boundaries of the plate are compared with the CAD one. The deflection results are given in Table 5. One can see the influence of the selection of the boundaries: smaller boundaries result in a higher deflection at the centre of the plate. Depending on this parameter, the errors in deflection and shear stress vary respectively from 1.28% to 2.16% and 0.86% to 1.1%. Moreover, it can be seen that a good accuracy can be obtained in this case, with elements whose aspect ratio is moderate. The case of the thick plate (thickness 0.3mm) is now considered: the base mesh is composed of a 0.15×0.15×0.15mm quadratic elements level 0 mesh. In order to represent accurately the boundaries of the domain, 1, 2 and 3 levels are added: Fig. 22depicts the influence of adding multiple levels to the initial mesh. The deflection and shear stress errors are given in Table 6. One can see that although the deflection error is decreasing, the shear error does not decrease monotonously upon mesh refinement. This is due to the reference that is used: it was obtained using shell elements that may not represent the three dimensional behaviour of the plate. An overkill FEM solution is computed in order to build a reference (0.06×0.06×0.06mm quadratic elements). The figures inside the brackets show the errors (in both deflection and stress) with respect to this new reference: it can be seen now that the error converges to zero when the number of levels increases, which is consistent.Finally, we still consider the same example, but now the plate is rotated by an angle of 60 in the xy plane in order to study the influence of the orientation of the part with respect to the mesh. 1, 2, 3 and 4 levels are considered, level 0 mesh being composed of 0.15×0.15×0.15mm quadratic elements. The corresponding meshes and boundaries are depicted in Fig. 23, and the improvement on the geometry is clearly visible. Deflection errors are presented in Table 7(stress errors are not depicted, as the plate is not oriented along x- and y-axes). Like in the previous example, the improvement in terms of error is clear when increasing the number of mesh levels. It is also clear that the rotation of the plate almost did not modify the error level (with a monotonous decrease of the error with respect to the overkill FEM solution).The proposed approach is now illustrated on some idealized CAD parts provided by EADS IW. These structures are representative of substructures that are commonly found in the aerospace industry. Of increasing complexity, the objective here is to illustrate the potential of the approach.We are interested in the simulation of the behaviour of the drilled plate shown in Fig. 4(a). The boundary conditions that are considered are depicted in Fig. 24: they represent combined traction and bending loadings by means of a prescribed displacement. Three meshes are considered: (i) a regularLx=Ly=Lz=0.6mmelements mesh, (ii) a regularLx=Ly=Lz=1.2mmelements mesh with two grid levels and (ii) a regularLx=Ly=Lz=1.2mmelements mesh with three grid levels. These meshes are shown in Figs. 7(a) and 5(b) and (c) respectively.The results are presented in Figs. 25–27for the proposed cases. One can see that despite the fact that the level 0 mesh in Figs. 26 and 27 is twice coarser than the mesh in Fig. 25, the mechanical fields (both displacement and Von-Mises norm of the stress) are similar and extremely smooth. Adding mesh levels allows similar or better geometrical accuracy depending on the number of levels involved, but with a smaller amount of dofs than homogeneous refinement.In order to deal with quantitative results, the error in the strain energy is computed from the previous results. The reference energy is obtained by means of an overkill conforming finite element solution with a fourth order polynomial approximation (594,060 dofs). The results are summarized in Table 8. In particular, it can be seen that the use of multiple mesh levels greatly improves the accuracy and the efficiency of the approach: the coarse meshLx=Ly=Lz=1.2mmwith two levels gives a lower error and fewer dofs than the fine mesh (Lx=Ly=Lz=0.6mm) with only one level.The convergence of the approach is finally assessed by means of homogeneous mesh refinement. Meshes of sizeLx=Ly=Lz=0.8,0.4,0.3and 0.25mm are considered, and the error in the strain energy is computed with respect to the reference solution. The results are presented in Fig. 28. It can be seen that the convergence rate is close to the optimal one (i.e. 2 as a quadratic approximation is used). Theoretically, the convergence rate should be bounded byO(h3/2)(see [43, p. 119; 44]). However, it was shown in [45] that optimal convergence could nevertheless be obtained in practice, depending on the problem (which seems to be the case here). The influence of the integration is now assessed: rather than partitioning the elements along the iso-zero of the Level-Set, a classical integration rule is considered. In order to be able to converge, the number of integration points is increased in the elements that are cut by the interface: a 72 points degenerated quadrangle integration rule is considered in this case: the convergence of this approach is depicted in Fig. 28: it can be seen that a loss of accuracy can occur depending on the mesh density and most likely on the geometry of the problem. Moreover, increasing the number of integration points on such fine meshes has a huge impact on the computational time. Note also that if the number of integration points is insufficient, then the stiffness matrix can become singular. This minimum number of points depends on both mesh and geometry. The advantage of such an approach stems from the fact that the burden of creating the sub-elements is avoided. A better alternative would consist of the use of this incompatible integration strategy together with the exact CAD description of the geometry (like with the Finite Cell [2]).The case of the glued junction is now considered. Here, only one part of the junction is presented in order to run on a personal computer. The part is subjected to a uniaxial traction along z by means of a prescribed displacement (100mm along z) on facez+(cf. Fig. 29) and zero Dirichlet BC on facez−.A two level mesh withLx=Ly=Lz=6mmfor level 0 elements is considered. The mesh is composed of 249,816 quadratic tetrahedra (1,051,404 dofs). Thanks to the use of solid elements, the junction between the different parts is taken into account without any hypothesis on the geometry of the different sub-parts. The displacement and stress fields are displayed in Fig. 30. Stress concentrations are captured by the solution at the centre of the junction. These informations could not be obtained using a plate model.Finally, the stiffened plate presented in Section 2.2 is considered. Like in the previous example, only one part of the plate is considered in order to allow its treatment on a personal computer. The corresponding geometry is presented in Fig. 31. Like in Section 2.2, the Level-Set is computed on a mesh composed of only one level of elements (1.5×1.5×4mm elements), as the geometrical accuracy is sufficient. The part is then subjected to a bending loading by applying the boundary conditions depicted in Fig. 31. The size of the corresponding model is 2,452,461 dofs, and the results are presented in Fig. 32for both deformed configuration and stress.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
