@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Thermo-mechanical modeling and simulation of microstructure evolution in multi-pass H-shape rolling

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A set of mechanism‐based unified constitutive equations was developed.Procedure for the multi‐pass rolling simulation was developed and a Scheduled 9‐pass H‐shape rough rolling process was carried out.A numerical orthogonal experiment was designed to investigate the effects of rolling parameters on the microstructure evolution.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multi-pass hot rolling,H-shape,Numerical simulation,Austenite grain evolution,Numerical orthogonal experiment,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A set of mechanism-based constitutive equations was developed to model the effects of microstructure evolution on elastic–plastic flow of Q235 steel. This set of equations is implemented into the finite element (FE) solver ABAQUS for multi-pass shape rolling process simulation. The procedure for multi-pass rolling simulation was developed, a scheduled multi-pass rough rolling process of H-shape steel was carried out and the accuracy of the equations was validated by comparisons between the calculated mill load and measured ones. A numerical orthogonal experiment was designed to investigate the effects of rolling parameters on the microstructure evolution.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the last few decades, numerous different models were developed to describe the phenomena that characterize the material response to deformation. According to the length scale of the phenomena they describe, the models are classified as atomic-scale, mesoscale, and macroscopic scale models [1]. The first two types are mainly used in scientific researches for requirements of specialized scientific and computational knowledge. In practical industrial process design and simulation the macroscopic scale models are most commonly used. However, if the microstructure evolution that controls the material response to deformation is not taken into account, the macroscopic scale models will become inaccurate outside their validation space.Quality assurance requires materials to be processed with known microstructure; only thermal-mechanical simulation of metal behavior during hot deformation is not sufficient to meet the needs of the process designer on roll pass design, and microstructure evolution should also be taken into account. Since the application of a fully three-dimensional simulation leads to very long computation time, different numerical procedures to simulate multi-pass rolling were developed in the last 10 years. Bontcheva and Petzov [2] presented an axi-symmetric approach for numerical simulation of die forging using the finite element code MARC. Liu and Lin [3] developed a set of mechanism-based unified viscoplastic constitutive equations and numerical procedures to simulate multi-pass rolling with a two-dimensional finite element method. Glowacki [4] presented a generalized plane-strain (GPS) approach for fast simulation of multi-pass shape rolling. Bontcheva and Petrov [5] presented an approach for predicting the final microstructure and main mechanical properties of thermo-mechanically strengthened non-alloy steel and their further improving, using computer simulation by means of a finite element method (FEM). Lin and Dean [6] introduce their techniques for the development of functions of physical variables and coupling of the variables within viscoplastic material models to form a set of unified constitutive equations. They also predicted the mechanical properties of the products. Phaniraj et al. [7] studied the evolution of microstructure through the thickness of the strip in a hot strip mill. They found that the microstructure evolution reported by Hodgson as well as by Sellars led to similar values of rolling loads. In order to include work softening due to dynamic phase transformations as well as the effect of temperature and strain rate variation on flow stress, a mathematical model was developed and verified by Serajzadeh and Karimi Taheri [8]. In order to investigate the effect of deformation mode on constitutive relation, hot torsion and compression tests of AISI 4140 steel were conducted, and a modified constitutive equation was presented by Kim et al. [9].The main aim of the present work is to present an approach for FEM simulation of multi-pass H-shape hot rolling. Based on the models developed by Hodgson [10] and Sellers [11], a flow stress constitutive equation for Q235 steel was developed and implemented into the FE solver procedure to carry out simulation of a scheduled multi-pass rough rolling process of H-shape steel. The rolling loads as well as the austenite grain evolution were predicted. Furthermore, a numerical orthogonal design experiment was carried out to study the effects of rolling parameters on the microstructure evolution.The main chemical composition of Q235 steel is given inTable 1.Fig. 1 gives a schematic drawing of hot stock section along rolling direction in one pass of hot rolling at a specific time. The stock is divided into three zones marked as A, B and C. In zone A, the stock has a homogeneous austenite grain distribution which is obtained by preheating process for the first pass or an inhomogeneous distribution of austenite grain size developed at the past rolling passes. In zone B, the microstructure in the section will undergo dynamic recovery, dynamic recrystallization, or dynamic recrystallization with subsequent meta-dynamic recrystallization if the volume fraction of dynamic recrystallization Rdreaches the value of 0.99. In zone C, the microstructure will undergo static recrystallization, continued meta-dynamic recrystallization and grain growth depending on the specific rolling conditions. The zone mark and austenite grain evolution flow chart with lot of details are shown in Fig. 1.Fig. 2(a) shows a schematic drawing of material resistance stress σdversus the full strain εT(elastic plus plastic), where σ0 is the initial yield stress when full strain reaches ε0, and the corresponding plastic strain is 0.2% marked as ε0.2% in the figure. The deformation in the elastic zone, shown in Fig. 2(a), is assumed to be elastic with Young’s modulus E=σ0/(ε0−0.002). A schematic drawing of equivalent resistance stress σyversus equivalent plastic strainεpeqwith the value recalculated from Fig. 2(a) is shown in Fig. 2(b), where σpis the peak flow stress, εpkis the peak plastic strain, εcris the critical strain for judging whether the dynamic recrystallization has been started or not, and σsis the steady flow stress under specific deformation conditions.In the presented work, σyis defined as(1a)σy(εpeq,T)=A(εpeq)n,ε0.2%≤εpeq≤εcr(1b)σy(εpeq,T)=A(εpeq)n(1−Rd)+σsRd,εpeq>εcrwhere A and n are the material dependent constants and Rdis the volume fraction of dynamic recrystallization. The Zener–Hollomon parameter is adopted to represent the rate-dependent hardening behavior of the material. The calculated flow stress curves of Q235 steel at temperatures 900°C and 1300°C with the strain rate of 1, 6, and 15s−1 are shown inFig. 3.It is known that the composition of carbon–manganese steels does not affect the recrystallization kinetics significantly. So the microstructure models developed by Hodgson and Sellers were assumed to be applicable for Q235 steel. The parameters determined for Q235 steel are listed inTable 2. The equations and constants marked with “*” were developed in the presented work. The equations were implemented into the FE solver ABAQUS/Explicit through the user defined subroutine VUMAT.Although the plastic strain during hot forming processes is much larger than the elastic strain, the elastic–plastic model was still used in the presented work. Based on the von Mises yield condition and the associated material flow rule, the isotropic-hardening yield function of the Q235 steel is defined as(2)F(σik,κ)=f−κ=12SikSik−13σy2(εpeq,T)=0The differential form is expressed as(3)∂f∂σikdσik−23σy∂σy∂εpeqdεpeq−23σy∂σy∂TdT=0where∂f/∂σik=Sikis the stress deviator tensor,dεpeq=(2/3dεikp:dεikp)1/2is the equivalent plastic strain increment, anddεikpis assumed to bedλSik, so it is further expressed as(4)dεpeq=(23dλSik:dλSik)12=(23dλdλSik:Sik)12=(23dλdλ23σy2)12=23dλσyThe total strain increment is defined asdεjl=dεjle+dεjlp+dεjlT, wheredεjlT=αdTδjlis the temperature strain increment (αis thermal expansion coefficient),dεjlpis the plastic strain increment, anddεjleis the elastic strain increment and can be expressed as(5)dεjle=Cikjledσik+∂Cikjle∂TdTσik=dεjle′+dεjlT′where the flexible tensorCikjle=Dikjle−1is considered to be a function of temperature. So the stress increment tensordσikcan be expressed as(6)dσik=Dikjle(dεjl−dεjlp−dεjlT−dεjlT′)=Dikjledεjl−∂f∂σjlDikjledλ−DikjledεjlT−DikjledεjlT′where(7)dλ=Sik(dεjl−dεjlT−dεjlT′)(2σy2/9G2)(3G+Ep)−(∂σy/∂T)dT(2/3)σy(3G+Ep)whereEp=∂σy/∂εpeqis the plastic modulus defined as the slow rate of the equivalent resistance stress cure, and G is the shear elastic modulus of the material.Finally, the increment constitutive equation can be given as(8)dσik=Dikjledεjl−Dikjlepdεjl−DikTdTwhereDikjleis the elastic matrix,Dikjlepis the equivalent elastic–plastic strain matrix, andDikjlTis the temperature matrix(9)Dikjle=2Gδikδjl+λδikδjl(10)Dikjlep=SikSjl(σy2/9G2)(3G+Ep)(11)DikT=SikSjl(αδjl−∂CikjlT/∂T)σik−(1/3G)Sik(∂σy/∂T)(σy2/9G2)(3G+Ep)Fig. 4 shows a schematic drawing that illustrates the processing steps.The whole rough rolling process used in industry for H-shape steel production can be generally described by the following three steps. Firstly, the stock is preheated in a walking beam furnace for a scheduled time. Secondly, the stock is conveyed to a device with predesigned descaling sprays to remove iron oxide scale layers from hot stock surfaces. Then it undergoes scheduled multi-pass hot deformation on a reversing mill.We consider the rough rolling process for the production of H200×200×8/12, a typical size of H-shape steel commonly used in construction sites. The stock has an 240×375mm2 cross-section and is 5000mm in length. Nine roll passes shaped by four different gauges with specific gaps were applied to the reversing rough rolling process.The model consists of two rollers and a half-symmetry deformable stock (taking advantage of symmetry). Coulomb friction with a varying friction coefficient is assumed between the rollers and the stock. The friction coefficient f is defined as(12)f=1.05−5×10−4T−5.6×10−2vwhere T (°C) is the current temperature of the stock and v (m/s) is the rolling velocity. The equation was implemented into the ABAQUS/Explicit solver through the user defined subroutine VFRIC.Both rollers in the model are assumed to be rigid and are modeled as an analytical rigid surface. All degrees of freedom are constrained on the roller except rotation about the z-axis, where a scheduled angular velocity value listed inTable 3 is defined. The deformable stock is meshed with C3D8RT elements and for each analysis case the stock is given an initial velocity listed in Table 3 in the x-direction to initiate contact.A schematic model of the reversing rough rolling is shown inFig. 5, and a general geometry without dimensions of the gauge is given inFig. 6. The first two passes are rolled in gauge 1 with different rolling parameters; the next four passes are rolled in gauge 2, two passes in gauge 3, and one pass in gauge 4. The rolling schedules are given in detail in Table 3. Considering the symmetries of the geometry and forming conditions only half of the stock was modeled and simulated in the ABAQUS solver for time saving.The heat transfer coefficient between the rollers and the stock, listed inTable 4 and implemented into the ABAQUS/Explicit solver through the user defined subroutine VFILM, was assumed to be dependent on the minimum gap distance between the contact surfaces of the roller and the stock.The complete roughing rolling process including all nine rolling passes was simulated using the input parameters shown inTable 5.Multi-pass rolling of H-shape steel involves very large deformations, so it is very important to maintain the mesh quality to avoid the decrease of solution accuracy. A procedure for the multi-pass rolling simulation was developed and is shown inFig. 7.The main steps of the procedure are given below1.The microstructure evolution models were implemented into the Abaqus/Explicit solver and three-dimensional (3D) simulation of hot rolling of H-shape steel was performed until the specific steady state criteria were matched.A set of elements was created automatically by the Abaqus/Explicit at the end of step 1.In order to perform a two-dimensional (2D) simulation of the thermal process and microstructure evolution during the inter-pass time, a set of nodes on the front face of the elements was created by a programmed python script file. An input file for the Abaqus/Implicit solver was also created automatically by defining the temperature and the solution dependent variables (SDV) as initial conditions. Simulation was performed for the inter-pass time.The out profile line of the 2D elements was constructed by the programmed python script file and re-meshed manually. Nodes temperature was mapped using the sub-modeling methods presented by Abaqus/Implicit.In order to perform a 3D simulation of the next rolling pass, 3D elements were created along the vertical direction of the 2D elements by a specific defined programmed python script file, and the nodes temperature and solution dependent variables were also mapped automatically. 3D simulation was performed until the specific steady state criteria were reached and then step 2 was performed to move on with the FE procedures.In order to investigate the influences of preheating temperature, descaling treatment, rolling velocity and inter-pass times on the evolution of austenite grain size, an orthogonal experiment by means of numerical simulation was carried out. Three levels were set for each factor with the effect of decaling treatment represented by holding times measured as soon as the stock leaves the walking beam furnace until it comes into contact with the rollers. The design of the numerical orthogonal experiments is shown inTable 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The set of unified constitutive equations presented here enables predicting distribution of temperature and microstructure evolution of the material during and after the hot deformation, which are very helpful for engineers working on roll pass design. Scheduled multi-pass rough rolling processes of H-shape steel as well as numerical orthogonal design experiments were simulated and the following conclusions could be drawn:1.By using the developed materials model and the FE procedures, the microstructure evolution during rolling process can be taken into account in the period of rolling schedule design, reducing the cost of expensive industrial tests.The lower the preheating temperature, the smaller the minimal value of average austenite grain size obtained.Despite variations of the other factors, the slower the rolling velocity the faster the minimal value of average austenite grain size obtained in such deformation conditions.