@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
PDMS residues-free micro/macrostructures on flexible substrates

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
PDMS residues-free micro/macrostructures.Transfer printing the micro-/nanostructures to ultra-flexible substrates.Removing PDMS using chemical etch and dispersion.Disintegrating and dissolving the PDMS.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#


@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Transfer printing has been reported recently as a viable route for electronics on flexible substrates. The method involves transferring micro-/macrostructures such as wires or ultra-thin chips from Si (silicon) wafers to the flexible substrates by using elastomeric transfer substrates such as poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS). A major challenge in this process is posed by the residues of PDMS, which are left over on Si surface after the nanostructures have been transferred. As insulator, PDMS residues make it difficult to realize metal connections and hence pose challenge in the way of using nanostructures as the building blocks for active electronics. This paper presents a method for PDMS residues-free transfer of Si micro-/macrostructures to flexible substrates such as polyimide (PI). The PDMS residues are removed from Si surface by immersing the transferred structures in a solution of quaternary ammonium fluoride such as TBAF (Tetrabutylammonium Fluoride) and non-hydroxylic aprotic solvent such as PMA (propylene glycol methyl ether acetate). The residues are removed at a rate (∼1.5μm/min) which is about five times faster than the traditional dry etch methods. Unlike traditional alternatives, the presented method removes PDMS without attacking the flexible PI substrates.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Elastomers based on PDMS are an important class of materials for the fabrication of micro-/nanoscale systems because of properties such as biocompatibility, chemical inertness, optical transparency [1–3]. The formulation of poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS), its fabrication and application in soft lithographic techniques have been extensively studied and applied to develop a variety of functional components and devices for applications such as microfluidics, microelectromechanical systems (MEMS), soft robotics, and microelectronics [1,3–6].Recently, PDMS has been used in flexible or bendable electronics as an intermediate carrier substrate to transfer Si or compound semiconductors based nano-/microstructures on to flexible substrates such as polyimide (PI) [7–9]. Termed as transfer printing, the method shown in Fig. 1(a)–(c) involves obtaining ordered arrays of micro-/nanowires and ribbons using standard top-down fabrication steps (Fig. 1(a)) and then transferring these structures to the final substrate such as PI (Fig. 1(c)), using elastomeric transfer substrates such as PDMS (Fig. 1(b)) [10–13]. Similar approach has been recently used to obtain macroscale structures such as Si membrane on flexible substrates [14–16]. The process exploits the controlled adhesion between PDMS and Si nano-/microstructures, obtained through suitable oxygen plasma exposure, to selectively pick the nano-/microstructures from bulk wafers and subsequently transfer them to flexible receiver substrates [9,17]. The adhesion between PDMS and Si micro-/nanostructures plays an important role in this transfer printing process, as the bonding strength must be strong enough to lift the Si nano-/microstructures and sufficient to allow them to stick to the PI. In other words, the bonding between PDMS and nano-/microstructures should be weaker than that between nano-/microstructures and PI. It may be noted that commonly used resists such as SU8 or PMMA (polymethyl methacrylate) could also be used for transfer of wires and other silicon structures. However, unlike PDMS it may not be possible to control the adhesion between wires and the resists and then between wires and the final receiver substrates such as PI. On other hand, the major challenge not associated with commonly used resists but with cross-linked elastomers such as PDMS in the above transfer process is to obtain the residues-free surface after the nano-/microstructures have been transferred to the final receiver flexible or bendable substrates. After transfer printing of microstructures the PDMS residues remain on the free surface, as shown in Fig. 1(d). Fig. 2shows the profiles of two kinds of Si wires arrays after they are transferred to PI. PDMS being an insulator, its residues on the transferred Si nano-/microstructures make it difficult to realize metal connections on these structures and hence pose significant challenge in using them as the building blocks for active electronics. For example, in presence of PDMS residues it is difficult to realize metal contacts for the source and drain terminals of a Si wire transistor or the transistors made from an array of Si wires. Herein, we report transfer of PDMS residues-free Si micro-/macrostructures on flexible PI foils. The work confirms the initial results presented in [18]. The new results include demonstrating the effectiveness of proposed approach on larger samples such as ultra-thin Si chips, using I–V measurements and also the XPS measurements on different samples.The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents various methods for removing PDMS and their suitability for nano-/microscale structures. Section 3 describes the method for removing PDMS from Si micro-/macrostructures. Finally, the results are summarized in Section 4 and the potential use of this work in other areas has been explained.The known methods for removing cured PDMS include: (a) mechanical scraping [19], (b) swelling of PDMS and peeling [2], (c) chemical–mechanical removal [2,19], and (d) dry etching [20,21]. The suitability of these methods depends very much on the target applications. For example, the mechanical scraping followed by media blast and water rinse using pressurized spray removes bulk PDMS. But, it is not suitable for nano-/microstructures due to potential surface damage, incomplete removal of PDMS, and invariable requirement of an additional cleaning operation with organic solvents, which again does not result in silicone free surface.Another method of removing PDMS is to swell it with nonpolar organic solvents such as hydrocarbons, toluene, hexane and dichloromethane [2] or organic solvents without any reactive reagent like dimethylformamide (DMF) and then peeling it off. PDMS, like silicon dioxide, apparently requires a fluorine-based etch chemistry. The manual operation of peeling off and the swelling related mechanical stress makes this method less practical to remove PDMS from Si nano-/microstructures. Further, the solvents required in this method are unacceptable due to environmental and health issues associated to them.The chemical–mechanical removal of PDMS employs a strongly alkaline solution (comprising NaOH, KOH, or TMAH (Tetramethylammonium Hydroxide)) in lower boiling alcohols such as methanol or isopropanol. The PDMS removal is achieved here with base induced chemical degradation of –Si–O–Si– chain surfaces. However, the low boiling solvent with strong alkali has chemical safety and flammability issues. Further, the method is not suitable for nano-/microstructures on flexible substrates such as PI foils, as TMAH is known to damage PI. The issues like chemical safety and flammability can be avoided with dry etching of cured PDMS.Since PDMS is a Si-based polymer, the required etch chemistry is different from that of polymers consisting mainly of carbon and hydrogen. These polymers can be etched with oxygen, but the siloxane bonds –Si–O–Si– that make up the backbone of the polymer chains in PDMS are not easily broken by oxygen plasma. A problem with dry etching is that unlike chemical removal, which enables removal of PDMS also from hidden surfaces, it results in removal of PDMS from exposed surface only. Dry etching is slower (∼20μm/h [20]) and if the PDMS is on a Si substrate (as here on the Si nano-/microstructures), the plasma will begin to etch Si after it etches through the PDMS, propagating the roughness. The standard methods of using etch-stop layers such as Al or Au [22] is not desirable in this work as the metallization is done after transferring Si nano-/microstructures to flexible substrates. Further, if Si micro/nanostructures are present on flexible substrates such as PI, as here, the dry etching also removes PI, which leads to increased chances of issue such as step coverage, making it difficult to realize electrical connections.A combination of wet and dry etching of PDMS has also been reported to overcome issues related to the surface roughness and to attain faster etch rates [21]. However, due to smaller dimensions it is challenging to use these methods for Si nano-/microstructures, especially when these structures are present on flexible substrates. For example, the dry etching step will also etch the flexible substrate.The complete removal of PDMS residues from nano-/microstructures requires methods that: (a) do not involve manual scrubbing; (b) are swelling neutral, and (c) compatible with the various substrates such as polyimide (PI), inorganic materials, and metals used in the fabrication of electronic components from nano-/microstructures. In this regard, organic reactive reagents based chemistry such as quaternary ammonium fluoride (QAF) (e.g. TBAF (Tetrabutylammonium Fluoride)) in low solubility solvents such as di-substituted amides (e.g. N-Methylpyrrolidinone (NMP), dimethylformamide (DMF)) or tetrahydrofuran (THF) are interesting, as they have been found to yield satisfactory results [23,24]. These solutions cause rapid disruption/disintegration of the PDMS polymer matrix, and mostly remove the residues by dislodging PDMS from the surface and, to a large extent, by dissolving PDMS residues by breaking Si–O bonds and forming Si–F bonds, which is similar to the etching of glass in hydrogen fluoride [23,24]. A similar chemistry, with dilute solution of TBAF (1% weight concentration) in hydrophobic non-hydroxylic aprotic solvent propylene glycol methyl ether acetate (PMA), has been used in this paper. This solution is compatible with the flexible PI substrate and the Si micro-/macrostructures used in this paper, as evident from the results given in the following section.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
