@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A web-based e-learning application for wound diagnosis and treatment

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A web tool is developed for adaptive self-learning of pressure ulcer evaluation.We evaluate the effectiveness of an e-learning tool for pressure ulcer diagnosis.The effectiveness of the tool is compared with that from a traditional training.The e-learning strategy gives significantly better knowledge acquisition results.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Pressure ulcer,E-learning,Adaptive tutorial systems,Image processing,Computational intelligence,Nursing informatics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Pressure ulcers (PrU) are considered as one of the most challenging problems that Nursing professionals have to deal with in their daily practice. Nowadays, the education on PrUs is mainly based on traditional lecturing, seminars and face-to-face instruction, sometimes with the support of photographs of wounds being used as teaching material. This traditional educational methodology suffers from some important limitations, which could affect the efficacy of the learning process. This current study has been designed to introduce information and communication technologies (ICT) in the education on PrU for undergraduate students, with the main objective of evaluating the advantages an disadvantages of using ICT, by comparing the learning results obtained from using an e-learning tool with those from a traditional teaching methodology. In order to meet this major objective, a web-based learning system named ePULab has been designed and developed as an adaptive e-learning tool for the autonomous acquisition of knowledge on PrU evaluation. This innovative system has been validated by means of a randomized controlled trial that compares its learning efficacy with that from a control group receiving a traditional face-to-face instruction. Students using ePULab gave significantly better (p< 0.01) learning acquisition scores (from pre-test mean 8.27 (SD 1.39) to post-test mean 15.83 (SD 2.52)) than those following traditional lecture-style classes (from pre-test mean 8.23 (SD 1.23) to post-test mean 11.6 (SD 2.52)). In this article, the ePULab software is described in detail and the results from that experimental educational validation study are also presented and analyzed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Pressure ulcers (PrU) are considered as one of the most challenging problems for Nursing professionals in their daily practice, whatever is the assistance speciality they are working on. The PrU care usually suffers from a high variability and uncertainty in decision-making tasks carried out by nurses, not only when dealing with prevention strategies but also when considering the evaluation of the wound and the pharmacological treatment to be administered [1,2]. All these aspects are on the basis of the interests that Nursing professionals pursue when they are proposed to enroll on an education activity to improve their skills in PrU evaluation and wound care-taking. On the other hand, getting a better education on PrU diagnosis and treatment, not only by professionals but also by undergraduate students, could become the most effective strategy to reduce the use of pharmacological products with not-yet-demonstrated benefits, and also to homogenize the clinical interventions and increase the efficiency of decision-making protocols for PrUs.Nowadays, the education on PrUs for undergraduate students is mainly based on traditional on-campus learning, with face-to-face classes and the common use of real PrU photographs as teaching aid. The most frequent educational objectives are usually focused on two main aspects: (1) to facilitate the comprehension of the risk factors related to PrU incidence and prevention; and (2) to provide the students with the necessary knowledge to identify accurately and classify correctly each one of the different types of wounds, on the basis of the four classical PrU evolution stages proposed in USA in 1989 by the NPUAP (National Pressure Ulcer Advisory Panel), and adapted with minor changes in 1999 by the EPUAP (The European Pressure Ulcer Advisory Panel) in Europe [3]. Furthermore, that theoretical education is usually complemented with other practical activities, which the students can carry out when attending the practical clinical sessions in which they are able to observe PrU wounds in a real clinical context and try the therapeutic criteria they learned at the classroom. Nevertheless, this traditional education suffers from some important limitations that could compromise the efficacy of the learning process: on the one hand, in traditional education schemes the students behave usually as passive subjects during their learning process, as the classical teaching methodology is difficult to arouse their motivation and interest; on the other hand, a high variability in the learning process is generated during the clinical sessions, so that it is not possible to control the entire educational environment – its final configuration depends on the eventual existence or absence of PrU wounds in the clinical unit in which each student is temporary practicing, as well as on the offer of opportunities for the student to get involved in the care of the existing PrUs of that clinical unit. Having all these aspects into account, it is not possible to guarantee that all the students can observe and care for PrUs and, furthermore, the number of PrUs that each student can observe is limited and different to that of their classmates; finally different evolution stages and high variable treatments could be found by each student when dealing with the PrUs of patients in the clinical unit they are involved in during their practical sessions. To conclude, the traditional education on PrUs makes difficult to homogenize the acquisition of knowledge and practice by the undergraduate students, while it does not guarantee yet the learning of the same concepts and the enjoyment of the same education opportunities on PrUs evaluation. This fact could also determine the subsequent variability of the PrU care carried out by the Nursing professionals when the join finally the Health system. Moreover, the continuing education on PrUs of these Nursing professionals usually suffers from the same limitations as the undergraduate education above, as it is difficult to arouse the motivation and participation of these Health workers in their own education on PrU diagnosis and treatment.With the aforementioned problems, this current study has been designed to introduce the information and communication technologies (ICT) in the education on PrUs for undergraduate students, and evaluate its advantages by comparing the results from this e-learning strategy with those obtained with traditional teaching methods. Many studies have appeared in the last decade which show the impact of ICT on Nursing education (see [4,5] as two conclusive reviews on this particular subject). However, although the methods based on e-learning have gained an increasing popularity in the last few years and become effective strategies constituted as a real alternative to traditional teaching tools, some authors have recently pointed to the necessity of improving the validity of the studies which evaluate the effectiveness of e-learning tools, advancing by this way to the optimization of the methodological design of those studies [4]. Similar studies from the more general field of biomedicine have also shown the advantages of incorporating e-learning systems into professional education programs. In [6] the design of an e-learning virtual reality-based software system to be used for the developing skills in dental restoration is presented. According to the authors, the errors from dental surgeries can be significantly reduced and in some cases entirely eliminated by the use of e-learning systems based on therapeutic interventions simulation techniques. As a more recent example, in [7] the use of an on-line e-learning system for pharmacy interns in critical care settings showed significant improvement in interns’ knowledge and practice.Educational software has become an autonomous discipline of Software Engineering, with its own design, implementation and evaluation [8,9] methods. Being part of this educational software, adaptive learning systems could be considered as a step forward in themselves, so that they could offer the users even more pedagogical and didactic opportunities [10,11]. In the particular case of software tools for the learning of Nursing processes and interventions, a very recent study [12] has shown the importance of the quality of the e-learning system, as well as the adequateness of the design of the user's interface, as the main factors determining the perception of the utility and usability of the software by the Health professionals.The software developed for this study consists of the necessary modules for teaching, monitoring and evaluating undergraduate students and Nursing professionals enrolled in continuing education programs. This software has been named ePULab (Educational-Pressure Ulcer LABoratory) and allows the users to enjoy an autonomous learning of PrU diagnosis and treatment by offering them several difficulty levels, which adapt automatically the complexity of the proposed questions to the dexterity that each user shows while they interact with the e-learning system. The software has been also designed to give the appropriate feedback by offering the users the opportunity of monitoring their own learning progress, as well as identifying and correcting the errors made in the evaluation of different testing cases of PrUs proposed by experts. The development of this tool has been focused on the promotion of significant and consolidated learning of PrUs by Nursing students, with the main two objectives of improving their ability to make decisions on the treatment of PrU wounds and obtaining a higher satisfaction and motivation from the learning process, therefore making the student an active subject as well as a responsible part of their own education on PrUs. The ePULab software allows the users to have both an on-line or an off-line learning, therefore making the time consumed by the learning process more flexible and adaptable, and increasing the effectiveness of the education as an important result. The ePULab software can be considered as a customizable educational tool which can be used remotely by the users, with total flexibility. On the other hands, ePULab improves those important aspects of Nursing education which influence directly the subsequent assistance for patients with PrU pathologies.The design of the ePULab software has been focused on the registering of PrU photographs, their automatic segmentation, the computer-assisted labeling of all the tissues present in the PrU images by using artificial vision techniques [13], and the collaborative work for mutual evaluation of PrUs done by Nursing professionals and other clinical experts. On the one hand, the specification the ePULab system includes the design of some modules to manage the different educational levels of the students. These modules adapt the educational level of the system to the learning necessities of each student during their evolutionary learning cycle. On the other hand, the design of the ePULab software has been oriented to allow the monitoring of the progress made by the students, while giving also support to the teachers to analyze the learning objectives that their students achieve, therefore making possible the subsequent generation of reports and statistics on the progress and marks obtained by the students. Fig. 1shows the general architecture of the ePULab software, which consists of two main modules, the labeling and the educational modules, that integrate all the operating characteristics of ePULab.Regarding the labeling module, in previous studies [13] the same authors of this paper developed a computer-aided diagnosis tool (based on computational intelligence techniques) for the automatic segmentation and classification of tissues present in PrU images. The diagnosis module described in [13] was arranged as the core of the PULab software, which was designed by this same team and aimed for the collaborative work of Nursing professionals in computer-aided consensual evaluation of PrU clinical cases. That pattern-recognition tool consisted of a hybrid approach, based on neural networks and Bayesian classifiers, for automatic tissue identification in wound images. The functioning of the system can be summarized as follows: (1) a mean-shift procedure and a region-growing strategy [14,15] is used for effective PrU image segmentation; (2) a set of color and texture features is extracted from the segmented PrU images; (3) a set of k multi-layer perceptrons is trained with inputs consisting of color and texture patterns, and outputs consisting of categorical tissue classes which are determined by clinical experts; (4) a Bayesian committee machine is formed by training a Bayesian classifier to combine the classifications of the k neural networks [16]; finally, (5) specific heuristics based on the wound topology are designed to significantly improve the results of the classification. We obtained high efficiency rates from this approach for tissue identification (see [13] for more details and performance analysis results). These final tools for PrU image segmentation and tissue identification play a central role in ePULab, as they supply the teachers with the functionality necessary for computer-aided evaluation (i.e., tissue types identification and labeling) of wound images that can be included directly in the system for educational purposes (by means of the PrU record manager module shown in Fig. 1).On the basis of this diagnosis module for PrU evaluation, the initial gathering of the system and software requirements for ePULab was conducted through interviews with clinical experts in evaluation and care of PrUs. The functional specification of the ePULab software included the development of self-adaptive educational levels, while permitting autonomous, asynchronous, and flexible learning and allowing the students and their instructors to keep track of their progress. The clinical experts also validated the contents of the e-learning system by reaching agreements on a series of PrU cases that were collaboratively evaluated and included in the system for the purposes of this experimental study. The ePULab application has been designed to guide the student through the entire evaluation process of each one of the PrUs included in an ad-hoc designed test (with difficulty levels that are automatically adapted to the student's skills), while also offering them specialized on-line instructional tutorials and significant contextual information. EPULab's test manager (Fig. 1) has been designed to allow the instructors to design and manage a set of tailored case studies (tests) that can include a variable number of PrU cases to be evaluated by the students. For each PrU in a test, evaluation starts by providing the student with an original photograph of the PrU, which is furthermore complemented with that useful information obtained from medical records that the instructor has decided to supply about the patient's general health state (see the test manager module in Fig. 1). With all these data as contextual information, the student uses a test panel (see Fig. 1) to respond to the questions previously posed by the instructor, which can include different items such as the visual identification of the tissues present in a segmented PrU image (see Fig. 4), the classification (stage) of the wound, the evaluation of the peri-ulcer skin, the recognition of signs of infection in the wound, the identification of amount of exudate, the choice of the appropriate type of dressing, or, finally, the determination of suitable care interventions on the PrU or the patient.In the next paragraphs, the characteristics of the ePULab interfaces are presented. This software has been designed by following a development scheme that is based on a client–server model, which provides the user with a web interface. In the next sections, the general functioning of the user's interface is described. The system's interface is divided into two separate parts: on the one hand, a specific interface has been designed to allow the teacher to manage all the necessary functionalities, which include the insertion of new PrU cases, wound photographs, PrU evaluations, etc., the generation of new tests for the students, and the monitoring of their progress; on the other hand, the student's interface has been developed to allow the student to access the learning module on PrU evaluation.The so-called teacher's interface (Figs. 2and 3) allows the instructor to insert new PrU cases in the system, as well as edit their clinical information – which includes the possibility of uploading PrU photographs and their image segmentation and tissue-labeling maps – and all the relevant information about the PrU evaluation: local features such as classification, PUSH index, presence of infection signs or smell, state of the surrounding skin, depth, presence of cavitation, amount of exudate existing in the wound, etc.; treatment information such as dressing type and treatment, handling of bacterial load, position changes to be provided, support devices used by the patient, etc.; and patient's general information on their health state, such as patient's Pfeiffer and Braden indexes, patient's sex and age, informal carer's interest, education and motivation, patient's nutritional status, etc.The login page of the teacher's interface allows them to have access to the system by using an authenticated connection which counts on the SSL encrypting protocol, with a https URL, to get a secure connection to the data. The design of the login page is similar for both interfaces, i.e., the teacher's one and the student's one, although those two separated interfaces are independent and located at different URLs.Once a user with teacher profile has been granted access to the system, an operating interface is shown, which consists of several frames with specific functionality. The main page of this teacher's interface is structured in three different sections (Figs. 2 and 3):•The list of PrUs: it is located in the upper left frame (Fig. 2) and consists of the list of all the PrUs available in the system. From this frame, the information on the evaluation of each PrU is accessible for edition and query.The list of training/evaluation tests for students: it is located in the lower left frame of the teacher's interface (Fig. 2), and allows the user with teacher profile to create and edit training/evaluation tests, i.e., a set of PrU cases that have been evaluated by the teacher and grouped together to be available to the students for their practice on PrU evaluation (by using the ePULab student's interface). Consequently, these training/evaluation tests have to be designed by the teacher with two main objectives: to allow their students the learning of the principles of PrU diagnosis and treatment (at three different complexity levels that the teacher is able to select), and to evaluate and monitor the progress that their students achieve during their learning phases.The central frame of the interface, in which the forms, fields, panels and data of each PrUs stored in the system are shown for query or edition (Fig. 2). These data consist of information on the evaluation of each PrU, which includes photographs, local information on the wound, general information on the patient's health state, information on the treatments and Nursing clinical interventions on the wound, informal carer's data, etc. On the other hand, this central panel is also used to manage all the information regarding the creation, query and editing of training/evaluation tests for the students.The fields in the forms for PrU evaluation are classified in three different levels (Fig. 2): beginner, intermediate and advanced. When a training/evaluation test is presented to a student for the first time, all the diagnosis and treatment questions corresponding to the beginner level are set up. The student can then interact with the system by reading the on-line tutorials and contextual information, and answering the proposed questions on tissue identification, diagnosis and treatment. At any moment, the student count on the possibility of monitoring their progress, consulting and editing their answers to the proposed questions, etc. Once the number of correct answers from an user with student profile has risen above an established threshold (which is previously configured by the teacher when they designed the training/evaluation test), the student's level increases and they get the intermediate level. This new level would include more complex questions on PrU diagnosis and treatment, which were previously configured by the teacher by using their own interface. Similarly, the advanced level could be get by the students once a new learning threshold is reached.The student's interface (Fig. 4) is located at a URL that is different from that used for the teacher's interface (Section2.1). Nevertheless, the login page to access to the system by an authenticated connection (with user/password login) is similar to that used by the teachers. As in the case of the teacher's interface, the student's interface is also provided with the SSL encrypting protocol to get a secure access to all the specific functionality that the students are supplied with.Once a user with student profile has been granted access to ePULab, a welcome page is displayed, which consists of a list of training/evaluation tests that a teacher would have left available for their students. The student is then able to choose a particular training test to start with the evaluation questions of all the PrU cases that it consists of. With this purpose, the student can select a training test by clicking on it; from that moment on, the student will get all the contextual information necessary to the effective understanding of each one of the PrU cases that the test is grouping together as established by the teacher when they designed the test. For each PrU, the student is able to read its contextual information and navigate through the sequential evaluation phases by answering the different diagnosis and treatment questions that the system poses. During this training process, the student can also get all the necessary feedback about their progress and check their responses to the different questions on PrU evaluation. EPULab supplies the students with a multimedia user's manual (which includes textual descriptions, screen-shots and illustrative animations of all the functionalities included in the system), along with a set of on-line tutorials on PrU diagnosis, care and treatment. The user's manual and tutorials are fully accessible at any moment during the student's session and address the following main aspects:•Fundamentals of PrU etiology, anatomy and prevention.PrU stages and classification (standardized indexes and international classification systems).PrU histology.Evaluation and management of the peri-ulcer skin.Evaluation and management of PrU exudate.Evaluation and management of infection signs.PrU hygiene management and cleaning.PrU treatment: dressing types and management.Surgical and chemical debridement of unhealthy tissues.When a user with student profile gets access to the system for the first time, they start at a beginner level, so that they only have to answer those question on PrU evaluation that are included in that initial level, such us tissue identification (Fig. 4), PrU classification, Health education for the informal carer, state of the surrounding skin and the presence of infection signs. As the student is making progress for the questions in the beginner level and finally reaches an established threshold, they go forward to the intermediate level and, subsequently, to the advanced level. In each one of these levels, the student has to answer all the question on PrU evaluation corresponding to that level and the lower ones. Some questions included in the intermediate levels are: wound depth, the presence of cavitation, PUSH index, or cleaning types necessary for the hygiene of the wound. The advanced questions include some treatment issues such as the necessity of debridement [17], dressing type, handling of bacterial load, number of position changes, etc. In all moments, the student is able to query the contextual information that the teacher has included for each PrU in the training test. That information involves additional comments and observations on the wound, such as the amount of exudate, the location of the wound, the patient's sex and age, the wound area, etc. Furthermore, a complete set of on-line tutorials on PrU diagnosis and treatment are available to be looked up by the students.One of the most important sections that each student has to go through when evaluating each one of the PrUs included in a training/evaluation case is the identification of all the significant tissues present in the PrU image. In Fig. 4 one of the PrU tissues proposed for classification is shown, as it is displayed on the student's interface. The ePULab software supplies the user with a PrU image-viewer which allows the student to display the original PrU image and navigate friendly through the different tissues previously segmented in the image (Fig. 4). The image segmentation maps, as well as the classification of the tissues, are provided by the teacher when they insert a new PrU case in the teacher's interface. Those segmentation maps can be manually or automatically generated by using the image processing tools designed and implemented by this same research group as a result of previous projects (see [13] for a complete review of these techniques and results).The EPULab software is the result of the integration of set of independent modules (see Fig. 1) which aim two main objectives: (1) to supply the clinicians with computer-aided PrU diagnosis tools, based on automatic image segmentation and tissue recognition approaches, and (2) to take advantage of those PrU image evaluation system capabilities to provide a web-based adaptive e-learning tool for PrU-care instructors and students. Although that first main objective was addressed in previous projects [13], the resulting computational tools have been integrated in ePULab (labeling module in Fig. 1) as they provide support to the development of new PrU case-studies (tests) that are designed and managed by the instructors and carried out by the students using the functionalities given by the educational modules of the system. EPULab follows a client–server paradigm and is composed of a set of modules and sub-modules that have been implemented using different programming languages, open-source libraries, environments, tools and data communication strategies. In the following paragraphs a detailed list of the system components along with the specific technologies used for their implementation is given (see Fig. 1 for a general view of the software architecture):1.Educational module:•Front-end (teacher and student interfaces, client side): web client (Rich Internet Application), using HTML/Javascript.–Development languages: Java + Google Web Toolkit (GWT) 2.4.0, following the Model-view-presenter pattern.Back-end (server side):–Development language: PHP 5.2.Libraries and development tools:*Framework MVC Symfony 1.4 (HTML view has been changed for JSON objects).DBMS MySQL 5 (via ORM Doctrine 1.2).ImageMagick library for image processing.Platform: GNU Linux 2.6 / 3, Apache 2 Web Server.Communication: AJAX, JSON.Labeling module: it is composed of a set of independent utilities and modules that connect each other by following the UNIX paradigm:•Automatic PrU-tissue recognition module: mean-shift image segmentation [14] followed by a hybrid approach based on binary classifiers composed of Bayesian committee-machines of multilayer perceptrons (see Section2 and [13] for details):–Development language: C++.Libraries:*ImageMagick for image processing.GSL (GNU Scientific Library) [18] for linear algebra.FANN (Fast Artificial Neural Network) [19].PrU-tissue manual labeling:–Front-end (client interface):*Development language: Java SE 1.6Libraries and tools: SwingBackend: Web services*Development languages: PHP 5.2 (Web services) + MySQL SQLLibraries and tools: MySQL 5Communication: XML.In order to validate the ePULab tool as an effective adaptive e-learning software on PrU diagnosis and treatment, we have designed an analytical and experimental study of educational research by configuring a randomized trial with a non-concurrent control group. The main objective of this study is to compare the educational efficacy of the ePULab software with that obtained from the traditional on-campus face-to-face instruction of Nursing undergraduate students.The population of the study was composed of 72 Nursing undergraduate students enrolled in the Nursing degree in the Escuela Universitaria de Enfermería of the Provincial Council of Málaga, Spain. This population sample was divided into two different groups: an experimental/intervention group, which used the ePULab software for e-learning education on PrU; and a control group, which received an on-campus education on PrU evaluation and treatment. The experimental and control groups consisted of 30 and 42 students, respectively. This difference in the number of students in each group was motivated by the limitations in the number of computers available for the experimental intervention with the ePULab software, as well as by the necessity of guaranteeing a homogeneous intra-group education on PrU care for all the students of the population. Assignment to the experimental or control groups was otherwise completely randomized via a computer-generated random sequence for the selection of the students of both groups. In order to confirm the sufficiency of the population sample, we have tested to check that the number of students included in the two groups makes it possible to use statistical tests (yielding statistical power above 80%).The experimental group received an educational intervention in a Computer Science laboratory, sited in the facilities of the Department of Languages and Computer Science in the University of Málaga, Spain. In order to guarantee the homogeneity of the educational intervention received, each one of the students in the experimental group counted on a similar equipment, which consisted of a personal computer (PC) with a 19in. TFT screen, mouse and keyboard, a wideband Internet connection (100Mbps) and an Internet browser (Mozilla Firefox®) for the authenticated access to the ePULab software, which was hosted in a computer server sited in the same facilities of the University of Málaga (https://itaca.lcc.uma.es). Before starting the educational intervention, a written pre-test was given to the students for evaluating their background knowledge on PrU evaluation and care. During a first part of the educational intervention undertaken with this group, an instructor explained for 15min the use of ePULab. Following that, the instructor explained how the participants would need to access, during the course of the educational intervention, the training tutorials for on-line learning (which were available through links within the ePULab application), as well as the nature and structure of the information the tutorials contain. Afterwards, the students were given access to ePULab and were urged to interact individually and freely with the software during the rest of the class, for 2h. During that time, the students could analyze and evaluate a variable number of PrU cases (see Section2.2), each one being randomly selected and automatically presented to the students by ePULab, from an existing pool of four available PrU cases previously chosen as representative and evaluated by clinical experts. Upon completing this free interactive session with ePULab, the students filled in another written test, which in this case aimed for measuring knowledge acquisition on PrU evaluation and treatment. The educational intervention, including the pre- and post-tests as well as the initial explanations given by the instructor, had a total duration of 4h.On the other hand, the students in the control group were taught by getting a traditional on-campus face-to-face class, which was given by an expert lecturer who used audiovisual material to teach on PrU diagnosis and treatment. That theoretical class was held in the facilities of Escuela Universitaria de Enfermer??a of the Provincial Council of Málaga, Spain. The control group met in a classroom equipped with standard audiovisual media. Before beginning the class, they completed the same previous-knowledge test as the experimental group did. Afterwards, they received a 4-h theoretical explanation that followed a traditional methodology, in which an expert instructor taught the students about PrU diagnosis and care, with the support of projecting the same training tutorials that were developed to be integrated in ePULab (this time in a non-interactive manner). Upon completion of the intervention, the students filled in the same knowledge-acquisition test as the students in the experimental group. That traditional class, including the pre- and post-tests, had a duration of 4.5h.The variables measured in the a priori knowledge test (pre-test), as well as in the acquired knowledge test (post-test), are the same for both groups of the population (experimental and control group), and are based on the observation of a PrU image that is printed on a paper and projected on a screen in the classroom at the same time (Table 1). On the basis of that PrU image, which was always the same for both groups of students, we evaluated the following aspects: the student's ability to classify the wound, by proposing them a multiple choice question with five exclusive options; the student's ability to evaluate the characteristics of the periulcer skin, by means of a multiple choice question with 10 non-exclusive options; the student's faculty to detect infection signs in the wound, with a multiple choice question of three exclusive options; the degree of correctness in the choice of the type of dressing necessary for the wound healing, which was evaluated by proposing the student the selection of one of four different dressing types as well as the possibility of giving a blank-response answer to this question. On the other hand, there has been also designed a question in both the pre- and post-tests to evaluate the student's skill to determine which Nursing care interventions are appropriate for that wound in the image. This was an open question, for which the student could freely indicate the necessary therapeutic interventions to be established for that wound, and which will be subsequently evaluated by these researchers by classifying the student's answer into one of five previously set intervention categories (hygiene, nutrition, Health education for the informal carer, pressure release, or pharmacological treatment). Finally, the last issues in the tests were designed to measure the student's ability to identify the different significant tissues present in the wound image. For this propose, the students were provided with a segmented image of the PrU, for which they had to label each one of the separated regions (i.e., tissues) in the image. These last questions on tissue identification were posed as open questions by these researchers, so that no optional guiding answers were proposed, as the student was totally free of giving their own name to each one of the separated regions found in the image.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In the previous sections, we have presented the design of an experimental research study to analyze the efficacy of two different educational approaches for knowledge acquisition on PrU evaluation: on the one hand, an educational approach based on a traditional on-campus face-to-face teaching was held for 42 undergraduate students in a control group; on the other hand, an experimental group of 30 undergraduate students received an educational intervention based on the use of a new adaptive e-learning tool, named ePULab, which was specifically designed and developed for this project. Along the previous sections the results from this analysis have been presented, as they were obtained on the basis of two different tests which were carried out by the students in both groups, before (pre-test) and after (post-test) the educational interventions were held.In general, the results obtained show, on the one hand, the comparability of the populations selected for study, thus presenting very similar results (with no significant differences) from the a priori knowledge analysis obtained from the pre-tests. Furthermore, for the majority of the items analyzed – as they were individually measured or grouped together in evaluation categories – both analyzed educational approaches gave concluding results which demonstrated their adequateness as effective instruments for knowledge acquisition on PrU evaluation. However, for most of the analyzed items, as well as for the categories that grouped them together, the total scores obtained from the tests show better significant results from the students in the experimental group (who used the ePULab tool) than those from the students in the control group (who received a traditional on-campus instruction).These results demonstrate the validity of the ePULab e-learning tool as a very effective instrument for the learning on PrU evaluation and treatment, as well as for the efficient acquisition of skills for those processes of a high significance in Nursing daily practice, of which we can cite: the evaluation of the wound state, by detecting and identifying the different tissue types present in the wound and considering the characteristics of the periulcer skin; the accurate determination of the stage and classification of the degree of severity that the ulcer shows; and, finally, the appropriate selection of the available care interventions and pharmacological treatments (dressing types) which could be adequate for each PrU.