@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Finding disseminators via electronic word of mouth message for effective marketing communications

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We identify disseminators for effective marketing campaign by using eWOM message.Our approach identifies more accurate and comprehensive opinion leadership.Opinion leaders’ eWOM influences product sales through product experience effects.Opinion leaders’ eWOM influences product sales through knowledge background effects.Firms need disseminators with individually broad and collectively focused knowledge.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Opinion leader,Electronic word-of-mouth,Online user reviews,Marketing communication,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
It has become increasingly important for companies to utilize electronic word of mouth (eWOM) in their marketing campaigns for desired product sales. Identifying key eWOM disseminators among consumers is a challenge for companies. WOM is an interpersonal communication in which a sender spreads a message to receivers. Previously, researchers and practitioners have searched for opinion leaders by examining senders and receivers due to limited records on WOM message. Our study identifies three types of opinion leaders through eWOM using a message-based approach that elicits more accurate and comprehensive information on opinion leadership than sender-based and receiver-based approaches. We demonstrate that eWOM of opinion leaders drives product sales due to their product experience and knowledge background. Our findings suggest that companies can increase product sales via effective use of eWOM of such opinion leaders. Managerial and marketing implications are addressed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
When HTC introduced the Windows-based smartphone, it recruited 1000 T-Mobile or AT&T customers to write product reviews and Facebook and Twitter posts, reaching more than 234,000 consumers and significantly increasing the brand awareness [12]. When Dunkin’ Donuts launched Latte Lite, it used 3000 consumers to spread the word about the new beverage, reaching 111,272 consumers over twelve weeks and increasing sales by 26% in test markets [13]. Both examples illustrate that electronic or online word of mouth (eWOM) has become an important factor in consumer buying decisions [37]. Consumers trust eWOM more than advertisements, as they regard their peers as more reliable than companies [65]. As such, companies receiving favorable eWOM have a better chance to increase sales [21]. Although eWOM is implemented by consumers, companies can initiate eWOM campaigns for marketing communications [35]. To launch an effective eWOM campaign, companies need to identify a small number of disseminators known as opinion leaders who exert personal influence upon other people [68]. The challenge is: How can companies choose eWOM opinion leaders from ecommerce sites?Identification of opinion leaders relies on the “two-step flow of communications” theory: as senders, opinion leaders cultivate their knowledge from a variety of sources including mass media in the first step, and then spread their opinions (messages) to the general public (receivers) via WOM in the second step [47]. Thus, sender, message, and receiver are key components in the WOM process [6,20], and provide three important bases for searching for opinion leaders. Information on WOM content (i.e., message) has generally been unavailable to companies in the past because interpersonal communication such as a chat between friends leaves no record for analysis [20]. As a result, researchers turn to senders and ask whether they really are opinion leaders by a questionnaire survey [50]. However, a survey may capture self-confidence rather than opinion leadership for two reasons [61,68]. Firstly, consumers often have no clear sense of the possible influence of their opinions. Secondly, they tend to overstate influence due to strong confidence in their own opinions.An alternative identification approach, the network structure approach, examines how many receivers a sender can reach. The network structure approach can identify senders who are highly connected with receivers in a social network [41]. While the network structure approach avoids overestimation issues by using objective measures, it may underestimate opinion leadership. The network structure approach also requires knowledge on consumers’ social networks that are often private information [5,43]. Moreover, even when companies acquire information about consumers’ social networks, consumers’ influence over strangers outside their social networks in an online setting is difficult to determine. Therefore, the network structure approach is not suitable for identifying eWOM opinion leadership. Unlike traditional WOM, eWOM leaves digital records on the Internet, and therefore provides companies with accessible information [20]. Since message is a key component in the original theory by Katz and Lazarsfeld [47], we wonder: Can companies explore the rich information contained in eWOM message to identify opinion leaders? If so, can companies use such opinion leaders as disseminators to launch effective marketing campaigns via their eWOM?In this paper, we introduce a new message-based method to measure opinion leadership from eWOM. By using objective measures available from online user reviews, we identify three influential disseminators for products with qualities difficult to access before consumption (experience products). The first type is communicative opinion leaders who write a large number of reviews. The second type is buzz-generating opinion leaders whose online reviews generate contagious talk about a brand, service, product, or idea [11]. The third type is trustworthy opinion leaders whose online reviews are useful to fellow consumers. Practitioners are using eWOM to identify opinion leaders: for example, Amazon publishes the top 10,000 reviewers on its website. Although the exact ranking method is a secret, communicativeness and trustworthiness are reported to be important factors [66]. However, empirical evidence that such opinion leaders have effects on product sales is absent in the literature.To understand if opinion leaders identified by the message-based approach can be used as disseminators to launch effective marketing campaigns, we examine the effects of opinion leaders’ eWOM on product sales. Building upon the literature on eWOM created by the general public, we suggest that companies focus on two aspects of opinion leaders when developing eWOM marketing communication campaigns: product experience and knowledge background. For product experience effects, we study opinion leader eWOM’s impact on sales in terms of product popularity/awareness, customer satisfaction (for quality assurance), and horizontal product differentiation. For knowledge effects, we examine whether sales can be affected by the breadth and focus of opinion leaders’ product knowledge. Our findings reveal that opinion leaders’ eWOM drives product sales due to their product experience and product knowledge, which suggests that companies can increase product sales via effective use of eWOM of opinion leaders.This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we present our literature review and hypothesis. We then discuss data and modeling in Section 3 and present the empirical results and managerial implications in Section 4. Section 5 concludes and addresses the limitations of this study and future research directions.Opinion leader WOM has long been used to promote products or to criticize competitors’ offerings [44,47]; its positive impact on new product introduction was first reported by Arndt [3]. In recent years, online social networks and social media platforms have further helped the spread of eWOM. What sets eWOM apart from traditional WOM is the combination of (1) unprecedented scale, (2) the possibilities for eWOM designers to control and monitor eWOM operation, and (3) unique properties of online interaction [26]. One of the most important capabilities of the Internet is interactive communication at a larger scale: “for the first time in human history, individuals can make their personal thoughts, reactions, and opinions easily accessible to the global community of Internet users”, and the interactive communication provides an online feedback mechanism to serve multiple functions, including brand building and customer acquisition, product development and quality control, and supply chain quality assurance [26].Electronic commerce performs better than the traditional market in acquiring customers [77]. One advantage of electronic commerce is the availability of eWOM. Consumers read eWOM for several reasons: (1) to obtain buying-related information, (2) to achieve social orientation through information, (3) to have a sense of belonging to a community, (4) to gain financial reward, and (5) to learn to consume products. However, their main purpose is to save decision time and to make better decisions [40]. For such reasons, companies are interested in providing eWOM as “free sales assistance” [18]. In order to identify key eWOM disseminators, companies need to understand why review writers post their opinions, and prior research suggests the following reasons: (1) to add value to community by helping others (focus-related utility), (2) to seek advice from other community members after purchasing (consumption utility), (3) to gain approval from other community members (approval utility), (4) to moderate consumer interaction with other consumer and companies (moderator utility), and (5) to balance their emotions through expressing their opinions (homeostase utility) [39].To be effective in viral marketing campaigns, companies must identify opinion leaders properly and then let them communicate information to their followers [43]. Opinion leaders are consumers who provide information to others that influences their consumption decisions [22] by obtaining key information through research and shaping their own opinions earlier than the general public. Opinion leaders in women’s fashion, for example, acquire fashion knowledge from fashion magazines first and then spread it to followers via WOM [70].Rogers and Cartano [68] summarize three methods of identifying opinion leaders: (1) the self-report method, i.e. using surveys to ask consumers to identify whether and to what extent they are opinion leaders; (2) the key informant method, i.e. using surveys to ask consumers whom they listen to; and (3) the network structure method, i.e. using social networks to compute network centrality and other network structure-related measures. The first two methods are sender-based and the third is receiver-based. The self-report method seems to be most popular due to existing scales such as King and Summers’ [50], although the key informant method has also been used in a recent study [59]. In addition, consumer demographics [1] and loyalty [35] are considered in conjunction with surveys to identify opinion leaders. The main findings of the extant literature are that self-reported and peer-nominated opinion leaders influence the choices of their followers. However, self-reported surveys may capture self-confidence rather than opinion leadership [2,42]. Rogers and Cartano [68] noted that sender-based surveys are “dependent upon the accuracy with which respondents [senders] can assess and report their self-images on opinion leadership”. Both self-report and peer-nominated methods share survey biases such as inconsistent interpretation of survey questions and recall inaccuracy, which can lead to overestimation or underestimation of the degree of opinion leadership [24]. Recall inaccuracy bias is a particular issue because consumers receive eWOM from a large number of strangers on the Internet.The network structure method has been widely used by marketers and network analysis researchers [41,43]. Network analysis determines opinion leaders by identifying those who connect with many people (i.e., hubs) and those who connect two clusters of densely connected people (i.e., bridges) in a social network [41]. However, other researchers suggest that impact of WOM is driven by a large number of easily influenced people rather than by opinion leaders [74]. The receiver-based approach is built upon the argument that opinion leaders spread word of mouth via their personal influence networks [67]. Since the advent of the Internet in the 1990s, WOM is no longer restricted to personal influence networks because the Internet allows one to reach strangers at a larger scale [26]. While individuals can arguably expand their social network to include the strangers, Dunbar’s number (150) suggests a cognitive limitation in the number of social relationships that people can maintain [30]. Existing evidence suggests that the Internet does not remove the cognitive/biological constraints on human communication [36]. As noted by Weimann and colleagues, the network structure method “works best in a closed, self-contained social setting, such as hospitals, prisons, or army bases” [75]. However, a defining feature of eWOM is its potential to reach large numbers of strangers outside a sender’s own social network [26]. Our method is therefore not restricted to a sender’s social network, and can capture the influence of opinion leadership outside a given social network.In this paper, we identify opinion leaders through eWOM by using a dataset of Amazon user reviews and product sales rank. The dataset is described in the following section. In order to determine key eWOM opinion leaders, we consider three attributes of Amazon online user reviews: the number of reviews a reviewer has written, the amount of buzz a reviewer has generated, and the trustworthiness of a reviewer.22A firm can generate the same information by developing their own online user review database similar to Amazon’s.In the original voting study that introduced the concept of “opinion leader”, Lazarsfeld and colleagues wrote that opinion leaders “were the interested, highly articulate voters who gave political advice or even tried to convert other citizens” [52]. Thus, a key behavior of eWOM opinion leaders is their ability to communicate with other consumers about their product experience [28]. The reasons for communication can be either altruistic or self-serving: to help consumers and companies sell products [72] or to reduce opinion leaders’ emotional tension when they feel strongly about a product [28]. In their survey which became the basis for sender-based methods, King and Summers [50] ask consumers whether they like to talk to their friends (Item 1 in their scale) and similar questions (Items 3, 5, and 6). In this paper, we measure opinion leaders’ communicativeness by observing their reviews on multiple products over time. By counting the number of reviews a consumer posts, we can identify the most communicative opinion leaders.A second characteristic of eWOM opinion leaders is that their eWOM reaches a large number of consumers and thus creates buzz. Godes & Mayzlin [35] adopted the King and Summers scale to measure how many followers an opinion leader reaches. Item 4 in the Godes & Mayzlin scale asks: “During the past six months, I have told ____ about [product] category (7—no one to 1—a lot of people)”. Buzz is generated around a product when a large number of followers receive eWOM [11,31]. Previous studies suggest that opinion leaders are progressive attention-seekers [70] and fulfill their self-enhancement motivation via buzz creation [33]. The reviews written by buzz-generating opinion leaders can increase product/brand awareness among followers, which benefits sales whether the buzz is positive or negative [7]. We thus identify buzz-generating opinion leaders as consumers whose reviews spark the most interactions among other consumers.A third characteristic of eWOM opinion leaders is that their eWOM is a trusted source that provides helpful information. Trust is an important issue in electronic commerce and eWOM studies (e.g., [26,80]), as it is one of the main reasons for followers to seek advice from opinion leaders. Although an expert in a broadcast knows more about voting than the average citizen, followers “can trust the judgment and evaluation of the respected people among their associates” [52]. For example, the dual-process theory suggests that consumers find information from trustworthy sources more persuasive [15,64]. King and Summers [50] measure this characteristic by asking (Item 7): “Do you have the feeling that you are generally regarded by your friends and neighbors as a good source of advice about [products]?” In the offline world, WOM is spread through consumers who know each other, such as friends and neighbors; in an online setting, eWOM is disseminated freely among strangers. Manipulating online user reviews is a known phenomenon [62], which makes it important for consumers to receive eWOM from trustworthy opinion leaders. An indirect approach to measure trustworthiness is analyzing the structural, lexical, and semantic aspects of eWOM, which are found to be associated with trustworthiness [10]. Amazon and other companies have implemented a more direct approach whereby consumers provide feedback as to whether eWOM is helpful. In our study, we identify the most trustworthy opinion leaders as the consumers who receive the most helpful votes on their user reviews.In summary, our approach measures the behaviors central to opinion leadership determined by the self-report approach. However, instead of the subjective measures collected in a survey, our approach uses objective measures like the ones used in a network structure approach. Our approach also addresses four challenges endemic to the self-report and network structure methods. Consumers do not know all opinion leaders, as consumers only know a limited number of peers [30], and companies cannot directly compare different opinion leaders reported in either the self-report or key informant approaches. However, our approach allows us to identify all opinion leaders among a large number of consumers and compare their relative strengths in opinion leadership. While a network structure approach may miss opinion leadership expressed in eWOM, our approach does not need information about consumers’ private social networks that are not observable to companies, and eWOM of the opinion leaders we identified can reach strangers outside of their social networks.Opinion leaders’ eWOM affects three aspects of product experience: product awareness/popularity, customer satisfaction, and horizontal product differentiation. We first examine the relationship between sales and product awareness/popularity of eWOM. Product awareness is the first phase in a consumer’s buying decision – without product awareness, consumers will not have the interest or desire to consider a particular product that leads to a buying decision. The amount of eWOM influences consumers in two ways: eWOM increases exposure to a product and therefore increases consumer awareness of its existence [54]; and a large amount of eWOM suggests a product’s popularity [17,79]. Previous studies reveal that the amount of eWOM created by the general public drives sales [21,27,29,54]. To examine whether the same relationship exists between product sales and eWOM created by opinion leaders, we propose the following hypothesis:H1aProduct awareness/popularity expressed in eWOM of opinion leaders is positively associated with product sales.Consumers communicate their satisfaction using online user ratings [18,71]. Positive ratings created by the general public can improve consumer attitude, while negative ratings created by the general public can worsen consumer attitude [54]. Customer satisfaction among the general public has been found to have a positive impact on future sales [4,78]. We examine this relationship in the following hypothesis:H1bCustomer satisfaction expressed in eWOM created by opinion leaders is positively associated with product sales.Companies can use vertical or horizontal differentiation strategies to attract consumers. Vertical differentiation refers to unique product features on which all consumers have consistent assessments. For example, when considering two car brands with otherwise comparable characteristics, consumers will prefer to buy brand A over brand B if A has better fuel economy. Thus, brand A can obtain a competitive advantage by strengthening its vertical differentiation in fuel economy. Horizontal differentiation refers to unique product features on which consumers have different assessments. Comfort and sportiness are examples of horizontal product differentiation in car design; unlike fuel economy, consumers rank such product features differently due to personal preference and lifestyle. Comfort and sportiness are often incompatible features and preferred by different segments of consumers, e.g., retirees and young men. The same product can satisfy some consumers and thereby receive high ratings while simultaneously disappointing and receiving low ratings from a different consumer segment; consequently, variance of user ratings is high. Companies use horizontal differentiation to attract a specific consumer segment. Cars with sporty features are more likely to attract young men while cars with comfort features are more likely to attract retirees. Cars with neither sporty nor comfortable features will lose consumers in both market segments to horizontally differentiated cars. Horizontally differentiated products are preferred by consumers who are well matched to the products, and have higher sales than non-horizontally differentiated products [23,71]. We examine this relationship in the following hypothesis:H1cHorizontal product differentiation shown in eWOM of opinion leaders is positively associated with product sales.To understand whether opinion leaders can be used as disseminators to launch effective marketing campaigns via eWOM, it is important to consider who they are [46]. Opinion leaders have strong personal interest in products and are enthusiastic about product ownership and use [72]. They are also motivated to contribute their knowledge to other consumers [19,39]. Merton [56] discussed two types of opinion leaders: monomorphic opinion leaders are experts in a limited number of product categories, while polymorphic opinion leaders have knowledge in a variety of product categories. The opinion leadership literature suggests that both types have advantages. According to Childers [22], opinion leadership is product category specific. The more a consumer purchases and consumes within the same product category, the more likely the consumer is to acquire complex category knowledge. Consumers with such consumption-based expertise need less cognitive effort to comprehend and evaluate new products in the same category. However, the specificity of their expertise suggests that monomorphic opinion leaders are likely to lack knowledge about other product categories. In contrast, Feick and Price [34] found influential consumers, or market mavens, who have broad product category knowledge. Market mavens tend to have earlier awareness of new products across product categories, and to use multiple information sources to acquire general marketplace information. However, polymorphic consumers lack the focus and depth of product category knowledge compared to monomorphic consumers. Therefore, companies will find it difficult to recruit opinion leaders with both monomorphic and polymorphic characteristics. To address this conflict, we propose that companies recruit individual opinion leaders with broad product category knowledge (polymorphic characteristics of individual opinion leaders). At the same time, their collective product category knowledge should overlap and therefore be focused (collective monomorphic characteristics of opinion leaders). We thus propose the following hypotheses:H2aPolymorphic characteristics of individual opinion leaders are positively associated with sales.Collective monomorphic characteristics of opinion leaders are positively associated with sales.Identifying opinion leaders from observed behaviors such as WOM is the most expensive method, although highly accurate [75]. Fortunately, online user reviews are now available to companies and can serve as a proxy for overall WOM [79]. This approach is consistent with recent research findings that link online consumer behavior with product sales [51]. We use an Amazon user review dataset from a study by Leskovec and colleagues to identify opinion leaders and examine their eWOM effects on product sales [53].Our dataset contains a sample of 350,122 book, music, video and DVD titles, which, as experience goods, have qualities difficult to ascertain before consumption, making user reviews helpful for consumers [60,63]. A user review on Amazon contains both a star rating and a text review. For each title, three statistics of star ratings created by the general public are available: average rating, number of reviews, and variance. On average, a title receives 13.98 reviews from the general public with an average rating of 4.33 and variance of 0.68 (Table 1). Amazon organizes titles into relevant product categories under four broad product lines: books, music, videos, and DVDs. Each product category has a tree structure. The four product lines sit at the top level of the tree. The deeper the level is, the finer the category is. For example, Jane Austen’s Sense and Sensibility belongs to the category:/Books/Literature & Fiction/World Literature/British/19th Century. The number of categories (category count) for a title ranges from 1 to 116 with an average of 4.88.A key Amazon feature that enables us to identify opinion leaders is reviewer identity, as Amazon displays reviewer names. We find 2,145,885 unique consumers from 1995 to 2005 in the dataset. On average, each consumer writes 4.37 reviews, and the most prolific one has 8659 reviews. The number of reviews a consumer has written is a proxy for communicativeness. The number of votes (either helpful or not) is a proxy for buzz generated by a consumer’s reviews, while the number of helpful votes is a proxy for how trustworthy the consumer is. On average, each consumer receives 26.43 votes and 12.83 helpful votes (Table 2).We choose to identify opinion leaders using individual consumers as our unit of analysis. Although some researchers treat all reviewers as opinion leaders [25], we are interested in examining a much smaller set of reviewers because it is costly for a company to recruit all available reviewers [75]. The theoretical basis for considering a subset of reviewers is that opinion leadership is not a dichotomy; rather, it varies in a continuous fashion [22,67]. Since opinion leadership is a continuous variable, we choose the top 1% (21,458) of reviewers in the dataset in each of the three opinion leadership characteristics discussed in Section 2.33Our empirical results are robust for different percentages of opinion leaders, for example, top 0.5%, 1%, 2%, 4%, 8%, and 10% of reviewers in the dataset. Word of Mouth marketing practitioners Ed Keller and Jonathan Berry estimate opinion leaders at 10% of the population. The opinion leaders in our analysis are 1% of the consumers who write reviews. Since the set of consumers who write reviews is not larger than the entire consumer population, the opinion leaders in our analysis are no more than 1% of the consumer population. Thus, we provide empirical evidence that the set of opinion leaders can be smaller than suggested in Keller & Berry [48].Specifically, we identify the top 1% of communicative, buzz-generating, and trustworthy opinion leaders according to the number of reviews written, the number of votes received, and the number of helpful votes received. It is worth noting that these three types of opinion leaders are not mutually exclusive. The total size of the three sets is 21,458×3=64,371, but the number of distinct opinion leaders in the three sets is 34,340 (Table 3). 12,109 consumers are both communicative and buzz-generating opinion leaders; 11,819 consumers are both communicative and trustworthy opinion leaders; and 16,989 consumers are both buzz-generating and trustworthy opinion leaders. Only 10,886 consumers belong to all three sets. The overlap between different types of opinion leaders is consistent with extant literature [43].Since we are interested in the impact of opinion leaders’ eWOM on the sales of a title, our unit of analysis is an individual product. We find 199,253 titles in the dataset that have at least one review from a communicative opinion leader (Table 4). Following the literature, we use a log transformation of sales rank as a proxy for sales [21]. To test product experience effects of eWOM (H1a-c), we collect star ratings from communicative opinion leaders for each title. Based on these ratings, we compute three statistics for each title: number of ratings (volume), average rating (valence), and standard deviation (SD). We operationalize product popularity/awareness in H1a as the number of ratings (volume). Average rating (valence) is a proxy for customer satisfaction in H1b. Standard deviation (SD) measures the variation among user ratings for a title. The higher the standard deviation is, the greater the variation in consumer satisfaction with a title is. Thus, standard deviation is a measure of horizontal product differentiation in H1c. On average, a title receives 6.02 reviews from communicative opinion leaders. The average rating is 4.24, and the standard deviation is 0.40 (Table 5).To measure product category knowledge, we collect all titles in the dataset that a unique consumer has written reviews for, and identify the product category for each title. Let Aidenote the set of product categories reviewed by ithopinion leader. For example, an opinion leader i has reviewed the set Ai={cooking, cooking, romance}. We then count the total number of distinct product categories of the titles and use the number as a proxy for product category knowledge. Let |A| denote the number of distinct elements in the set A. In the previous example, |Ai|=2 because there are two distinct categories, i.e., cooking and romance in the set. The median product category knowledge for a unique consumer is 31 (Table 2). Suppose that I communicative opinion leaders write user reviews for a title. Then average knowledge of communicative opinion leaders for the title, denoted by know, is defined as:Know=∑i=1IAi/I.The I opinion leaders can have overlapping knowledge. For example, a book has two communicative opinion leaders writing reviews. Consider two cases. In the first case, one communicative opinion leader has knowledge in the categories of children’s books and science fiction, and the other leader has knowledge in the categories of cooking and romance. In the second case, both opinion leaders have knowledge in two categories: children’s books and science. The average knowledge is the same (2 categories) for both cases. However, the combined knowledge is more focused in the second case than in the first case. To capture such focus, we define average distinct knowledge of communicative opinion leaders, denoted by knowdas:Knowd=∪i=1IAi/I.where ∪i=1IAiis the union of product category knowledge of I opinion leaders who write reviews for a title. In the previous example, the average distinct knowledge is 2 for the first case and 1 for the second case. Average knowledge captures the knowledge breadth of individual opinion leaders; the larger the average knowledge is, the broader (i.e., more polymorphic) the individual knowledge is. Average distinct knowledge measures the collective knowledge focus of opinion leaders as a group; the smaller the average distinct knowledge is, the more focused (i.e., monomorphic) the collective knowledge is. On average, each title has been reviewed by communicative opinion leaders with an average knowledge of 3710 product categories and an average distinct knowledge of 2874 product categories (Table 5).We add two control variables for each title. The first is category count, or the number of categories a title belongs to. As shown in Table 5, on average a title belongs to 5.34 categories. As described in the Data and Model section, Amazon’s categories have a tree structure. We use the top level of categories as a control variable and refer to it as group. Book is the group with the largest number of titles, Music the second largest, Video the third, and DVD the smallest (Table 4).We specify the following model to empirically test our hypotheses.sales=α0+α1group+α2countcat+α3volumej+α4valencej+α5SDj+α6knowj+α7knowdj+ϵSaleslogarithm of sales rank of a titletype of opinion leader (i.e., communicative, buzz-generating, trustworthy)top level category (i.e., book, music, DVD, video) to which a title belongsnumber of categories to which a title belongsaverage review by type j opinion leadersnumber of reviews by type j opinion leadersstandard deviation of reviews by type j opinion leadersaverage product category knowledge by type j opinion leadersaverage distinct product category knowledge by type j opinion leaders

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
