@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Properties of electroless Cu films optimized for horizontal plating as a function of deposit thickness

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A production-level electroless copper bath designed for horizontal plating was characterized.In-situ stress evolution of the Cu(Ni) films was studied with XRD and via substrate curvature.Stress of the Cu films depends on substrate choice (metal or ABS polymer).Stress and its relaxation are inversely proportional to film thickness.The Ni content of the Cu(Ni) films is highest at the film-substrate interface.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Electroless plating,Internal strain,X-ray diffraction,In-situ strain monitoring,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Electroless Cu plating is used in the electronics industry to obtain conductive layers on bare resins [1–3]. High-end applications like plating of integrated circuit (IC) substrate interconnects require fine-grained copper to achieve small structures [4]. As plated structures become smaller and substrates smoother, film adhesion is increasingly problematic, and stress data are becoming part of industrial process specifications. Moderate tensile stress is essential for the film adherence to the substrate. Nickel, initially added to the electrolytes in order to improve deposition speed, promotes film adhesion. During plating films without nickel are in a compressive state that can cause blisters. Co-deposition of about 1% Ni in the Cu film prevents compressive stress during deposition [5]. Building upon a model for the stress evolution in pure metal films with high atomic mobility [6], we proposed segregation of the Ni in the grain boundaries (GBs) as the mechanism that suppresses Cu adatom diffusion into the GBs during deposition [7], thus avoiding the compressive regime that in Ni-free deposits can cause blisters during plating [8,9]. In-situ measurements of the average film stress during electroless deposition were carried out for metal substrates and insulating substrates [10,11]. The mechanical state of Cu films on insulating substrates has to be considered carefully [12].The mechanical problem is complex because a (yielding) polymer substrate is mechanically coupled to a ductile film. Furthermore, in nanocrystalline materials macroscopic stress and Cu crystallite strain are, even in the elastic regime, not coupled directly because of significant elastic or inelastic GB sliding [13]. With the deposit thickness, substrate type and bath temperature as variables, this paper considers stress and strain for films plated from a bath whose performance has been optimized for IC substrate applications and horizontal plating processes at high deposition rates.The Cu films were produced from a commercial electroless plating bath (Printoganth SAP Plus). Table 1lists the bath components and the operating conditions for optimum performance. Plating on non-metallic surfaces was preceded by cleaning and desmearing steps, and deposition was initiated by palladium nuclei created by the reduction of palladium ions directly on the surface that is to be plated (Pd-activation).X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements were carried in symmetric reflection with a custom built θ−θ diffractometer equipped with graphite monochromator and analyzer crystals, and a scintillation detector. CuKαradiation was used, and the X-ray tube was operated at 40kV and 35mA. Strain was determined by finding the Cu lattice constant a(ψ) as a function of the angle ψ between the scattering vectorq→and the direction normal to the film [5]. The sample was tilted by ψ about the χ-axis, located in the scattering plane and perpendicular to the scattering vector. XRD strain measurements at standard bath operating conditions were carried out in-situ during and after the electroless plating process. Substrates were acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) coupons (diameter 30.00mm, thickness 1.25mm, supplied by Metak GmbH, Burgwald, Germany) that were thinned with a lathe at their centers to 0.23mm to minimize X-ray absorption. The Pd-activated coupons were mounted on the top of a temperature controlled Plexiglas cell (diameter 7cm, height 5.5cm) using Teflon tape as sealant. Plating was initiated by filling the cell with electrolyte using a peristaltic pump, and the electrolyte was circulated through the cell during plating. The X-rays reached the growing film through the thinned ABS coupon. Hydrogen, evolving as part of the electrochemical process, was vented through a tube connected at the highest point of the cell tilted by 17° with respect to the vertical. For rapid measurements during plating, only the Cu (311) peak was monitored alternatingly at ψ=0° and ψ=65°. At the end of plating, the cell was drained and rinsed by briefly circulating deionized water. Monitoring of the (311) peak continued for 10h, followed by measuring all five accessible diffraction peaks at a wider range of sample tilts, ψ.Coupons were plated ex-situ with film thicknesses ranging from 0.13 to 7.69μm at temperatures between 10 and 50°C. XRD measurements of fully relaxed samples were carried out. Typical relaxation times are less than one day, as shown below. In this case the Cu film faced up, and symmetric reflection measurements of five diffraction peaks were carried out at ψ=0, 20, 40, 60 and 80°. All experiments were done in pseudo-random sequence.The time-evolution of average stress in copper films was determined based on the substrate curvature technique. Stoney's equation relates the curvature of the test strip, κ, to the biaxial film stress,(1)σ=Eshs26hf1−νsκ,where hfand hsare the thicknesses of film and substrate, respectively, and Esand νsare, respectively, the elastic modulus and Poisson's ratio of the substrate [14]. For the purpose of this analysis we assume that the films grow at a constant rate during plating. The Pd-activated samples were mounted on an optical bench in front of a camera. The electroless plating solution was held in a transparent Plexiglas container (8cm wide, 3cm thick and 18cm high). The container with the plating solution was raised to immerse the test strip, and photographs were taken before, during and after plating. Metal test strips for these deposit stress measurements, made from Cu–Fe (alloy 194, 51μm thick) and Ni–Fe (alloy 42, 38μm) were purchased from Specialty Testing and Development Co., York, Pennsylvania. These strips have two legs that are varnished on opposite sides, such that the Cu film grows only on one side of each leg, and film stress will bend the legs in opposite directions. The ABS test strips were cut from 0.5mm thick ABS sheet (CS Hyde Company, Lake Villa, Illinois) to the same shape and size as the metal strips. Prior to cutting and desmearing, the sheet was sanded with 600grit abrasive paper on both sides to achieve a dull and even finish. To grow copper only on one side of each leg, during activation opposite sides were covered with adhesive tape (3M, type 851). Following a procedure described elsewhere, the spread of the test strips in the images is converted to curvature, allowing for the effect of gravity on the strip shape [11].To monitor the initial phase of thin film growth, copper was plated on to Pd-activated ABS coupons for times ranging from 1s to 17min. Non-specular reflectivity spectra of the plated surface were collected in the range from 400 to 900nm with a DIVA Series 2 HWL digital spectrometer (Nicholl Education Ltd., Hudersfield, UK). A halogen lamp with a glass filter was used for illumination. Scanning electron micrographs (SEM) were obtained with a JEOL JSM-5600 operated at 10kV, and an Oxford Inca Energy 200 system was used for elemental analysis of the deposits. Prior to imaging an approximately 10nm thick gold coating was applied to the surface by plasma sputtering. XPS spectra were obtained, after Ar ion sputtering, with a VG Microtech MultiLab ESCA 2000 System. Film adhesion was evaluated for seven films on ABS substrates with a LumiFrac adhesion analyzer (LUM GmbH, Berlin).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Plating start, plating rates, composition, stress and crystallite strain evolution and film texture were investigated for a production-level electroless plating bath that is optimized for blanket copper plating in horizontal plating applications. Key properties of this bath are listed in Table 1. The plating start is prompt, with continuous coverage of the surface after about 30s. For the ABS substrates used here, the standard thickness of 0.8μm was attained after 17min. Comparison of SEM micrographs with photo-spectroscopic data show that a dark purple color impression corresponds to the continuous copper film. The Ni content of the film at the start of plating is about 6%, and it decreases to about 1% as the film thickness increases to 1μm and more. Ni atoms are segregated at the grain boundaries in the form of hydroxides, and the decreased Ni content of the thicker films reflects a reduced volume fraction of GBs. The larger crystallites near the film surface have preferred 〈110〉 orientation.Crystallite strain, determined by XRD, and film stress based on substrate curvature are tensile during and after plating. Tensile stress is highest at the film-substrate interface. On metal substrates, the region of tensile stress is followed by a narrow region of compressive stress located about 50nm from the substrate. The substrate curvature indicates a higher stress than the crystallite strain if elastic behavior is assumed. The difference is attributed to elastic/inelastic grain boundary sliding. Stress after plating first relaxes quickly towards compressive due to mechanical yielding of the ABS, and then, in a slower process, back towards tensile due to GB relaxation in the Cu film. Relaxation of overall film stress and XRD based crystallite strain follow the same pattern, but again the amplitude of the strain relaxation is smaller. The final film stress and the stress relaxation amplitude decrease with film thickness in a pattern that matches the Ni content. They are correlated because Ni segregation, stress and stress relaxation are associated with the GBs, whose volume fraction decreases with increasing film thickness.