@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The Fisher effect in the presence of time-varying coefficients

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We introduce a time-varying Data Generating Process for the Fisher Effect.We examine the effect of time-variation on the behaviour of cointegration estimators.We argue that inference should be based on simulated critical values.We provide evidence that support the validity of the Fisher hypothesis.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Co-integration estimators,Fisher effect,Monte Carlo simulations,Time-varying coefficients,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A resolution of the Fisher effect puzzle in terms of statistical inference is attempted. Motivation stems from empirical evidence of time-varying coefficients in the data generating process of both the interest rates and inflation rates for 19 OECD countries. These time-varying dynamics crucially affect the behaviour of all the co-integration estimators considered, especially in small samples. When employing simulated critical values instead of asymptotic ones, the results provide ample evidence supporting the existence of a long-run Fisher effect in which interest rates move one-to-one with inflation rates in all countries under scrutiny except for Ireland and Switzerland.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A vast literature is devoted to the size of the response of nominal interest rates to changes in expected inflation, broadly known as the Fisher (1930) effect (see  Cooray, 2003). The importance of this response stems from the fact that permanent shocks to either inflation or nominal rates should not be translated into permanent disturbances to real rates themselves. Such a case would be problematic in the context of standard models of inter-temporal asset pricing. Moreover, long-run super-neutrality of money is associated with a coefficient relating interest rates to expected inflation equal to one. A value below unity implies substantial long-run non-neutralities.Unfortunately, there is no consensus among economists about the true size of the Fisher effect, as several problems plague the empirical estimates. First, as Darby (1975) argued, the Fisher effect estimate should be greater than one in order to compensate debt holders for a lower after-tax return, since interest income is usually taxed as ordinary income. Second, the expected inflation rate is generally unobservable and when actual realised inflation is used to proxy expected inflation, an errors-in-variables bias is introduced on the estimate of the Fisher effect. Finally and more importantly, the time series properties of both interest rates and inflation rates should be considered carefully. In the event of integrated variables, the only way to establish a theoretical Fisher relationship is via co-integration techniques. However, even when applying the appropriate co-integration methods, severe problems may arise, such as the low power of co-integration tests, structural breaks and nonlinearities in the co-integrating relationship, or the performance of co-integration estimators in small samples.In general, there is much conflicting evidence in the literature about the Fisher effect. Numerous studies have found that the slope coefficient in a regression of inflation against nominal rates is significantly different from 1, at least over certain periods. Mishkin (1992) was one of the first to suggest that the Fisher relation should be treated within the context of a co-integrated system, as in Engle and Granger (1987), but did not derive any strong conclusions due to the large standard errors of the estimated parameters. Subsequent studies used more efficient estimation procedures and generally found support for a long-run Fisher relation in the US (see  Evans and Lewis, 1995; Crowder and Hoffman, 1996; Atkins and Coe, 2002; Fahmy and Kandil, 2003). Caporale and Pittis (2004) show that the inability of the frequently employed estimators to provide efficient estimates in small samples is likely to be responsible for the over-rejection of the Fisher hypothesis. Once the estimators with the best properties are chosen, the evidence is strongly supportive of the Fisher effect in the US.Turning to studies examining whether the Fisher relationship holds internationally, Rose (1988) examined the integration properties of nominal interest rates and inflation for 18 OECD countries. The author concluded that inflation does not appear to have a unit root, while nominal interest rates do. By contrast, Koustas and Serletis (1999) established that the Fisher effect conditions hold for a set of 10 industrialised countries, without, however, establishing a unit coefficient. With the development of panel co-integration techniques, several authors examined the international Fisher effect in a panel setting. For example, developing two new panel co-integration tests for the null of no co-integration, Westerlund (2008) showed that the null can be safely rejected for a panel of 20 OECD countries. The author provided evidence of a unit slope on inflation, thus lending support to an international Fisher effect. Moreover, Coakley et al. (2006), motivated by panel data studies on the Fisher and other economic relationships, provided insights into the impact of error cross-section dependence and persistent autocorrelation on panel regression estimates.Another strand of the literature, developed relatively recently, takes another route and attempts to explain the failure of the Fisher effect due to either nonlinearities or structural breaks which may exist in this equilibrium relationship. Bierens (2000) and Lanne (2006) found that interest rates and inflation shared common nonlinear trends. Similar evidence was provided by Kapetanios et al. (2003) and Koustas and Lamarche (2010) who found that the process of the real interest rate exhibited asymmetric mean reversion, while stationary. Christopoulos and Leon-Ledesma (2007) showed that the co-integrating relationship between US interest rates and inflation was a nonlinear one. The authors attribute the less-than-proportional relationship found in the literature to this nonlinearity. On the other hand, Haug et al. (2011) provided evidence in favour of a linear Fisher relationship when accounting for structural breaks in the co-integration equation. However, in the majority of cases, their findings could not support the assumption that nominal interest rates and inflation move one-to-one in the long run.In this study, we also focus on the empirical examination of the long-run Fisher effect for 19 OECD countries. Our main objective is to investigate whether the empirical failure of the Fisher effect is linked to the likely distorted small-sample performance of the co-integration estimators under time-varying dynamics. Previous studies that introduced time-varying dynamics in the analysis of co-integrated variables include Bierens and Martins (2010) and Koop et al. (2011). Both studies developed a vector error correction model which allows the co-integration relationship to evolve over time. Our approach differs since, under our data generating process (DGP), the coefficient of the co-integration equation is time invariant, while the time-varying dynamics are introduced in the process of the co-integrating error and the error that drives the regressor.Our analysis is motivated by the potential of relevant shifts in policy conduct. Specifically, changes in monetary policy regimes are likely to be an important source of variation in the processes governing both real interest rates and inflation rates. In a similar mode, Haug et al. (2011) allowed for a time-varying co-integrating coefficient subject to breaks, probably induced by shifts in monetary policy stance. However, instead of allowing for abrupt regime changes, our error model parameters shift over time in a smooth and gradual fashion consistent with interest-rate smoothing monetary policy. Trecroci and Vassalli (2010) modelled monetary policy reaction functions with a time-varying parameter model and provided an extensive discussion on its appropriateness.We put forward a wide class of processes, which allow for more general heterogeneity properties in the data similar to those encountered in empirical applications. Specifically, we model the co-integrating error process and the error that drives the inflation process as a vector autoregressive model with either autoregressive or random coefficients. Interestingly, this class of DGPs is likely to satisfy the conditions for the applicability of the functional central limit theorem (FCLT), thus allowing for asymptotics of integrated processes to be derived and restoring the asymptotic optimality of the common co-integration estimators (Phillips and Durlauf, 1986). The behaviour of various co-integration estimators in the presence of time-varying coefficients is then examined. By means of Monte Carlo simulations, we show that these time-varying dynamics affect the behaviour of all the co-integration estimators considered in this study, causing significant size distortions when testing the Fisher effect. Our findings suggest that among the estimators under scrutiny, the augmented autoregressive distributed lag (AADL) estimator (Pesaran and Shin, 1999) appears to be the most robust estimator to time-varying dynamics, closely followed by the fully modified least squares (FMLS) estimator (Phillips and Hansen, 1990).As a second step in our analysis, we estimate the Fisher equation and base our statistical tests on simulated critical values instead of asymptotic ones. Taking this route, we find that the Fisher effect survives the empirical evidence irrespective of the estimator choice, with just a few exceptions. We, therefore, conjecture that a possible explanation for the scarce evidence of an international Fisher effect in the literature is the poor small-sample performance of the co-integration estimators under a DGP with time-varying coefficients. A word of caution is in order here. Our findings do not rule out the possibility of alternative specifications, such as regime switching or breaks in either the error dynamics or the co-integration parameter.The layout of this paper is as follows: Section  2 provides a discussion of the Fisher equation and introduces the DGP for the relationship between interest rates and inflation. Next, we examine the effect of time-varying dynamics on the behaviour of various co-integration estimators. Section  3 presents the estimates of the Fisher equation obtained by various estimators and discusses the main findings of our empirical analysis. Finally, Section  4 summarises the main findings of the paper.In this section, we first describe the Fisher effect modelling in a co-integrating framework and then introduce a DGP for the relationship between interest rates and inflation rates that allows for time-varying dynamics in the error generating process. We also provide some theoretical results on the presence of nuisance parameters in the distribution of the OLS estimator in the context of the DGP under consideration. Finally, we examine the behaviour of various co-integration estimators in terms of their ability to provide correct statistical inference in the presence of time-varying dynamics.Formally, the ‘Fisher effect’ can be expressed as follows:it(m)=πte(m)+rte(m),whereit(m)is them-period nominal interest rate at time t,πte(m)denotes the expected rate of inflation from time t tot+m, andrte(m)is the ex-ante real interest rate. Assuming rational expectations (see, for example  Mishkin, 1992), realised inflation is linked to expected inflation as follows:πt(m)=πte(m)+et,whereetis a white noise process, orthogonal toπte(m). If we further assume that the process followed by the real interest rate is a white noise process with a mean equal tor, we are able to test for the Fisher effect in the context of the following regression:(1)it(m)=r+θπt(m)+νt.Ifit(m)andπt(m)are both considered to be I(1), the null hypothesis to be tested can take the following form:Fisher hypothesis holds⇔(i)νtis I(0) and (ii)θ=1.The first of these conditions, that is, the condition thatit(m)andπt(m)are co-integrated processes is supported by the bulk of empirical evidence in the literature. On the other hand, when dealing with the second condition, estimates ofθappear to be significantly different from unity, leading to the Fisher effect puzzle.Many studies in the literature examine the co-integration equation between the variables of interest in the context of the triangular DGP proposed by Phillips (1988). Under this triangular DGP, the vector of the co-integrating error and the error that drives the regressor is usually modelled as a VAR(1) process. The need to parameterise the vector of errors stems from the necessity to evaluate the various estimators in finite samples, typically used in empirical applications, and/or to derive sample-specific critical values for testing a co-integration relationship of interest. In this context, several Monte Carlo studies of the small-sample properties of co-integration estimators have been conducted (see, for example  Phillips and Hansen, 1990; Stock and Watson, 1993; Christou and Pittis, 2002; Panopoulou and Pittis, 2004).In order to accommodate the empirical regularities observed in the relation between interest rates and inflation rates, we choose to introduce a more general DGP that allows for time-varying dynamics in the process of the co-integrating error and the error that drives the regressor. Specifically, we consider the following bivariate DGP for the I(1) vectorzt=[yt,xt]⊤:(2)yt=θxt+u1tand(3)Δxt=u2t.We further assume thatut=[u1t,u2t]⊤is an I(0) process generated as follows:(4)ut=(M+Pt)ut−1+et,whereMis a diagonal 2×2 parameter matrix andPtis a diagonal 2×2 time-varying matrix. Specifically,(5)(u1tu2t)=[(μ1100μ22)+(ρ11,t00ρ22,t)](u1t−1u2t−1)+(e1te2t)and(6)(e1te2t)∼NIID[(00),Σ12=(σ11σ12σ12σ22)].Moreover, we allowPtto follow a vector autoregressive (VAR) process of order 1, that is,Pt=ΦPt−1+vt, whereΦis a diagonal 2×2 constant parameter matrix:(7)(ρ11,tρ22,t)=(ϕ1100ϕ22)(ρ11,t−1ρ22,t−1)+(v1tv2t)and(8)(v1tv2t)∼NIID[(00),Σ34=(σ3300σ44)].It is easy to see that under this specification, the co-integration error and the error that drives the regressor follow the following two univariate processes:u1t=(μ11+ρ11,t)u1t−1+e1t,ρ11,t=ϕ11ρ11,t−1+v1tandu2t=(μ22+ρ22,t)u2t−1+e2t,ρ22,t=ϕ22ρ22,t−1+v2t.Appendix A.1 provides the stationarity condition foru1tandu2tbased on the results of Weiss (1985).The aforementioned DGP assumes thatutfollows a VAR(1) model with AR(1) coefficients (VAR(1)-AR(1) process). In our analysis, we also consider a second DGP that assumes thatutfollows a VAR(1) process with random coefficients (VAR(1)-RC process). This case is naturally a subset of the previous one. By settingΦ=0,Ptis a mean zero process withE[Pt⊗Pt]=C. It is easy to show that the elements of the matrixCcan be obtained from those of the matrixΣ34for a diagonal matrixPt. In deriving the necessary and sufficient conditions for the stationarity and stability of this process, we further assume thatPtis independent ofet. Analytically, the generating mechanism for the VAR(1)-RC case is given by the following equations:(9)(u1tu2t)=[(μ1100μ22)+(ρ11,t00ρ22,t)](u1t−1u2t−1)+(e1te2t)and(10)(e1te2tρ11,tρ22,t)∼NIID[(0000),(σ11σ1200σ12σ220000σ330000σ44)].After some algebra, we show that the stationarity of the VAR(1)-RC model is ensured by the following condition.Proposition 1The vectorut=[u1t,u2t]⊤that follows a VAR(1)-RC process given by Eqs.   (9) and (10)   is stationary if1−μ112−σ33>0and1−μ222−σ44>0.ProofSee Appendix A.2. ■Next, we relate the parameters of our DGPs to the nuisance parameters that are present in the distribution of the OLS estimator.The presence of nuisance parameters in the distribution of the OLS estimator renders standard asymptotic theory useless in the case of co-integration. The reason for the presence of these non-standard asymptotics is that when the elements ofutare contemporaneously and/or temporally correlated, the following two types of second-order asymptotic effects are present in the limiting distribution of the OLS estimator (see  Phillips and Loretan, 1991): (i) The nuisance parameterω12/ω22that describes the ‘long-run correlation’ effect, due to non-diagonality of the long-run covariance matrixΩ=[ωij],i,j=1,2and (ii) The nuisance parameterδ21=∑k=0∞E(u20u1k)(of the one-sided covariance matrix,Δ) that describes the ‘endogeneity’ effect. However, the design of our DGPs rules out any feedbacks from the co-integration error to the error that drives the regressor or from the regressor to the error that drives the co-integration error. In this case, both nuisance parameters have the same source, namely, the contemporaneous correlation betweenu1tandu2t.We now derive the relevant nuisance parameters for the VAR(1)-RC process given by Eqs. (9) and (10). To keep the analysis clear, the derivation of the variance matrices is given in Appendix B. We end up with the following formulas: The variance–covariance matrixVofutis given byvecV=(I−M⊗M−C)−1vecΣ12and the long-run covariance matrixΩis given byΩ=V+M(I−M)−1V+V(I−M′)−1M′.In our DGP,Ω=((1+μ11)σ11(1−μ11)(1−μ112−σ33)σ12(1−μ11)(1−μ22)σ12(1−μ11)(1−μ22)(1+μ22)σ22(1−μ22)(1−μ222−σ44))andΔ=(σ11(1−μ11)(1−μ112−σ33)σ12(1−μ11)(1−μ11μ22)σ12(1−μ22)(1−μ11μ22)σ22(1−μ22)(1−μ222−σ44)).Hence, we haveω12ω22=σ12(1−μ222−σ44)(1−μ11)(1+μ22)σ22andδ21=σ12(1−μ22)(1−μ11μ22).We observe that both nuisance parameters are increasing functions ofμ11andσ12. On the other hand, the persistence of the error that drives the regressor (mainly controlled byμ22) drives the nuisance parameters in the opposite direction; that is, asμ22increases,ω12ω22decreases whileδ21increases. What is interesting in this case is that the effect of the random coefficients does not amplify the magnitude of the nuisance parameters. Specifically, asσ44increases, the ‘long-run correlation’ effect decreases, due to increased variation in the error that drives the regressor.Similar results for the general case of a VAR(1)-AR(1) process are not easy to derive, due to the algebraic intractability of the process.We investigate, by means of Monte Carlo simulations, the finite sample performance of various co-integration estimators in cases where the co-integration error and the error that drives the regressor follow either a VAR(1)-AR(1) or a VAR(1)-RC process. The estimators are evaluated on the basis of their accuracy of statistical inference since this is of interest in our empirical investigation of the Fisher effect. As a measure of accuracy of statistical inference, we calculate the empirical size of thet-test for testing the hypothesisθ=1in Eq. (2) for a nominal size of 5%. We use 2000 replications and consider sample sizes ofT+50observations withTequal to 50, 150, and 200. In all cases, the first 50 observations are discarded to eliminate the effect of initial values. The selected sample sizes are in line with the sample sizes of most empirical applications, including the one presented in Section  3 of this study.We consider the following nine estimators: (i) the standard OLS estimator; (ii) two versions of the DOLS estimator—one, denoted as DOLS(hac), uses the HAC covariance matrix estimator while the other, denoted as DOLS, re-scales the OLS coefficient covariance matrix; (iii) two versions of the canonical cointegrating regression (CCR) estimator, denoted as CCR(nw) and CCR(a); (iv) two versions of the FMLS estimator, denoted as FMLS(nw) and FMLS(a), which use either the Newey–West or the Andrews procedure for bandwidth selection, respectively; (v) the JOH estimator; and (vi) the AADL estimator. We use the Akaike information criterion (AIC) to choose the lag and lead specification for DOLS and AADL along with the lag specification for JOH. AIC is also used to determine the optimal lag specification for the estimation of the long-run covariance matrix in the context of FMLS and CCR. Appendix C provides a brief description of these estimators.We generate random samples from DGPs that are similar, but differ in the value of only one or two coefficients, in order to be able to isolate the effect of each coefficient of interest on the behaviour of the estimators under scrutiny. In the case of a VAR(1)-RC process, the coefficients that affect the nuisance parameters and, as a consequence, the behaviour of the estimators areσ12,σ44, andμ11. Moreover, when we consider the case of a VAR(1)-AR(1) process, the values ofϕ11andϕ22probably affect the results. On the other hand, we keep the value of all the remaining coefficients of the DGP fixed throughout the experiment. Specifically, we setσ11=σ22=1,μ22=0.3, andσ33=0.1.Our first experiment focuses on the case of a VAR(1)-RC process. Specifically, we examine six different DGPs, and the results for samples of 50, 150, and 200 observations are reported in Table 1. The first DGP (DGP1) corresponds to a process with (i) small contemporaneous correlation betweenu1tandu2t(σ12=0.3), (ii) low persistence ofu1t(μ11=0.4), and (iii) mild time-varying dynamics (σ44=0.1). DGP1 serves as a benchmark in our analysis since it describes a process with mild time-varying dynamics and small nuisance parameters. Even though DGP1 is a process with relatively mild dynamics, we observe significant size distortions especially for small samples of 50 observations. To be more specific, whenT=50, both versions of the DOLS estimator have an empirical size of around 30%, which is much higher than the nominal size of 5%. Similarly, the empirical size of the OLS and JOH estimators is around 20%, while AADL appears to be the estimator with the lowest size distortions, with an empirical size of 12%.As the sample size increases, the behaviour of all estimators improves. WhenT=150, most estimators have an empirical size that ranges from 7% (AADL, FMLS(a), and CCR(a)) to 9% (JOH). The empirical size of DOLS(hac) also decreases from 29% to 13%. On the other hand, the ‘naive’ versions of DOLS and OLS continue to have important size distortions with empirical sizes of 22% and 18%, respectively. If we further increase the sample size to 200 observations, the behaviour of DOLS and OLS does not improve, while the size distortions for the remaining estimators slightly decrease.The comparison of the results for DGP1 and DGP2 shows that the size of the contemporaneous correlation betweenu1tandu2tseems to lead to a small increase in the size distortions of OLS, while the behaviour of the other estimators remains unaffected. Comparing DGP3 and DGP5, we find that when the persistence ofu1tis relatively high, an increase inσ12increases the size distortions of both versions of the CCR estimator, especially for small sample sizes. Moreover, high persistence of the co-integration erroru1tleads to a significant deterioration of the behaviour of all estimators. For example, when we increaseμ11to 0.7 (DGP3), the empirical size of DOLS and JOH is 54% and 30%, respectively (T=50). AADL seems to be the estimator that is less affected by the persistence ofu1tsince its empirical size increases from 12 in DGP1 to 15% in DGP3 (T=50). The behaviour of all estimators improves as the sample size increases and most estimators have an empirical size of around 10% whenT=150, which further decreases to 7% to 9% whenT=200. OLS, DOLS, and, to a lesser degree, DOLS(hac) are the only exceptions with much higher size distortions compared to the other estimators considered in this study. Finally, an increase in the value ofσ44that controls the ‘random-coefficient’ effect (together withσ33) causes, in general, minor improvements in the behaviour of the estimators. This is illustrated by the comparison of DGP4 to either DGP1 or DGP6.In summary, the findings of our first Monte Carlo experiment suggest that all the estimators under scrutiny suffer from size distortions when the DGP corresponds to a VAR(1)-RC process. The size distortions are higher for small sample sizes and are an increasing function of the persistence of the co-integration error and, to a lesser degree, of the contemporaneous correlation betweenu1tandu2t. AADL appears to be the best-performing estimator followed by the two versions of FMLS. On the other hand, OLS and DOLS are the estimators with the worst behaviour in the context of our DGPs.Our second experiment focuses on the case of a VAR(1)-AR(1) process. We consider four different DGPs: DGP7 to DGP10. The results, reported in Table 2along with the results for DGP1, which serves as a benchmark, suggest that switching from a VAR(1)-RC process to a VAR(1)-AR(1) process increases the size distortions of all the estimators examined in our analysis. In all cases, the size distortions decrease as the sample size increases. AADL remains the best-performing estimator, closely followed by FMLS and CCR. On the other hand, OLS and DOLS have the largest size distortions among the estimators under scrutiny. The comparison of the empirical sizes for DGP7 and DGP8 shows that high values ofμ11cause larger size distortions compared to high values ofϕ11. DGP9 reveals that, similar to the VAR(1)-RC case, the size distortions increase with the size ofσ12. Finally, DGP10 shows that the behaviour of the estimators is not affected by the value ofϕ22.In this section, we use data from 19 OECD countries to examine whether the Fisher relation has empirical support internationally. Our main focus is on the ability of the alternative co-integration estimators to provide valid inference about the validity of the Fisher relationship. The empirical analysis is based on the same nine estimators included in the Monte Carlo experiment presented in the previous section.We use annual data for long-term interest rates and inflation rates available at the website of Professor Michael D. Bordo and the IFS database. The use of a long annual historical dataset stems from our need to increase the power of our testing methodology. Given that our focus is on the long-run equilibrium relation between interest rates and inflation rates, the findings in the literature indicate that the time span is far more important than the mere number of observations. In other words, co-integration is a long-run concept and therefore the literature suggests that it is preferable to conduct a co-integration analysis using low-frequency data over a long time period rather than high-frequency data over a short time period (see, among others  Hakkio and Rush, 1991; Otero and Smith, 2000; Zhou, 2001).We use the IFS database to extend the sample period to 2009 for all variables. However, the start date differs among countries due to data availability. Specifically, the sample starts in 1881 for Canada, Denmark, Ireland, the Netherlands, Sweden, the UK, and the USA; 1883 for Switzerland; 1947 for Australia, Belgium, and Norway; 1949 for France, Italy, New Zealand, and Portugal; 1955 for Germany; 1965 for Austria; 1966 for Japan; and 1970 for Luxembourg.Some preliminary results confirm the widely held view that interest rates and inflation rates are I(1) processes and co-integrated. Specifically, we employ the trace statistic and the maximum-eigenvalue statistic developed by Johansen (1988, 1991) and Johansen and Juselius (1990) to test for co-integration between interest rates and inflation rates. Both tests clearly suggest the existence of co-integration for almost all countries under scrutiny. Austria, Italy, Japan, and Luxembourg are the only exceptions. We should note however that the sample size for the aforementioned four countries is relatively small and this might influence the power of the tests to reveal co-integration (see, among others  Haug, 1996). In summary, our results suggest that the first condition for the Fisher hypothesis to hold is, in general, satisfied. In this mode, we focus on testing the second hypothesis, namely, that the slope coefficient is insignificantly different from 1.Before proceeding to the estimation of the slope coefficient,θ, we first establish its time-invariancy property on the basis of tests for stability in co-integrating regressions (Hansen, 1992). More in detail, we employ three tests, namely, theLc,MeanF, and SupF tests, which test the null hypothesis that the co-integrating vector is constant. To save space, we provide a brief description of the tests along with our results in Appendix D. In the majority of cases, our findings (Table D.1) point to the stability of the co-integrating relationship justifying our modelling approach. However, we can identify some exceptions. The tests uniformly reject the null hypothesis of a constant co-integrating parameter for Austria and Switzerland. Our results are mixed for Denmark, Italy, Portugal, and, to a lesser degree, France. France, Italy, and Switzerland are among the countries with a structural break in the co-integrating relation according to Haug et al. (2011).Although our findings so far broadly support the existence of a time-invariant co-integrating relation between interest rates and inflation rates, we cannot rule out the possibility of the existence of a break in the Fisher equation for specific countries. Unfortunately, there is no straightforward way to differentiate between (i) a process with constantθand time-varying dynamics in the error terms and (ii) a process with a time-varyingθand a constant coefficient process for the error terms. We believe that the former is more likely than the latter, since the literature indicates that the existence of a break in the co-integrating relation usually leads to co-integration test rejections (see  Gregory et al., 1996; Davidson and Monticini, 2010; Haug et al., 2011).In an attempt to further investigate this issue, we perform a simple Monte Carlo experiment, described in detail in Appendix E. In brief, we first consider a DGP with time-variation in the co-integrating parameter and examine how often the co-integration tests indicate the existence of co-integration. Then, we repeat the same procedure in the context of a DGP with a constantθand time-varying dynamics in the error terms. In the former case, our findings confirm previous findings in the literature since the co-integration tests indicate the existence of co-integration in less than 20% of the generated samples. In the latter case, the power of the co-integration tests increases significantly exceeding 90% in some specifications. We, therefore, continue our empirical analysis assuming a constantθ, keeping in mind, however, that this might not hold for specific countries, such as Austria and Italy where co-integration is not supported and the Hansen stability tests indicate a structural break inθ.We now proceed with the estimation of the slope coefficient. Table 3presents the estimated value ofθ, along with the respective standard errors, for all the countries and estimators under consideration. First, we observe significant variation in the estimated slope coefficient both across estimators and across countries. The OLS estimator systematically produces the lowest estimates ofθwith a median value of 0.233, while the estimatedθs range from 0.01 (Ireland) to 0.64 (Austria). CCR and FMLS also generate, on average, low estimates ofθ, while JOH provides the highest ones with a median estimate of 1.308. A cross-country comparison reveals that Ireland and Switzerland generate, in general, the lowest estimates with a median of 0.01 and 0.065 respectively. On the other hand, Austria and Italy give the highest estimates with a median of 1 and 0.724, respectively.Next, we test the null hypothesis thatθequals unity for all countries under scrutiny based on the nine different estimators considered in the analysis. The t-statistics for the null hypothesis ofθ=1are reported in Table 4. Entries in bold indicate rejection of the null hypothesis based on 5% asymptotic critical values. Our findings suggest that in most cases, the Fisher hypothesis is rejected. Specifically, eight out of the nine estimators lead to the rejection of the null hypothesis for France, Ireland, the Netherlands, Portugal, and Switzerland. In most countries, at least four estimators suggest thatθis not equal to unity. The countries with the strongest evidence in favour of the Fisher hypothesis are Austria and Luxembourg. For these two countries, all estimators, other than OLS, do not reject the null hypothesis. As far as the behaviour of the estimators is concerned, we observe many differences. The results based on the OLS estimator suggest rejection of the Fisher hypothesis in all 19 countries under scrutiny. Similarly, CCR produces t-statistics that reject the Fisher hypothesis for 15 or 16 countries depending on the version of the estimator. On the other hand, the results of AADL indicate that the null hypothesis is rejected in only four countries. It is interesting to note that, according to our previous simulations, AADL is the most robust estimator to DGPs with time-varying dynamics. The remaining estimators reject the null hypothesis for 8 to 12 countries.So far, the results produced by most estimators provide evidence against the validity of the Fisher hypothesis. These findings are based on asymptotic critical values that might be inappropriate for small sample sizes such as ours consisting of 40 to 128 observations. Moreover, it is possible that the DGP of both interest rates and inflation rates has time-varying coefficients. In such cases, the results of the Monte Carlo experiment presented in Section  2 reveal that the estimators considered in this analysis suffer from significant size distortions. Therefore, the utilisation of asymptotic critical values seems problematic and can lead to false conclusions. We overcome these issues by repeating the analysis based on simulated critical values that take into account both the small sample size and the time-varying dynamics.In order to generate the simulated critical values, we first need to choose the proper DGP to describe the relationship between the interest rate and the inflation of each country. We consider three alternative models; the VAR(1)-AR(1) and VAR(1)-RC models described in Section  2, and a simple VAR(1) model with constant coefficients. The constant coefficient VAR(1) model is a simplified version of VAR(1)-RC whereρ11,tandρ22,tare not included in the model ofut. Specifically,ut=Mut−1+etwhereMis a diagonal 2×2 matrix andet∼NIID(0,Σ12). For each country under examination, we select among the three models by means of the likelihood ratio (LR) statistic. Once again, we use simulated critical values instead of asymptotic ones to ensure correct inference. The values of the LR statistic, together with the 5% simulated critical values and the selected model are reported in Table 5. The general VAR(1)-AR(1) model is selected for nine countries, while the VAR(1)-RC model is also selected for nine countries. On the other hand, the constant coefficient VAR(1) model is supported only for Austria.Given the selected model for each country, we now calculate the simulated critical values (not reported) for each estimator. In this way, we can conduct proper statistical inference for the null hypothesis thatθequals unity. An asterisk on the estimates reported in Table 4 indicates rejection of the null hypothesis based on simulated critical values. In a nutshell, this last set of results paints a totally different picture. We now provide strong evidence supporting the validity of the Fisher hypothesis. To be more specific, all the estimators lead to the same conclusion thatθ=1in almost all cases. OLS is the only exception since it still suggests rejection of the Fisher hypothesis for 11 countries. If we concentrate on the other eight estimators, they all support the Fisher hypothesis for 14 countries (Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Germany, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, the UK, and the USA), while seven of them support the Fisher hypothesis for France and Sweden. The results are mixed for Portugal where four estimators lead to the rejection of the Fisher hypothesis. However, we should note that the estimators with the best Monte Carlo performance, namely, AADL and both versions of FMLS, support the validity of the Fisher hypothesis in Portugal. On the other hand, Ireland and Switzerland are the only cases where almost all the estimators reject the Fisher hypothesis.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This study examines the Fisher hypothesis for 19 OECD countries. We consider the case of time-varying dynamics in the error generating process of both interest rates and inflation rates. In such cases, the behaviour of the co-integration estimators that are usually utilised to investigate the validity of the Fisher hypothesis can be affected leading to incorrect conclusions.We first use Monte Carlo simulations to examine the properties of nine alternative estimators under DGPs with time-varying coefficients. Our results suggest that the estimators suffer from significant size distortions, especially for small sample sizes. The AADL estimator appears to be the most robust estimator to time-varying dynamics, closely followed by the FMLS estimator.Next, we employ 19 OECD countries to examine whether the Fisher relation has empirical support internationally. The findings crucially depend on the critical values used to test the Fisher hypothesis. When we use asymptotic critical values, which, according to our Monte Carlo experiment, are inappropriate for correct inference in cases of small samples and/or DGPs with time-varying dynamics, empirical evidence is usually against the validity of the Fisher hypothesis. AADL is the only exception since this estimator rejects the Fisher hypothesis for only four countries. On the other hand, when we use simulated critical values that take into account both the available sample size and the time-varying dynamics of the data generating process, the picture changes dramatically. All the estimators under scrutiny, with the exception of OLS, strongly support the validity of the Fisher hypothesis. The only exceptions are Ireland and Switzerland where almost all estimators reject the Fisher hypothesis, while the results are mixed in the case of Portugal.