@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multilevel principal component analysis (mPCA) in shape analysis: A feasibility study in medical and dental imaging

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
mPCA in ASMs can be used in medical and dental image analysis.Results provided by mPCA in initial studies appear to be sensible.Between- and within-subject variations are modelled correctly using mPCA.mPCA has more flexibility, control, and accuracy than standard PCA.mPCA is the correct method of combining sets of landmark points from different experts.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multilevel PCA,Active shape models,Dentistry,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Background and objectiveMethods used in image processing should reflect any multilevel structures inherent in the image dataset or they run the risk of functioning inadequately. We wish to test the feasibility of multilevel principal components analysis (PCA) to build active shape models (ASMs) for cases relevant to medical and dental imaging.MethodsMultilevel PCA was used to carry out model fitting to sets of landmark points and it was compared to the results of “standard” (single-level) PCA. Proof of principle was tested by applying mPCA to model basic peri-oral expressions (happy, neutral, sad) approximated to the junction between the mouth/lips. Monte Carlo simulations were used to create this data which allowed exploration of practical implementation issues such as the number of landmark points, number of images, and number of groups (i.e., “expressions” for this example). To further test the robustness of the method, mPCA was subsequently applied to a dental imaging dataset utilising landmark points (placed by different clinicians) along the boundary of mandibular cortical bone in panoramic radiographs of the face.ResultsChanges of expression that varied between groups were modelled correctly at one level of the model and changes in lip width that varied within groups at another for the Monte Carlo dataset. Extreme cases in the test dataset were modelled adequately by mPCA but not by standard PCA. Similarly, variations in the shape of the cortical bone were modelled by one level of mPCA and variations between the experts at another for the panoramic radiographs dataset. Results for mPCA were found to be comparable to those of standard PCA for point-to-point errors via miss-one-out testing for this dataset. These errors reduce with increasing number of eigenvectors/values retained, as expected.ConclusionsWe have shown that mPCA can be used in shape models for dental and medical image processing. mPCA was found to provide more control and flexibility when compared to standard “single-level” PCA. Specifically, mPCA is preferable to “standard” PCA when multiple levels occur naturally in the dataset.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Methods used in image processing should reflect the underlying structures not only within the images themselves but also between images. This is particularly important for repeated images taken from the same person or different “patches” from the same image. Methods that reflect these relationships between images at multiple levels, should function more efficiently than those that do not shape models (ASMs) and active appearance models (AAMs) [1–8] are a common technique of image processing that are used to search for specific features or shapes in images.Central to these methods is the principal components analysis (PCA) of sets of “landmark” points that define a specific shape in a set of images. Often these sets of points for the images are identified or defined by an expert (or experts) using a graphical user interface (GUI). For example, Fig. 1shows a typical landmarked medical image and GUI for a panoramic dental radiograph [8].Once an image has been landmarked, the principal components form a point distribution model and one uses this information to detect shapes in new images. A distinct advantage of ASMs is that one constrains the types of shapes that are allowed in any image search. This is achieved by allowing any image search to go only so far along directions defined by the eigenvectors (major modes of variations) based on PCA, e.g., for ASMs, of a covariance matrix for sets of landmark points. Therefore any shape found in the new image using this approach is never too extreme when compared to the training set, which is very useful for medical images for which artefacts and noise are common.If clustering or multilevel data structures exist naturally in the data set, the eigenvectors and eigenvalues from PCA will only be partially reflective of the true variation in the set of shapes. Multilevel modelling is a method of statistics that has been used extensively, e.g., to model naturally occurring clusters in the data or to model the effects of repeated-measures in longitudinal studies. A previous application of mPCA in ASMs was for segmentation of the human spine [9]. The results of this study showed that mPCA offers more flexibility and allows deformations that classical statistical models cannot generate. As mPCA decomposes data into a within-individual and a between-individual component clear benefits to the analysis of multi-level images is seen.This study takes Monte Carlo simulations (called the “Smile” dataset as a shorthand) and data from the OSTEODENT project [8] to explore an application of mPCA to a practical problem. The OSTEODENT project aims to investigate the link between dental measurements (e.g., bitewing and panoramic radiographs) and osteoporosis, and the reader is referred to Refs. [8,10] for more detailed information about the project. The present work follows on to some extent from previous analyses of placement errors of landmark points [11] for the OSTEODENT dataset. The focus of this previous work was to use the OSTEODENT data and also simulated data in order to explore the effects of measurement errors [12–14] on ASMs [11]. Although there are some parallels with this previous work, mPCA is the correct method for those cases where multiple levels occur naturally in the data, and where one wishes to use PCA in models of shape. For the OSTEODENT project, mPCA describes mark-ups of landmark points in these images for all subjects as one level in the data. The mark-ups are provided by two independent experts for these images and therefore the “experts” provide the next level. The approach of mPCA discussed in Ref. [9] is used to study the effects of multiple levels in the dental images. The aim is to test if it is possible to apply such methods to topics in dentistry and if clinically applicable results can be obtained when compared to results of “standard” single-level PCA. Finally, we explore practical issues relating to mPCA such as how the number of mark-up points, the number of shapes, and the number groups will affect the results. The formalism for mPCA is presented in the methods section and an explicit calculation of covariance matrices and mPCA is given in an appendix for a very simple example. Results for the application of mPCA to the “Smile” and OSTEODENT datasets are then given. We present our conclusions in the final section.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
It has been shown that mPCA in ASMs can be used in dentistry and that this approach gives clinically applicable results. Explicit calculations were given, which can be a useful guide to other researchers who wish to employ this approach. We have explored some of the practical issues relating to using such methods in these initial calculations, e.g., how changing the number of mark-up points affects results. This initial investigation for the Monte Carlo “Smile” dataset suggests that a better model should also lead to better model fits, especially for “extreme” cases with respect to the training set. An important point is that mPCA allows one, in principle, to have much more flexibility and control when forming models and then fitting these models in subsequent image searches. There appear to be many future areas for research relating to mPCA in ASMs and AAMs, including applications in medicine and dentistry.