@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Quality optimized medical image information hiding algorithm that employs edge detection and data coding

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A method for embedding patient's information into medical image is proposed.Two coding methods have been utilized to embed the EPR and improve imperceptibility.Cost optimization function is contributed to enhance the quality of the stego image.The proposed system is robust against textural feature steganalysis.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Digital steganography,Cryptography,EPR,Edge detection,STC,Hamming code,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
ObjectivesThe present work has the goal of developing a secure medical imaging information system based on a combined steganography and cryptography technique. It attempts to securely embed patient's confidential information into his/her medical images.MethodsThe proposed information security scheme conceals coded Electronic Patient Records (EPRs) into medical images in order to protect the EPRs’ confidentiality without affecting the image quality and particularly the Region of Interest (ROI), which is essential for diagnosis. The secret EPR data is converted into ciphertext using private symmetric encryption method. Since the Human Visual System (HVS) is less sensitive to alterations in sharp regions compared to uniform regions, a simple edge detection method has been introduced to identify and embed in edge pixels, which will lead to an improved stego image quality. In order to increase the embedding capacity, the algorithm embeds variable number of bits (up to 3) in edge pixels based on the strength of edges. Moreover, to increase the efficiency, two message coding mechanisms have been utilized to enhance the ±1 steganography. The first one, which is based on Hamming code, is simple and fast, while the other which is known as the Syndrome Trellis Code (STC), is more sophisticated as it attempts to find a stego image that is close to the cover image through minimizing the embedding impact. The proposed steganography algorithm embeds the secret data bits into the Region of Non Interest (RONI), where due to its importance; the ROI is preserved from modifications.ResultsThe experimental results demonstrate that the proposed method can embed large amount of secret data without leaving a noticeable distortion in the output image. The effectiveness of the proposed algorithm is also proven using one of the efficient steganalysis techniques.ConclusionThe proposed medical imaging information system proved to be capable of concealing EPR data and producing imperceptible stego images with minimal embedding distortions compared to other existing methods. In order to refrain from introducing any modifications to the ROI, the proposed system only utilizes the Region of Non Interest (RONI) in embedding the EPR data.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In recent years, the growth of information and communication technology have made the transmission of digital information more appropriate and necessary requirement for different sectors such as government, education, banking and health care where the Internet has become the backbone for data exchanging and sharing [1,2]. The health care system primarily utilizes the Internet to facilitate remote exchange of digital medical images and information between hospitals and clinics and to provide e-health services to patients [3,4]. Access to medical information, enable the communication of patient data between different doctors; and efficient remote diagnosis [4].Digital medical images are fundamental to the diagnosis and treatment of many diseases, and hence, it is extremely important to guarantee secure storage, processing and analysis of medical images without violating the Code of Ethics for Health Information Professionals. The Hospital Information System (HIS) and Picture Archiving and Communication System (PACS) form the bases of digital hospital systems that adopt the Digital Imaging and Communication in Medicine (DICOM) standard [5–8]. Since the first publication of DICOM in 1993, it has been established as the international standard for handling, storing, printing and transmitting medical imaging and related information [9]. It defines the format for medical images that can be exchanged with the data necessary for clinical use. However, DICOM was initially introduced without considering network security or data protection [7,8,10]. A DICOM encoding method has later been initiated and become the only data protection for nearly 20 years. DICOM standard accepts different encryption methods such as Data Encryption Standard (DES), Triple-DES, and RSA (Rivest, Shamir, Adleman) to protect the privacy and confidentiality of health information [11]. However, those encryption methods do not ensure confidentiality of important data [6].Lately, numerous methods were introduced to provide protection of medical image and patient records [3,12,13]. For secure communication, these methods depend either on cryptography or information hiding techniques. Cryptography methods use encryption to hide the meaning of the message, but they cannot hide its existence [1,14]. The main feature of cryptography is that unintended users cannot explain the encrypted message without the private key. However, the transmission of encoded text certainly stimulates intruders’ attention, whom may attempt to decrypt it. Information hiding on the other hand is the process of embedding information inside another medium for secure transmission. It can be applied in a wide range of applications such as copyright, tampering detection and secret data transmission [15]. In general, information hiding techniques can be categorized into two types, i.e., steganography and watermarking, according to the applications that information hiding is utilized for. Steganography is the art of concealing the existence of the secret message within other media such as text, image, audio and video without drawing attention of unintended users and achieving a high embedding capacity [12]. Whereas watermarking techniques are used to verify the identity and authenticity of the owner of a digital image by embedding a distinguishable data such as a signature into the host medium [16]. The work presented in this paper belongs to the steganography category, where the purpose is to conceal the existence of patient's secret data in a medical image. Section 4 reviews steganography and watermarking methods that have been utilized in hiding data in medical images. Combining steganography and cryptography aim to make it difficult for attackers to extract the sensitive information [1]. This type of integration does not embed readable text, but embeds encrypted text to add another layer of security. In recent years, there has been increased interest to integrate these two techniques such as [1,17–20].Steganography techniques can be classified into two categories depending on the domain type; spatial and transform [12,21,22]. Spatial domain algorithms directly embed the secret data in the cover image. Transform domain algorithms on the other hand embed the data after transforming the cover image to another domain [23,24]. Transform domain algorithms usually have better robustness against attacks compared to the spatial ones, however their main limitations are the high computational cost and limited embedding capacity [25]. On the contrary, spatial domain algorithms need shorter execution time and provide a high embedding rate [22,25].On the contrary to steganography, steganalysis aims to distinguish whether a given digital media has a secret message embedded in it. Moreover, some steganalysis methods may determine the type of steganography technique or estimate the length of the secret message [26]. In term of security measurement, steganalysis has been utilized to evaluate the efficiency of steganography techniques from a security point of view [27]. There are two categories of steganalysis techniques: blind and targeted methods. Blind steganalysis methods depend on machine learning techniques to detect the existence or absence of an embedded message in a different steganographic schemes. While targeted steganalysis methods aim to detect specific steganographic scheme [28]. In [26], it is possible to design an optimal detector scheme when the embedding technique is determined and there is an optimal statistical model of the cover medium. However, there are many theoretical and practical problems prevent the moving of steganography and steganalysis from the laboratory into the real world, such as cover selection.In this research, we have contributed towards introducing a secure digital medical imaging information system based on a combined steganography and cryptography technique. The proposed steganography method represents an integration of two main components: (1) two different syndrome codes (STC or Hamming code) that have been utilized to enhance the embedding efficiency by minimizing the distortion function caused due to data embedding, and (2) an accurate method to identically identify sharp regions in both cover and stego images for improving the imperceptibility and to embed larger payload.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The basic steganographic methods are reviewed in Section 2. Section 3 introduces the Syndrome Trellis Code (STC). Section 4 presents some of the existing biomedical steganography methods. Our proposed method is described in Section 5. Experimental results to evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed method are presented in Section 6. Finally, the conclusion is given in Section 7.The Least Significant Bit (LSB) method is the most common spatial steganography methodology [29,30]. It is capable of embedding relatively large secret data in a cover image [31]; by replacing the LSBs of the cover image pixels with the secret data bits [32,33]. Eq. (1) presents the embedding process of the LSB steganography.(1)yi=2⌊xi2⌋+miwhere xiis the ith cover pixel value before embedding, yiis the ith pixel value after embedding, and miis the ith message bit. The ⌊ ⌋ operation is the floor function.Several examples of the LSB method have been presented [12,30,32], and improvements to the original method have been proposed, e.g. through the incorporation of Pseudo Random Number Generator (PRNG) [32,34]. Moreover, LSB matching (LSBM), also known as ±1 embedding, presents a slight improvement on LSB replacement to solve the asymmetry structure (even values are never decreased and odd values are never increased by using Eq. (1)). In LSBM, when the secret bit to be embedded does not match the LSB of the cover pixel, then a random increment or decrement is added to the cover pixel. However, LSB techniques are vulnerable to statistical attacks, which would allow unauthorized users to extract the secret message [35,36]. Various steganalytic methods have been introduced to detect the LSB methods. These approaches can be classified into four groups: (1) hypothesis testing theory detector [37], (2) structural detector [38,39], (3) weighted stego-image detector [40,41] and (4) the modern steganalysis methods that are based on extracting a set of features [42–44].The Pixel Value Differencing (PVD) is another powerful spatial domain steganography method that embeds the secret data directly in the cover pixels. It was proposed by Wu and Tsai to provide both high embedding capacity and imperceptibility [45]. The method which was motivated by the functionality of the Human Visual System, divides and classifies the cover image into non-overlapping blocks of two adjacent pixels and each block is evaluated based on the difference between the grey values of its two pixels. A large difference value indicates that the block is in sharp region while a small difference value indicates that the block is in a smooth region. The PVD method has a high embedding capacity as it embeds more than one bit per pixel in large difference grey value blocks [46], but it cannot utilize all edge directions because it depends on a single direction [47,48]. The PVD method may also cause significant distortions to the stego image histogram [49].The Tri-way Pixel Value Differencing (TPVD) represents an extension of the original PVD method, as it hides secret data into non-overlapping blocks of 2×2 pixels. It enlarges the embedding capacity by embedding more bits in sharp contrast areas of the image compared to smooth areas [47,50,51]. The TPVD has a higher embedding rate with lower visual quality compared to the PVD method [47].Luo et al. [48] designed an edge adaptive LSB Matching Revisited (EALSB-MR) algorithm. The method discovers vertical and horizontal edges in an adaptive way. It searches for edge regions by calculating the difference between consecutive pixels. The selection of regions depends on the secret message length and is verified by a threshold value. The method uses horizontal and vertical edges by dividing the image into blocks then rotating each block by a random angle, however, this process could destroy the relationship between vertical/horizontal pixels [52].The utilization of coding theory in steganography (also known as matrix embedding) that was introduced by Crandall [53] has attracted the attention of many researchers, as it proved to enhance the embedding efficiency by minimizing the amount of changes caused by the embedding process. Coding theory was adopted by Westfeld, who incorporated Hamming code in his F5 method [54]. Later on, different steganographic methods were introduced by utilizing other linear codes, such as Golay [55], BCH [56], Reed-Solomon code [57] and low density generator matrix codes [58]. Recently, a novel syndrome coding approach based on convolutional codes equipped with the Viterbi algorithm was proposed, also known as Syndrome Trellis Code (STC), to minimize the impact of the embedding process [59,60]. So far, STCs serve as the most powerful coding method for steganography. Some of the other state-of-the-art image steganography that do not introduce detectable artefacts into the statistical features include: Highly Undetectable SteGO (HUGO) [61], Wavelet Obtained Weights (WOW) [62], ASO [63], UNIversal WAvelet Relative Distortion (UNIWARD) [64] and MultiVariate Gaussian cover model (MVG) [65].As will be explained in the next section, most of the existing medical information hiding algorithms are based on LSB, PVD or their variants, and hence inherit the limitations of these steganography techniques. In this paper, we propose an efficient information hiding for medical images that (i) combines encryption and steganography, (ii) proposes a simple, yet effective, method for accurately identifying edge pixels in both cover and stego images with the aim of minimizing visual distortions to the original medical image, (iii) utilizes either STC, which is described in the next section, or Hamming code to add an extra security level and reduce the amount of changes caused by the embedding process, and (iv) incorporates an optimization function that balances between the embedding capacity and number of bits utilized from edge locations. Accordingly, the goal of the proposed method is to come up with a scheme that can enhance the security level and resist steganalysis attacks.Convolutional codes are introduced in [66] and considered one of the most common Error Correcting Codes (ECC). Basically, the encoder of the convolutional codes has memory and outputs depend on the current and previous inputs. A binary convolutional code C is specified by three parameters (N, K, h), where K is the number of inputs, N is the number of outputs and h is the constraint height which represents number of shift registers.Filler et al. [59,60] proposed an efficient coding method for steganography, which is called the Syndrome-Trellis Code (STC). It aims to minimize the embedding distortion by finding the closest stego image to the cover image. The STC, which is classified as convolutional code class, represents the codeword by the parity-check matrix. In the binary Syndrome-Trellis Code, the parity-check matrix H ∈{0, 1}k×nof size k×n is represented by placing a small sub-matrixℍˆof sizeh×wand shifting it down by one row for a number of times. Eq. (2) shows an example of a parity-check matrix H with k=4 and n=8 formed from the sub-matrixℍˆ(h=2,w=2).(2)ℍˆ=1011,H=10111011101110It is worth to mention that the constraint height h influences the embedding process speed (typically, 6≤h≤15).The Syndrome-Trellis Code is a graph compromising a number of blocks, where each block of the trellis represent one sub-matrix and has2h(w+1)nodes structured in a grid of 2hrows andw+1columns. A bipartite graph is created between the nodes of the two adjacent columns.Suppose the cover vector X∈{0, 1}nis changed to the stego vector Y∈{0, 1}nafter embedding a secret data vector m∈{0, 1}k. The extraction process of the Syndrome Code is calculated as shown in Eq. (3).(3)Ext(y)=HyTThere are many solutions of y that can satisfy Eq. (3). The set of all possible solutions of y is called coset of m, which is identified by C(m)={z∈{0, 1}n∣Hz=m}. To select the best solution of y that achieves the minimum distortion, the embedding method computes the additive distortion function for each y from the coset using Eq. (4). The additive distortion function Dstis used to identify the total effect of the embedding modifications caused by the embedding process, such that the lower value of Dst, is the less detectable by steganalysis.(4)Dst(x,y)=∑i=1nρ(xi,yi)where ρ(xi, yi) is the cost of altering xiwith yiand di∈[0, ∞]. To improve the embedding efficiency, the syndrome embedding process is to select y that minimizes the embedding distortion using Eq. (5).(5)Emb(x,m)=argminy∈C(m)D(x,y)The embedding process is comprised of two stages: a forward and backward stages. The forward stage involves constructions of the trellis based on Hk×nand Ext(y), while the identification of the closest codeword is implemented in the backword stage.Each path in the trellis begins in the leftmost all-zero state and extends to the right. The edges represent adding (y[i]=1) or not adding (y[i]=0) the ith column of Hk×nto the current partial syndrome. The calculation of the syndrome trellis is explained step-by-step on each path. For example, in Fig. 1, the first two edges that connect the state 00 (S00) from column P0 with states 11 (S11) and 00 (S00) in the next column, correspond to adding or not adding the first column of H[.,1] to S00. At the end of the first block, all paths for which the first bit of the partial syndrome does not correspond to the message bit m1 are finished. Then, we get a new column P1 of the trellis, which will be utilized as the starting column of the next block. The previous step is repeated at each sub-block of the matrix H. To achieve the best match between the stego and cover bits, a weight is computed to each edge in the trellis. Therefore, the path that has the minimum weight is considered the closest match between the cover and stego bits. It is easy to find this path using the backward path from the rightmost state using the edges that were not terminated and create the stego bits (y).Fig. 1 represents an example to embedding process using syndrome-trellis when the secret message (m) is 1001 and the cover vectors (X) is 10011011. The path with the minimum weight using the backward step is used to produce the stego vector (Y) which is 10110011.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
