@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Fatigue life assessment of fabric braided composite rubber hose in complicated large deformation cyclic motion

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The fatigue life of braided 5-layer rubber hose in the complicated large deformation cycle motion is numerically evaluated.The fatigue life cycles are evaluated by three different fatigue evaluation models for two distinct cycle paths.The relative differences in the critical fatigue life cycles with respect to the basic strain-life approach are−35.13~+18.80%at the Morrow model and−48.24~+12.04%at the SWAT model, respectively.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Fabric braided rubber hose,Large deformation cyclic motion,Fatigue life cycle,Basic strain-life approach,Morrow and SWAT models,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
High-pressure braking hose in the automobile power braking system undergoes the complicated large deformation cyclic motion during the driver’s steering operation and the up and down motion of vehicle, so that the fatigue damage becomes accumulated in proportional to the cycle number. Since the occurrence of fatigue-induced micro crack in the braking hose may cause the oil leakage, the fatigue life assessment becomes the most important task in the design of high-durable braking hose. In this context, this paper intends to introduce a numerical method for predicting the fatigue life of braking hose in the lamination structure composed of pure rubber and fabric braided layers. A specific trajectory of braking hose in the combined tire’s steering and car’s up-down motion is defined as the target cyclic path, and the variations in strain and stress fields along the cyclic path are analyzed by the large deformation finite element analysis. The strain and stress cycles in their variations are calculated by the rainflow cycle counting method, and the fatigue life cycle is evaluated by three fatigue life evaluation models, together with the Palmgren–Miner accumulative damage law. Theε−Ncurves of rubber layers are obtained by a specially designed displacement-controlled fatigue test using rubber specimens, while the inserted fabric braided layers which are excluded from the fatigue life assessment are modeled as an orthotropic material. The validity of the proposed numerical method is illustrated by the numerical experiments, and the fatigue life cycles to the evaluation model and to the cyclic path are investigated and compared.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Currently, high-pressure rubber hoses reinforced with various materials are widely used in a variety of engineering applications to convey gas, water and hydraulic oil, and the hydraulic braking hose used in the hydraulic automobile power braking system can be a representative example. The braking hose is generally in three- or five-layered lamination structure composed of pure rubber layers and fabric braided layers, such that pure rubber layers resist oil leakage and chemical damage while the inserted fabric braided layers provide the sufficient structural strength against the large radial expansion of rubber hose [1]. The most important function of the braking hose is to deliver the driver’s braking force via working oil without any oil leakage under not only the severe pressure and temperature loadings but also the complicated large deformation cyclic motion. Thus, the fabric braided braking hose should be carefully designed to have the sufficient structural strength and durability against the oil leakage stemming from the excessive expansion, stress relaxation or fatigue-induced micro cracking under the severe thermo-mechanical dynamic loadings [2–4].The braking hose may, but frequently, lose the desired sealing performance when the micro cracking occurs in operation according to the frequent driver’s steering operations and the up and down motions of car. Once this situation is happened, the only way to recover the sealing performance is to replace the damaged braking hose with a new one. The braking hose is to be assembled into an automobile by fixing its ends to the car body and to the strut of tire wheel respectively, so it experiences the complicated large deformation motion by the driver’s steering operation and the up and down motion of car. The overall deformed configuration of braking hose varies depending on the strut position, and it is usually characterized by nine distinct strut positions which are resulted from the combination of three steering modes (i.e., left, neutral and right) and three vertical motions of car (i.e., bump, neutral and rebound). Here, the rebound and bump motions denote the up and down motions of car according to the quick start and quick stop or the passing over obstacles [5]. The fatigue damage becomes to be accumulated in proportional to the number of steering operations and the up and down motions because the change in the overall configuration of braking hose is accompanied by the variations in both strain and stress fields. The fatigue life evaluation for both car makers and part manufacturing companies has been traditionally performed by defining the trajectories of braking hose between each two positions among the nine strut positions as the target cyclic paths of braking hose. Meanwhile, the braking hose does also experience the stress relaxation and creep during the complicated large deformation motion for long periods of time. However, this complicated viscoelastic behavior is beyond the scope of this study, rather two cyclic motions of braking hose, a left-neutral-right steering cycle at the neutral car position and a bump-neutral-rebound cycle at the neutral steering position, are considered here for the fatigue life assessment of fabric braided braking hose.The fatigue life of braking hose has been traditionally relied on the experiment at the level of part [6–7], so the highly cost- and time-consuming experiment always becomes a main obstacle in the design of cost-effective high durable braking hose. In this context, it is natural that the replacement of such a painstaking job with the numerical method draws a worldwide attention. The fatigue life estimation methods introduced so far could be classified into two basic approaches, one is the crack nucleation approach and the other is the crack growth approach [8]. In the former approach which traces back to the earliest Wöhler work on railroad axles [9], the fatigue life estimation is formulated in terms of stress, strain or strain energy density at a point within the material under consideration. Since the fatigue life parameters are easily defined in the sense of continuum mechanics, this approach is easy to implement and widely used by engineers. However, restricted to hyperelastic materials like rubber, stress has rarely adopted as a fatigue life parameter [10,11]. It is because not only the fatigue test is usually conducted by controlling the displacement, but the accuracy of stress calculated from strain is not so high owing to the highly nonlinear relation between stress and strain. Meanwhile, the latter approach based on the fracture mechanics predicts the growth of a particular initial crack or flaw which is expected to lead to the final failure. However, in rubber materials, both the up-front information about the state and location of the initial crack causing the final failure and the geometry change of the problem are not available in most cases. For this reason, this approach still remains several problems to be resolved for its robust and unified numerical implementation [8,12–13].As an extension of out previous work [1] on the fabric braided composite rubber hose composed of five material layers, this paper introduces a numerical method for evaluating the fatigue life of fabric braided braking hose. The variations in strain and stress fields of the braking hose during a cyclic motion are analyzed by the large deformation finite element analysis. The trajectory of the movable end of braking hose, which is to be input as the displacement boundary condition for the nonlinear finite element analysis, is quadratically interpolated using the co-ordinates and rotations of the hose cross-section at the movable end at three discrete positions on the path. Two braided fabric layers inserted between three pure rubber layers are modeled as an orthotropic material, and their equivalent mechanical properties are numerically obtained by our in-house module which was previously developed based on the superposition method and the unit cell finite element analysis [14]. The fatigue life calculation is made only for the inner and outer rubber layers because not only the micro cracking occurs at these two rubber layers but also the braided fabric layers are inserted only to suppress the excessive radial expansion of rubber hose. The hyperelastic behavior of inner and outer rubber layers is modeled by a four-term Mooney–Rivlin material model, and theε−Ncurves of rubber layers are obtained by a specially designed displacement-controlled [8] fatigue test using rubber specimens.The basic strain-life approach and the Morrow and SWAT (Smith–Watson–Topper) models corrected by the mean strain and stress [15], together with the Palmgren–Miner cumulative damage law [16], are employed to predict the fatigue life. The cycles of signed von Mises strain and stress during a cycle are calculated by the rainflow cycle counting method [17]. An in-house module for evaluating the fatigue life is developed and interfaced with midas NFX [18], a commercial FEM code. The numerical experiment is carried out to support the validity of the proposed numerical method, and the fatigue life cycles computed by three fatigue evaluation models are compared for two cyclic paths.Fig. 1(a) shows a braking hose used in automobiles to convey high pressure hydraulic oil to the braking disc cylinders. It should satisfy the regularized high pressure-resisting structural strength and the sufficient durability because oil leakage may lead to the fatal car accident. Rubber hose intrinsically possesses high resistance against leakage and chemical reaction, but it may easily reach to the structural failure once the excessively large deformation is repeated during the steering operations and the up and down motions of car. For this reason, the braking hose subject to the pulsating internal oil pressure with the amplitude over 100MPa is reinforced with fabric braided layers inserted between pure rubber layers as represented in Fig. 1(b). As a sort of laminated composite, the fabric braided layers provide the mechanical strength against the pulsating pressure load while rubber layers resist the leakage and chemical reaction and protect the fabric braided layers from being torn and worn owing to the contact with other adjacent mechanical parts.The overall deformed configuration of braking hose is definitely dependent of the position and orientation of the strut where the movable end of braking hose is attached, as represented inFig. 2(a). Both the position and orientation of strut are in turn determined by the steering mode of vehicle and the up and down motion of vehicle. The neutral position corresponds to the straight maneuvering mode without the up and down motion, from which the movable end of braking hose could reach to other possible critical positions depending on the steering mode and the vertical motion of car [5,6]. Both the bump and rebound positions are two possible furthermost up and down locations from the neutral position where the hose movable end could be reached. A number of cyclic paths of braking hose would be defined by choosing two positions among nine critical positions of the hose movable end. The number of cyclic paths and the corresponding paths taken for the fatigue life evaluation are solely determined by the car maker. Fig. 2(b) shows a scene of fatigue experiment at the level of part for a specific cyclic path of braking hose, where the fatigue life of braking hose specimen is determined by the cycle number when the crack is observed from the outer rubber layer [19].In the fatigue life test for a specific cyclic path, the trajectory of braking hose is maintained by controlling the co-ordinates and orientation of the strut. But, in the numerical simulation, it is obtained by the large deformation finite element analysis with the displacement boundary condition specified to the hose movable end. As will be described later in details, the displacement boundary condition, that is the locus of the co-ordinates and rotation of hose cross-section at the movable end, is approximated by interpolating the co-ordinates and rotations at several discrete points between two end positions of the cyclic path. The continuous change in the overall deformed configuration during a cyclic motion is accompanied by the variations of strain and stress fields in braking hose. And, the fatigue damage is to be accumulated along the cycle number, furthermore the pre-strain and pre-stress at the neutral position increases the fatigue damage. Thus, not only the fatigue damage owing to the amplitudes of strain and stress but also the mean strain and stress should be taken into consideration for the numerical assessment of fatigue life [15].Fabric braided layer is woven with polyester or nylon cords by a special braiding machine such that warp and fill tows cross each other with the predefined helix angleαH. Referring toFig. 3, bundles (called warp or fill tows) composed of several cords are woven along the hose axis such that the preset number of bundles within a pitch, denoted by Cr, is periodically repeated. The diameter of braid cords is usually denoted by denia which is defined by the total weight in gram of braid cord per 9000m. The effective mechanical properties of fabric braided layer are influenced by the helix angle, cord diameter and the braid structure as well as the material properties of base cords. Thus, both the fatigue analysis accuracy and the design quality of the whole reinforced rubber hose are not guaranteed unless the effective mechanical properties of braided fabric layers are derived by taking these detailed parameters into consideration.Fabric braided layers exhibit three distinct elastic behaviors; (1) the reorientation of fabric cords during the deformation of hose, (2) no strain during the reorientation, and (3) the negligible resistance to the compression loading. Owing to the characteristics (1) and (2), strains of fabric braided layers are smaller than those of rubber layers, and the elastic behavior of fabric braided layer is assumed to be large rotation but small strain. Meanwhile, the feature (1) results in the change of the helix angle and the homogenized material properties, but its implementation becomes a highly nonlinear problem because the change of helix angle cannot be determined until the finite element analysis is completed. The one-directional load bearing of fabric cords due to the characteristic (3) is ignored in the current study because not only its implementation is troublesome but strains are much smaller than those of rubber layers. Thus, the anisotropic elastic behavior of fabric braided layers is modelled as a small-strain homogenized orthotropic solid, that is the St. Venant–Kirchhoff model.The configuration of the real unfolded fabric braided layer is shown in Fig. A1(a) in Appendix A1, where warp and fill tows (bundles) are composed of several polyester cords and a pitch contains twelve bundles in the axial direction of the hose. Since warp and fill tows in the fabric braided layer are in the periodic structure, a RVE (or unit cell) can be easily defined, differing from other heterogeneous phase composites. A unit cell taken for the 3-D detailed solid modeling and mesh generation are represented in Figs. A1(b) and A2(a), respectively. Referring to Figs. 3(a) and A1(a), the Cartesian co-ordinatesx,yandzare oriented such thatyandzdirect the hose axis and the thickness direction, respectively. When the fabric braided layer is assumed to be a small-strain 3-D orthotropic solid, its constitutive relations are expressed in terms of the(6×6)stiffness matrix [20] which contains three Young’s moduliE1,E2andE3, six Poisson’s ratiosνij(i≠j)and three shear moduliG23,G13andG12such that(1){σ1σ2σ3τ23τ31τ12}=[1−ν23ν32E2E3Δν21+ν31ν23E2E3Δν31+ν21ν32E2E3Δ000ν12+ν13ν32E3E1Δ1−ν31ν13E3E1Δν32+ν31ν12E3E1Δ000ν13+ν12ν23E1E2Δν23+ν13ν21E1E2Δ1−ν12ν21E1E2Δ000000G23000000G31000000G12]{ε1ε2ε3γ23γ31γ12}withΔ=(1−ν12ν21−ν23ν32−ν31ν13−2ν12ν23ν31)/E1E2E3. Where, subscripts 1, 2 and 3 stand for x, y and z, respectively. From the symmetry of the compliance matrix, six Poisson’s ratios satisfyE1ν21=E2ν12,E1ν31=E3ν13andE3ν23=E2ν32. The derivation of equivalent orthotropic mechanical properties by the superposition method using a unit cell finite element analysis is briefly summarized in Appendix A1.Meanwhile, three rubber layers exhibit the incompressible hyperelastic behavior, so a four-term Mooney–Rivlin material model expressed by the strain energy density functionalW(I1,I2,I3)given by(2)W(I1,I2,I3)=C10(I1−3)+C01(I2−3)+C20(I1−3)(I2−3)+D2(I3−1)2is employed. In which,Iiare the invariants of Green–Lagrange strain tensor,Cijthe material dependent Mooney–Rivlin constants which are determined by the stress–strain curves obtained by the uniaxial tension test of rubber specimen [21]. Meanwhile, the parameterDis introduced to enforce the material incompressibility such that the higherDis the more incompressibility is the material. The detailed numerical values of four material parameters for the inner, middle and outer rubber layers are given in Section 4.The inner and outer rubber layers play an important role in preventing the oil leakage so that only both rubber layers were taken for the fatigue test using rubber specimen. Theε−Ncurves of both rubber layers were obtained by the uniaxial tension using the rubber specimens.Fig. 4(a) represents a specially-designed fatigue test apparatus composed of the tension test machine, controller and handle. The test conditions such as the exciting frequency are set by the controller, and the cycle-histories of tensile force and strain are also recorded. The displacement amplitude of rubber specimen is adjusted by the handle installed on the top of tension tester. Each fatigue test was performed by controlling the displacement amplitude with the exciting frequency of 1.0Hz at room temperature. For a specific displacement amplitude, the number of cyclesNwhen the tensile force exerted on the specimen drops by 15% is taken as the corresponding fatigue life [8]. Fig. 4(b) shows the specimens of outer and inner rubber layers manufactured with the filled EPDM (ethylene-propylene-diene-monomer) rubber. The shape and dimensions given in Fig. 4(b) are the same for both the inner and outer rubber layers, but the thicknesses are set by 2.3mm for the inner rubber layer and 2.6mm for the outer rubber layer, respectively. Five specimens were tested for each displacement amplitude (i.e., the strain amplitude) and the test results of three specimens were taken and averaged, in order to minimize the deviation in the test data stemming from the unexpected test failure and the unevenness of specimens.Fig. 5(a) and (b) represent theε−Ncurves obtained by the specimen fatigue test for the inner and outer rubber layers respectively, where two curves are provided for each rubber layer. Owing to the inherent strain hardening [22], the permanent deformation of rubber specimen increases while the section area of specimen decreases in proportional to the number of test cycles. As a result, the strain amplitude at the final cycle becomes smaller than one at the initial cycle in the displacement-controlled fatigue test. The curves labeled by original indicate theε−Ncurves evaluated in terms of the initial strain amplitudes, while those labeled by modified are obtained by replacing the initial strain amplitudes in the originalε−Ncurves with the final strain amplitudes. The numerical formulae in two plots indicate the curve-fittedε−Nrelations in the log–log scale where the coefficientsR2of determination are 0.974 for the inner rubber and 0.923 for the outer rubber, respectively. The fatigue strength parameters included in the fatigue life prediction models are to be determined from theseε−Nrelations in the log-log scale. One can realize that the modifiedε−Ncurve leads to the fatigue life shorter than the original curve so that the fatigue life assessment leads to the braking hose design with higher safety, even though the choice between two types ofε−Ncurves depends solely on the designer’s decision making.The braking hose is subjected to cyclic loads with the presence of mean strain and stress, as can be realized from Fig. 2(a). It is well known that the mean stress has a significant effect on the fatigue life, such that the tensile mean stress is detrimental while the compressive one is beneficial. When the applied stresses generate predominantly elastic strain amplitudes, the mean stress effect can be taken into consideration by Basquin’s mean stress correction method [23] given by(3)σar=σ′f(2Nf)bwhereNfis the fatigue life,σ′fis the fatigue strength coefficient, andbis the fatigue strength exponent, respectively. Here, the equivalent fully reversed stress amplitudeσar(=σmaxσa)is defined by the maximum stressσmaxand the stress amplitudeσa. But, when the cyclic response of the material is within the elastic–plastic stress–strain range, the mean stress effect on fatigue life has been based on the strain-life approach represented by(4)Δε2=εa=Δεe2+Δεp2=σ′fE(2Nf)b+ε′f(2Nf)cwhereεais the strain amplitude,ε′fthe fatigue ductility coefficient, andcthe fatigue ductility exponent, andEthe elastic modulus.The modification of Eq. (4) which is used to predict the fatigue life only at zero mean stress was made by several investigators [15]. The current study utilizes the Morrow model [24] given by(5)Δε2=σ′f−σmE(2Nf)b+ε′f(2Nf)cand the Smith–Watson–Topper (SWAT) model [25]:(6)σmaxεa=σmaxΔε2=(σ′f)2E(2Nf)2b+ε′fσ′f(2Nf)b+cIt is not hard to follow that Eq. (6) is obtained by substituting Eq. (3) into Eq. (4) using the relation ofσar=σmaxat zero mean stress. By the way, these two correction models are slightly modified for the current study because the large deformation analysis of braking hose is carried out using the Mooney–Rivlin hyperelastic material model by neglecting the plastic strain. Furthermore, the termσ′f/Eis replaced with a material-dependent fatigue parameterKfwhich can be determined from theε−Ncurve shown in Fig. 5 in the log–log scale. Then, we have the modified correction models given by(7)Δε2=(Kf−εm)(2Nf)b(8)σmaxεa=σmaxΔε2=σa1+σm/σaKf(2Nf)bNote that the relation ofσar=σa1+σm/σais used for Eq. (8) and the parametersKfandbare determined from the modifiedε−Ncurves considering the permanent rubber deformation.Fig. 6(a) represents a cyclic path of braking hose, where positions I and II represent two end positions of the path which are chosen from the eight critical positions shown in Fig. 2(a) of the hose movable end. The fatigue life assessment is performed for each cyclic path, for which the whole trajectory of hose movable end along the path is approximated by quadratically interpolating its 6-DOFs at several discrete locations (indicated by x) on the path, as mentioned earlier. Strains and stresses at each material point exhibit the complex time histories composed of a number of harmonic cycles while the braking hose deforms along the path, as illustrated in Fig. 6(b). The total accumulated fatigue damageDwithin the braking hose during a single deformation cycle along the path is calculated by the Palmgren–Miner cumulative damage law [16] given by.(9)D=∑i=1NsDi,Di=ni(Nf)iwhereNsis the number of distinct harmonic strain cycles,Dithe accumulated fatigue damage by the ith harmonic strain cycle, andniand(Nf)ithe repetition number and the fatigue life of the ith strain cycle, respectively. Then, the fatigue lifeNf(cycles)at each material point within the braking hose along the specific path is calculated byNf=1/D.The fatigue life calculation is performed node by node using the signed nodal von Mises strains±εvmand stresses±σvmwhich are recovered using those at Gauss integration points. Here, the signs of von Mises strain and stress are determined by the signs of the first principal strainε1and stressσ1, respectively. The repetition numbersniof each distinct strain and stress cycle are counted by the rainflow cycle counting method [17].An in-house module for evaluating the fatigue life of braking hose was coded and interfaced with midas NFX [18], a commercial FEM software in which the previously developed in-house module called BLMH (braided layer material homogenization) [1] for calculating the equivalent orthotropic mechanical properties of braided fabric layers is built.Fig. 7 shows a graphic user interface (GUI) of the in-house module called BHFL (braking hose fatigue life). Basically, the updated Lagrangian formulation was used to compute the increments of strain and stress, and the invariants of Green–Lagrange strain tensor in Mooney–Rivlin models were evaluated in the sense of total Lagrangian. The material incompressibility of rubber layers was enforced by introducing the penalty term into Mooney–Rivlin model as expressed in Eq. (2).The numerical implementation of fatigue life assessment of braking hose by the present method is carried out as follows:•The equivalent orthotropic mechanical properties of two fabric braided layers are calculated by BLMH module.The large deformation of braking hose along a specific cyclic path illustrated in Fig. 6(a) is analyzed by the finite element analysis.Signed von Mises strains and stresses at each finite element node of the inner and outer rubber layers are computed at each incremental step during the large deformation analysis.From the variations of signed von Mises strain and stress, the total cycle numberNsand the repetition numbersniof each distinct cycle are calculated by the rainflow counting method.The total accumulated fatigue damageDin Eq. (9) within the braking hose during a single deformation cycle is computed by the Palmgren–Miner cumulative damage law.Fig. 8(a) shows a finite element model of braking hose with three rubber layers and two fabric braided layers, where the right end is allowed to move along the predefined path while the left end clamped. The entire braking hose is uniformly discretized with the total of 33,002 8-node hexahedron elements, where two fabric layers are modeled as orthotropic while three rubber layers as hyperelastic material. The layers interfaces are assumed to be completely bonded so that FE meshes of two neighboring layers exactly share common nodes on the layer interfaces. The Mooney–Rivlin constants in Eq. (2) of three rubber layers are given inTable 1, and the stress–strains curves for the inner and outer rubber layers between the tension test and the Mooney–Rivlin model are compared inFig. 9. The least-square curve fitting was performed by considering the strain ranges of both rubber layers. The equivalent orthotropic mechanical properties of two fabric braided layers as well as the detailed geometry information and base material properties are given in Appendix A1.Referring to Fig. 2(a), two paths are considered in the current study, a cyclic path from position 2 to position 3 by the pure steering motion of wheel and another cyclic path from position 4 to position 5 by the pure up and down motion of vehicle. The co-ordinates and rotation angles of the hose section at three positions on path 1 and 2 are given inTable 2, and those are specified to the center of cross-section at the hose movable end, for which all the nodes on the cross-section are connected to the center of cross-section using rigid elements. Meanwhile, the fatigue strength exponentsband the fatigue parametersKfin Eqs. (7) and (8) are as follows: −0.8754 and 30.7003 for the inner rubber and −0.9067 and 18.1773 for the outer rubber respectively, which were determined from the modifiedε−Ncurves in log–log scale shown in Fig. 5.Fig. 10 represents the deformed configurations and the distributions of von Mises strain and von Mises stress of the braking hose at the neutral position (i.e., at point 1 shown in Fig. 2(a)). It is observed that the significantly high strain and stress are produced in the vicinity of the left fixed end and in the right one-third region of hose as the combined bending and torsional deformation is dominated in these regions. Referring to Fig. 2(a), one can figure out that the bending and torsional deformations in these regions exhibit the remarkable variation in their magnitudes along the hose trajectory. But, differing from these regions, the remaining intermediate portion of hose experiences relatively simple and small deformation such that the bending and torsional deformation and its variation are not severe. Therefore, it is expected that the fatigue damage along with the hose cyclic motion is concentrated on these two regions.Fig. 11(a) and (b) show the deformed configurations and the distributions of von Mises strain at two end positions on path 1. When compared with Fig. 10(a) at the neutral position 1, it is clearly observed that positions 2 and 3 produce the slightly different strain distributions with different peak values and peak positions as well as the remarkable change in the deformed configuration. The peak von Mises strains at three positions are 0.340 at position 2, 0.342 at position 1 and 0.406 at position 3, respectively. This change along the cyclic path in both the overall distribution and the peak value and peak position of the von Mises strain can be also observed fromFig. 12 for path 2. The peak von Mises strains are as follows: 0.406 at position 4, 0.342 at position 1 and 0.333 at position 5. The continuous change in the hose overall configuration along the path which is caused mainly by the combined bending and torsion causes the successive change in the strain field. It is noticeable that the region near the right movable hose end displays the peak strain and the largest variation so that this region is expected to show the lowest fatigue life cycle.Fig. 13 comparatively represents the fatigue life profiles of braking hose for path 1 which were predicted by three different fatigue life evaluation models. The fatigue life profiles are displayed for the outer rubber layer because the critical fatigue life cycle (i.e., the lowest fatigue life cycle) occurs at this outer layer. Not only the outer rubber layer is more vulnerable to fatigue damage than the inner rubber layer as represented in Fig. 5, but the strain and stress and their amplitudes caused by the bending and torsional deformations become largest at the outer rubber layer. The undeformed hose configuration is aligned with the top and bottom sides being the left fixed and right moveable ends respectively, and the numerical values in each color spectrum indicate the fatigue life cycles. The result indicated by strain-life approach was obtained by the basic strain-life approach which corresponds to Eq. (7) with the mean strainεmbeing zero and without the plastic effect. It is observed that both the basic approach and the Morrow model show almost the similar fatigue life profile but the SWAT model leads to a slightly different one. It is because the Morrow model is corrected from the basic strain-life approach by replacing the fatigue parameterKfwithKf−εm, however the mean strainεmis not only relatively small but also its spatial variation is not remarkable., except for the region showing the large von Mises strain. Meanwhile, for the SWAT model, the fatigue parameterKfis corrected by multiplying withσar/σmaxwhich depends substantially on the position in the outer rubber layer, which results in the different fatigue life profile. It is found that the critical fatigue life cycles occurs near the bottom side at all three fatigue evaluation models, and the SWAT model leads to the highest critical fatigue live cycle and vice versa for the Morrow model.The fatigue life profiles predicted by three different fatigue evaluation models for path 2 are shown inFig. 14, where one can see that path 2 leads to the profiles slightly different from path 1. When compared with path 1, the fatigue damage is focused more at the lower portion of hose. It is because the bending deformation becomes concentrated at the lower portion when the braking hose moves up along the almost vertical trajectory. As represented in Fig. 2(a), the bending deformation near the hose movable end becomes most severe at the bump position. But, similar to path 1, both the strain-life approach and the Morrow model lead to almost the similar profiles and the SWAT shows a different one. The reason is because the SWAT model is corrected by means ofσar/σmax(=1−σm/σmax), differing from the Morrow model corrected by the mean strain, as explained above. It is noticeable that the Morrow model leads to the critical fatigue life cycle higher than the basic strain-life approach and vice versa for the SWAT model, contrary to path 1. From the fact that the fatigue parameterKfis replaced withKf−εmin the Morrow model, it can be inferred that the mean strain of hose is caused by tension along path 1 but by compression along path 2. This contrary trend of the critical fatigue life cycle between the Morrow and SWAT models to the cyclic path is resulted from the distinct deformation behavior between paths 1 and 2. The braking hose commonly experiences the bending and torsional deformations along the both paths, but its behavior is additionally characterized by the tensile deformation along path 1 and by the compressive one along path 2. Meanwhile, from the contrary trend of the SWAT model, it can be inferred that the factorσm/σmaxproduced along path 1 is smaller than one along path 2. As given inTable 3, the relative differences in the critical fatigue life cycle with respect to the basic strain-life approach are−35.13~+18.80%at the Morrow model and−48.24~+12.04%at the SWAT model, respectively.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
