@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An axisymmetrical non-linear finite element model for induction heating in injection molding tools

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Induction heating in injection molding tools was simulated with an FE-model.B-H is described with a modified Fröhlich equation and parameters are included.Cyclic steady state model agrees with experiments.An effective linear permeability can be established for this type of setup.The temperature dependency of the B-H was not found to be strong.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Injection molding,Temperature dependent magnetic properties,Induction heating,Non-linear finite element,Axisymmetric,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
To analyze the heating and cooling phase of an induction heated injection molding tool accurately, the temperature dependent magnetic properties, namely the non-linear B-H curves, need to be accounted for in an induction heating simulation. Hence, a finite element model has been developed, including the non-linear temperature dependent magnetic data described by a three-parameter modified Fröhlich equation fitted to the magnetic saturation curve, and solved with an iterative procedure. The numerical calculations are compared with experiments conducted with two types of induction coils, built in to the injection molding tool. The model shows very good agreement with the experimental temperature measurements. It is also shown that the non-linearity can be used without the temperature dependency in some cases, and a proposed method is presented of how to estimate an effective linear permeability to use with simulation codes not able to utilize a non-linear solver.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Induction heating is well known in processes like surface hardening, annealing, preheating for hot forging of billets as well as melting and welding of metals. In recent years induction heating has been employed for injection molding tools for different reasons. Using a very rapid heating in the cavity surface of the mold is typically desired due to micro- or nanostructures on the surface, the part is long and having thin features, or a good surface finish is required. Since injection pressure levels are decreased with higher mold temperatures, it is also possible to mold large parts on smaller machines than normally if applying induction heating. Another use is to avoid weld lines, hence improving the mechanical properties of injection molded parts. Elevating the mold temperature above the no flow temperature will help ensuring complete filling of the cavity, but will lead to a longer cooling time, hence cycle time, if the mold is heated in a conventional way. Placing an induction coil near the cavity surface can increase the temperature very fast to reach the no flow temperatures, which will prevent the frozen layer to develop during filling.Induction heating in injection molding is typically based on two different principles either using an external inductor or an internal inductor. The external inductor is typically placed on a moving arm, which heats up the mold surface when the mold is open. The inductor coil can be wrapped around features [1–3], or be a flat coil, not necessarily circular, placed above a flat mold surface with e.g. micro/nano features [4,5]. The internal inductor is integrated in the mold, and different types exist, such as placing a coil with a flux concentrator beneath the mold surface [6].As mentioned, induction heating for heat treatment, melting and welding of metals has been used for a long time, and also simulation of the induction heating process in those applications has been addressed in the literature; see [7,8] for references. More recently, the topic of simulating induction heating in injection molding tools has been introduced in several papers, which are typically dealing with the simulation of the induction heating itself [1,2,4,5,9–12,6], while the effect of fluid flow is emulated by assuming an equivalent thermal boundary condition [13,14]. In these papers, the magnetic properties are assumed linear, that is a linear relation between the magnetic field and flux. Recently, simulation of coupled induction heating and fluid flow has been conducted [3,15,4], in which the electromagnetic analysis and the mold filling simulation are coupled by imposing either an average constant thermal boundary condition or the actual transient thermal field from the induction simulation to the fluid flow simulation. This is done by mapping the thermal field from the electromagnetic solution to the flow solver to include the effect of the induction heating during filling of the cavity. Imposing the mapped actual transient thermal field was found to give the most realistic results. The work done in Refs. [3,15,4] also assume linear magnetic data, similarly to the previously mentioned papers.The magnetic materials that have been used in this work include magnetic tool steels, which had their B-H relation (describing the relation between magnetic flux density, B, and magnetic field, H) and its dependence on temperature (in the range of the injection molding process 25–350°C) characterized by the authors in [16]. Due to the fact that the magnetic properties depend on temperature, and are non-linear (stemming from magnetic saturation) a lot of data is required to analyze the influence of induction heating applied to injection molding tools. Furthermore, the heat arising from the induction is mainly due to Eddy currents, which can be realistically estimated from the linear magnetic properties (e.g. constant permeability), but since the magnetic permeability is non-linear and temperature dependent, a study on these effects are needed.In this work a finite element model has been developed with a proposal on how to include the non-linear temperature dependent magnetic data characterized in [16] by using a three-parameter modified Fröhlich equation fitted to the B-H data, and solved with an iterative procedure. The numerical calculations are compared to experiments conducted with two types of induction coils built in to the injection molding tool. A traditional ferrite core with copper windings and a flat core made of Somaloy with copper windings, are investigated.The electromagnetic part of induction heating is controlled by Maxwell׳s equations, which here are presented in terms of free charges and currents:(1)∇·D=ρf(2)∇·B=0(3)∇×E=−∂B∂t(4)∇×H=Jf+∂D∂twhere D is the electric flux density, B is the magnetic flux density, E is the electric field, H is the magnetic field,Jfis the free current density, ρfis the free charge density, t is the time. Relating D and H in terms of E and B depends on the material, and for linear media it can be related through the following constitutive relations:(5)D=εE=ε0εrE(6)H=1μB=1μ0μrBwhereε0=8.854·10−12F/mis the vacuum permittivity, εris the relative permittivity,μ0=4π·10−7H/mis the vacuum permeability, and μris the relative permeability. Furthermore the current density and electric field can be related by the well-known Ohm׳s law:(7)J=σEwhere σ is the electrical conductivity. The displacement current, the last term in Eq. (4), will be ignored and the assumption that a time-harmonic varying source current density will result in a sinusoidally varying magnetic field will be made. Combining Maxwell׳s Eqs. (1)–(4) with the constitutive Eq. (5)–(7), the following complex diffusion equation can be derived:(8)1μ∇2A¯+iωσA¯=−J¯swhereA¯is the magnetic vector potential related to the magnetic flux byB=∇×A,J¯sis the source current density in the coil,ω=2πfis the angular frequency (and f the frequency), and the overbar is denoting the peak value or the amplitude. From Eq. (8) it is possible to derive certain other quantities, such as the magnetic flux density B or the magnetic field H, but for the case of induction heating it is the time average Joule heat density that comes from the induced Eddy currents which is of interest and can be derived from Eq. (8) as:(9)J¯e=−iωσA¯And the Joule heating is found using Joules law:(10)Q̇=12σ|J¯e|2For the calculations of the temperature distribution from the induction, the transient heat conduction equation is solved(11)ρcp∂T∂t=k∇2T+Q̇where T is the temperature, ρis the density, cpis the specific heat capacity, k is the thermal conductivity andQ̇is the heat source from Eq. (10). The thermal conductivity is assumed not to vary as a function of temperature.The B-H curves (sometimes called anhysteresis curves) express the non-linear behavior of the magnetic material, and they can be used to describe the relation between the magnetic field and the flux density in a material. This relation can be used in an FEM simulation code that assumes the electrical currents and the magnetic fields are varying sinusoidally, hereby using the complex formulation. It can in this respect be convenient to have an analytical expression for the anhysteresis curve, also in connection with iterative methods [17]. Most commonly used is the Fröhlich approximation:(12)B=Hα+β|H|where α and β are two material fitted constants (which can be temperature dependent). The equation has two limitations with respect to this work, firstly it does not yield a relative permeability of 1 at high fields, but it rather yields 0, so an extra termμ0Hshould be added. Furthermore, it does not correctly describe the transition from the high permeability at low magnetic fields to the saturation (the knee area). This can be remedied by adding a term that is proportional to the square root of the magnetic field, so the Fröhlich equation becomes a three-parameter equation [18]:(13)B=Hα+β|H|+γ|H|+μ0HThe three parameters in the modified Fröhlich equation, can be seen in Figs. 14–21 for all the measured materials from [16]. They all represent the measured B-H curves and have been fitted in a least square sense. The fitting of the modified Fröhlich and the original Fröhlich equations can be seen in Fig. 1, and it shows a better fitting with the modified Fröhlich equation as expected. Further explanation of this is given in Section 3.A simulation code can then utilize the three parameters of α, β, γ, with a coupling to a heat transfer analysis. In [17] a procedure for utilizing the parameters from the Fröhlich equation was presented. The non-linear material is approximated with a fictitious linear material that has a constant relative permeability, which is unknown, called μrfwhere f denotes the fictitious material. The linear fictitious material should have the same average heat density loss as the non-linear material, in every point, and this is ensured by a permeability given by Eq. (16). The procedure is slightly changed compared to the one presented in [17], due to the extra added terms in the analytical representation of the B-H curves. The iteration method requires a calculation of the magnetic co-energy density (integrated B-H curve with respect to H), from both the analytical representation called w1iand from the average value of the slope during a quarter of a period denoted w2i, i.e.:(14)w1i=∫0HmifBdHand(15)w2i=12BmiHmifThe two co-energies should give an over and underestimation of the heat losses, respectively. These values are subsequently used to calculate a fictitious linear material with a relative permeability of:(16)μrif=w1i+w2iμ0(Hmif)2Substituting Eq. (13) into Eq. (14) and integrating is not trivial (given in the appendix), hence numerical integration can be utilized. Finding the value of w2ifrom Eq. (15) is done by substituting in Eq. (13) and evaluating. An initial value for the relative permeability can conveniently be chosen as the initial relative permeability (i.e. the slope of the B-H curve close to zero magnetic field), which can be derived as follows. We start by using the linear relation(17)Bmi=μ0μrHmiin Eq. (15) to give the co-energy in one quarter of a period:(18)wf=12μ0μr(Hmif)2Then using the modified Fröhlich approximation Eq. (13) in a quarter of a period gives(19)w2i=12(Hα+β|H|+γ|H|+μ0H)HmifNow, settingwf=w2iby combining Eqs. (18) and (19), and settingHmif=0it is finally possible to solve for the initial relative permeability, which gives:(20)μrf=12+12αμ0As earlier mentioned, Eq. (20) can be used as an initial guess for a domain of a given material. It will be constant throughout each material domain in the beginning, but will gradually start to change as the iteration procedure is commenced.The iteration procedure presented by [17] can be employed for the modified Fröhlich equation by modifying some of the equations used in the different steps. Since both μrfand Hfare unknowns, an iterative procedure can be employed using these few steps:1.Solve for the magnetic field Hfusing Eq. (20) as initial guess for μrf.Calculate the magnetic co-energy density wifusing Eq. (18) with Hffound in step 1.Calculate magnetic co-energy densities w1iby inserting the modified Fröhlich equation Eq. (13) into Eq. (14) and use numerical integration, and w2ifrom Eq. (19). Also find the averagewi=w1i+w2i2.Test whether the change in energy in every point is less than a small value|wi−wif|≤werr, if true end the iteration procedure, if not go to step 1, but useμrif=2wiμ0(Hmif)2as a new initial guess for the relative permeability.The computed value of losses has an acceptable difference compared to transient calculation when using the above criteria [17].The materials used in this work includes two core materials, EPCOS Ferrite N27 and HöganäsSomaloy®, and the primal heated mold material is the Uddeholm Impax Supreme (AISI P20). The magnetic properties of these materials are non-linear and temperature dependent, and have been characterized with a Vibrating Sample Magnetometer (VSM) equipment in earlier work by the authors [16]. The B-H curves have all been fitted to the modified Fröhlich equation see Eq. (13). The three coefficients have been found for each temperature level ranging from 25°C to 350°C at an interval of 25°C. They have been fitted in a least square sense and all the resulting α, β and γ coefficients can be seen in the appendix, Figs. 14–21. The value of the squared 2-norm of the residual for all the fittings is below 0.1, indicating they have a good fit to the modified Fröhlich equation, as was also seen in Fig. 1.The electrical properties for the mold insert have been estimated by having a long parallelepiped of approx. 1×1×5mm subjected to a 5A current, and then measuring the voltage drop over the material. The electrical conductivity was then estimated from Ohm׳s law Eq. (7).The magnetic, electrical and thermal properties used in this work can be seen in Table 1. For the non-linear magnetic materials an estimate of the initial magnetic permeability is given.The material used for the moldings is ABS and it is the objective to reach its no flow temperatureTno−flowwhich is usually close to the glass transition temperature Tgwhich is 94°C. TheTno−flowis around 111°C, so if the mold cavity surface is above 120°C it should be sufficient.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
