@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Subject identification via ECG fiducial-based systems: Influence of the type of QT interval correction

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Electrocardiography (ECG) has been recently proposed as biometric trait for identification purposes.The influence of the QT interval correction method on the performance of ECG-based identification systems is analyzed.ECG signals were collected from the Physionet open access database.A public domain software was used for fiducial points detection.Results suggested that QT correction is always required to improve the performance.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Electrocardiogram,QT interval correction,Biometrics identification systems,Classification,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Electrocardiography (ECG) has been recently proposed as biometric trait for identification purposes. Intra-individual variations of ECG might affect identification performance. These variations are mainly due to Heart Rate Variability (HRV). In particular, HRV causes changes in the QT intervals along the ECG waveforms. This work is aimed at analysing the influence of seven QT interval correction methods (based on population models) on the performance of ECG-fiducial-based identification systems. In addition, we have also considered the influence of training set size, classifier, classifier ensemble as well as the number of consecutive heartbeats in a majority voting scheme. The ECG signals used in this study were collected from thirty-nine subjects within the Physionet open access database. Public domain software was used for fiducial points detection. Results suggested that QT correction is indeed required to improve the performance. However, there is no clear choice among the seven explored approaches for QT correction (identification rate between 0.97 and 0.99). MultiLayer Perceptron and Support Vector Machine seemed to have better generalization capabilities, in terms of classification performance, with respect to Decision Tree-based classifiers. No such strong influence of the training-set size and the number of consecutive heartbeats has been observed on the majority voting scheme.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
During the past decades, the feasibility bio-medical signals, such as electroencephalography, heart-rate variability, blood pressure and pulse oximetry, for subject identification [1] was studied. The idea of using electrocardiography (ECG) for identification purposes is however recent [2,3].As well known, a proper biometric should posses peculiar characteristics such as uniqueness, permanence, universality and collectability and ECG shows these particularities. Hoekema et al. [4] highlighted the uniqueness of ECG signal on the basis of geometrical and physiological factors. Wuebbeler et al. [5] revealed its permanence by observing similarities of healthy subjects’ ECG data gathered repetitively during several years. ECG can be easily collected from the whole population (universality): it is present among all living individuals. It can be recorded for every subject, as long as he is alive; moreover, a single-lead ECG (requiring only three or even two electrodes) is sufficient to extract the signal, even in case of physical disability (collectability). As such, its properties further motivated researchers to employ ECG as appropriate biometric. Moreover, traditional biometrics are at risk of falsification and alteration: face and eye scans, voice patterns, fingerprints etc. are publicly available. Facial images are recorded every time we enter a bank or a supermarket, conversations and voices are taped by many phone-based service providers, fingerprints are left on every surface we touch. They can be easily forged (face or iris pictures, lifted latent fingerprints, high quality voice recordings, etc.). To get rid of the potential risk of replication of traditional biometrics, researchers introduced automatic liveness detection approaches [6,7], whose aim is to determine if biometric data are captured from a living and legitimate user, physically present at the collection site. To this respect, the ECG signal detection is a life indicator itself: it implies users’ existence and liveness.However, aside the aforementioned advantages, the use of ECG in subject identification shows some limitations. First, the use of ECG arises privacy issues: indeed, ECG signals convey information about subjects’ cardiac health, which is considered as confidential. Second, although a single lead ECG can be acquired easily and effectively using only two electrodes [8,9], a typical electrode has to firmly contact the body surface, making this biometric particularly critical with respect to the acquisition procedure. Third, specific conditions may alter the characteristics of the waveform. Except for heart diseases such as arrhythmias, which significantly modify the ECG traits, some physiological conditions like mental stress or exercise, may also interfere with the morphological properties of the ECG. Thus, despite the inter-individual (amongst the population) ECG variability allows its use as a biometric (uniqueness), its intra-individual variability, which involves signal variations for the same subject, might represent a limit to its robustness. ECG biometric in presence of cardiac disorders is still an open research issue [10], however any ECG-based identification system needs to be invariant to the mentioned physiological conditions.Intra-individual variations are mainly due to the regulation of cardiac activity by the Autonomous Nervous System(ANS). The heart function indeed includes delivering oxygenated blood to the whole body. The cardiac output, that is the amount of blood ejected from the ventricles in a minute, is modified by the ANS in order to satisfy organs’ requirements. This is achieved by continuously adjusting the heart rate. However, it modifies the QT intervals along the ECG waveforms reducing the intra-individual stability of the signal [11–14].In this work, we expanded and completed our previous work [15] focussed on analysing the influence of the QT interval variation on some fiducial based ECG features (amplitude and temporal) used for subject identification.In particular, we widen our analyses to evaluate the performance of different classifiers (or an ensemble of classifiers) provided with ECG features with or without adjustment. QT correction was obtained using well established models available from the literature. In addition, we investigated other important variables in attempting to clarify their influence on the performance of an ECG-based identification system. Specifically, we studied the impact of the duration of ECG recordings used as the training set, the selected classifier, the number of consecutive heartbeats on a majority voting scheme (which is a common strategy to gain robustness). To further extend our analyses, we compared the results obtained with our fiducial-based approaches with respect to a non fiducial-based solution. Since some authors [16,17] proposed the use of Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) based approaches for ECG Identification, we compared our best finding with the performance of a Nearest Neighbour classifier using the DTW as distance measure.The rest of the paper is organised as it follows: in Section 2 we introduce a general scheme of an ECG based identification system; in Section 3 we describe the features used for this study. Section 4 deals with features correction using QT information. Database and signal processing are described in Section 5 while in Section 6 the adopted classification methods are reported. Section 7 details on the performance metrics. In Section 8 the results of this study are reported and, finally, in Section 9 and in Section 10 our findings have been discussed in detail.In this study, we referred to a general architecture for ECG identification as shown in Fig. 1:•ECG acquisition: ECG signals are recorded via appropriate instrumentation. We did not focus on this issue as we used signals from a public database (see Section 5.1);Fiducials detection: Specific anchor points (fiducials) need to be extracted along the ECG recording to provide a proper feature identification (see Section 3.1): to this aim we used public domain software as described in Section 5.2;Feature extraction: It is the evaluation, for each heartbeat, of the feature vector (described in Section 3);QT correction: In order to take into account for the heart-rate variability, features must be amended. The correction methods are described in Section 4;Classification: In subject identification, each analysed heartbeat is normally ascribed to a specific subject (it identifies an individual). In this study we compared the performances of several state-of-the-art classifiers and classifier ensemble (see Section 6).Performance evaluation: To evaluate classification performance, specific metrics need to be computed. Metrics and performance analysis are reported in Section 5.1.ECG-based identification systems can be roughly categorised in two types: fiducial based and non-fiducial [18,19]. In fiducial based systems [3], the ECG is segmented into a number of simpler waves, and specific points (fiducials) must be identified in order to provide the basis for feature extraction. In non-fiducial systems [20], the ECG is considered as a whole: linear or non-linear transformation are performed in order to extract features.QT interval variation can affect both types of identification systems. However, in this study we focused on fiducial based systems.The temporal relationships between the ECG waves (P, QRS, T) are related to the electrical paths within the heart from the sino-atrial node to the Purkinje fibers: it is intuitively expected that these paths may differ from subject to subject due to geometrical configurations and electrical impedances of the tissues [21]. Temporal intervals (among waves) can be derived by locating appropriate fiducial points, typically wave peaks or boundaries (Fig. 2). The interval between two consecutive R peaks (RR) can be also used as an additional feature in QT-aware identification systems taking into account for heart rate variability, although not providing any QT correction (see Section 4).A detailed list of features used in this study is reported in Table 1.Amplitude features capture the relative height of the different wave-peaks with respect to the R peak. Typical amplitude features are shown in Fig. 3.The rationale for amplitude features can be traced back to the study of Hoekema et al. [4]. As previously reminded, they demonstrated that a large part of inter-individual ECG variability, which can serve to discriminate individuals, is due to geometrical characteristics.Sasikala et al. [22] also observed that ECG can change with time (ageing) and if a person does physical work. These changes mainly affect temporal features (e.g. the P-wave duration and the PR interval). Most of studies on subject-recognition however use both temporal and amplitude features.The combination of amplitude and temporal features is expected to improve the performance of the whole system. Wang et al. [23] compared the use of temporal features only with the combination of temporal and amplitude features on two public databases (PTB and MIT-BIH). They indeed found that the use of temporal features lead to 84% of subject identification (on PTB), while 100% was achieved on both DBs by using a mixed feature sets.Other feature types can also be conceived: for instance, Zhang et al [24] introduced the QRS area feature.Heart rate (HR) variation can affect the performance of fiducial-based subject recognition: time intervals among fiducial points change with varying heart rate [12,25]. In addition, HR is related to both emotional and physiological conditions. Therefore, many authors attempted to normalize features with respect to HR modifications. In particular, Israel et al. [21] assumed a linear relationship between the heart rate and the time intervals computed with respect to the R peak: in order to remove heart rate dependence, they normalised intervals with respect to the length of the P-QRS-T complex.However, the assumption of a simple linear relationship between heart rate and fiducial intervals [21] is questionable.In this work, we then prefer to use a different approach based on the suggestion presented by Tawfik et el. in [26]: QT intervals lengths are adjusted according to population models [12]. However, as there is no agreement in literature as to which is the best model, we compared several correction formulae (models) proposed in literature [27,12,13] for normalising QT and related intervals, with respect to the relative HR. Models’ formulae are reported below:(1)QTc=QT+αL(1−RR)linearQTc=QT−αH(1/RR−1)hyperbolicQTc=QT/RRαPparabolicQTc=QT−αLOGln(RR)logarithmicQTc=ln(eQT+αS(1−RR))shiftedlogarithmicQTc=QT−αE(e−RR−1/e)exponentialIn the equations, QT is the QT interval of a specific heartbeat, RR is the interval between the R-peak of the considered heartbeat and the subsequent one, QTcis the QT corrected value and α is a model-dependent coefficient. For this study, α has been estimated for each model by using a training set composed by all subjects. Features related to the QT interval (such as Q−Tmax, Tend−Tstart, etc...) were corrected similarly (see Table 1). We assumed that all QT related intervals are affected by the HR in the same manner; therefore, the same α was used to correct these other intervals as well. Described models were compared to a well established QT-correction approach derived from a linear model [27] (the Framingham study) having αL=0.154 estimated on a population of over than 5000 subjects.In this study we also assessed the results achievable without QT-correction (qtNone). Finally, as an additional benchmark we evaluated the performance of a QT-aware classifier adding the RR interval length to the selected feature without any QT-correction.As the objective of this work was to study the influence of QT interval correction on ECG-based identification systems, and because it is well known that heartrate (RR intervals) is prone to short (5min) and long variability (one day) [28], it was necessary to use ECG records of long duration. Nevertheless, to facilitate comparisons with other studies, we choose to use a public database. Previous considerations should have suggested the normal sinus MIT-BIH database, which is a collection of 48h Holter ECGs acquired at 128Hz. However, literature review (e.g. [21,29,30]) and preliminary exploration of data suggested a higher sampling frequency to capture ECG features with sufficient detail for subject identification.Signals used for this study were from the Physionet [31] database Fantasia [32]. This database includes 40 short-term ECG recordings (120min) from 20 young (21–34 years old) and 20 elderly (68–85 years old) rigorously screened healthy subjects. All subjects where monitored (continuous ECG and respiration signals were acquired) while maintaining a resting state watching the Disney's movie Fantasia. The signals are digitised at 250Hz. One signal was found to be digitised at 333Hz and excluded from the analysis. Each heartbeat was annotated using an arrhythmia detection algorithm, and each beat annotation was verified by visual inspection. Recordings were collected using the free software CYGWIN (https://www.cygwin.com). It is worth to mention that another database [30] has recently become public, however ECG recordings are of short duration, thus not suitable for the type of investigation addressed in this work.After notch filtering (for removal of 60Hz powerline interference), fiducial points were located on recordings by using the ECGPUWAVE detector, developed by Laguna et al. [33]. It detects onset, peak and offset of the P, QRS and T waveforms, characterizing the patterns of the P wave (regular or inverted), the QRS complex (Q, R or S position), and the T wave (regular, inverted or biphasic). Moreover, this QRS detector is already implemented and available within the toolkit provided by the database.All intervals reported in red in Table 1 have been corrected using the models presented in Section 4.In subject identification, each inspected heartbeat is ascribed to a specific subject via the use of a classifier. Classifier choice generally influences the functioning of the whole system; thus is worth exploring different approaches for ECG based identification applications. For this study, we compared the performances of some classifiers: MultiLayer Perceptron (MLP), Support Vector Machine (SVM) and Decision Tree (DT). The classifiers were chosen since they are recognised to be state-of-the-art methodologies in classification. Their properties are well known in literature and we refer the interested reader to [34] for details.Moreover, since classification performance can be improved by using an ensemble of classifiers, we also explored few well established approaches [35] such as Random Forest (RF), BAGging (BAG) and AdaBoost (AB) for the DT. We did not use BAGging or boosting techniques on MLP or SVM. In fact, to increase classifier performance, these approaches should be used with unstablebase classifiers (small changes in the training set may produce large changes in the classifier output) [35].Summarising, we compared the following classifiers: MLP, SVM, DT, Random Forest DT (R-DT), Bagging DT (B-DT) and AdaBoost DT (A-DT). We used the implementation of the mentioned classifiers as provided in WEKA [36] and in Knime [37], which are ‘de facto’ standards in the field and are widely used.To obtain a robust identification, we further introduced the concept of majority voting (MV), which is also well known in classification literature. In particular, we considered groups of consecutive heartbeats and we assigned the subject identity using the majority-voting scheme as reported in [38].Finally, we compared our results with respect to a nonfiducial-based identification system. Specifically, since it is regarded as highly effective in ECG-related verification or identification tasks [16,17], we employed a 1 Nearest Neighbour (1-NN) classifier using the Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) as distance measure. The DTW public domain implementation provided by [39] was adopted here.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
