@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Using a serious game to complement CPR instruction in a nurse faculty

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
LISSA is a serious game designed to complement CPR teaching in an enjoyable way.LISSA has been evaluated in a population 109 nursing undergraduate students.Students using LISSA gave significantly better learning acquisition scores than those following traditional classes.Students that use LISSA performed the CPR protocol better than the ones that did not use it.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Serious games,Cardiopulmonary resuscitation,E-learning,Nursing informatics,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) is a first aid key survival technique used to stimulate breathing and keep blood flowing to the heart. Its effective administration can significantly increase the chances of survival for victims of cardiac arrest. LISSA is a serious game designed to complement CPR teaching and also to refresh CPR skills in an enjoyable way. The game presents an emergency situation in a 3D virtual environment and the player has to save the victim applying the CPR actions. In this paper, we describe LISSA and its evaluation in a population composed of 109 nursing undergraduate students enrolled in the Nursing degree of our university. To evaluate LISSA we performed a randomized controlled trial that compares the classical teaching methodology, composed of self-directed learning for theory plus laboratory sessions with a mannequin for practice, with the one that uses LISSA after self-directed learning for theory and before laboratory sessions with a mannequin. From our evaluation we observed that students using LISSA (Group 2 and 3) gave significantly better learning acquisition scores than those following traditional classes (Group 1). To evaluate the differences between students of these groups we performed a paired samples t-test between Group 1 and 2 (μ1=35, 67, μ2=47, 50 and p<0.05) and between students of Group 1 and 3 (μ1=35, 67, μ3=50, 58 and p<0.05). From these tests we observed that there are significant differences in both cases. We also evaluated student performance of main steps of CPR protocol. Students that use LISSA performed better than the ones that did not use it.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In last years, there has been a rapid growth of serious games in educational contexts [1,2]. Two main factors have motivated this change. On the one hand, the new teaching and learning paradigm where the learner becomes the center of the process, and practice takes an important role. On the other hand, the capacity of serious games to capture students attention and engage them in the exposed content by providing virtual environments to practice [3,4]. In medical context, the use of serious games started forty years ago. First, with the introduction of role-playing techniques and mannequins, and more recently with digital games [5,6]. Several studies showed that students prefer a serious-game based approach than the traditional one, even though the obtained scores were similar in both approaches [7–10]. The well-acceptance of this new teaching approach has led serious games to be an emerging focus of research and development.Unfortunately, the design and creation of video games is costly in terms of time and effort, mainly due to the graphical interface that require and the narrative that is needed to support them. Three years ago, we started to develop LISSA, that stands for LIfe Support Simulation Activities, a serious game to teach and learn cardiopulmonary resuscitation skills [11]. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) is an emergency lifesaving procedure that is done when someone's breathing or heartbeat has stopped. The procedure combines rescue breathing to provide oxygen to the lungs and chest compressions to keep oxygen-rich blood flowing until the heartbeat and breathing can be restored. Permanent brain damage or death can occur within minutes if blood flow stops. Therefore, it is very important that blood flow and breathing be continued until trained medical help arrives [12]. Since 1960, when Kouwenhoven et al. published an article stating that anyone, anywhere, could perform CPR, providing CPR has become an essential competency not only for expert but also for laypersons.To teach CPR, different learning strategies have been proposed such as classical teaching strategies with mannequins, interactive videos and 3D simulation scenarios [13–16]. Below, we review some of them. On the one hand, there are video training applications such as Save-a-life [17], an interactive on-line video simulation that tests the player knowledge of helping someone suffering from sudden cardiac arrest; and CPR Choking [18], an application that provides instant information on how to perform CPR and how to aid a choking victim. On the other hand, there are handheld device applications such as CPR Game [19], a cardiac arrest simulator on iOS platform focused on advanced CPR training; iResus [20], an application for smart phone, designed to improve the performance of an advanced life support provider in a simulated emergency situation; iCPR [21,22], an iPhone application designed for both lay persons and healthcare professionals able to detect the rate of chest compressions performance by using the built-in accelerometer; M-AID [23], a first aid application for mobile phones that uses yes or no questions to judge an on-going situation giving to the user detailed instructions of how to proceed; CPR simulator [17], a set of CPR exercises including adult, child and infant CPR simulator that runs through the CPR sequence and Viva!CPR [24], a smartphone application from the Italian Resuscitation Council addressed to children and young adults to provide real time feedback on chest compression quality. Other applications are the Mini-Virtual Reality Enhanced Mannequin (Mini-VREM) [25] which is a CPR feedback device with motion detection technology including Kinect, sensor and software specifically designed to analyze chest compression performance and provide real-time feedback in a simulation training setting; AED Challenge [26], an application that provides online automated external defibrillation and CPR skill practice and testing with realistic scenarios; First-Aid game [28], a video game addressed to middle and high school students based on a low-cost software simulation with photo-realistic scenarios and simple interactions to introduce the theory of basic life support and the correct performance of its procedures; and LIFESAVER [16] a simulator proposed by the UK Resuscitation Council that fuses interactivity with live-action film. In the serious games context, some games for CPR training are JUST VR System [14] an immersive virtual reality situation training system for non-professional health emergency operators; MicroSim Prehospital [13] designed for pre-hospital training on emergency medical services, and Staying alive [27], an online 3D simulator which provides a learning experience of saving a virtual patient from cardiac arrest in 4min; Relive [24] a first person 3D adventure where the player faces different rescue situations and can test the quality of his CPR, directly; Viva!Game [29], a Web-based serious game designed to create awareness on cardiac arrest and cardiopulmonary resuscitation [24]; and HeartRun [31], a mobile simulation game to train resuscitation and targeted at giving school children an understanding of CPR and getting them to take action.Different studies assessed CPR instruction and results indicate that CPR skills decay within three to six months after initial training [30,32,33]. Therefore, as important as teaching CPR is the development of techniques to refresh and maintain CPR knowledge and skills. In this context, serious games can be suitable tools to tackle this problem since they can be used not only to complement CPR instruction but also to present new situations in order to refresh the protocol knowledge [34]. In this paper, we describe and evaluate the use of LISSA as a tool to complement CPR teaching in the Nurse Faculty of our university.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Currently, CPR training in nurse education follows the traditional model consisting of a theoretical introduction and individual manikin-based procedural training. Different virtual techniques can be used for theoretical introduction but there are few virtual methods for practice. The main limitation of current approaches is that they only consider some parts of the CPR protocol, especially the CPR maneuver. In this article, we have evaluated the use of LISSA, a serious game that considers all the steps of the CPR flowchart. We have analyzed the impact of using LISSA after theory introduction and before laboratory practice. The obtained results show that students that practice with LISSA performed better in the laboratory sessions than students that only read theory material. We also observed that some actions that are not clear enough in the game can lead to some misconception in practice sessions. For instance, when checking for victims breath students spent less time than the 10 required seconds. This type of errors requires a better representation of some steps of the CPR protocol. However, from the results we can conclude that LISSA use improves students knowledge and skills on CPR. In addition, students consider that LISSA helps them to learn.Our future work will be centered in the design of new scenarios and the introduction of new characters into the game. In addition, we want to test LISSA as a tool to refresh CPR knowledge since CPR skills decay within three to six months after initial training. We plan to test LISSA with experimented people on CPR.There are no conflicts of interests.