@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Anomalous modulation characteristics of DC Josephson current through niobium tunnel junction by applying external magnetic field 4000A/m in perpendicular direction

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Through Nb superconducting junction with Al-oxide current flow without voltage drop.Josephson current Ic dependence on Hx, Hyand Hzmagnetic field was obtained.Ic dependence on Hx, Hybefore applying Hzwas Fraunhofer pattern.Ic dependence on Hx, Hyafter applying Hzwas not Fraunhofer pattern.Numerical simulation explained the measured dependence.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Josephson current,Niobium,Tunnel junction,Three-dimensional modulation characteristics,Perpendicular direction magnetic field,Helmholtz coils,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Anomalous modulation characteristics of Josephson current Ic through niobium tunnel junctions at liquid helium temperature were first measured after applying the external magnetic field in perpendicular direction. Josephson current Ic was modulated by applying the external magnetic fields (Hx, Hy) parallel and Hzvertical to the junction plane. Modulation characteristics of the Ic value upon Hzhad hysteresis. Before applying the vertical field, modulation characteristics Ic–(Hx, Hy) were the product of the two Fraunhofer diffraction patterns in Hxand Hydirections which were parallel to the junction edges of the square shape junction, respectively. Under the perpendicular magnetic field as much as 4000A/m, the maximum Ic value did not appear at (Hx, Hy)=(0, 0) point. After removing this vertical field, the Ic–(Hx, Hy) modulation pattern changed from the product of the two Fraunhofer diffraction patterns to the deformed Ic–(Hx, Hy) characteristics, whose anomalous shape was explained by assuming the extremely low current density at four edges of the square shape except the four corner regions. Some magnetic flux would be trapped perpendicularly inside the junction electrodes within the junction area. After the junction was heated to the room temperature and was again cooled to the liquid He temperature, these modulation characteristics again became the normal modulation pattern, in which the trapped flux would be released by this thermal cycle.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Between two superconducting electrodes with thin oxide layer can current flow without voltage drop, whose critical value can be changed by applying external magnetic field parallel to this oxide barrier [1–5]. In order to obtain more information of the barrier uniformity, we have changed the external magnetic field in two Hxand Hydirections parallel to the junction plane as shown in Fig. 1, and have measured the Ic–(Hx–Hy) dependence [6–11]. By applying the external magnetic field Hx[Hy], Josephson current distribution is modulated in y [x] perpendicular direction. From these Ic–(Hx–Hy) characteristics, by using the junction as simple magnetic sensor, Meissner effect of the superconducting film can be observed [12]. Superconductor–insulator–ferromagnet–superconductor junctions are also studied by Ic–(Hx–Hy) characteristics [13].By applying the perpendicular Hzfield perpendicular to the junction plane we have found the critical current can also be changed [14]. The modulation characteristics of the Josephson current by applying the vertical magnetic field are important both in fundamental physics and in application of superconducting devices to integrated circuits [15–17]. In the case that the critical current once decreased by flux trapping or some external magnetic noise, this current value can be recovered by alternating the Hzfield [18].In this article, we have applied the external magnetic field perpendicular to the junction plane and have obtained Ic–(Hx–Hy) characteristics under 4000A/m Hzfield and those after reducing this field. In section 2, detailed fabrication process and measurement method of the junction were described. In section 3, Ic–(Hx–Hy) characteristics with wide Hx–Hyrange were mentioned. In section 4, deformed shape of Ic–(Hx–Hy) characteristics after reducing the Hzfield was studied. Conclusions were described in section 5.In order to fabricate superconducting junctions, niobium and aluminum thin films were deposited in separate vacuum chambers for niobium and for aluminum by DC magnetron sputtering vacuum system with load-lock chamber [19]. Diameters of niobium and aluminum targets were 75mm and 100mm, respectively. The sputtering and the load-lock chambers were pumped down to 10−5Pa range using two molecular pumps and two dry pumps. The thicknesses of base niobium, aluminum-oxide and counter-niobium electrode were 300, 5 and 50nm, respectively. Tunnel oxides of niobium/aluminum-oxide/niobium tunnel junctions were formed by natural oxidation of the surface of the aluminum film with pure oxygen atmosphere in oxidization chamber. The junction areas were defined using selective niobium anodization process [20]. Junction size was 50μm square. After sputter-etching the surface of the niobium/aluminum-oxide/niobium tri-layers, a wiring niobium electrode of 100nm thickness was sputtered and was patterned using chemical etching with mixture of fluoric acid, nitric acid and de-ionized water.In order to obtain the magnetic field dependence, the external magnetic fieldH(Hx, Hy, Hz) to the junction was produced using three pairs of Helmholtz coils [6,8]. Two pairs of Helmholtz coils produced the Hxand Hymagnetic field parallel to the junction plane and the third pair produced the magnetic field Hzvertical to the junction plane, as shown in Fig. 1. The maximum fields which Helmholtz coils were able to produce, were 3000A/m for Hxand Hyfield and 8000A/m for Hzfield, respectively. The Helmholtz coils were driven by using DC power supply and were controlled by personal computer and GPIB (General Purpose Interface Bus) system.In this section, dependences of the Josephson current Ic through superconducting junction on external magnetic field were studied in the wide range −3000<Hx<3000A/m, −3000<Hy<3000A/m. The characteristics of the Josephson current Ic on the vertical field Hzhad hysteresis [14], where the Ic value depended not only on the value of the vertical field Hzbut also on the previous history of changing the vertical field Hz. The dependence of the value Ic on the fieldH(Hx–Hy–Hz) were not drawn as the three-dimensional graph on Hx–Hy–Hzaxises. If we fixed the Hzvalue, however, the Ic–(Hx–Hy) surface was able to be obtained without hysteresis even in the wide range −3000<Hx<3000A/m, −3000<Hy<3000A/m, where the obtained Ic–(Hx–Hy) dependence was smooth without jumping in increasing or decreasing scan of Hx(or Hy) component. Hence, the vertical magnetic field Hzwas changed as (0)–(+4000)–(0)–(−4000)–(0), in which at every point the Ic–(Hx–Hy) dependences were measured by scanning theH(Hx, Hy) parallel field vector 75A/m step by step. In the Hzchanging sequence shown in Fig. 2(a), the points (b)–(f) explain the timing of the Ic–(Hx–Hy) measurement. So, five dependence in Fig. (b)-(f) showed the Ic–(Hx–Hy) characteristics that belonged to the changing history Hzin (a). After cooling the sample to 4.2K, the initial Ic–(Hx–Hy) characteristics before applying Hzfield were obtained as shown in Fig. 2(b). The Ic–(Hx–Hy) characteristics were the product of two Fraunhofer diffraction patterns in Hxand Hydirection parallel to each edge of the square junction. Figs. (c) and (e) are the Ic–(Hx–Hy) characteristics obtained under +4000 and −4000A/m vertical Hzfield, respectively. By applying the Hzfield as much as +4000A/m [−4000A/m], the peak position of the Ic value moved in −Hydirection [+Hydirection]. Owing to the flux expelled and curved by Meissner effect from the superconducting electrode, some Hycomponent existed at the measured junction position by applying the external Hzfield, in which the moving direction became opposite in Figs. (c) and (e). After removing the vertical field, the peak position of the Ic value came back near the origin point (Hx, Hy)=(0,0), as shown in Figs. (d) and (f), about which we studied in the next section.In this section, anomalous shape of Ic–(Hx–Hy) dependence surface after applying the Hzfield was studied with scanning of the parallel Hxand Hyfield by 40A/m narrower steps. Fig. 3(a) showed the initial Ic–(Hx–Hy) dependence before applying the Hzfield. Resonant current steps Istepat finite voltage of I–V curves were also measured. Fig. 3(b) shows the Istep-(Hx–Hy) dependence at 0.20mV, where the Istepvalue were defined from the difference between the maximum and minimum current values in the range 0.18<V<0.22mV. We changed the perpendicular Hzfield; (0)–(+4000)–(0)–(−4000)–(0)–(+4000)–(0)–(−4000A/m)–(0), as shown in Fig. 4. The Ic–(Hx–Hy) and Istep–(Hx–Hy) dependences measured at the points (a)–(e), were shown in Fig. 5. (a1)–(e2). After these measurements the sample was heated to the room temperature and the Nb electrode films of the junction were let to the normal state, the sample was again cooled down to the liquid He temperature. Then Ic–(Hx–Hy) and Istep–(Hx–Hy) dependences were measured as shown in Fig. 5(f1–2). In Fig. 5, (a1)–(c1), (d), (e1), (f1) showed Ic–(Hx–Hy) dependence, and (a2)–(c2), (e2), (f2) showed Istep–(Hx–Hy) dependence at the resonant voltage Vr=0.20mV. In these Istep–(Hx–Hy) dependences, the points (α1), (α2), (β1), (β2) were resonant modes: (nx, ny)=(1, 0), (−1, 0) (0,1) (0,−1), respectively. Index (nx, ny) were the numbers of the flux quantum penetrating into the barrier region in x and y directions during resonance under the external magnetic fieldHex. In (1, 0) and (−1, 0) modes, one wavelength of electromagnetic wave and superconducting order parameter stood in the y direction perpendicular to the external magnetic field inside the junction area. In (0, 1) and (0, −1) modes, there was one wavelength of those in the x direction.As shown in Fig. 5(a1), before applying the Hzfield, the Ic–(Hx–Hy) dependence was the product of the two Fraunhofer pattern. In Fig. (a2), typical resonant mode (α1), (α2), (β1), (β2) at finite voltage [0.2mV] were also observed around the main Ic peak area in Fig. (a1). For example after applying the Hzfield as (0)–(+4000A/m)–(0) triangle shape, as shown in (b1–2), the Ic–(Hx–Hy) and the Ic–(Hx–Hy) dependence surface moved to the third quadrant area. In Fig. 6, the position (Hx, Hy) of the Ic maximum value in the Ic–(Hx–Hy) dependence of Fig. 5(a1), (b1), (c1), and (e1) after reducing the Hzfield were plotted as points a, b, c and e, respectively. As shown in this figure, the returning point of the Ic maximum moved in every sequence, because differed the places of the magnetic flux still remained at the pinning centers in Nb films near the measured junction under Hz=0 in every sequence. Fig. 5(d) showed Ic–(Hx–Hy) dependence in −800<Hx<800, −800<Hy<800A/m range under −4000A/m Hzfield, in which the Ic current value was less than 30μA. In Fig. 5(d) the high Ic value area went away from this measured region, which was easily understood from the wider area measurement of Fig. 2(e). After a thermal cycling from 4.2K to room temperature, the Ic–(Hx–Hy) characteristics became the product of two Fraunhofer patterns i.e. normal characteristics again, as shown in Fig. 5(f1). So, the anomalous characteristics of Fig. 5(a1), (b1), (c1) and (e1) was caused by the changes of superconducting order-parameter distribution in Nb electrodes and the electromagnetic field. These changes were reset to the initial state without flux trapping by normal state transition of Nb superconducting electrodes in thermal cycling to room temperature.Numerical simulation was also studied to explain these measured dependences. First, after removing the vertical Hzfield, the magnetic field from the trapped flux in the superconducting film not inside the junction but near the measured junction would simply move the high Ic mountain area as the bias magnetic field, whose offset value was easily evaluated from the peak position (Hx, Hy).Secondly, the critical junction current density Jcin the junction area would become non-uniform even after reducing the Hzfield such as at the points (a), (b), (c), (e) in Fig. 4. In triangle [hexagonal] shape junctions [9], junction current of the three [six] corner areas made huge ridges of the mountain shape Ic–(Hx–Hy) dependence. However, in the dependence of Fig. 4 it would not be reasonable to assume higher current density at four corners of the square shape junction than the uniform current density Jc0 under no external magnetic field. So, we assumed the current density near four edges became extremely low, as shown in Fig. 7(a), which was caused by the magnetic flux that still trapped in the superconducting electrodes and remained at the edge regions even after removing the external magnetic field Hz. From this assumed current density distribution, the critical current was numerically obtained as follows. Generally speaking, along the pass across the barrier of the tunnel junction, the gauge-invariant phase difference γ between the two superconducting electrodes was considered from the sum of the phase difference and the line integral of vector potential of electro-magnetic field. This gauge-invariant phase difference γ was modulated perpendicular to the external magnetic field direction inside this barrier region, where the modulation wavelength was inverse proportional to the magnitude of the applied magnetic field. From the distribution of Jcsinγ, we calculated the total current that flew without voltage drop. Fig. 7(b) and (c) showed the simulated Ic–(Hx–Hy) dependence in the range −800<Hx<800, −800<Hy<800A/m and the enlarged center area, respectively. Four ridges of the two-dimensional Ic–(Hx–Hy) surface observed at four directions (45, 135, 225, 315 degree angle) and the boomerang-like shape of sub peaks were successfully explained in this numerical simulation.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Modulation characteristics of Josephson current Ic through the niobium tunnel junction upon external magnetic field Hx–Hy(parallel field) and Hz(vertical field to the junction plane) have been studied. As the Ic–Hzdependence had hysteresis and the Ic–(Hx–Hy) dependence with fixed Hzvalue had no hysteresis, the modulation characteristics were successfully measured as the Ic–(Hx–Hy) surfaces with the previous changing history Hz(t) of the vertical field.(a) The initial Ic–(Hx–Hy) characteristics at 4.2K before applying Hzfield were the product of the two Fraunhofer diffraction pattern. (b) The maximum position (Hx, Hy) of the Ic–(Hx–Hy) characteristics under 4000A/m Hzfield moved from the origin point (0,0) owing to the Hycomponent at the measured junction position by the Meissner effect of the Nb superconducting films. (c) The Ic–(Hx–Hy) characteristics after removing 4000A/m Hzfield were not the product of the two Fraunhofer diffraction pattern. These characteristics were obtained numerically by assuming the lower current density at junction edge regions. (d) The shape of the deformed Ic–(Hx–Hy) characteristics of the junction after a thermal cycling from 4.2K to room temperature recovered to the product of the two Fraunhofer diffraction pattern, because the trapped flux had been released.