@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Gold-standard and improved framework for sperm head segmentation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We use three different color spaces for detection and segmentation of human sperm head, acrosome and nucleus.We propose a gold-standard built with the cooperation of a referent expert in the field, aiming to create a benchmark set methods for detecting and segmenting sperm cells.We achieve notable improvement in sperm head detection and fewer false positives compared to the state-of-the-art method.Our segmentation approach obtains over 80% overlapping against hand-segmented gold-standard.Our method achieves higher Dice coefficient, lower Hausdorff distance and less dispersion with respect to the results achieved by the state-of-the-art method.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Infertility,Morphological analysis,Sperm head detection,Sperm head segmentation,Acrosome segmentation,Nucleus segmentation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Semen analysis is the first step in the evaluation of an infertile couple. Within this process, an accurate and objective morphological analysis becomes more critical as it is based on the correct detection and segmentation of human sperm components. In this paper, we present an improved two-stage framework for detection and segmentation of human sperm head characteristics (including acrosome and nucleus) that uses three different color spaces. The first stage detects regions of interest that define sperm heads, using k-means, then candidate heads are refined using mathematical morphology. In the second stage, we work on each region of interest to segment accurately the sperm head as well as nucleus and acrosome, using clustering and histogram statistical analysis techniques. Our proposal is also characterized by being fully automatic, where a user intervention is not required. Our experimental evaluation shows that our proposed method outperforms the state-of-the-art. This is supported by the results of different evaluation metrics. In addition, we propose a gold-standard built with the cooperation of a referent expert in the field, aiming to compare methods for detecting and segmenting sperm cells. Our results achieve notable improvement getting above 98% in the sperm head detection process at the expense of having significantly fewer false positives obtained by the state-of-the-art method. Our results also show an accurate head, acrosome and nucleus segmentation achieving over 80% overlapping against hand-segmented gold-standard. Our method achieves higher Dice coefficient, lower Hausdorff distance and less dispersion with respect to the results achieved by the state-of-the-art method.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Infertility is a problem that affects up to 15% of couples worldwide [1]. This condition has emotional and physiological implications including stress, depression or sexual dysfunction [2]. A semen analysis according to standard criteria [3], is the first step in the evaluation of the male factor and sets the basis for all posterior steps for medical treatment of the couple [4]. A typical spermiogram considers concentration, motility, vitality, and/or the fragmentation of the spermatic DNA. In addition, the morphology of the sperm cells is considered as an important parameter to elucidate the potential fertility of a sample [5]. The classification of abnormal sperm morphology is a difficult task since the spectrum of possible malformations is considerably wide [6].Therefore, it is important to objectively quantify abnormalities, such as double-headed or multiple-tailed sperm, due to implications of the presence of these abnormalities in the semen sample [5]. However, there has been evidence for many decades that the aforementioned quantification is a challenging task. In 1966, a comparative study in 47 laboratories dedicated to human sperm morphological analysis showed that the traditional method of performing the analysis was personality oriented, as well as subjective, qualitative, non repeatable and difficult to teach to students and technicians[5,7]. Despite of the fact that the classification rules for morphological semen analysis have been simplified [3], the visual analysis of sperm morphology still presents a substantial challenge concerning reproducibility and objectivity, and inter and intra observer variability still presents a well known problem [8–11]. There are many authors revealing a lack of standardization of the methods used in laboratories in many countries [12,13]. A sophisticated computational analysis might help to overcome these problems.Overall, the evaluation of cellular and sub-cellular regions (size of the sperm head, tail length, residual cytoplasm area, etc.) and pattern recognition (multiple heads or tails, absent tail, coiled tail, etc.) are required for categorizing defects according to normal and abnormal sperm definitions in visual sperm classification under the microscope [14].In this paper, we present an improved framework for detecting and segmenting human sperm heads, since a reliable detection and segmentation presents the first step for all posterior classification algorithms. This fully automatic approach is based on a clustering method as well as on image processing techniques especially adapted for this application. In addition, we propose to combine different color spaces, instead of using only RGB color space. We also introduce a gold-standard11Available in http://morfologia.cedai.cl/public/.for head sperm parts segmentation. This dataset was built with the cooperation of a referent expert in the field and contains twenty images with more than two hundred sperm cells plus hand-segmented masks. This gold-standard has been used to evaluate and compare our results with the only reproducible method that has been published in the past and therefore presents our state-of-the-art reference method.Our main contribution is the application of a clustering algorithm for detecting sperm heads, combining different color spaces. Another contribution is the proposal of a novel algorithm to determine which direction the sperm head points. This is a very important issue for posterior stages in the quest for an accurate morphological analysis.This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we review the research work in the area, focusing on scientific papers and commercial applications whose main goal is segmentation of sperm cells. Our proposed framework as well as the gold-standard, are presented and described in detail in Section 3. In Section 4 we present the description of the results of applying our approach and the state-of-the-art method to the proposed gold-standard, which we discuss in more depth in Section 5. The conclusions can be found in Section 6.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We have presented a two-stage improved framework for detection and segmentation of human sperm head characteristics (including acrosome and nucleus). The usage of color space combinations (RGB, L*a*b* and YCbCr), together with the usage of a clustering method, provides us an exceptional tool for illumination invariant segmentation approach. In addition, our method proposed an ellipse fitting based algorithm to identify the head front direction. This is a very relevant issue to increase the accuracy of the segmentation.Our experimental evaluation shows that our proposed framework outperforms the state-of-the-art, with a higher Dice coefficient, lower Hausdorff distance and less dispersion with respect to the results achieved by Carrillo's method [24]. Our results achieve notable improvement in the detection rate with fewer false positives and an accurate head, acrosome and nucleus segmentation achieving over 80% overlapping against hand-segmented mask.To tackle the problem of lacking a public gold-standard for evaluating sperm head segmentation methods, we have introduced a gold-standard for head sperm parts segmentation, built with the cooperation of a referent expert in the field. This gold-standard has been used to evaluate and compare our results with the state-of-the-art method, and can be used to compare not only known techniques but also future improvements to present approaches. This is a very significant contribution to the scientific community.In our ongoing work, we are analyzing the impact of adding active contours as a third segmentation stage. For the future work, we will focus on both mid-piece and tail segmentation in order to provide a complete sperm parts segmentation tool.