@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A new method for the automatic identification of the dimensional features of vertebrae

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This paper proposes a new approach to determine the measure of human vertebrae.Typical approaches perform measurements with lack of repeatability and reproducibility.The proposed method is based on morphological features recognition from 3D high point density model of the vertebrae.The paper proposes unambiguous rules to identify geometric references and the associated dimensions.Compared to typical approaches, the proposed method proved to be more repeatable and reproducible.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Vertebral dimensions,3D medical-image analysis,Computer methods for vertebra analysis,Shape segmentation,Measurement protocols in biomedicine,Measurement accuracy,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper a new automatic approach to determine the accurate measure of human vertebrae is proposed. The aim is to speed up the measurement process and to reduce the uncertainties that typically affect the measurement carried out by traditional approaches. The proposed method uses a 3D model of the vertebra obtained from CT-scans or 3D scanning, from which some characteristic dimensions are detected. For this purpose, specific rules to identify morphological features, from which to detect dimensional features unambiguously and accurately, are put forward and implemented in original software. The automatic method which is here proposed is verified by analysing real vertebrae and is then compared with the state-of-the-art methods for vertebra measurement.The human vertebrae are solid morphologically-complex objects whose raison d’être is to house and protect the spinal cord and its nerve and muscle roots, as well as to support the body. These geometric and dimensional parameters of the vertebrae are usually analysed to gather some evidence which may be useful in medicine and in anthropological and forensic investigations.In Section 2, the most significant dimensional features used in the related literature are presented. Some of the lines of investigation described in the literature concerning anthropology, wherein human vertebrae measurement is dealt with are: body mass estimation [14]; identification of the height, posture and locomotion mode of a subject [14]; gender, age and ethnicity of the subject ([8] and [15]). In medicine, vertebral measurement is performed so as to identify in vivo subjects the correlation existing between the vertebral dimensions and women's menopausal phase [4]. In all the previously described applications, measures are required to be accurate enough to discriminate the factor being investigated.The measurements on real vertebrae are commonly performed with a sliding caliper and a goniometer. However, in the last few years, the Coordinate Measure Machines (CMM) are being widely used too. When the vertebra is available in the form of a 3D geometric model (as it is the case of CT-scans) its measurement can be performed by a specific software application.The concept of dimensional measure requires that some geometric features should be associated with the real object, and used as a reference, whose position is compared with a known size (the distance between the arms of the caliper). The identification of the geometric feature which is useful to perform the measurement of human vertebrae, and in general of any biological object, is made by the operator, but not without uncertainties and some arbitrariness. In order to make up for the lack of reliable measuring references, a protocol, as rigorous as possible, is required to conduct any measurements; the operator interprets the protocol and measures the dimensional parameters by identifying the morphological features associated with the measuring parameters. This measurement process is tedious and time-consuming, though, and the quality of its results depends on the training and experience of the operator. Moreover, it is important to highlight that, even in the case of highly qualified operators, the wide measuring variability inevitably implies a lack of objectivity in measurement estimation.In Section 3, the typical measuring processes (CMM and sliding caliper) are experimentally characterized and their uncertainties identified.In order to evaluate the measures of human vertebrae in a repeatable and reproducible way, the present study proposes a new method, which requires a 3D geometric model of the object (coming from CT-images or 3D scanning). The method is based on an algorithmic protocol implemented in original software devoted to the measurement of vertebrae. The method is verified and the results are compared with those obtained by traditional approaches.The human vertebrae can be classified into three main categories: lumbar, dorsal and cervical. The lumbar and thoracic vertebrae have a similar morphology and the same dimensional features. Conversely, the cervical vertebrae have a different morphology and specific dimensional features. In this work, the lumbar and thoracic vertebrae are going to be considered. The most used dimensional features of the lumbar and thoracic vertebrae in anthropological and medical investigations are listed and described in Tables 1–3. They refer to the spinous process, the vertebral body and the vertebral canal [4,7,8,12,15], respectively.In order to characterize the methods which are mainly used to measure vertebrae, a set of eight vertebrae (five thoracic and three lumbar) have been used (Fig. 1). This set of vertebrae has been submitted to 20 medical students, in the fifth year of their medical course and onwards, trained appropriately, who have carried out the measurements listed in Tables 1–3. The testers have also been presented with the measuring protocols, which have been rigorously defined. Let us consider, then, that the intra-tester repeatability and the inter-tester reproducibility of two measurement procedures have been examined and that the measurements with sliding caliper (Fig. 2a) and those with CMM (Fig. 2b) have been made according to the rules reported in Tables 1–3. The measurements with CMM are carried out by the 7-axis Faro Edge contact measurement system with 3-mm zirconia ball i-probe (Faro Company, USA, accuracy of 0.029mm).As regards the task been assigned, each tester has repeated the same measurement six times under repeatability experimental conditions. Nonetheless, all the testers have been blinded to the results of the measurements.Each set of measures has been subjected to the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test so as to check whether the data is normally distributed. In this case, the P values recorded are higher than 0.05, which indicates a normal distribution of all variables.Intra-tester repeatability, on the one hand, is examined on 12 (j=1–12) dimensional features measured on eight different vertebrae (lumbar and thoracic) (k=1–8). Intra-tester repeatability is evaluated as the mean value(σ¯j,kA)of the standard deviation of the 20 measured values for the same dimensional feature Djof a vertebra Vk. Those measurements have been taken within short intervals of time by the same tester, and, in this case, by means of both the sliding caliper and the CMM. The results are reported in Tables 4 and 5, respectively.It can be observed that intra-tester repeatability seems to be insensitive to the specific vertebra being measured. In fact,σ¯j,kAchanges little between the same dimensional features Dimeasured on different vertebrae, with few exceptional cases. However, high values of repeatability can be detected in the measure features of the spinous process with respect to the other dimensional features. This is mainly due to the objective difficulties found when it comes to performing the measurement of the spinous process length and the spa angle, which is measured by sighting from the spinous process to the superior border by means of a goniometer. This, in turn, entails subjectivity in the application of the measuring protocol, which is also evidenced by high values of intra-tester reproducibility.Intra-tester repeatability has higher values, though, when measures are taken by the CMM rather than by the sliding caliper. Due to the complex geometry of the measured object, the CMM measuring process is less repeatable if compared with that of the sliding caliper. In order to measure a dimensional feature, the tester touches the object with the CMM probe at two points, whose positions are detected in the 3D space; the distance between these two points is assumed to be the measure of the feature. However, each time that a tester touches a given vertebra with the probe to detect a measuring point, they inevitably choose a different position due to the complex and irregular surface of the vertebra. This is true for the two points required to carry out a single measure. In fact, each time that the measure is taken, the length of the dimension line changes and so does its spatial orientation.Conversely, the sliding caliper, despite being a less precise device, yields better results since its measuring faces approach the object to be measured while remaining all the time parallel to each other. In this case, the dimension line results from the enveloping of the object by means of two planar surfaces which touch it from opposite sides. The distance existing between those parallel measuring faces is assumed to be the measure of the feature. Basically, the sliding caliper intrinsically executes a rule of the measuring protocol that constrains the way to carry out the measurement.Inter-tester reproducibility, on the other hand, is evaluated as the standard deviation(σj,kE)of 20 mean values of the measures which, for a dimensional feature Djof a vertebra Vk, are taken by each tester with the same method. The results for inter-tester reproducibility are reported in Tables 6 and 7.Let us bear in mind that any measurement uncertainties in the dimensional features result from the contribution of both intra-tester repeatability and inter-tester reproducibility.Furthermore, the experiments which have been carried out have evidenced the lack of robustness of the measuring protocols (presented in the related literature and reported in Tables 1–3), a problem which is difficult to overcome by using traditional methods to measure vertebrae. It is not just the lack of repeatability and reproducibility of the measures that compromises the validity of the measurement process; the question rather concerns the identification of a reference value for a dimensional feature and, consequently, the agreement of the measure obtained from it. It is, therefore, required that a more robust measuring protocol should be defined so as to perform measurements which are really repeatable and reproducible.With a view to putting forth a more robust measuring protocol for vertebrae, this paper presents a new automated method. It executes algorithmically a highly repeatable and reproducible measuring procedure, which is applied to a 3D geometric model of the vertebrae. Furthermore, specific rules have been defined so as to evaluate each dimensional feature of the vertebrae. These rules do take into account the morphology of the vertebrae, as well as those characteristics that are invariant among the possible physiological inter-subject changes, filtering any non-relevant singularities that can affect a vertebra.The automatic method works by performing a preliminary identification of the main geometric references of the vertebra. These references are geometric entities deriving from the evaluation of the geometric properties of the vertebra. Generally speaking, these entities are not physical; for this reason, they are not directly measurable on the vertebra, but can nevertheless be derived from the measured surface. In this work, six derived geometric features are introduced (Fig. 3):•The symmetry plane ΠSof the vertebra.The vertebral cylinder Ω, which is the analytical cylinder approximating the vertebral foramen VF.The coronal plane Πc, which divides the vertebra into the body and the posterior element;The middle plane ΠMof the vertebra's body.The second coronal plane ΠB, which divides the vertebra's body.The axis of the posterior spinous processas.These geometric entities are constrained by one another as follows:ΠC,ΠB,ΠM⊥ΠSΠM⊥ΠSac≡ΠS∩ΠCas∈ΠSAll the dimensional features are defined in the characteristic planes in the previous list. The detection of the derived features is a critical phase in the vertebra-measuring process. A rigorous approach to their recognition is therefore proposed so that any dimensional parameter may be objectively evaluated and detected with repeatability.A vertebra is a symmetric object with respect to the sagittal plane ΠS. Since a vertebra is a biological object, its symmetry can never be rigorously verified in practice. Consequently, the identification of the symmetry plane requires a method which is robust against local asymmetries, such as Schmorl's nodes or small fractures, and against global asymmetries deriving from pathological or physiological singularities of the spine morphology. In order to determine the symmetry plane, this study makes use of a special variant of the classical method which is based on mirroring and registration. Such a method is described further in detail in a previous paper [1].The vertebral foramen feature (VF) is identified in the internal enveloping cylinder Ω having radius rcand an axis acwhich lays on the symmetry plane ΠS. The identification of this feature is performed by solving the following constrained optimization problem:(1)max(rc)|∀pi∈VF∧ac∈ΠS→pi×ac≥rcIn order to work out this optimization problem, a first-attempt estimation of the foramen cylinder needs to be made. For this purpose, and by sectioning the tessellated vertebra (TV) with the symmetry plane (ΠS), two curves are obtained: ΓSP-S (posterior spinous process) and ΓVB-S (vertebral body). ΓVB-S is the sectioning curve that has the maximum value of the ratio between the inner area and the area of its 2D bounding box. Then, the two nearest pointsP˜∈ΓVB-SandQ˜∈ΓSP-S(Fig. 4) are identified. Therefore, the solution at the first attempt is the cylinder whose axis passes through the midpoint betweenP˜andQ˜(M) and is normal to the segmentP˜Q˜→. From the first-attempt solution, the vertebral foramen feature which satisfies Eq. (1) is found by the quasi-Newton approximation method.The coronal plane is defined as the plane which is perpendicular to the symmetry plane and passes through the axis of the vertebral foramen feature:(2)ΠC|ΠC⊥ΠS∧ΠC϶acThe vertebral coronal plane partitions the vertebra into the body and posterior element. The body (Fig. 5) is distinguished from the posterior element by evaluating the ratio between the volume of the element and its bounding box(volume/volumeboundingbox). The body has the maximum value of this ratio.The middle plane (ΠM) is assumed to be the plane which is perpendicular to the symmetry plane and passes through line aB,m, medium between the superior (aB,s) and inferior (aB,i) lines, and which results from the intersection of the superior and inferior planar facets with ΠS:(3)ΠM|ΠM⊥ΠS∧ΠM϶aB,mIn order to obtain line aB,m, the curve ΓVB-S is segmented into two parts which are identified by evaluating the dot product between the normal at the ΓVB-S points and the unit normal vector of the axis of the vertebral canal (ac).The set of points pertaining to the upper part of ΓVB-S (up) and the set of points pertaining to the lower part of ΓVB-S (lp) are those which satisfy the following expressions:(4)(ni⋅ac)>thresholdvalue→pi∈up(nj⋅ac)<−thresholdvalue→pj∈lpaB,sand aB,iare the straight lines which minimize the root mean square of up and lp (Fig. 6c), respectively.The second coronal plane (ΠB) is defined as the plane which is perpendicular to the middle plane (ΠM) and to the symmetry plane (ΠS) and passes through the barycenter of the ΓVB-S (pBin Fig. 4):(5)ΠB|ΠB⊥ΠM∧ΠB⊥ΠS∧ΠB϶pBThe axis of the posterior spinous processasis defined as the principal axis of inertia, associated with a lower inertia moment, of the set of points of ΓSP-S (Fig. 4). The slope of asis used to distinguish the upper from the lower part of the body.The dimensional features of the vertebra can be evaluated on the characteristic planes defined in the previous section. In fact, the rules here described for the identification of the dimensional features require that those planes should be priorly recognized. Thus the dimensional features are grouped together according to the characteristic plane on which they are identified. In any case, the definition of the dimensional features based on the previously presented planes makes the vertebra measuring process robust and repeatable.Measurements performed on the planar sections, which are, in turn, obtained by the intersection of the geometric model with the general features, can be affected by local singularities, such as small fractures or growths. In order to filter those kinds of singularities, the sectioning between the vertebra and the general features needs to be performed by the approximating geometric model across the feature with strips of a Bézier surface (BS) having an assigned width. The intersection curves used in what follows are the intersections between those approximating strips and the general features. This method performs the measuring in an extended area similarly to the way any contact measurement instrument does.ParameterMeasurement illustrationsMeasurement definitionsvclvcl is assumed to be the minimum distance between the points pertaining to ΓVB-S and ΓSP-S:min{d(pi,qj)|pi∈ΓSP-S∧qj∈ΓBP-S}splThe length of the spinous process is conventionally evaluated along the asdirectionspaThe spinous process angle is calculated as the angle between asand aB,ssvbl (ivbl)svbl (ivbl) is the largest distance between the upper (lower) portion of the anterior and posterior part of ΓVB-S, whose dimension line is parallel to aB,spvbh (avbh)pvbh (avbh) is the largest distance between the posterior (anterior) portion of aB,sand aB,i, whose dimension line is perpendicular to aB,mParameterMeasurement illustrationsMeasurement definitionsvcbvcb is assumed to be the minimum distance between the points pertaining to ΓLP-C and ΓRP-C, whose dimension line is perpendicular to the projection of aconto ΠC(acc):min{d(pi,qj)|pi∈ΓLP-C∧qj∈ΓRP-C∧piqj→⊥acc}lvbh (rvbh)lvbh (rvbh) is the maximum height of the left (right) portion of ΓSCP (intersection between the vertebra and ΠB), whose dimension line is perpendicular to ΠMParameterMeasurement illustrationsMeasurement definitionssvbw (ivbw)svbw (ivbw) is the largest distance, measured parallel to the coronal plane, between all the body points which are over (under) the middle plane and projected onto ∏MThe vertebra measuring process is performed in six phases, some of which are typical of any 3D geometric scanning procedure. Fig. 7depicts the flow chart of data acquisition and processing.3D point cloud acquisition can be carried out in different ways. In vivo subjects, on the one hand, the 3D geometric model of the vertebra can be obtained by CT-scans [2,3,9,11,13]. In vitro, on the other hand, as it is usually the case in the archaeological field, the geometric model can be obtained through the 3D scanning of the vertebra performed by different types of technologies. For all the cases analysed in this work, the point clouds have been actually obtained from in vitro vertebrae by a calibrated FARO® Edge, 9ft (2.7m) laser scanner (where single point repeatability varies from 0.024 to 0.064mm and the average point spacing of the point cloud has been set to 0.1mm).However, the raw data obtained from the acquisition process needs to be processed in five phases as it has been briefly sketched in Fig. 7.Although the point clouds acquired by a 3D laser scanner are the direct and dense measurement of the corresponding objects, single or even cluster outliers can nonetheless appear. In such a case, they need to be detected and erased for each point cloud as they may cause serious problems for the subsequent measurement steps. In the case of high-quality acquisitions (Fig. 8), the small number of outliers can be automatically detected by using specifically designed tools which are typically available in dedicated commercial software. Otherwise, they should be selected and erased manually by a skilled operator.Since a human vertebra has a complex shape with different little concave zones, it is necessary to perform the acquisition through several stages (Fig. 9a) and to combine the different acquisitions in order to obtain a single coherent point cloud. For this purpose, the single point clouds need to be registered on one another (Fig. 9b). In this paper, the registration of the point clouds is performed by the Iterative Closest Point (ICP) algorithm, and is assumed to have been performed successfully when the mean distance between the two point clouds is lower than 0.08mm.In order to make the density of the point cloud uniform, a uniform point sampling must necessarily be performed. Data smoothing is subsequently carried out so as to reduce the random noise which typically affects any measuring process. Finally, the point cloud is tessellated by triangular planar facets, and a closed and oriented surface is obtained, which defines the solid geometric model of the vertebra.The quality of the vertebra scanning process affects the results obtained by the method being proposed. One of the main parameters which characterize the scanning process is point cloud density. A high-density point cloud gives rise to a verbose geometric model with redundant data. On the other hand, as the density of the cloud progressively decreases, the approximation of the surface of the vertebra becomes coarser.In order to balance the need for a fast measuring process and the need for accuracy in the measurements, a specific experiment has been carried out by which a single vertebra has been first scanned and sampled at different levels of point cloud density. Subsequently, the geometric models have been analyzed to calculate the dimensions. The values for the point cloud density δ used and the corresponding detected measures for each dimensional feature are listed in Table 8. Fig. 10, finally, shows the percentage deviation of the dimensional features with respect to the estimation performed for the geometric model with a point density of 15points/mm2. These experiments prove that errors increase for those values of point density δ which are lower than 6points/mm2.The method here proposed (AQ method) has been implemented in original software, coded in MATLAB. It can be applied to 3D discrete models with high density of points, coming from CT-scans or 3D scanning. This approach to acquire the vertebra makes it possible to compare the obtained measures with a measure taken directly on the vertebrae by contact measuring methods (caliper and CMM). CT-scans are performed in vivo patients and comparisons cannot be executed.The 8 vertebrae shown in Fig. 1 have been scanned and then processed by the proposed method so as to evaluate its performance in terms of measure variability. For this purpose, each vertebra has been scanned 20 times by the same operator under the same operative conditions so that inter-tester reproducibility has been evaluated (it is the root mean square of the obtained values). Table 9reports the inter-tester reproducibility performed on eight vertebrae. When the data acquisition process is performed by using the same protocol defined in Section 6, the inter-tester reproducibility of the proposed method is mainly due to:–the different sampling of the object;the difference in measuring noise;the registration process.The reproducibility of the proposed method is compared with that of the contact measuring devices, as described in Section 3. The degree of reproducibility reached through the proposed method is higher than that shown through the other methods for all the dimensional features: it is on average six times lower than with the C&G.Table 10reports the mean values of the measures taken with the three methods. Wide differences can be observed which are mainly due to the different measuring protocols used for each method, which follow a different criterion for identifying the measuring references. Therefore, there is no identifiable reference value of the measure for an accurate evaluation.Due to the comparatively shorter time required for the scanning process and for the next data processing, the proposed method makes it possible to process a relatively large number of vertebrae quickly and easily. Furthermore, the proposed method does not even require an operator with special skills, such as an anthropologist or an anatomist. The high accuracy of the method and the objective measures which it provides may open up the road to new investigations in anthropology and medicine.Future improvements may take advantage of the 3D geometric data representation of the vertebrae, which, in turn, may enable the implementation of new dimensional parameters which cannot be performed through traditional approaches.Future works can be addressed to a survey of the most common diseases of the vertebrae, involving orthopedic and anthropologists. Once identified some representative cases, a specific experimentation will be performed to compare the robustness of the three methods also for pathological and diseased vertebrae.The authors have NO affiliations with or involvement in any organization or entity with any financial interest (such as honoraria, educational grants, participation in speakers’ bureaus, membership, employment, consultancies, stock ownership, or other equity interest; and expert testimony or patent-licensing arrangements), or non-financial interest (such as personal or professional relationships, affiliations, knowledge or beliefs) in the subject matter or materials discussed in this manuscript.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
