@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A prototype of a novel cell phone application for tracking the vaccination coverage of children in rural communities

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Jeev is a novel smartphone application for tracking the vaccination coverage of children.Jeev synergistically combines smartphones, QR codes, and national id cards.Jeev is scalable and power efficient.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
QR codes,Vaccination coverage,Children,Cell phones,Rural communities,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Immunization saves millions of lives against vaccine-preventable diseases. Yet, 24 million children born every year do not receive proper immunization during their first year. UNICEF and WHO have emphasized the need to strengthen the immunization surveillance and monitoring in developing countries to reduce childhood deaths. In this regard, we present a software application called Jeev to track the vaccination coverage of children in rural communities. Jeev synergistically combines the power of smartphones and the ubiquity of cellular infrastructure, QR codes, and national identification cards. We present the design of Jeev and highlight its unique features along with a detailed evaluation of its performance and power consumption using the National Immunization Survey datasets. We are in discussion with a non-profit organization in Haiti to pilot test Jeev in order to study its effectiveness and identify socio-cultural issues that may arise in a large-scale deployment.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Immunization saves millions of lives against vaccine-preventable diseases. Through financial support from organizations such as the GAVI Alliance, and more recently the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, a lot of progress has been made in immunizing children since 2000 towards the Global Immunization Vision Strategy (GIVS) [51]. The number of deaths in children under 5 years of age has decreased. Yet, 24 million children born every year, do not receive proper immunization during their first year of life [51].While the GIVS aims to achieve 90% vaccine coverage by 2015 and reduce the number of childhood deaths to 4.3 million, there are several constraints that must be overcome. According to UNICEF and WHO [51], the health care systems are weak in developing countries.11The World Bank defines a country with low-income or middle-income economy to be a developing country [13].There is insufficient political and financial support. The monitoring infrastructure is weak and information systems are lacking. There is a shortage of trained health workers who can deliver immunization to the population. Many children live in poor, remote areas where health care facilities and public services are weak. Due to lack of information about the importance of immunization, many children do not receive the required vaccines. Unexpected deaths and side effects create fear of immunization among parents, thereby reducing the number of children who receive a full course of vaccines.22Recently, polio vaccines caused paralysis in 47,500 children in India [36].UNICEF and WHO have emphasized the need to strengthen immunization surveillance and monitoring in developing countries [51]. Immunization coverage information is useful to monitor the performance of immunization programs and improve the delivery of vaccines to the population [50]. Today, the use of paper records to track the immunization status of children in countries such as India leads to inconsistencies in the way information is recorded; immunization records may be lost or damaged [20,2,10]. Lack of immunization coverage information can lead to wastage of vaccines due to unnecessary revaccinations and poor forecasting of the vaccine demand [51,10].There has been an unprecedented rise in the use of cell phones worldwide; today, there are more than 6 billion cell phone subscribers [11]. Through cell phones, it is now possible to communicate with vast populations in previously hard-to-reach areas. The ubiquity of cellular infrastructure provides new opportunities to develop cell phone-based solutions for tracking the vaccination coverage of a rural population. In India, a middle-income economy [13], about 40% of the rural population has cell phones (or mobile phones) [29]. In Haiti, a low-income economy [13], the cellular infrastructure has grown quickly since the devastating earthquake of 2010. Haitians are using cell phones to receive relief incentives [42]. Furthermore, UNICEF has identified countries like India and Haiti as priority countries where routine immunization coverage is low and must be improved [44,45]. (Immunization tracking is a challenge even in countries such as USA, but our focus is on developing countries.)While tracking the vaccination coverage of a population has become a global challenge in public health,33Recently, the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation solicited proposals for developing low-cost cell phone applications to improve the uptake and coverage of childhood vaccinations as one of the grand challenges for 2011 [2].little research has been done in this domain. This is a timely opportunity for the health informatics community. In this work, we address the problem of tracking the vaccination coverage of children in hard-to-reach areas such as rural India, where cellular infrastructure is available. We present a low-cost cell phone application called Jeev.44Jeev means ‘life’ in the Sanskrit language.Jeev is unique in the sense that it synergistically combines the power of smartphones and ubiquity of cellular infrastructure, Quick Response (QR) codes, and national identification cards. Jeev is based on a client-server model: the data collected by the clients are synchronized at the server; the clients and server exchange small amounts of data using low-cost SMS text messaging. (The transmitted data is always encrypted for security and privacy reasons.) We report a detailed evaluation of Jeev to study its performance, scalability and power consumption, using the National Immunization Survey datasets [4]. Although Jeev has not been deployed and studied in a rural community, we are planning to pilot test it in rural Haiti through Maison de Naissance [14], which is a community health care facility for delivering healthy mothers and healthy babies.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides the background and related work. Section 3 presents the design of Jeev. Section 4 describes the communication protocol in Jeev. In Section 5, we report the performance evaluation of Jeev. Section 6 discusses our next steps for pilot testing Jeev in a rural community. Finally, we provide some points for discussion and our concluding remarks in Sections 7 and 8, respectively.A preliminary version of this paper appeared in the 2013 IEEE International Conference on Healthcare Informatics [32].Today, there are more than 6 billion cell phone subscribers [11]. The cellular infrastructure is ubiquitous in many developing countries and provides an easy way to connect to vast populations in hard-to-reach areas [21,29,42]. Smartphones have become popular and affordable; they have powerful processors, several GBs of storage, high resolution cameras, several hours of battery life, and touch screen technology. SMS text messaging provides an inexpensive way to communicate small amounts of data in hard-to-reach areas. Today, it costs less than $0.02 to send a text message in countries like India, Pakistan, Bangladesh and Haiti [19]. Data can be encrypted for security and privacy reasons.Quick Response (QR) codes have fast readability and higher storage capacity (up to 400 times more) as compared to standard UPC barcodes [15,38]. QR codes are 2-dimensional and can encode any type of data and even encrypted data. They have become popular in businesses and among consumers. QR codes use advanced error correcting codes. Even with up to 30% damage, a QR code can still be decoded [7] (see Fig. 1(a)). QR codes can also be modified for artistic reasons and still be decoded (see Fig. 1(b)). They can be easily decoded using applications on smartphones [12].National identity cards have become increasingly important in many developing countries to prevent voter fraud and corruption, and to take advantage of banking services, government incentives and subsidies. For example, in rural India, such cards are required to receive subsidies on food and grains [5] and open bank accounts [9]. In post earthquake Haiti, national ID cards are giving citizens access to work, banking services, and voting privileges [26]. These cards are usually laminated or made of plastic and are more durable than paper records.Closely related to our work is VaxTrac, which has received funding from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. It captures and processes infant fingerprints using fingerprint readers and inexpensive netbooks [10]. However, we believe there are some potential limitations: The system may not scale in large geographical regions because images are large in size and have to be physically transferred to integrate them in a central location. This also raises the issue of how to synchronize the data on the netbooks carried by health workers. Furthermore, fingerprints of infants change in size as they grow. Infants may not be cooperative to allow health workers to take good fingerprints.Jeev is different from VaxTrac in the sense that it relies on smartphones, which consume less power than netbooks, and does not rely on infant's biometric data. Jeev uses low-cost SMS text messaging for communication between the server and clients, synchronizes the vaccination records in real-time, and can be deployed in large geographical regions.Abhishek et al. [20] proposed the notion of mobile health cards to increase the immunization rate in rural areas. They highlighted the current problems with paper based records in rural India such as lost or damaged paper immunization forms. They suggested that all activities involved during immunization should be moved to the mobile platform using cell phones. Each child would be assigned a unique id generated by the system; the authors mentioned the use of biometric technology. However, no real system has been developed using the proposed ideas.In the US, Cook Children's healthcare system, in partnership with athenahealth, Microsoft, Sanofi Pasteur and Merck, has began using QR codes on vaccine bottles [1]. This will result in easy management of vaccines, tracking of vaccination status, and allow integration of vaccination information with EHR systems. Jeev is different in the sense it uses QR codes to identify children instead of vaccines and is designed for a rural population, where the computing infrastructure is minimal.Another prominent effort is OpenLMIS, an open-source platform designed to manage health commodity suppy chain in low-income and middle-incomes economies [47]. This platform was implemented in the African countries of Mozambique, Tanzania, and Zambia. More recently, Anderson et al. [23] developed a Cold Chain Information System to improve the immunization program in Laos. This system was designed to regularly report the vaccine stock levels and vaccine refrigerator status using Android phones and SMS text messaging.The term mHealth (or mobile health) refers to the practice of medical and public health using mobile technology such as mobile phones, personal digital assistants (PDAs), and so forth [49,30]. mHealth is a fast growing discipline for public health due to the growth in mobile devices and communication infrastructure in many countries.More than a decade ago, Srivastava et al. [43] discussed the problems associated with the use of information systems in rural economies for healthcare management. They proposed a cost-effective system based on wireless ad-hoc networking by utilizing existing transportation infrastructure to deliver healthcare services to villages. Kato et al. [33] studied the different 2D barcodes including QR codes for camera phone applications. They developed a set of criteria for selecting the best 2D barcode given the capability of the mobile phone's camera and operating conditions. Later, Navarro et al. [41] studied the feasibility of a 3G-based m-Health system for emergency scenarios. Their system used advanced signaling protocols for multimedia multi-collaborative conferences over IPv4/IPv6 networking. It supported simultaneous transmission of both real-time clinical data, videoconferencing, and non real-time medical services.In 2006, Kaplan et al. [31] reported that while there are several attractive reasons to use mobile phones for healthcare interventions in developing countries, the shared ownership of these phones may limit their adoption. They also reported that there is no literature on using mobile phones as a healthcare intervention for diseases like HIV and malaria in developing countries. A few years later, Laakko et al. [35] proposed a new mobile platform called the Ubiquitous Personal Health Information Access (UPHIAC) platform for providing connectivity between healthcare providers, patients, and measurement devices for different telemedicine and and wellness applications. HL7 CDA was used to exchange data between different components in the system. The authors developed a mobile tele-ECG application using their framework to demonstrate its feasibility. Black et al. [24] proposed to extend a mobile phone's capability with external sensors for providing low-cost mobile health applications in developing countries. They developed five new applications (e.g., respiratory and pulse rate calculator, gestational dates calculator) and sensor modules such as oximeter sensor, ECG sensor, and phonocardiogram.More recently, there has been increased interest in developing mHealth solutions for low-resource environments. Medhi et al. [39] developed a low-cost mobile phone based system for data collection and reporting to improve over paper-record management. This solution was used for a program aimed at prevention of child malnutrition in rural India. Vodopivec-Jamsek et al. [48] studied the impact of mobile phone messaging (e.g., SMS) for preventive healthcare and observed positive benefits of messaging in certain patient population. Zhang et al. [52] proposed a vaccination strategy for a population to prevent the spreading of diseases. Their strategy was based on analyzing mobile phone records to understand the social-interaction patterns among individuals. Khan et al. [34] developed a cell phone based solution for early detection of respiratory disorders for rural children using a modified stethoscope. The sound recording and the case history of the patient were transmitted via email to the health care center. Analysis of the recording was done by training a neural network to detect respiratory disorders and checked by a healthcare practitioner. Vaidya et al. [46] developed a portable diagnostic and communication device for remotely monitoring patients in rural areas. They built a health kiosk and smartphone software to present the patient data to doctors remotely and used a cloud platform to store the data. Their system was tested in a rural area of India.In recent years, a few researchers conducted systematic review and analysis of mHealth for developing countries. Zurovac et al. [54] suggested the use of text messaging on mobile phones for malaria control in Africa. They identified six areas of malaria control whose deficiencies could be overcome through text message based interventions. Deglise et al. [27] conducted a systematic review of mobile health applications using SMS for disease control in developing countries. They concluded that most of the applications used bulk messaging and were well accepted by the population. Martinez et al. [37] reviewed mobile health applications available for the most prevalent health conditions identified by WHO. They concluded that while there were many applications for depression and diabetes, there was a lack of applications for other conditions like anemia, low-vision, and hearing loss.There has also been some interest in addressing the security issues of using mobile devices for healthcare services. Ahmed et al. [22] explored the key security threats that arise in handling sensitive data on mobile devices for healthcare use cases. They developed a security framework to protect against these threats by providing physicians and patients a guarantee that sensitive information will not be transmitted without their knowledge. Gejibo et al. [28] developed a secure data storage system on low-cost mobile phone with limited software capability for sensitive data in mHealth applications. They tested their approach using an open-source Mobile Data Collection System (MDCS).There are a few design requirements for a vaccination coverage tracking application to successfully operate in rural communities. Firstly, a child may be vaccinated at different locations and therefore, must be identified correctly to avoid missing vaccines and receiving unnecessary revaccinations. Secondly, cellular coverage in certain areas may be lacking at times, and therefore, the application should cope with such situations. Thirdly, the application should be low-cost and easy to use and deploy in rural communities. Finally, the application should be efficient in performance and energy consumption.We have developed a novel application called Jeev for tracking the vaccination coverage of children in rural communities. Jeev synergistically combines the power of smartphones and the ubiquity of cellular infrastructure, QR codes, and national identity cards. Jeev is based on a client-server model: it has a client-side software and a server-side software. (Hereinafter, we simply use the terms client and server.) The server runs on a smartphone and is responsible for storing and managing the vaccination records of children. A smartphone is a perfect choice because the computing infrastructure in rural areas is minimal; having access to devices such as netbooks with Internet connectivity in these areas would be expensive. The server can be located in a community clinic or health care facility. A health worker carrying a smartphone running the client can access the vaccination record of a child from the server and request it to update the record with new vaccine doses. The client can also request the server to create a new vaccination record for a child.55In the current design, we use one server and multiple clients. If scalability and reliability become an issue, we can opt for multiple servers. We can avoid loss of data on the server by performing routine backups on inexpensive micro SD cards.The clients and server communicate via SMS text messaging and do not require a data communication network like 3G. The transmitted data is encrypted for security reasons.Fig. 2illustrates how Jeev operates. When a child is immunized for the first time, either at a vaccination camp, clinic, or home, a health worker will collect the name, sex, and date of birth of the child and some information about the parent (or legal guardian) from the national id card (e.g., name). This information is then encrypted and a QR code is generated and printed on a sticker of 50x50 pixels in size. (Printing can be done using a portable label printer priced less than $100.) The sticker is affixed on the national id card of the parent. (Additional stickers can be printed and affixed on a paper vaccination form if available, or be provided to the parent for safekeeping at home.) Also if the parent has a cell phone, then a text message can be sent containing the encrypted string from which the QR code was generated for backup purpose. This is useful in case the national ID card and/or QR code are lost or damaged, and will be discussed later. (Note that the parent's cell phone need not be a smartphone, which is quite realistic in rural areas.) The QR code on the sticker uniquely identifies the child during future immunization visits. It can be decoded only by authorized clients. The client sends the collected information to the server and requests it to create a vaccination record for the child. The server stores the vaccination records in a DBMS. The database schema in the current design is shown in Fig. 3(a).When a child is vaccinated in the future, a health worker will scan the QR code affixed on the parent's (or legal guardian's) id card using a smartphone running the Jeev client. Once the QR code is decoded, the child's identity is determined. The child's vaccination record is then retrieved from the server. After vaccination, the client sends a request to the server to update the child's vaccination record.Jeev has intuitive user interfaces for health workers and officials both on the client- and server-side. A few screenshots on the client-side are shown in Fig. 3(b) and (c). A few screenshots on the server-side are shown in Fig. 3(d) and (e), where the vaccination coverage information is displayed. If client-side smartphones have GPS capability, then the vaccination coverage of children can be mapped and visualized on an interactive map. Fig. 4(a) and (b) shows the relative size of the portable printer and the scanning process, respectively.It is possible for a parent to lose or misplace her national id card; the QR code sticker on the id card may be damaged and therefore, cannot be decoded by a client. Then the parent can bring the extra QR code stickers provided during the first visit to identify the child correctly. A health worker can also print a new sticker with the same QR code and affix it to the parent's new or old id card. Another way is to have the health worker receive the text message stored as a backup on the parent's cell phone, which was provided during the first visit. The encrypted data can be used to regenerate the original QR code using the software available on the client smartphone. If the parent loses his/her phone or does not use it anymore, then this information is not available for recovering the original QR code. As a final resort, the health worker can ask relevant questions to the parent and try to identify the child and locate its vaccination record on the server. Because vaccination records are stored in an RDBMS on the server, appropriate SQL queries can be posed to retrieve the record using partial information provided by the parent. In the worst case, a new QR code has to be generated and printed.When cellular coverage is not available, a client can store the vaccination data locally. Once coverage is available, the data can be pushed to the server. Vaccination records can be downloaded ahead of time from the server if needed.In this section, we describe the communication protocol in Jeev. The communication between the client and the server is carried out by exchanging request and responses messages, via SMS text messaging, that facilitate various interactions such as retrieving and updating vaccination records. The message packet is composed of two sections: a message type and a payload. The message type indicates the purpose of the message and aids in processing the payload. The payload contains name-value pairs depending on the type of message.In Table 1, we show examples of different messages and their sizes. For example, messagehas a message type 101, which specifies a request message to retrieve a vaccination record for the patient and is sent by the client to the server. The payload contains information to identify the patient. Messagehas a message type 201 to indicate the response from the server to the client, and the payload contains the vaccination record of the patient. Messagedenotes the update request message from the client to the server along with the attributes in the record that must be updated. Messagedenotes the acknowledgment from the server to indicate a successful update operation.In Jeev, the messages are encrypted using the 256-bit key AES encryption. Depending on the size of the encrypted message, one or more text messages are sent. For example, the encrypted messageis only 87 characters and hence sent as single SMS text message. However, the encrypted messageis greater than 160 characters and therefore, is sent as two SMS text messages. A sequence number is used to indicate the order of the text messages so that the recipient can reassemble them in the correct order. The (reassembled) message is then decrypted by the server to obtain the original message.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We presented a low-cost cell phone application called Jeev to track the vaccination coverage of children in rural communities. Jeev synergistically combines the power of smartphones and cellular infrastructure, QR codes, and national identification cards. Jeev does not use any biometric data. It is based on a client-server model and uses low-cost text messaging. Data captured by different clients can be synchronized on the server in real-time. We presented a evaluation of Jeev's performance and energy consumption using the National Immunization Survey datasets to show its efficiency and scalability under different workloads. In the future, we plan to conduct the pilot testing of Jeev in rural Haiti, to study its effectiveness and to identify socio-cultural issues that must be addressed for a large-scale deployment.