@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Finite element modal analysis and vibration-waveforms in health inspection of old bridges

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
FE modal analysis based on vehicle waveforms is consistent with the field results.FE modal analysis of original maps can be used to investigate health of old bridges.Major physical damage on the bridge is mainly associated with the first mode.FE modal analysis based on vehicle waveforms can be used to guide bridge inspectors.Bridge's deterioration is associated with the traffic that excites the first mode.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Damage,Vibration,Field tests,Finite element,Modal analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The validity of using the finite element modal analysis in combination with the operational vibration-waveforms generated by vehicles to guide structural health monitoring observers in their inspection of old bridges is investigated in this work. A nondestructive vibration-based approach, operational response and waveform analysis (ORWA), is introduced and used in the process of validating the predictability of the finite element model. In ORWA, the frequency-domain response of a highway bridge is generated from the operating traffic load, and the structural response is visualized and used to develop a holistic view of the bridge's response to automobile loadings. By visualizing the response of the bridge, concrete cracking in the abutment and deck is correlated with certain types of structural motion and their corresponding frequencies. Significant excitation frequencies for this particular structure and loading are identified using a frequency-domain study of the vibration-waveforms generated by vehicle, and field results showed similarity with field impact tests conducted on the bridge. The finite element modal analysis of the original CAD drawings of the bridge in combination with the vibration-waveforms generated by vehicles spectrum has demonstrated realistic consistency with the findings of ORWA in showing the correlations between the physical damage areas on the bridge and the excited mode shapes of the operational loading that tend to cause these types of damage.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Maintaining a safe and reliable civil infrastructure is of utmost importance to the national economy and the well-being of all citizens. With more than half of the 600,000 bridges in the United States built before 1975, areas of research related to bridge maintenance, inspection, and monitoring have received significant attention in recent years [1,2]. For example, in Iowa, especially, where 21% of the almost 25,000 bridges are structurally deficient and over 1000 bridges are more than 100 years old, the development of technologies related to the extension of bridge life is crucial to the state's economic growth [1]. Furthermore, since 1956, vehicle miles of travel in Iowa have increased by 176% [3], yet many bridges 50 years and older remain essentially the same structures as when first constructed.Much of the latest research in the civil infrastructure health monitoring field is focused on dynamic testing and finite element model updating [4,5]. Many researchers focusing on vibration-based health monitoring have used changes in natural frequencies [6], modal analysis methods [7–9], and frequency response function methods [10–12] to detect, locate, and quantify damage. Dynamic testing of field structures has been completed using both forced excitation with an impact hammer [13–15] and shaker [8,16,17], as well as ambient or operational excitation, often using traffic as a source of vibration [18,19]. Finite element model updating with experimental modal parameters has also been investigated [20–24]. Many of the current dynamic tests are difficult to implement on aging field structures [2,5,25], are prone to error due to experimental noise and complicated boundary conditions [26], and are often too global to detect small, localized damage [27]. In addition, field studies using modal analyses have shown that changes in modal parameters due to damage are relatively small and can be overshadowed by changes in environmental parameters such as temperature [28].Local health monitoring methods, such as those based on non-destructive manual testing, including ultrasonic, tapping, and imaging [26,29], have been very effective in locating damage in the areas where they are used. Their advantages could be maximized if the observers had prior knowledge about critical locations on the structures. This would save the observers a significant amount of time and make their testing plans more effective. Therefore, the existence of a finite element model of the bridge can be a very useful tool in guiding observers in their inspection process.The aim of this paper is to investigate the possibility of using the finite element modal analysis of old highway bridges, with information from the initial CAD drawings of the bridges, as a qualitative tool in assisting bridge observers in identifying the locations of the critical high stress/strain zones on the bridges that are associated with certain frequencies caused by the vibration-waveforms generated by vehicle. Experimental data from a 60-year-old highway bridge using operational response and waveform analysis (ORWA) was used as a baseline for comparison with the finite element modal analysis findings. The paper details the experimental methods used to obtain operational response data for a single-span highway bridge and presents evidence of problematic structural motion caused by certain frequencies present in traffic loading. Actual, visible damage present on the bridge is shown and correlated with motion through the use of waveform analysis and then compared with finite element modal analysis findings.The bridge investigated (FHWA #31690) is a composite steel I-girder and concrete deck bridge with a single span of 18.6m (61ft) carrying Highway 1 over a small natural creek in Johnson County, Iowa (Fig. 1a). It was constructed in 1949 with two W33×130 exterior girders, two W36×150 interior girders, a 20.3cm (8in.) composite action concrete deck, and a diaphragm consisting of twelve C15×33.9 channel sections between all girders (Fig. 1b). One end of each girder is fixed with a pintle (notch protruding from the masonry plate through the bearing plate), and the other end rests on the abutment, serving as a roller. The abutments and wing walls are supported by 42 untreated timber piles, each 13.7m (45ft) in length. Although the structure was not rated structurally deficient during its last bridge inspection, it has been deemed functionally obsolete and received a sufficiency rating of 37/100, meaning it is intolerable and requires high-priority corrective action.Methodologies currently being used in the mechanical systems and machinery field have shown great success in accomplishing all five goals. They aim to detect, locate, and quantify damage and then correlate that damage with operational loading and provide a solution to the problematic structural motion [30–33]. However, their potential usage on large civil structures has been given very little attention.ORWA can be summed up in four steps: (1) experimentally gathering operational response data, (2) visualizing structural motion across a large frequency spectrum, (3) determining the most significant excitation/response frequencies, and (4) correlating structural motion at significant frequencies with structural motion caused by operational excitation.In this work, operational response at various parts of the structure was visualized using acceleration data that were manipulated to give an operating deflection shape (ODS), which is a technique used for visualization of the vibration pattern of a structure under real-life operating conditions. Unlike mode shapes, an ODS can be used to analyze the response of a structure under forces and complicated boundary conditions because it contains both forced and resonant vibration components. Operating deflection shapes are one way to obtain correlation between different points on the structure and are capable of indicating the points with the largest motion and specifying their directions. They can also provide very useful information regarding the dynamic characteristics of a structure and its components.An ODS is essentially a column vector of transmissibilities. For experimental purposes, it is convenient to view transmissibility as a function of the cross and auto spectra, which can be readily obtained from most multi-channel data acquisition systems. The cross spectrum is the product of the Fourier spectrum of a measured response and the complex conjugate of the Fourier spectrum of a fixed reference response, as follows:(1)Gxy(ω)=Fx(ω)Fy⁎(ω)The auto spectrum is the product of the Fourier spectrum of the fixed reference response and its complex conjugate as follows:(2)Gyy(ω)=Fy(ω)Fy⁎(ω)Transmissibility is simply the ratio of the cross spectrum to the auto spectrum, which gives the motion of each roving response point normalized by the motion of the reference response point as follows:(3)Txy(ω)=Gxy(ω)/Gyy(ω)An alternative parameter to transmissibility (and ODS) is the operating deflection shape-frequency response function (ODSFRF), which is calculated by replacing the magnitude of the cross spectrum with the square root of the magnitude of the response auto spectrum [34], as follows:(4)ODSFRF(ω)=GxxGxy(ω)|Gxy(ω)|=F¯x(ω)One advantage of the ODSFRF is that it measures the true amount of motion at each measured point directly, whereas transmissibility must be multiplied by the reference auto spectrum to attain the true motion, which can introduce noise. Also, for viewing purposes, the ODSFRF is more convenient because it shows peaks at resonance frequencies, whereas transmissibilities show flat spots [34].The operational vibration test consisted of the measured dynamic response of the entire superstructure and part of the substructure to the vibration caused by vehicles traversing the bridge. Using five roving uniaxial accelerometers and one fixed-reference accelerometer (point A inFig. 2a), 440 response points were measured: 70 per beam, 10 per diaphragm, and 20 per abutment (Fig. 2a). Traffic loading was used as the operational vibration, and measurement was triggered by the reference accelerometer at point A in Fig. 2a. A 10-car average was used, meaning that after 10 automobiles triggered the reference accelerometer, one averaged auto spectrum and cross spectrum was calculated and exported for each accelerometer location. The nodal mesh on the beams was one measurement point per 10.2cm (4in.) for 61cm (2ft), extending out from each end, and one measurement point per 30.5cm (1ft) for the remaining length of the beam. Likewise, the nodal mesh for each diaphragm member was one measurement per 30.5cm (1ft). The nodal mesh for the abutment was one measurement per 10.2cm (4in.) directly below each beam for 50.8cm (20in.). The accelerometers were fixed to the bottom flange of the beams and diaphragm members using magnets, and brackets were fixed to the face of the abutment walls with epoxy so that the vertical acceleration of the walls could be measured.The focus of this field investigation was to mark the steel girders to create a nodal mesh (Fig. 2a) and acquire preliminary data for the entire bridge that could be used to calculate the frequency response function at different locations. With the help of a DOT snooper truck (Fig. 2b), each steel girder was marked at one foot intervals on the bottom flange and web, as shown in Fig. 2a. One scaffolding tower was constructed under part of beam 1 (Fig. 2b) so that the 12th node on that beam could serve as the fixed excitation point for the entire bridge.The field impact test was conducted on the bridge as a baseline approach with the goal of getting more confidence with the ORWA test. A 5000lbf range impulse hammer was used to excite the bridge. Three 5000g range Dytran triaxial accelerometers and six 100g range Dytran uniaxial accelerometers were used to determine the dynamic response of various structural elements. Typically, accelerometers were fixed to structures with a magnet, but in some cases, where rust and dirt or concrete existed, wax was used with a magnet. An IOtech ZonicBook/618E Data Analyzer and an IOtech/650U were used to acquire data and construct the frequency response function (FRF) between the input impact forces at node 12 on beam 1 and the response acceleration at different locations on the bridge (Fig. 2a). MEscope software (Vibrant Technology Inc.) was used to calculate the peak frequencies and associated mode shapes and to animate data.A low pass filter was also applied to the collected data due to the understanding that the structures being analyzed generally had low natural frequencies, so higher frequencies were not required to capture the dominant mode shapes. This filter removed the components higher than 100Hz. Processing the data included cutting each impact sample in the time domain so that only the impact and the response are looked at and then storing these impact samples collectively.To determine the effect of traffic passing over the field-tested bridge, the response of the reference accelerometer (point A in Fig. 2a) from every operational vibration data set recorded was analyzed. Taking the time history of the bridge's response to the frequency domain, it then becomes possible to recognize the frequencies at which the bridge shows large motions.Numerical modal analysis of a healthy bridge using the finite element method (FEM) can assist in identifying local areas of high stress or strain at the natural frequencies. With aging, new damage areas may develop, limiting the benefits of the numerical model. Nevertheless, a healthy bridge model may still give useful information about some high-stress areas caused by excitation of certain modes, especially if the changes in natural frequencies and mode shapes are not significant [28]. While the healthy model of an older field bridge under investigation may not accurately reflect the dynamic properties of the bridge, the information gained from this model can be verified by the findings of the proposed ORWA methodology. For example, damage areas correlated with motion caused by traffic loading on the actual bridge can be viewed on the finite element model. If the model shows an area of high strain or stress in the same areas identified as being critical during ORWA, the model can be verified and trusted at least at low excitation frequencies.Using data from the as-built plans of FHWA #31690 provided by the Iowa Department of Transportation, a numerical model of a bridge similar to a healthy form of the field-tested structure was created using ANSYS. The solid model was created with a mesh size of 30.5cm (12in.) on the majority of the structure (Fig. 3). However, the face of the abutment uses a mesh size of 10.2cm (4in.), and the rest of the abutment uses much larger elements, automatically sized using ANSYS. This meshing resulted in approximately 62,000 tetrahedral solid elements. A specified elastic modulus of 200GPa (29000ksi) was used for the steel beams, diaphragm members, and bearing plates. A specified elastic modulus of 24.7GPa (3528ksi) was used for the concrete abutments and deck.Due to the age of the structure, issues such as settlement, cracking, and significant corrosion make it very impractical to attain the actual dynamic properties of the tested field structure. Instead, the main focus was to view the effect of the mode shapes, around critical frequencies generated by the vibration-waveforms, of a highway bridge similar to FHWA #31690 on the abutment and deck. Although the beam, diaphragm, deck, and bearing plate sizes and locations are all accurate, the structure was simplified because users were not interested in matching the exact dynamic characteristics of the field bridge. For example, although each abutment is properly located relative to the rest of the structure, they were modeled by a 3.7m×3.7m (12ft×12ft) concrete cube in order to conserve computational time and effort. Furthermore, the concrete parapet on the deck was ignored, along with all soil considerations. Instead of using springs with a specified stiffness on the bottom of each abutment, the concrete was simply fixed with applied boundary conditions. Previous work has created a more detailed and accurate FEM of a single-span composite steel I-girder and concrete deck bridge, but the modeled field structure was less than five years old [19].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
