@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Method of meshing ITZ structure in 3D meso-level finite element analysis for concrete

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Aggregate-expansion method is proposed to generate realistic meshes for ITZ in concrete.50µm thick wedge meshes generated by AEM are close to ITZ’s real thickness.Total number of ITZ meshes generated by AEM is small and acceptable in FEA.Effects of ITZ on stress/strain/displacement distribution of concrete are studied.Tensile stress–strain response of concrete is predicted and validated with experiments.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Concrete,ITZ meshes,Aggregate-expansion method,Meso-level finite element analysis,Stress–strain response,Microcracking,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Meso-level finite element analysis (FEA) is a popular way to study the influences of meso-level structure of concrete (namely the aggregate, the mortar and the Interfacial Transitional Zone (ITZ) structures) on the macro-level properties. However, it’s been a huge challenge to mesh the ITZ structure in concrete because of the unique layer structure of ITZ, which is 10–50µm thick and rather small compared to the normal sizes of coarse aggregates. If ITZ were meshed by hexahedral elements or tetrahedral elements which were 10–50μm in all three dimensions, millions of ITZ elements would be generated and it’s impossible to perform FEA on such a huge concrete model. In the current meso-level FEA in the literature, ITZ is either represented by zero-thick interface elements or over-thick elements, either of which is far from the real dimension of ITZ, leading to big discrepancies between the numerical results and experimental results. In this paper a method to generate ITZ meshes called aggregate-expansion method (AEM) is proposed to generate wedge elements around 50µm thick to represent ITZ’s layer structure. The total number of generated ITZ meshes is limited and acceptable in meso-level FEA for concrete. A digital concrete specimen is generated from CT images with ITZ meshes generated by AEM and effects of ITZ on the compressive stress/strain/displacement distributions of concrete were studied. The characteristics of stress–strain response of the digital concrete specimen under tension were also studied and compared with experimental data.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Meso-level finite element analysis (FEA) is a popular and feasible way in studying the effects of mesostructures on the mechanical properties and durability of concrete, which is assumed to be a three-phase composite composed of coarse aggregates, mortar, and the Interfacial Transition Zone (ITZ) between them. The precondition of performance FEA is to discretize the mesoscopic concrete models [1], i.e., to represent the aggregates, mortar and ITZ structures by appropriate finite element meshes. However, meshing ITZ remains a challenging issue since ITZ is only 10–50μm thick [2], which is rather small compared with the general dimensions of coarse aggregates (at least 5mm in diameter) in concrete specimens in the laboratory. So millions of meshes would be generated in three-dimensional FEA for concrete if the ITZ structure were meshed with ordinary solid elements that were 10–50μm in all three dimensions. This will be super time-consuming and cannot be accepted in meso-level FEA for concrete. In all the existing meso-mechanical analysis for concrete in the literature, the ITZ structure was represented by either zero-thickness interface elements[3,4] or oversized brick elements that are about 0.5–1mm in thickness[5,6]. Both methods resulted in big discrepancies in the dimensions of ITZ between the models and the real structures, leading to a low accuracy of the meso-mechanical analysis. However, as the weakest link in concrete, it has been recognized that ITZ plays an important role in the macro properties of concrete because of its higher porosity, lower elastic modulus and lower tensile strength compared with mortar [7–9]. Simeonov and Ahmad [8] and Nilsen and Monteiro [10] concluded that concrete should be considered as a three-phase composite in elastic modulus analysis. ITZ also has a great influence on the initiation of microcracks in concrete [11,12]. Therefore, it is inevitable to generate realistic three-dimensional meshes for ITZ to get realistic numerical results.Accordingly, this paper proposes a method, named aggregate-expansion method (AEM), to mesh ITZ with acceptable number of elements in three-dimensional FEA for concrete. The ITZ structure in concrete are represented with wedge element around 50μm in thickness. Elastic mechanical analyses and tensile tests were performed on a realistic 3D digital concrete specimen which was reconstructed from CT images with ITZ meshed by AEM to study the effects of ITZ on the stress/strain distribution and stress–strain response of concrete.The characteristic size of ITZ in concrete (10–50μm) is quite small compared with the coarse aggregates (at least 5mm in diameter) in the laboratory. It’s unacceptable to mesh ITZ using hexahedral elements or tetrahedral elements that were 10–50μm in all three dimensions with the tradition meshing method in meso-mechanical analysis for three-phase concrete, because millions of elements would be generated and it’s impossible to perform FEA on such a huge concrete model. For example, if the ITZ outside an aggregate 10mm in diameter were meshed by hexahedral elements 50μm in side length, the number of ITZ elements would be 4π(10/2)2/0.052≈120,000, and the number would be 30,000 even if elements 0.1mm in side length were used. Considering usually several hundreds of coarse aggregates were contained in a cubic concrete specimen 100mm in side length, the total number of ITZ elements would be super huge (at the magnitude of 10 million if the side length is 0.1mm) and it’s definitely unacceptable.Aggregate-expansion method (AEM) was proposed in this paper to generate wedge elements about 50μm thick in an acceptable number that can represent the thin-layer structure of ITZ in FEA for concrete.The schedule of AEM is as follows (Take an aggregate shown inFig. 1(a) and (b) for example),i.Expand the surface of each aggregate by 50μm. First get the geometrical center of each aggregate by averaging the x/y/z coordinates of all the surface nodes. Then extend all the lines connecting the center to each surface node by 50μm and obtain a series of new nodes (like nodes A′, B′ and C′ in Fig. 1(a)) composing a new surface which is about 50μm away from the original surface.Wedge elements (like element ABC A′B′C′ in Fig. 1(a)) composed of every pair of triangles on the original surface and on the new surface as well as the three lines connecting every pair of nodes are generated to represent ITZ around the aggregate (as shown in Fig. 1(b)).Update all the mortar elements that contain nodes on the original surface of the aggregate by replacing the original nodes with their corresponding new ones.A software package called ITZgenerate was developed by Fortran to generate ITZ meshes for a two-phase concrete model. The function of ITZgenerate is as follows,a.Name NodeSet-ori, EleSet-mor-ori, EleSet-agg-ori for the original nodes set, the original mortar elements set and the original aggregate elements set in a given two-phase concrete model.Determine the total number of aggregates in the model (N), the node set of the surface of each aggregate (NodeSet-agg-surf), and the mortar element sets containing one, two and three nodes on the surface of each aggregate, respectively (EleSet-mor-surf-orig), based on the existing information of the mortar and aggregate elements and their corresponding nodes in the two-phase model.Determine the coordinates of the geometrical center (O) of the surface of each aggregate by averaging x/y/z coordinates of all the surface nodes.Obtain the coordinates of new nodes (like A′, B′, C′ in Fig. 1(a)) corresponding to the original surface nodes of aggregate i (like A, B,C, in Fig. 1(a)) by extending OA, OB, OC outwards by 50μm. Obtain a set of new nodes (NodeSet-new-i).Get the ITZ element set (EleSet-itz-i) by numbering the wedge elements (such as A′B′C′ABC in Fig. 1(b)), composed of three nodes on the new surface and three corresponding nodes on the orginal surface of aggregate i.Update all the mortar elements containing the original surface nodes of aggregate i (EleSet-mor-surf-orig) (update the mortar element DABC in Fig. 1(a) to DA′B′C′ in Fig. 1(b))) and get the new mortar element set (EleSet-mor-surf-new).Repeat the above steps to all the aggregates (i=1,2,… N), and get the total ITZ element set (EleSet-ITZ) and new nodes set (NodeSet-new), and the updated mortar element set (EleSet-mor-new).Finish the ITZ-meshing process by inserting the new nodes set (NodeSet-new), the ITZ element set (EleSet-itz) to the original ones as well as by replacing the orginal mortar element set(EleSet-mor-ori) with the updated one (EleSet-mor-new). The ITZ meshes are generated and represented by wedge elements about 50μm thick and a two-phase concrete model has been updated to a three-phase concrete model with ITZ meshs.Of course the thickness of the wedge elements generated by AEM could be set to be in the range from 10μm to 50μm. As the side length of the aggregate elements are usually 1 to 2mm, the reason we choose 50μm in this paper is to ensure that the aspect ratios of the generate ITZ meshes are between 1:20 to 1:40, higher than 1:50 which is the lower limit specified in commercial FEA software such as Abaqus. It is obvious to conclude that the number of ITZ elements equals that of the triangular meshes composing the surfaces of all the coarse aggregates.Aggregate-expansion method was applied in a digital concrete reconstructed from CT images and FEA was performed on the three-phase digital concrete to study the effect of ITZ on the macro properties of concrete.The most important step in producing digital concrete is to generate the coarse aggregate structure. Up to now, three models for generating coarse aggregate structure, Random Aggregate Model (RAM) [1,13,14], Particle Packing/Mixing Model (PPMM) [15–17], and CT-Image-based Model (CTIM) [18], are widely used. In RAM, Monte Carlo random numbers are generated to represent the spatial distribution of coarse aggregates in mortar, without considering the movement of coarse aggregates in the producing process of concrete. In PPMM, the final positions of coarse aggregates are determined by simulating the packing or mixing process of aggregates in the producing process of concrete. A common shortage of RAM and PPMM is that the shapes and spatial distributions of coarse aggregates are not consistent with the real concrete specimens, thus CTIM is developed to generate more realistic digital concrete. X-ray Computerized Tomography (CT) technology provides a powerful and nondestructive method for generating 3D structures with high resolution and more and more researchers use CT to reconstruct and study the internal meso-structures of cementitious materials such as aggregates, voids, or cracks [19–23]. Tian et al. [18] generated a two-phase digital concrete by meshing the reconstructed mortar and aggregate structures from CT images. However, because the ITZ structure was not considered and the model was too large for FEA, the corresponding accuracy of meso-mechanical analysis was rather low.Cylindrical concrete specimens, with sizes 20cm in height and 10cm in diameter, were scanned by the medical CT system, Philips/Brilliance 6. The scanning interval was 1mm and totally over 200 images were obtained for each specimen since the scanning length was a bit larger than the height of the specimen. All the CT images were 512pixel×512pixel in dimension and the spatial resolution was about 0.4mm, which satisfied the needs of reconstructing coarse aggregates. One of the CT image series is shown inFig. 2, from which coarse aggregates, mortar and voids are clearly seen and distinguished from each other. However, the voids structure was not taken into account and was regarded as mortar in the reconstructing process for the convenience of meshing and further analysis, because hundreds of thousands meshes would be generated to represent the neighboring regions of the voids, which could result in dramatic time consumption in FEA. In addition, the aggregates with dimension around 5mm were regarded as mortars for the same reason.The CT image series were analyzed using the image processing software MIMICS 10.0, which is powerful in reconstruction of CT/MRI image data and widely used in bio-medical fields [24,25]. The reconstruction and model of aggregate and mortar structures were achieved in the following procedure.Only the upper half of one cylindrical specimen was reconstructed and modeled to reduce the calculation time in the following FEA. So totally 102 CT images (the reconstructed length was a bit larger than 100mm) were imported into MIMICS.The image orientations were adjusted according to the declination angle between the scanning direction and the axis of the cylindrical specimen if the angle was not zero.Ignoring voids, there were only two components (aggregates and mortar) left on each image and only one component needed to be segmented before reconstruction, for the whole concrete structure was easy to be reconstructed and thus the other component could be obtained through the Boolean subtraction operation. The reason why aggregate objects were chosen to be segmented is that the three dimensional aggregate structure generated in the following step was easy to check and modified for incorrect connections between adjacent aggregates.Aggregate masks were initially generated automatically for segmentation according to an appropriate gray threshold value determined by a number of trials. And then a new mask was created by a region growing function based on the initial mask, which automatically deleted some mortar areas having the same gray values with the aggregates in the initial mask. And then morphological operations such as erode and close operations were performed on the new mask to fill some small cavities and reduce noises in the aggregates area. Though the contrast between the mortar and aggregates seems very good (as seen in Fig. 2), some of the adjacent aggregates were connected to their neighbors in the mask. Thus manual editing of the mask had to be done to refine the aggregate outlines. One of the segmented CT images can be seen inFig. 3(a).Once the segmentation procedure was completed for all the 2D CT images, the 3D aggregate structure could be obtained according to the image reconstruction function based on the surface-rending algorithm in MIMICS. However, the adjacent aggregate surfaces would be connected to each other because of the reconstruction error. So the aggregate mask had to be modified repeatedly until no incorrect connections were found between the aggregate surfaces. The reconstructed aggregate structure can be seen in Fig. 3(b).The mortar surface could be easily obtained by subtracting the aggregate surface from the cylinder specimen, as seen in Fig. 3(c).Only surfaces can be meshed by MIMICS 10.0 because of the functional limit, and incompatible meshes would be generated if mortar and aggregate surfaces were meshed simultaneously because of the geometrical error in reconstruction. To get compatible meshes of the mortar and aggregate structures, only the mortar surface meshes was generated.The 3D mortar surface generated in the afore-mentioned procedure was composed of very fine triangular meshes, which kept the geometrical details of the mortar structure as much as possible. However, the fine meshes had to be re-meshed via Remesher module in MIMICS to get their quality raised, so that tetrahedral meshes could be generated in the preprocessor of ABAQUS.A series of operations to reduce the total number and improve the quality of the meshes were performed iteratively to make the meshes uniform enough and the total number small enough for the preprocessor of ABAQUS. The meshes could even be added/deleted/modified manually in the module if their quality parameter, which was expressed by normalized height/base ratio of the triangle, was not high enough.The maximum mesh dimension and geometrical error were set at 5mm and 0.8mm, respectively, in the re-meshing procedure of the mortar surface and finally the quality parameter of all the triangles were higher than 0.2, satisfying the needs of generating tetrahedral meshes for ABAQUS. The total numbers of the triangular meshes composing the mortar surface before and after the re-meshing procedure were 600,000 and 36,000, respectively, showing the great effect of MIMICS Remesher in reducing element numbers and improving mesh quality. Perspective views of the mortar surface before and after the re-meshing procedure were shown inFig. 4. It can be seen from Fig. 4 that the meshes became uniform in dimension after re-meshing, which makes generation of tetrahedral meshes in the following procedure possible.The aggregate surface meshes were obtained by extracting the inner surfaces out of the mortar meshes by a Fortran-based program called SurfExtract2D.The procedure of SurfExtract2D is as follows:i.Read the number and the corresponding nodes of every mortar element. Save them in a link list.Take out the first element in the link list, and then record its number and their corresponding nodes before deleting it from the link list.Look up the remaining elements in the link list one by one and check if they have one same node with the first element. If yes, this element belongs to the same aggregate surface which the first element belongs to, and it will be deleted from the link list after its corresponding nodes are recorded. If no, go on to verify the next element in the link list. All the other elements belong to the aggregate which the first element belongs to can be found with this method.Repeat steps ii and iii till no element left in the link list.The triangular aggregate meshes can be seen in Fig. 3(e).Fig. 5 shows the comparison of the 3D reconstructed aggregate with its finite element model, from which it can be seen that most of the surface details of the aggregate are preserved after re-meshing.The mortar and aggregate surface meshes were import into ABAQUS successively and tetrahedral meshes (as seen in Fig. 3(f) and (g)) could be generated by the mesh-editing tools in ABAQUS based on the triangular meshes.Duplicate nodes could be found at the interfaces between the tetrahedral aggregates and mortar meshes generated by the above procedure. Compatible meshes were obtained (as seen in Fig. 3(h)) by merging the duplicate nodes with a geometrical tolerance of 10−6 in ABAQUS.The three-phase digital concrete generated in the above method (hereinafter referred as the three-phase digital concrete) had great potential in meso-mechanical analysis of concrete, because of its three advantages over other digital concrete also constructed from CT images found in the literature (as shown inTable 1). The three advantages are as follows,(1)Small model scale. The total element number was less than 60% of that in [18], although the volume of the three-phase digital concrete specimen was 2.3 times as large. One reason was the re-meshing procedure which was not performed in [18], and another reason was that the ITZ wedge elements generated with aggregate-expansion method took only one seventh of the total element number of the digital concrete (see Table 1).Realistic ITZ meshes. The ITZ structures were represented with solid wedge elements (as seen inFig. 6), enabling direct meso-mechanical studies of concrete based on clearly defined material law of ITZ rather than creating a new black box material law.High fidelity. The structure of the three-phase digital concrete had a high fidelity to the real concrete, resulting from the small scanning interval, which was 1mm and just one fifth of that in [18].The digital concrete specimen was subjected to a uniform load along the z-axial direction (P=107N/m2) at the top layer with the bottom layer of elements fixed along the loading direction. The material parameters of the three phases are listed inTable 2. According to Yang’s study [26], the elastic modulus of ITZ was 50–70% of the matrix and was assumed to be 2/3 for this analysis is a qualitative study of the ITZ’s effects on the stress and strain distributions of concrete.The distributions of the minimum principal stress and strain (namely maximum compressive stress and strain) in the aggregates, ITZ and concrete were shown inFigs. 7 and 8, from which it could be seen that the stress and strain distributions were both complicated resulting from the geometrical complexity of the meso-scale structures, and that the average maximum compressive stress of ITZ was much smaller than that of aggregates, while the average maximum compressive strain of ITZ was much greater than that of aggregates because of the lower elastic modulus of ITZ. In addition, it could be seen from Figs. 7 and 8(b) that the maximum compressive stress/strain in the ITZ in the middle part of each aggregate was smaller than that in the ITZ on the top or bottom of the aggregate.Fig. 9 showed the typical distributions of displacements of concrete along and perpendicular to the loading direction (U3 and U1/U2). It could be seen that the magnitude of U3 decreased to zero from top to bottom when the top layer were subjected to uniaxial loading, while that of U1 (U2) decreased from both sides to the center vertically. In addition, the greatest value of U3 (around 2.6×10−5m) was almost one order of magnitude greater than that of U1 and U2 (around 3.1×10−6m) which were mainly caused by the poisson effect of concrete.Elastic modulus of concrete could be figured out by the following formula,(1)E=σε=PU/Hwhere P is the uniform load (N/m2), U is the average displacements along the loading direction of all the nodes on the top layer (m), and H is the height of the specimen (m).A series of elastic mechanical analyses were made to verify the accuracy of this digital concrete by comparing the calculated elastic modulus to the experimental data from Mandel and Dantu [8], which were calculated from a series of theoretical equations based on experimental data, as shown inTable 3.It could be seen from Table 3 that the calculated elastic modulus of concrete changed little when the elastic modulus of ITZ changed from 50% to 70% of aggregates. Moreover, the agreement between the calculated elastic modulus and the experimental results was quite satisfactory. Especially for case 1, the relative error of elastic modulus was between 0.3% (Eitz=0.5Em) and 0.7% (Eitz=0.7Em) while the volume fraction of aggregates was 1.8% smaller than that in the experimental data. In addition, the calculated elastic moduli were closer to the experimental results than the lower HS-bounds (LHS) which were derived based on the assumption of a two-phase composite of concrete. It indicated the great effectiveness of the proposed three-phase digital concrete in estimation of the elastic modulus of concrete considering ITZ.Fig. 10 shows a typical numerical tensile stress–strain response of the above three-phase digital concrete specimen and its comparison with experimental results taken from Guo [27]. The tensile stress is obtained by dividing the sum of nodal reaction forces by the area of the cross section. The average strain is obtained by dividing the displacement along the loading direction by the specimen height.Brittle cracking model [28] is employed in the numerical tests to simulate the damaging and failure behavior of mortar and ITZ under tension. Mortar and ITZ are linear elastic in compression or in tension before cracking. Smeared cracking assumption in which the effect of cracks on the material behaviors is represented by the degradation of material stiffness is chosen to represent the discontinuous crack behavior of materials. A simple strength criterion is used to detect crack initiation which means that a crack forms when the maximum principal tensile stress exceeds the tensile strength of the brittle material. The postfailure stress will go linearly down to zero after the material is cracked.The material property parameters of aggregate, mortar and matrix in the numerical tests are shown inTable 4. Aggregates are not allowed to crack in this test.It can be seen from Fig. 10 that the tensile stress increases firstly linearly and then nonlinearly, reaches a peak value, and then decreases gradually with the increase of the tensile strain. The stress–strain curve is quite realistic and agrees well with experimental results.Microcrack patterns at different loading stages (marked A, B, C in Fig. 10, A-initiation of the inelastic stage, B-peak stress, C-the strain-softening stage) are shown inFig. 11. It can be seen from Fig. 11(a) that the inelastic stage in the stress–strain curve starts with the emerging and developing of ITZ microcracks resulting from the lower tensile strength of ITZ. With the increase of tensile strain, mortar microcracks begins to merge (see Fig. 11(d)) and grow together with ITZ microcracks (see Fig. 11(b)). And at the drop stage of post-peak stress macro cracks are formed resulted from the further development and coalescence of microcracks (see Fig. 11(c) and (e)) and finally split the specimen into two halves (see Fig. 11(f)).From the above analysis, it can be concluded that with solid wedge elements generated by AEM representing ITZ structure in meso-level FE analysis for concrete, the unique features in tensile stress–strain response of concrete such as the initial linear response, the commencement of nonlinearity, the peak stress followed by development of microcracking and softening response can be effectively captured. The essentials of damage and failure process of concrete can be seen explicitly and clearly with AEM proposed in this paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Aggregate-expansion method (AEM) to generate ITZ meshes from aggregate–mortar meshes in a two-phase 3D digital concrete were proposed in this paper. Wedge meshes which were 50µm thick were generate to represent the thin layer structure of ITZ and the total number of ITZ meshes equals to the surface meshes of all the coarse aggregates and was acceptable in FEA. The three-phase digital concrete has much potential in meso-mechanical analyses because of its realistic ITZ meshes, small model scale.Results of the elastic-mechanical analyses showed that the average maximum compressive stress of ITZ was much less than aggregates, while the average maximum compressive strain of ITZ was much greater than the aggregates because of the lower elastic modulus of ITZ.Results of the numerical tests showed that with solid wedge elements representing ITZ the unique features of concrete under tension, such as the nonlinear response before peak stress and the tension-softening response accompanied with initiation and development of ITZ and mortar microcracks, can be effectively captured. Aggregate-expansion method proposed in this paper is a promising method to mesh ITZ explicitly and study mechanisms of damaging and failure process.