@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Parametric-based brain Magnetic Resonance Elastography using a Rayleigh damping material model

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Rayleigh damping (RD) model is structurally non-identifiable with single frequency data without extensive a-priori information.We propose an alternative approach to overcome non-identifiability issue of the model.Parametric RD model was mooted in application to in vivo mechano brain imaging.Results indicate that parametric RD approach shows potential for diagnostic MRE imaging with single frequency data.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Magnetic Resonance Elastography,Inverse problem methods,Brain,Tissue characterisation,Mechanical properties,Medical imaging,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The three-parameter Rayleigh damping (RD) model applied to time-harmonic Magnetic Resonance Elastography (MRE) has potential to better characterise fluid-saturated tissue systems. However, it is not uniquely identifiable at a single frequency. One solution to this problem involves simultaneous inverse problem solution of multiple input frequencies over a broad range. As data is often limited, an alternative elegant solution is a parametric RD reconstruction, where one of the RD parameters (μIor ρI) is globally constrained allowing accurate identification of the remaining two RD parameters. This research examines this parametric inversion approach as applied to in vivo brain imaging.Overall, success was achieved in reconstruction of the real shear modulus (μR) that showed good correlation with brain anatomical structures. The mean and standard deviation shear stiffness values of the white and gray matter were found to be 3±0.11kPa and 2.2±0.11kPa, respectively, which are in good agreement with values established in the literature or measured by mechanical testing. Parametric results with globally constrained μIindicate that selecting a reasonable value for the μIdistribution has a major effect on the reconstructed ρIimage and concomitant damping ratio (ξd). More specifically, the reconstructed ρIimage using a realistic μI=333Pa value representative of a greater portion of the brain tissue showed more accurate differentiation of the ventricles within the intracranial matter compared to μI=1000Pa, and ξdreconstruction with μI=333Pa accurately captured the higher damping levels expected within the vicinity of the ventricles.Parametric RD reconstruction shows potential for accurate recovery of the stiffness characteristics and overall damping profile of the in vivo living brain despite its underlying limitations. Hence, a parametric approach could be valuable with RD models for diagnostic MRE imaging with single frequency data.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
A range of tools have been developed to assess mechanical properties of biological tissue [1]. The most common tool to detect pathological tissue in clinical practice remains manual palpation [2]. Palpation detects changes in tissue resistance to compression and shear deformations. Hence, many tumors are still first detected by touch [3]. However, the sensitivity of this method is limited to soft tissues located near the body surface. In contrast, the brain, heart and other internal tissues are not accessible to palpation and thus do not naturally lend themselves diagnosis by stiffness contrast.Because of the diagnostic potential, assessment of the brain tissue mechanical properties has been the subject of several clinical studies [4–16]. However, the brain is naturally shielded, making it very difficult to accurately investigate viscoelastic properties. Additionally, conventional imaging techniques, such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), computed tomography (CT) and ultrasonography (US), are not capable of directly assessing mechanical properties of the brain. Therefore, most existing measurements were obtained during in vitro dissection of postmortem specimens, and there is no certainty whether they reflect the intact physiological environment [17–19,7,20,21].In vivo brain tissue is a highly heterogeneous, vascularised medium and its mechanical properties also may be affected by the extracellular fluid and associated pressure acting throughout the soft tissue matrix. These complex effects might explain the inconsistent estimates of the shear modulus of brain tissue in the literature [22].Magnetic Resonance Elastography (MRE) can directly visualise and measure tissue elasticity in vivo[23,24,5,25,26]. MRE acquisition requires application of mechanical waves to tissue within the MRI and sophisticated inverse problem methods to identify an elastic modulus map of the tissue. Integration of the elastographic imaging with other conventional imaging modalities can bring additional diagnostic potential and enhance understanding of disease mechanisms and progression.Brain elastography was first mentioned by Kruse et al. [5], who visualised propagating strain waves in brain tissue. Early studies of the brain MRE obtained in vivo values for the shear modulus that showed significant discrepancy with stiffness estimates for white matter ranging from 2.5 to 15.2kPa and 2.8 to 12.9kPa for gray matter. Since then, cerebral elastography methods have significantly improved. Recent brain MRE studies have reported values between 1 and 3kPa with much lower variation depending on the reconstruction method and the frequency range used [27–30,16]. However, regardless of the extensive nature of the data and many inversion methodologies used, the extraction of high resolution, accurate results from naturally noisy data for complex and heterogeneous organs, such as the brain, is still a challenging task.Accurate quantitative estimates of the brain's viscoelastic (VE) properties may prove useful for characterising various brain diseases. Recently published cerebral elastography results indicate alterations in VE properties of the intracranial tissue in a number of neurodegenerative pathologies, such as Alzheimer's disease [28], Normal Pressure Hydrocephalus (NPH) [31,32] and Multiple Sclerosis (MS) [27,33]. Cerebral MRE may also be effective in diagnostic conditions of brain tumors [14], traumatic brain injury [8] or intraventricular haemorrhage. Valid VE moduli of the brain are also necessary for finite element analysis (FEA) studies of brain trauma [34–36] and development of neurosurgery simulation techniques [37].To date, reconstruction approaches generally assumed tissue to be purely elastic [38–40], although more complex models, such as VE [41,4,42,43,15,44] and poroelastic (PE) [45–47] models have been used in different applications. In brain mechano-imaging, a number of constitutive VE models have also been investigated to provide characterization of locally resolved mechanical properties [44,48,15,43,27,29]. However, these models typically fail to accurately reflect rheological response of the intracranial tissue [49]. Classical VE models, such as Kelvin, Voigt and Maxwell have shown to be inaccurate in predicting the complex behavior of the in vivo brain response [50,51]. Nevertheless, it has been demonstrated that fractional VE models have an advantage over traditional VE models by an ability to describe dispersion characteristics in a form of power-law relationship of the complex shear modulus commonly seen in biological tissues.Thus, in an attempt to improve upon excising modeling techniques, Klatt et al. [50] studied five standard VE models (two-parameters Maxwell and Voigt models, three-parameters Zener and Jeffreys models, and a fractional four-parameter Zener model) applied to MRE inversion to investigate data-model match for the observed dispersion curves of brain tissue across multiple frequencies. They showed that a fractional Zener model has the potential to provide a better data-model fit using monochromatic excitation compared to traditional Zener model using multi-frequency (MF) based MRE. Furthermore, Sinkus et al. [51] studied three classical VE models (Maxwell, Voigt and Springpot) and found that fractional Springpot model has an advantage over traditional Maxwell and Voigt models by providing better data-model correlation. Asbach et al. [52] used broad-band frequency encoding during simultaneous MF excitations and applied higher order VE model to evaluate dispersion of the complex shear modulus over the respective frequency in application to liver MRE studies. He concluded that MF MRE utilizing higher-order rheological models is well suited for clinical assessment of the liver. Finally, Sack et al. [53] proposed the use of fractional order springpot model with MF excitation approach to estimate VE properties of the in vivo healthy human brain of 55 subjects.Higher order rheological models typically require wave data sets from multiple excitation frequencies over a broad range to measure dispersion characteristics of the dynamic modulus. Thus, these models exhibit significant limitations with more readily obtained single frequency data when studying in vivo brain tissue, as no information about dispersion properties is attainable. Rayleigh damping (RD) or proportional damping is an alternative model for soft tissue attenuation for elastic materials. Compared to traditional VE models, it incorporates an additional damping parameter proportionally related to the inertial effects [54]. Thus, the RD model offers a more complex description of energy dissipation using two different forms of damping.The global RD property reconstruction methods have been discussed previously in the context of simulation studies with perfect noise free data [55] and to investigate damping properties of tissue-simulating phantoms and in vivo breast tissue [56]. Considering the highly-saturated, sponge-like nature of the brain, the RD model may provide a more accurate match to expected brain tissue response. Furthermore, spatially resolved damping properties might enhance elastographic imaging by providing additional information on attenuation characteristics of the tissue structure.It has been demonstrated that the RD model is non-identifiable given only single frequency data [57], which is the typical approach in a range of biomedical elastographic inverse problems. However, it should be noted that single frequency data is very appealing venue for MRE as it is fast and only subjects the patient to a single test. This approach has the advantage that repeatability between tests is not required nor assumed, which could be problematic in multi-frequency tests in vivo. Hence, a single frequency approach with reasonable accuracy would offer benefits, if only to obtain good initial estimates. This paper proposes a parametric identification approach using RD rheological model to find optimal values in application to in vivo elastographic brain imaging with data at a single frequency.A linear isotropic nearly incompressible RD elastic model was applied to in vivo sinusoidal brain response to account for the nearly-incompressible behaviour expected in the highly-saturated media like brain tissue. Motion amplitude is calculated from the Navier's equation, which in time-domain is defined:(1)∇·(μ(∇u+∇uT))−∇(λ∇·u)−∇P=−ρ∂2u∂t2,where u is the displacement within the medium; λ is the first Lamé's parameter, μ is the second Lamé's parameter, also known as the shear stiffness; ρ is the density of the material, ∇P is a pressure term, related to volumetric changes through the bulk modulus, K, via the relationship: ∇P=K∇·u.The damped Navier's equation is facilitated by introducing the damping coefficient α proportional to the velocity [58,55,56]:(2)∇·(μ(∇u+∇uT))−∇(λ∇·u)−∇P=−ρ∂2u∂t2+α∂u∂t.Assuming time-harmonic motion, whereu(x,t)=uˆ(x)eiωt, Eq. (2) becomes:(3)∇·(μ(∇uˆ+∇uˆT))−∇(λ∇·uˆ)−∇P=−ρω2uˆ+iαωuˆ.Introducing the complex density, ρ*=ρR+iρI, into the right-hand-side of the frequency domain analogue of Eq. (1) yields:(4)∇·(μ(∇uˆ+∇uˆT))−∇(λ∇·uˆ)−∇P=−ρRω2uˆ+iρIω2uˆ.Eq. (4) is equivalent with Eq. (3) when ρI=−α/ω, thus indicating direct relation between ρIand viscous damping force which is proportional to the velocity.The discritised Navier's equation with damping can be represented:(5)Mu¨+Cu˙+Ku=fwhere M, C and K are mass, damping and stiffness matrices, u is the displacement vector (u˙andu¨correspond to the first and second time derivatives), and f represents external and body forces. In time-harmonic (steady-state) elastography, motion and forces can be defined:u(x,t)=uˆ(x)eiωtandf(x,t)=fˆ(x)eiωt; yielding:(6)(−ω2M+iωC+K)uˆ=fˆ.In the RD model, the damping is directly proportional to the mass and stiffness, C=αM+βK, yielding:(7)−ω21−iαωM+1+iωβKuˆ=fˆ,where K and M are initial undamped stiffness and mass distributions, respectively. All coefficients in M contain the density, ρ, and all coefficients in K contain the shear modulus, μ. Thus, these parameters can be moved outside the matrices, giving:(8)−ω2ρ−iαρωM′+μ+iωβμK′uˆ=fˆ,where M′=(1/ρ)M and K′=(1/μ)K are the normalised mass and stiffness matrices, respectively.Eq. (8) indicates that the RD model can be implemented using a complex density ρ*=ρR+iρIand complex shear modulus μ*=μR+iμI. Here, μRand ρRdescribe the real valued shear modulus and density in the undamped system, while μIand ρIcan be expressed in terms of the RD parameters [55]:(9)μI=ωβμR,ρI=−αρRω.Eq. (9) shows that the μIparameter contributes damping linearly proportional to the input frequency and the ρIparameter contributes damping inversely proportional to the input frequency. Considering that the terms (1−iα/ω) and (1+iωβ) carry the spatial information of RD parameters, Eq. (8) can be further simplified:(10)[−ω2ρ*M′+μ*K′]uˆ=fˆThe resulting damping ratio, ξd, is defined:(11)ξd=12βω+αω⇒ξd=12μIμR−ρIρR.Eq. (11) indicates that the stiffness proportional damping related to the μIparameter is dominant at higher frequencies, while the mass proportional damping effect associated with the ρIparameter is dominant in the lower frequency range. Rheologically, μRand μIcan be interpreted as the storage and loss modulus, respectively, while ρIfor a nearly-incompressible material is hypothesised to indicate fluid perfusion within the solid elastic matrix of the porous media causing energy loss due to the mass transfer.Thus, the RD model allows reconstruction of not only the stiffness distribution (μR), but also energy attenuation mechanisms proportionally related to both elastic (μI) and inertial (ρI) effects. Accounting for two damping mechanisms may allow better description of the microscale interactions that cause motion attenuation in brain tissue, compared to the more commonly used VE models, which do not incorporate inertial damping effects.Based on Eq. (9), the RD coefficients, α and β, can be formulated:(12)α=−ωρIρR,β=μIωμR.Considering that all terms in M′ contain the density (ρR) and all terms in K′ contain the shear modulus (μR), then substituting Eq. (12) into Eq. (8) for a single degree of freedom system yields:(13)−ω2ρR+iωμIω−ωρI+μRuˆ=fˆ.Collecting the coefficients of theRand ℑ terms yields:(14)[(μR−ω2ρR)+i(μI−ω2ρI)]uˆ=fˆ.In Eq. (14) the force and displacement are complex valued,fˆ=fR+ifIanduˆ=uR+iuI, thus by further collecting the real and imaginary terms, it can be rewritten as:(15a)(μR−ω2ρR)uR−(μI−ω2ρI)uI=fR,(15b)(μR−ω2ρR)uI−(μI−ω2ρI)uR=fI.Multiplying Eqs. (15a) and (15b) by uRand uI, respectively, and summing them up, yields:(16)(μR−ω2ρR)(uR·uR+uI·uI)=fR·uR+fI·uI.Given that the density (ρR) can be assumed to be the same as density of water, Eq. (16) implies that μRis uniquely identifiable as a direct function of the displacements:μR=f[uˆ].However, the shear wave attenuation of the material due to its damping effects is described by two parameters that have the same scaled model role. In particular, model behaviour defined by some particular values of μIand ρIwould be indistinguishable from μI=μI0+x and ρI=ρI0+x/ω2. Hence, these parameters have a non-unique model role and cannot be uniquely identified with data from a single frequency without further a-priori information. Therefore, the three variable RD model is not identifiable. In a parametric RD inverse problem approach either ρIor μIis set to a constant value or dependant function. This approach eliminates a variable, yielding a uniquely identifiable system of two equations with two unknowns in Eqs. 15.The 3D subspace-based nonlinear inversion (SNLI) algorithm [59–61] calculates the final property estimates through an iterative optimization framework that minimises the objective function (Φ) defined:(17)Φ(θ)=∑i=1Nm(uim−uic(θ))(uim−uic(θ))H,whereuimrepresents the complex valued measured displacement data at i'th measurement point,uic(θ)is the co-located displacement calculated by a forward simulation of the model using a current estimate of the properties (θ), Nmis the number of measurements and the superscript H denotes the complex conjugate transpose. The conjugate-gradient (CG) method is used to iteratively update the material property distribution by improving the agreement between finite element (FE) computed displacements and the displacements captured by MRI.The algorithm operates on small overlapping subzones processed in a hierarchical order determined by progressive error minimisation. The final output is distributions of the reconstructed material properties. Thus, the choice of constitutive model is crucial to accurately matching observed tissue response.The ability of the RD elastography to produce accurate and reproducible measurements was tested by a repeatability study. Six repetitive MRE examinations were undertaken on the same healthy volunteer (24 years old) over a two month time frame. Ethics approval was obtained from the Institutional Review Ethics Board of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (Urbana, IL, USA). Informed consent was obtained prior each MRE examination.MRE experiments were performed using a 3T Allegra head-only scanner (Siemens Medical Solutions, Erlangen, Germany). 3D motion encoding was achieved by an innovative multi-shot spin-echo (SE) sequence with bi-polar spiral motion encoding gradients (MEGs) [29]. 20 coronal slices of 2mm × 2mm × 2mm isotropic voxel resolution were acquired using following parameters: 6 k-space interleaves, time to repetition (TR)/time to echo (TE) = 2000/55ms, field of view (FOV) = 256mm, 128×128 matrix resolution. Wave acquisition was performed by 8 equally spaced time harmonics over a single period. Complex-valued subtraction was used to combine images with positive and negative gradient polarisation. The resulting phase images were further unwrapped with method described by Wang et al. [62]. FFT was applied to extract motion at a first harmonic which resulted in 3D complex-valued displacements. No further filtering was applied to the data prior to reconstruction processing. Total MRE acquisition time was less than 10min. The quality of each MRE data set was evaluated by calculating octahedral shear strain SNR (OSS-SNR) [63].The actuation methodology was similar to MRE studies reported by Sack et al. [53]. The actuation system comprised a long rod that was mutually attached to a speaker membrane at one end and a custom-made cradle on which the head was positioned on the other end. A 50Hz excitation frequency was applied resulting strong deflection component of the head motion parallel to the head-feet direction.In addition, a T1-weighted magnetisation-prepared rapid acquisition with gradient-echo (MP-RAGE) images were also acquired using following parameters: repetition time (TR)/inversion time (TI)/echo time (TE)=2000/900/2.2ms; 1mm × 1mm × 1mm isotropic voxel resolution. The area of brain imaging was in the region of the corpus callosum (refer to Fig. 1). Image registration between MP-RAGE and MRE images was performed using the Brain Extraction Tool (BET) followed by the FMRIB Linear Image Registration Tool (FLIRT) [64] in the FMRIB Software Library (FSL) [65]. Furthermore, segmentation of the intracranial matter (white & gray matter) and CSF was performed using the FMRIB Automated Segmentation Tool (FAST) [66] to calculate statistic distribution of the material property values (Table 1.)The subspace-based nonlinear inversion (SNLI) algorithm was used to estimate material properties from measured MR displacement data. Reconstruction computations were carried out on High Performance Computing (HPC) system Blue Fern P575. A total of 32 processors were employed in a parallel Message Passing Interface (MPI) environment using CG optimisation method. The average runtime for the reconstruction processing was 5 hours. Each parameter was interpolated at different resolution levels [67].Reconstruction of material properties using an isotropic linearly elastic nearly-incompressible RD model was performed using the following parameters: an isotropic subzone size of 24mm × 24mm × 24mm with the subzone overlap of 0.15%×0.15%×0.15%. Initial and final total variation minimisation (TVM) weighting was 10−15 and 10−14 with TVM delta set to 10−19. The initial and final spatial filtering (SF) weights were set to 0.25% and 0.15% respectively. Displacements were approximated on the mesh with 1.8mm × 1.8mm × 1.9mm voxel resolution, providing approximately 16 nodes per wavelength for the FE forward problem. Initial a-priori estimates were: μR= 3300Pa; μI= 330Pa and ρI= -100kg/m3. To account for a nearly incompressible behaviour expected in a highly saturated media like brain tissue, the density (ρR) and the bulk modulus (K) were constrained from inversion and set to 1000kg/m3 and 107Pa, respectively.Convergence criteria was achieved for all material properties for brain reconstruction. Stabilisation of statistical indicators (median and interquartile range (IQR)) of parameter behaviour across all the nodes within the finite element mesh (FEM) was used to evaluate of the convergence for a particular parameter.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This research presents parametric-based results for RD model based brain MRE. The main strengths and weaknesses of a parametric RD reconstruction approach are demonstrated for this application to the brain. The results indicate good reproducibility of this technique in obtaining useful overall estimates at a single frequency. The values obtained for the brain are in agreement with previously published in vitro and in vivo data despite limitations associated with the simple parametric approach adopted. Furthermore, in vivo brain measurements augment available elasticity data as well as provide first qualitative results on brain's RD properties. Thus, parametric RD MRE shows promise for potential in vivo determination of different brain tissue types, and the possibility of providing additional diagnostic tools.Finally, it is clear that even a simple parametric approach can yield significant insight and results for this otherwise non-identifiable problem. Further RD brain elastography experiments, as well as studies of a variety brain simulating damping phantoms are needed to investigate attenuation mechanisms across different intracranial tissue types, including tissue in diseased states. Equally, the results presented justify further clinical experiments with multiple frequencies or more advanced parametric approach.We declare that we have no conflicts of interest.