@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Reliability (or “lack thereof”) of on-line preference revelation: A controlled experimental analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Outcome from information market is much consistent with expert panel.Information market does influence individual preferences.There is considerable inconsistency between survey and individual true preferences.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Preference revelation,Information market,Information revelation,Information aggregation,Controlled experiment,Survey accuracy,Survey reliability,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Networks permitting anonymous contributions continue to expand and flourish. In some networks, the reliability of a contribution is not of particular importance. In other settings, however, the development of a network is driven by specific purposes which make the reliability of information exchanged of significant importance. One such situation involves the use of information markets for aggregating individuals' preferences on new or emerging technologies. At this point, there remains skepticism concerning the reliability of the preference revelations in such markets and thus the resulting preference aggregations and rankings of emerging technologies. In this paper, we study the reliability of on-line preference revelation using a series of controlled laboratory experiments. Our analysis includes individuals' pre- and post-experiment rankings of technologies, individual trading and accumulation activities during an electronics market experiment, the final experimental market outcomes, and a ranking of the same technologies by a panel of experts from a Fortune 5 company. In addition, as a final step, we allowed each participant to actually select and keep a unit of one of the technologies at zero price (free). That is, we were able to observe each participant's actual final true preference from the set of technologies.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Networks permitting anonymous contributions continue to expand and flourish. In some networks, the reliability of a contribution is not of particular importance. Banter in a social media network may include tongue-in-cheek kidding or creation of a pseudo persona for participation in a second-life. In other settings, however, the development of a network is driven by specific purposes which make the reliability of information exchanged of significant importance. One such situation involves the implementation of networks for engaging individuals in real business applications such as the evaluation of new or emerging technologies [1], new product concepts [3,4,6], and idea generation [8]. Information preference markets (see discussion in [1]) have gained growing recognition as a relatively efficient process for gathering and aggregating information from a large number of dispersed individuals. However, there remains skepticism concerning the reliability of preference revelations (and thus the usefulness of the preference aggregations and decision rankings) gathered in such on-line markets.Chen et al. [2] argued that the assumption that traders are “truth-telling” might not be reasonable when an information market is relatively small. Van de Walle and Turoff [14] observed in their experiment that a large number of traders chose to follow market leaders instead of acting based on their private information. To date, however, we find no direct exploration of the accuracy of preference revelation, no testing of whether individuals really reveal their true preferences in preference markets. Further, we find no direct analysis of the consistency of individual preference revelations before, during, and/or after participation in preference markets. Here we report the structuring, operationalization, and outcomes of a series of controlled laboratory experiments addressing these issues. The ability to carefully structure the settings and observe all individual activities and market occurrences makes laboratory experimentation an attractive process to address the questions of interest (see [5,7,9,10]). Specifically, through controlled laboratory experiments, we seek to address each of the following research questions:(1)are individuals' actual revealed preferences consistent with initial reported preference, portfolio accumulation activities during the course of the experimental market, and/or post-experiment reported preference?are individual true revealed preferences more closely aligned with peer activities during the experimental market and the resulting final market outcomes than with the individual's stated preferences pre- and/or post-experiment? and,is there any relationship between the number of market participants who accurately reveal their preference and the consistency between market outcomes and rankings from a panel of experts?The third question requires a bit of explanation. Chen et al. [1] explained in detail that their Fortune 5 partner company was not dis-satisfied with the results from the use of panels of experts. The issues for the company were the costs and the lack of scalability of panels of experts. Here we are not arguing whether or not panels of experts provide the best outputs. Rather, our experience suggests that the outcomes from panels of experts are valued by firms (Chen et al.'s [1] partner firm and others) and representative of an interesting comparison. The remainder of the paper is as follows. In Section 2, we briefly review related literature in preference markets and experimental economics. Section 3 is devoted to the development and discussion of the research questions analyzed in this note. In Section 4, we outline the design of our experimental market and detail the experimental techniques used to capture the participants' preference revelations over the course of the experimental process. Section 5 presents the findings of our controlled experiments. Section 6 summarizes our findings and suggests future research directions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
