@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Lab-on-a-chip devices: How to close and plug the lab?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We review two main challenges of microfluidics technology: sealing and interfacing.These are crucial for commercialization and wide-spread use of microfluidics.We review well-established techniques as well as recent state-of-the-art methods.We discuss both research and commercial activities.We provide up-to-date examples for each technology discussed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Microfluidics,Lab on a chip,Microfabrication,Sealing,Fluidic interconnect,Electrical interconnect,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Lab-on-a-chip (LOC) devices are broadly used for research in the life sciences and diagnostics and represent a very fast moving field. LOC devices are designed, prototyped and assembled using numerous strategies and materials but some fundamental trends are that these devices typically need to be (1) sealed, (2) supplied with liquids, reagents and samples, and (3) often interconnected with electrical or microelectronic components. In general, closing and connecting to the outside world these miniature labs remain a challenge irrespectively of the type of application pursued. Here, we review methods for sealing and connecting LOC devices using standard approaches as well as recent state-of-the-art methods. This review provides easy-to-understand examples and targets the microtechnology/engineering community as well as researchers in the life sciences.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Miniaturization techniques have been continuously shaping the microelectronics technology and its ability to produce devices for a broad range of applications. In the late 1950s, “planar” processes were introduced for the manufacturing of integrated circuits. Since then, downscaling the dimensions of transistors has been rigorously pursued in the industry to fulfill the ever-increasing demand for smaller, faster, and more energy-efficient electronic systems [1]. In addition to conventional processes used in the microelectronics, new techniques were developed for the fabrication of high-aspect ratio structures and suspended layers, which opened up new possibilities particularly for sensing applications. In the early 1970s, it was possible to fabricate microsensors using bulk and surface micromachining of silicon. With progress in the processing technologies and the integration of nonconventional (i.e. not silicon-based) materials, a new field named microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) emerged [2]. Following the early examples of silicon-based pressure sensors and accelerometers in the mid-1970s, inkjet printing nozzle arrays were developed using anisotropic etching of silicon [3]. First implementations of inkjet printer heads demonstrated that minute amounts of liquids can be manipulated in micromachined channels. A few years later, Terry et al. presented a micromachined gas chromatograph in silicon [4]. The following studies also demonstrated handling of small volumes of liquids, and it was the pioneering paper of Manz et al. in 1990 that introduced and established the concept of miniaturized total chemical analysis systems (μTAS) [5]. Soon after, early companies were founded to utilize these systems for life science applications. Rapid prototyping and replication of polymers as an alternative to silicon processing boosted the academic research and new terminologies such as “microfluidics” and “lab-on-a-chip” (LOC) emerged (we here use both terms interchangeably).Over the last 10–20years, LOC devices have demonstrated their potential and benefits for many applications, including point-of-care diagnostics, genomic and proteomic research, analytical chemistry, environmental monitoring, and the detection of biohazards. These miniaturized systems offer many advantages compared to bulkier and “historical” analytical instruments: they support precise control of liquids flowing usually under laminar regime, minimize consumption of reagents and samples, favor short reaction times, enable highly parallel and multiplexed analysis, require little or less power to operate, are portable, and potentially have low cost of production. Today, structures can be fabricated with sub-micrometer precision, flows of liquids can be sustained and precisely controlled using integrated or external pumps and valves, and quantitative detection of different analytes can be done in high sensitivity using optical-, electrical- or magnetic-based techniques.This review is not about the applications and markets of LOC devices, the detection mechanisms and sensing principles of these devices, microfluidic pumps and valves, the integration of reagents, or the theory of LOC devices. Insightful reviews on different aspects of LOC devices and applications can be found elsewhere [6–14]. Instead, we focus on two important practical challenges: sealing and interfacing LOC devices. These challenges are common to nearly all LOC devices and affect how these devices are conceived and perform.Nowadays, microfluidic and microelectronic devices do not follow the same scaling and manufacturing rules: microfluidics incorporate a very diverse set of materials and fabrication techniques, and they can also comprise many different functional elements. However, both types of devices still share a common challenge attendant to miniaturization. They both require reliable, low-cost and convenient interfaces to the outside world and a suitable package supporting efficient device operation. The microelectronic industry is already facing the “interconnect bottleneck” problem because the effective operation speed of the system has started to be limited by on-chip and off-chip interconnecting wires, which was previously limited by the transistor or the device itself. The amount of heat that can be removed from the package has also started to limit the performance of the circuits, which makes the bonding techniques and materials used in the package more important than ever before. Researchers have been looking for a shift in paradigm on how functional blocks are placed and connected. For example, hybrid optical/electrical interconnects and through-silicon-vias are emerging as promising solutions for replacing conventional copper connections and wirebonds. Similarly, the I/O (input/output) complexity of microfluidics systems has increased over the years because many applications now require high-density fluidic and/or electrical interconnections. There are also other packaging-related challenges that are unique to LOC systems. Microfluidic chips often need manual handling and plugging by the operator, which induces additional constraints on the final package due to practical reasons. Moreover, unlike for the majority of electronic systems, reusability or disposability is crucial for some LOC applications. This requires interconnects that are reliable, cost-effective to fabricate, and also that can be connected to LOC devices in a reversible manner. The community working on these devices demonstrated significant improvements in terms of device performance and generation of novel detection mechanisms but we think that packaging and interfacing microfluidics remain a significant technical challenge and obstacle for the commercialization and wide-spread use of microfluidics.Fig. 1illustrates a sealed microfluidic device having fluidic and electrical connections. Typically, after the fabrication of microfluidic structures and electrodes, various back-end processes are needed to realize a fully-functional device [15,16]. Taking the example in Fig. 1, microfluidic structures can (1) be sealed with a cover layer, which is drilled or patterned so as to create openings for fluidic/electrical interfaces, (2) chemically-treated for tuning the wetting properties of surfaces and modulating protein-surface interactions, (3) indented or fully diced to produce individual chips, and (4) connected to peripheral devices such as pumps and valves using inlet/outlet ports. Although these back-end processes are sometimes neglected in the microfluidics community, they have great impact on the manufacturing cost and performances of the final devices.This review is divided into three main sections that focus on sealing (1), fluidic connection (2), and electrical connection (3) techniques developed for LOC devices. The first section on sealing surveys various bonding methods based on conformal materials (PDMS), non-conformal polymers (plastics), hard materials such as glass and silicon, intermediate adhesive layers, and recently emerged prototyping technologies, and discusses reversible bonding techniques and open-channel microfluidic devices. The next section on fluidic connections provides an in-depth overview and recent examples of reversible (inserted or contact-based), permanent (adhesive based), and monolithically integrated fluidic interfaces. The final section on electrical connections discusses commonly used connectors (sockets and spring-loaded contacts), some of the advanced packaging techniques developed for hybrid CMOS/microfluidics integration, and emerging interconnection techniques.LOC devices are typically sealed to (1) confine solvents, samples and reagents in defined volumes, (2) prevent uncontrolled spreading of liquids along wettable areas, (3) reduce contamination and biohazards, (4) minimize adversary evaporation of samples and reagents from chips, and (5) protect sensitive and fragile structures or molecules from dust or physical impacts. Depending on the materials and the constraints imposed by the application, many bonding techniques are available. An early review from Verpoorte et al. covers a wide range of fabrication and sealing techniques for microfluidic chips [17], and more recent examples are outlined in reviews by Abgrall et al. [18] and Nge et al. [19]. Here, we survey some of the most common and emerging materials and their bonding techniques.PDMS (Polydimethylsiloxane) has become by far the most popular material in the academic microfluidics community because it is inexpensive, easy to fabricate by replication of molds made using rapid prototyping or other techniques, flexible, optically transparent, biocompatible and its fabrication does not require high capital investment and cleanroom conditions. Various techniques have been adapted to fabricate microfluidic structures in PDMS, including wet and dry etching [20–22], photolithographic patterning of a photosensitive PDMS [23], and laser ablation [24]. But, it was the “soft-lithography” techniques [25] introduced by Whitesides et al. that enabled the widespread use of PDMS and opened up the era of PDMS-based microfluidics in the late 1990s. Replica molding, which is the casting of prepolymer against a master and generating a replica of the master in PDMS, has become a standard fabrication technique available in almost every research laboratory. Detailed overviews of soft-lithography techniques and their applications can be found from the reviews by McDonald et al. [26] and Sia et al. [27]. Nowadays, many tools dedicated for this purpose are available and can be purchased as a complete set (e.g. SoftLithoBox® provided by Elveflow (USA) [28]). Moreover, companies, such as FlowJEM (Canada) [29], Microfluidic Innovations (USA) [30], and Scientific Device Laboratory (USA) [31] provide rapid prototyping service for PDMS-based LOC devices.Besides easy and fast fabrication, one of the key properties of PDMS is that it can be sealed to itself or other substrates both reversibly and irreversibly without an adhesive. This spontaneous conformal contact that PDMS establishes with substrates and with itself made this elastomer a widely used material for sealing microfluidic chips. In the mid-1990s, Kim et al. used the reversible sealing property of PDMS to pattern submicrometer-scale structures of polymeric materials [32]. The method was called MIMIC (micromolding in capillaries) and was based on capillary filling of prepolymers in enclosed channels between the substrate and the PDMS microfluidic layer, as illustrated in Fig. 2a. Soon after, Delamarche et al. introduced the concept of removable microfluidic networks (μFNs) for simultaneous patterning different biomolecules on the surfaces and for miniaturizing biological assays (Fig. 2b) [33].A PDMS layer that is exposed to various surface treatments can be used for permanent sealing. A review by Zhou et al. provides a broad range of surface modification techniques developed for PDMS [34]. Complex microfluidic networks, valves and pumps have been fabricated using irreversible self-sealing of PDMS. Quake et al. introduced, for the first time, integrated pneumatic valves and pumps based on multilayer integration of elastomers [35]. This method enabled the large-scale integration of thousands of valves and individually addressable microfluidic chambers in LOC devices [36] and provided the concept of “microfluidic processors”. Following the success of this technology, Fluidigm (USA) [37] was founded and similar pneumatic microvalves are still being implemented in commercial chips. Later, other PDMS-based microfluidic chips have been fabricated for numerous applications. In a typical process flow, layers fabricated by replica molding are briefly exposed to a O2 plasma and placed in contact. Then, permanent bonding is achieved by applying heat in an oven or on a hot-plate. Using this technique, Chang-Yen et al. fabricated a microspotter having 4×12 array of spotting apertures formed by 5 layers of PDMS. More recently, Juncker et al. developed complex capillary flow circuits and elements, “capillarics”, in PDMS [38]. Furthermore, transfer-bonding methods were utilized for 3D microfluidic networks having multilayers of PDMS connected by microfluidic vias [39,40].Structured or flat PDMS layers can also seal other planar substrates, such as silicon, glass, or plastics. This approach has been widely adapted in the academic community particularly for easy and rapid testing of LOC devices, especially the ones having metal electrodes on their substrates. Because PDMS can be casted in almost any shape and openings can be punched or cut after curing, patterning of openings for fluidic and electrical connections is readily achieved. As an early example of LOC devices with integrated electrodes, Fujii sealed Poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) and glass substrates with a microfluidic layer of PDMS [41]. Later, permanent bonding of PDMS and plastics also became attractive. Lee et al. used organofunctional silanes to bond a PDMS membrane to a Polycarbonate (PC) microfluidic layer [42] and Vlachopoulou et al. demonstrated irreversible bonding (bonding strength as high as 1MPa) between PDMS and chemically-modified PMMA, polystyrene, SU-8, PEEK, and epoxy-tape substrates [43]. Tang et al. demonstrated irreversible bonding (up to 180kPa bonding strength) between PDMS and various plastic materials, such as PMMA, PC, polyimide (PI), and polyethylene terephthalate (PET), at room temperature using aminosilane and epoxysilane anchoring [44]. A siloxane-based surface adhesion promoter was introduced by Cai et al. to obtain an irreversible sealing between PDMS and an FR4-based printed-circuit-board (PCB), as a cost-effective substrate for LOC applications [45]. More recently, Baraket et al. formed silanol groups on PDMS and polymer substrates and reported flexible microfluidic channels bonded without applying pressure and heat [46]. As a notable example related to flexible devices, Jamal et al. demonstrated a hybrid SU-8/PDMS self-assembling microfluidic device (Fig. 2c) [47]. In their technique, differentially photo-crosslinked SU-8 supports were employed to spontaneously curve PDMS microfluidic networks into cylindrical flow paths, enabling new possibilities for LOC devices based on PDMS sealing.PDMS is an excellent material for rapid prototyping and easy sealing of many LOC devices. However, it is known to have some drawbacks, such as adsorption of hydrophobic molecules, short-term stability after surface treatment, swelling in organic solvents, water permeability, and incompatibility with very high pressure operations [48,49]. In addition, PDMS is not a material of choice for large scale manufacture because it needs molds, significant time for curing, and quite some hand labor for unmolding it after curing. For these reasons, PDMS has not gained the same popularity in the industry as in the academia. Instead, thermoplastic have been preferred as low-cost and mass-producible alternatives to PDMS as well as to silicon and glass. Many companies are currently using thermoplastics in their commercial LOC products and several companies and organizations, such as Acamp (Canada) [50], thinXXS (Germany) [51], ALine (USA) [52], Epigem (UK) [53], and Microfluidic ChipShop (Germany) [54], provide production services.Thermoplastics show a wide variety of material properties that are attractive for LOC applications. Many of their properties, including elasticity, mechanical strength, optical transparency, auto-fluorescence, chemical stability, and biocompatibility, can be tailored according to the constraints imposed by the manufacturing process and the application. Patterning of micrometer- and sub-micrometer-sized structures can be done using various methods, among which hot embossing and injection molding are the most widely utilized for high volume production. Detailed overviews on these techniques can be obtained from review papers by Becker et al. [55,56], Heckele et al. [57], and Attia et al. [58]. Here, we focus on major sealing strategies developed for thermoplastics [59]: (1) thermal fusion bonding, (2) solvent bonding, (3) ultrasonic welding, and (4) bonding after surface modification.Thermal fusion bonding involves simultaneous application of pressure and heat. Substrates are heated to temperatures near or above the glass transition temperature (Tg) of one or both of the substrate materials. This technique is straightforward, can be applied to many thermoplastic materials and gives relatively high bonding strengths; however, un-optimized temperatures and pressures or use of materials with different Tg may result in channel deformation and collapse. Solvent-based bonding techniques are promising to relax the constraints on the temperature and the bonding time. A compatible solvent can be applied to substrates in liquid or vapor phase prior to mating them under pressure. Mair et al. reported chips resistant to pressures as high as 34.6MPa using solvent-based bonding of Cyclic Olefin Copolymer (COC) substrates at room-temperature [60]. Another commonly used low-temperature bonding technique is localized welding. Bonding can be done by locally applying laser or microwave, but these techniques typically require an absorbent layer at the interface. Instead, ultrasonic welding, which involves the application of an ultrasonic energy to locally weld the interfaces of thermoplastic components, emerged as a more convenient solution. Truckenmüller et al. demonstrated welding of polymer parts for a piezo-driven micro membrane pump [61]. Later, Luo et al. reported multilayer bonding of PMMA using a commercial ultrasonic bonding tool (Fig. 3a) [62]. Alternatively, various surface modification techniques, such as plasma, UV, or UV/ozone treatments, are available. Kettner et al. compared the bonding of PMMA–PMMA and COC–COC substrates after plasma treatments of different gasses (O2, N2, H2, He, and Ar) [63]. They reported bonding strength of 100Pa for a bonding temperature of 50°C applied after O2 plasma treatment. Soon after, the use of UV/ozone surface treatments was evaluated by Tsao et al. [64]. More recently, Saharil et al. introduced a dry and biocompatible bonding technique, “click” wafer bonding, which involves the sealing of off-stoichiometry thiolene polymers on surface functionalized silicon substrates at temperatures below 37°C [65].Thin films of thermoplastics have also become increasingly attractive in the LOC community particularly for flexible microfluidic devices, namely “Lab-on-a-Foil”. An excellent review paper by Focke et al. covers fabrication techniques and applications of such devices [66]. As a recent example in this context, Miserere et al. used a simple lamination process to create flexible chips in COC (Fig. 3b) [67]. In addition, roll-to-roll hot embossing and sealing methods have allowed more commercially-attractive solutions particularly for biological applications that require disposable chips [68]. Thermoplastics properties of polymers also enabled the use of the microthermoforming technology for the fabrication of complex 3D microfluidic channels having micro- or nano-structures [69–71]. Furthermore, Chen et al. introduced the concept of “Shrinky-Dink” microfluidics as a fast prototyping alternative to above-mentioned techniques [72]. In this technique, they leveraged the shrinking properties of biaxially pre-stressed thermoplastic films for easy and rapid channel fabrication and stacking of layers for 3D microfluidic chips (Fig. 3c).Early examples of LOC devices were fabricated mostly on Si and glass substrates using the technology derived from microelectronics. Although PDMS and thermoplastics dominate the field these days, micromachining of Si and glass is still attractive for some applications that may require robust, chemically-stable (e.g. solvent-compatible) and reproducible microfluidic structures potentially having high-resolution integrated electrodes and/or active sensing elements. The most common technique for channel fabrication is the etching of substrates. Anisotropic wet etching of Si was already known in the 1950s [73], but it was the invention of deep reactive ion etching (DRIE) (known as the “Bosch Process”) in the mid-1990s that revolutionized the entire microelectronics/MEMS field [74]. This technology made it possible to etch very deep and with high aspect ratio structures in Si. In the early days of this technology, it was possible to fabricate multilevel microstructures having vertical sidewalls using specific combinations of hard and soft etching masks for DRIE [75]. Nowadays, many microfluidic chips having extremely precise structures that are as deep as several hundreds of micrometers can be fabricated at a full wafer-scale (with etch rates typically ranging from 5 to 10μm/min).Direct bonding techniques have been adopted in order to seal the microfluidic structures. Si–Si fusion bonding, for example, enables a very high bonding strength. However, it is not the most preferred technique for LOC devices because optical transparency is desired for many applications or for visual inspection in general. Instead, anodic bonding of Si and glass enables both a high-quality bonding and a transparent layer. For example, in 1999, Gray et al. fabricated complex microfluidic structures using a combination of fusion bonding and anodic bonding [76]. More recently, Lovchik et al. employed DRIE and anodic bonding for the fabrication of multilayered [77] and vertical [78] microfluidic probe heads for localized surface chemistry. Fig. 4a shows the process flow and a custom-made anodic bonding tool used in that study. Similarly, versatility of DRIE and anodic bonding techniques was used by Lopez-Martinez et al. for a micropipette technology [79].Alternatively, glass–glass fusion bonding has also been extensively studied because Si is a relatively expensive material. Glass is available in wide range of formats and thicknesses (even as flexible films) and the chemical composition can be tailored depending on the application. Microfluidic channels and openings for fluidic/electrical connections can be structured using laser ablation, drilling, sand blasting, dicing, and wet/dry etching processes although etch rates and patterning resolution are typically lower than those achieved by silicon micromachining. Glass wafers are also compatible with many tools developed for microelectronics. Hence, electrodes can be patterned on flat or structured glass substrates in micrometer resolution using standard metal deposition and photolithography processes. For example, Fig. 4b shows a fusion-bonded glass microfluidic device having all-around interdigitated electrodes for an electroosmotic pump [80].Glass-glass and Si-glass bonding techniques generally require extremely clean surfaces, cleanroom conditions to avoid dust particles affecting the yield, specialized tools, and high temperature bonding or annealing steps (typically above 500°C). In order to relax these conditions, various low-temperature (below 200°C) bonding approaches were introduced, such as HF-assisted [81] and high pressure-assisted [82] fusion bonding. Zhi-Jian et al. developed a room-temperature bonding technique by bringing the cleaned surfaces of glass substrates into close contact during a continuous flow of demineralized water [83]. Howlader et al. reported bonding strengths as high as 20MPa by treating substrates with a sequential process of plasma activation steps (O2 RIE and nitrogen radical treatment) prior to the bonding at room temperature [84]. Recently, one-step O2/CF4 plasma treatment [85] and sodium silicate assisted bonding [86] have been reported for low-temperature bonding of glass substrates.Glass and silicon provide well-characterized surface properties and high-quality and high-yield sealing for LOC devices; however, they are not as much attractive as PDMS and thermoplastics especially in the academic community due to the requirement of high capital. Custom production services are provided by many companies including, but not limited to, Micralyn (Canada) [87], Dolomite Microfluidics (UK) [88], iX-factory (Germany) [89], Invenios (USA) [90], LioniX (Netherlands) [91], Little Things Factory (Germany) [92], IMT AG (Switzerland) [93], Trianja (USA), Innovative Micro Technology (USA) [94], and QMicro (Netherlands) [95].The sealing techniques discussed in previous sections typically require at least one of the following conditions: (1) the ability to adhere to a surface conformally (e.g. PDMS), (2) tailored surface chemistries, (3) high temperatures, (4) the use of the same or similar materials for the channels and the cover layer, (5) extremely clean surfaces and a dust-free environment, and (6) specialized tools. The use of adhesive layers for bonding and sealing parts of microfluidics relaxes some of these requirements and allow hybrid integration of a variety of standard and nonconventional materials. With this approach, an intermediate adhesive material is applied to the cover layer or the substrate comprising the microfluidic structures prior to bonding. Alternatively, the adhesive layer itself can be patterned to form the microfluidic layer. Here, we survey some of the most common materials that can be used as an adhesive, such as UV-curing adhesives, SU-8, and parylene, as well as materials that have emerged in the recent years.One of the most widely used adhesive bonding techniques is based on the application of liquid adhesives (glues) that hardens by evaporation of a solvent, by cross-linking after UV exposure, or by mixing with a catalyzing agent. The main challenges of using such liquid adhesives are the difficulty of obtaining a uniform thickness along large surfaces, patterning adhesives on specific areas, and avoiding clogging of microfluidic channels during bonding. UV-curable adhesives, in particular the thiolene-based resin family NOA (Norland Optical Adhesive), have become increasingly popular for the sealing of LOC devices due to their excellent physical and optical properties, solvent-compatibility, and ability to cure at low temperatures under UV exposure. As a prominent example in 2008, Bartolo et al. introduced the concept of “microfluidic stickers” that enable stacking and sealing of patterned NOA 81 layers [96]. Later, Dupont et al. fabricated microfluidic chips having a channel layer structured by casting of NOA 63 and sealed by a membrane of NOA 63 [97]. In order to avoid clogging of channels by the adhesive, Arayanarakool et al. developed a technique for transferring a thin layer of NOA 81 to a microfluidic layer using a roller [98]. More recently, a LOC device fabricated by bonding of a PCB substrate with a glass slide having an UV adhesive was developed by Li et al. (Fig. 5a) [99]. This example demonstrates that various substrates, such as a standard PCB having etched Cu as the microfluidic layer, can be sealed using adhesives without the requirement of special treatments or tools.Although UV curing adhesives are good for sealing LOC devices at low temperatures, patterning and applying a uniform thickness are still challenging. Instead, SU-8 has become the material of choice for patterning high-resolution structures in the microelectronics/MEMS community. SU-8, an epoxy-based negative-tone photoresist developed by IBM in the mid-1990s, was initially used as an inexpensive alternative for molds prepared using X-ray lithography and Ni electroplating (process known as “LIGA”). It was soon after used for the fabrication of high-aspect-ratio layers in MEMS [100]. Later, it became a widely used material in microfluidics as well, particularly for replica molding of PDMS or other polymers. SU-8 is also used as a structural material or intermediate layer for adhesive bonding, or both. In the early 2000s, Jackman et al. developed microfluidic devices using exposed SU-8 as the microfluidic layer and unexposed SU-8 on Pyrex as the adhesive layer [101]. Many other approaches followed, including direct bonding of SU-8 and plasma-treated glass cover [102], selective deposition of uncured SU-8 on the bonding surface using a roller [103], and lamination of a PET film having an uncross-linked SU-8 layer [104]. More recently, Steigert et al. reported a high bonding strength of 45MPa using additive bonding of patterned SU-8 layers at temperatures above 125°C. One important problem of patterned and cured SU-8 for adhesive bonding is that highly cross-linked SU-8 does not give good bonding quality if bonded at low temperatures. Recently, Mitri et al. addressed this issue and developed a SU-8 bonding protocol that involves the exposure of patterned SU-8 layers to 254nm light for opening the residual epoxy rings in the resin thereby promoting milder temperature and pressure requirements for bonding [105]. Several companies, including microLIQUID (Spain) and miniFAB (Australia), provide microfluidic chip manufacturing services for SU-8 processing.In addition to SU-8 bonding, low temperature adhesive bonding techniques based on polyimide and benzocyclobutene (BCB) gained increasing popularity in microelectronics/MEMS community in the early 2000s [106]. Metz et al. developed polyimide based microfluidic devices using photosensitive and non-photosensitive polyimide layers deposited by spin coating [107]. More recently, parylene thin-films deposited in vapor-phase emerged as bio-compatible passivation, encapsulation or adhesive layers for LOC devices. Besides good chemical-stability and thickness uniformity, the compatibility with many cleanroom processes (e.g. patterning by O2 RIE after photolithography) makes parylene an attractive material for microfluidic channel fabrication and sealing. For example, Ciftlik et al. reported bonding strength of 10 and 23MPa after bonding Pyrex wafers to Parylene C layers deposited on silicon-oxide [108] and silicon–nitride (Fig. 5b) [109], respectively. The bonding technique developed in this work was later used in the fabrication of a high-pressure compatible microfluidic chip for immunohistochemical applications [110].Several other adhesive materials and techniques have been employed to prevent clogging of microfluidic channels by the adhesive material and to reduce the temperature and the time required for a reliable bonding. In 2005, Satyanarayana et al. [111] and Wu et al. [112] introduced a technique called “stamp-and-stick”, where a thin layer of adhesive, such as an uncured PDMS or UV adhesive, is selectively transferred to the microfluidic layer using a stamping process, then bonded to a substrate. Soon after, Carroll et al. used this technique for room-temperature bonding of chips for capillary electrophoresis [113]. Later, Bart et al. introduced a novel room-temperature bonding technique based on chemically activated fluorinated ethylene propylene as an intermediate adhesive layer for glass and silicon substrates modified with APTES [114]. Kontakis et al. bonded SU-8 microfluidic structures to a PMMA cover using a thin PMMA adhesive layer deposited on SU-8 structures by spin-coating [115]. Gutierrez-Rivera et al. formed a 15nm thick “conformal adsorbate layer” on KMPR® photoresist and used this thin layer to fabricate multilayer microfluidics by adhesive bonding [116]. Polycaprolactone, a biodegradable polyester, was used by Koesdjojo et al. as an intermediate bonding medium for the bonding of polymer-based layers [117]. They reported compatibility with working pressures up to 10MPa for chips sealed at 60°C. Very recently, a doubly cross-linked nano-adhesive was introduced by You et al., wherein they deposited 200nm of epoxy-containing polymer on various substrates via chemical vapor deposition and reported a maximum burst pressure of 11.7MPa after curing the film at 70°C for 5h [118].Commercially-available adhesive tapes have also been used in various LOC applications as low-cost, equipment-free and easy-to-apply alternatives to above-mentioned materials. As a notable example, in 2008, Martinez et al. fabricated 3D microfluidic devices by stacking layers of patterned paper and double-sided adhesive tape [119]. Soon after, Kim et al. reported a bonding strength of 586kPa using a PDMS/tape composite [120]. Goh et al. compared the sealing and sagging properties of different pressure sensitive tapes [121].The community working on microfluidics has always been searching for easier and faster ways to fabricate and seal chips. The techniques we discussed in this review typically require the generation of masks for photolithography or molds/masters for molding and embossing. These intermediate steps set a minimum time and a non-recurring cost even for the production of a single research prototype. To reduce the time between the design and the experiments and to have more flexibility in the architecture of the final device, new materials and rapid-prototyping techniques have emerged over the last 10years, such as laminated dry-film resists (DFRs), the use of digital draft cutters and 3D printing.DFR is a photo-definable polymer film that was initially developed for the PCB manufacturing. Later, it was found to be interesting for MEMS applications as an alternative to SU-8 [122,123]. The film can easily be applied by lamination regardless of the shape, dimension, and surface topography of the substrate. High thickness uniformity, ability to tent over microfluidic structures, fast and simple processing, excellent adhesion to many surfaces make the DFR an attractive structural and sealing material for both rapid prototyping and mass production of LOC devices. In the mid-2000s, Vulto et al. demonstrated wafer-scale fabrication of microfluidic chips having integrated electrodes using multilayer lamination of DFR and bonding with a glass cover (Fig. 6a) [124,125]. Ito et al. characterized the chemical and electrical properties of such films and reported compatibility with pressures up to 0.6MPa when the DFR microfluidic layer is sandwiched between two PMMA layers [126]. As a notable example for rapid prototyping using DFRs, Zhao et al. introduced a process, “do it yourself 3D microfluidic chips”, which is based on multilayer lamination of DFRs and patterning them by direct projection lithography using a commercially available digital projector [127]. More recently, different types of DFRs were used by several research groups for various biosensing applications [128–130]. Companies, such as DuPont (USA) [131], Engineered Materials Systems (USA) [132], Elga Europe (Italy) [133], Tokyo Ohka Kogyo Co. (Japan) [134], DJ DevCorp (USA) [135], are producing DFRs having thicknesses ranging from 5μm to 1000μm and in the form of sheets or rolls (up to 100m long).Draft cutters (or cutting plotter) enable rapid fabrication of sub-millimeter structures directly from a computer-generated layout for producing flexible microfluidic devices. Cutter tools are mainly used in the sign making industry for patterning adhesive vinyl sheets. Several research groups working in microfluidics have adopted this technology to create microfluidic channels in many types of films. As an early example in 2005, Bartholomeusz et al. fabricated multilayered microfluidic structures patterned by cutting various polymer films and demonstrated feature sizes as small as 20μm [136]. More recently, Glavan et al. used a low-cost and desktop draft cutter having 50μm width blade to engrave channels into paper, which were sealed using an adhesive tape [137]. Cooksey et al. demonstrated foldable and multidimensional microfluidic devices using tapes and plastics cut by a draft cutter [138]. Our group has recently introduced a high throughput chip sealing and singulation technique based on the lamination of a DFR film patterned using a draft cutter. We called this technique the “chip-olate” process because the singulation of sealed chips from the wafer is as easy as breaking a chocolate bar. We also demonstrated the compatibility of DFR-based sealing technique with capillary-driven microfluidic chips [139] and immunoassays having patterned protein arrays [140].Rapid fabrication of complex and custom-designed devices has always been of significant technological interest. An additive process, 3D printing, has enabled the rapid structuring of materials for many uses, from medical implants to custom-fit shoes. For microfluidics applications, this technology allows the prototyping and low volume production of monolithic LOC devices that do not require an additional sealing or microfluidic port integration step. In the early 2000s, Therriault et al. demonstrated the fabrication of 3D microvascular networks using direct-write assembly of a fugitive organic ink [141]. Currently, 3D printing is becoming more widely available while operating at higher resolution and with a larger variety of materials. Among 3D printing variants, stereolithography is standing out as a key technique for the prototyping of transparent devices having features sufficiently small for many microfluidics applications (Fig. 6b). A recent paper by Au et al. discusses this technique and compares different desktop stereolithography systems [142]. Today, many companies provide “mail-order” stereolithography services and several companies, such as Nanoscribe (Germany) [143] and FEMTOprint (Switzerland) [144], provide state-of-the-art laser lithography systems for prototyping microfluidic devices having sub-mm sized features.In addition, the concept of “pen microfluidics” by Rahmanian et al. was introduced as a rapid production technique for fully-sealed chips having microfluidic structures that are drawn by hand [145]. In another interesting concept called “microfluidic puzzle”, Jiseok et al. implemented the idea of reconfigurable microfluidic chips by embedding “plug-and-play” type of functional PDMS units (e.g. T-junction, flow focusing, inlet/outlet etc.) into PMMA-based microfluidic scaffolds [146].Permanent and high-strength sealing of microfluidic devices is generally desired. Nonetheless, reversible sealing can be essential or beneficial for some applications, such as patterning of materials on surfaces using microfluidics [32,33] or studies on cells. Reusing a chip after removing the cover layer and cleaning is also attractive particularly for research laboratories when number of chip samples is limited or manufacturing is costly and time-consuming (e.g. LOC devices that comprise active electronics). Direct bonding techniques that are discussed in previous sections do not allow damage-free separation of bonded layers and highly cross-linked adhesives used at the interfaces are very difficult to remove. Furthermore, it is typically not practical to reapply the adhesives or use the bonding tools for chips that are already singulated. To the best of our knowledge, only a small number of studies address these issues and they utilize mostly conformal and reversible sealing properties of PDMS (as mentioned in Section 2.1) and hard materials having hydrophobic coatings.Junker et al. developed microfluidic chips having hydrophilic channel walls and a hydrophobic chip surface that is temporarily covered with a polystyrene-coated glass slide to avoid liquid leakage during capillary filling of the channels [147]. For applications that involve higher pressures of liquids, a hydrophobic coating may not be sufficient. Thus, a PDMS-based sealing assisted with a mechanical clamping is typically preferred. A magnetic clamping setup was developed by Tkachenko et al. for reversible sealing of PDMS microfluidic chips against cover glasses having cell cultures (Fig. 7a) [148]. This clamping technique enabled to exert a uniform pressing force on the microfluidic chip, resulting in a reliable sealing for liquid pressures up to 40kPa. More recently, Lamberti et al. demonstrated a PMMA clamping system to fix a PDMS-based microfluidic chamber in between two fluorine-doped tin oxide covered glass slides for the fabrication of a dye-sensitized solar cell [149]. The authors reported a reversible sealing for liquid pressures up to 50kPa at operation temperatures as high as 80°C. Recently, Thompson et al. used commercial adhesive tapes for reversible sealing of PDMS microfluidic devices [150]. The authors studied the optimum baking time after sealing for different tapes and demonstrated burst pressures as high as 350kPa for a baking time of 2h at 65°C. As an example of non-PDMS-based reversible bonding, Gong et al. developed a bonding technique based on a hot-melt adhesive wax [151]. They applied the technique to various substrates (e.g. paper, PMMA, glass, and metal) and demonstrated good sealing properties for 15-day long cell culture studies.In addition to reversibility, some applications, such as studies on cells, may require a sealing step when open microfluidic structures are already in a wet medium. Lovchik et al. addressed this challenge by introducing the concept of “overflow microfluidic networks” (Fig. 7b) [152]. They patterned wettable microstructures around PDMS cell chambers to wick away excess culture medium from the chambers during sealing of the chip. Cells can be easily deposited in open cell chambers and cultured for many days in vitro with direct exchange of culture medium using a pipette. This flexible and versatile method enabled easy access to cells for experiments using a patch-clamp setup or direct chemical stimulation of cells (open chip) followed by precise investigation of the interactions between cell populations in neighboring chambers (closed chip).The community working on microfluidics has also implemented LOC devices that do not require sealing, i.e. open-channel microfluidics. For example, Folch et al. developed open-channel microfluidic devices for cell studies and recently Wheeler et al. studied manipulation of discrete droplets on open surfaces, namely open “digital microfluidics” [153]. Other applications of open-channel microfluidics usually employ capillary action for the transport of liquids. Feng et al. recently demonstrated a PDMS-based open-channel device that has directional wicking property, similarly to a “microfluidic diode” [154]. A technique for wettability patterning for pumpless fluid transport on open and non-planar microfluidic platforms was introduced by Ghosh et al. [155]. The technique used versatile substrates, such as metals, polymers, paper, to demonstrate complex manipulations of liquids and droplets. Moreover, paper-based diagnostic devices, such as dipstick assays and lateral flow tests are typically not sealed and are also based on capillary flow for the transport of fluids. LOC devices using paper as a substrate hold great potential as affordable, equipment-free, rapid and simple-to-use alternatives to those made of glass/silicon, plastics, and PDMS. A recent review by Hu et al. provides insight on advances in paper-based point-of-care diagnostics, including the substrates, fabrication techniques, and challenges [156].Besides a high-quality sealing, an equally important factor for a functional LOC device is a reliable fluidic interface between the chip and the peripherals (e.g. external pumps, valves, tubings, etc). These fluidic interfaces are commonly called “fluidic interconnect”, “world-to-chip” or “macro-to-micro” interfaces and we here use these terms interchangeably. Although the importance of fluidic interconnects is sometimes neglected in the microfluidics community, they are typically the least reliable components of a LOC device and often limit the overall performance of these devices. The back-end processes required for integrating fluidic connections significantly contribute to the cost of the device. In addition, a key issue for the wide-spread use of LOC devices is the standardization of these connections [157,158]. There are a few standards for fluidic interfacing, such as Luer Lock and Luer Cone, but these are suitable for a small number of applications and not readily compatible with most of fabrication techniques. To the best of our knowledge, a universally-accepted fluidic connection does not exist, but the community working on microfluidics has developed a wide variety of techniques specific to the target application.Ideally, a fluidic interconnect should (1) have minimal dead volume, (2) avoid cross-contamination of samples, (3) be easy to plug, (4) be removable and reusable, (5) be reliable at high pressures, (6) be small enough to allow high density connections, (7) be made using simple and low-cost techniques, (8) be chemically inert, and (9) be compatible with commercial tubings and fittings. There are various world-to-chip interfaces having some of these features and they can be categorized based on the plugging orientation (i.e. in-plane or out-of-plane), material of the microfluidic device (e.g. PDMS, plastic, glass/silicon, etc), pressure capability, and maximum number of connections that can be achieved simultaneously. An early review paper by Fredrickson and Fan covers notable examples of fluidic interfaces published until 2004 and classifies them based on their modularity and propensity to integration [159]. Here, we cover more recent studies and categorize the interconnects using as criteria (1) reversible insertion of micro-needles or tubes into holes drilled or etched on the chip surface or edge, (2) reversible fluidic connection with direct contact to the surface of the device by compression sealing, (3) application of an adhesive to achieve a high strength and permanent interface, and (4) monolithic integration of microfluidic ports. Some LOC devices, such as autonomous microfluidic capillary systems [160], open-channel microfluidic devices, and strip tests based on capillary flow (Section 2.7), typically require just a loading pad or a reservoir for adding a liquid sample. We therefore do not particularly discuss such devices in this section.One of the most straightforward fluidic interfacing techniques is based on the insertion of a tubing to a receiving opening that is defined on the cover layer or on the substrate of a microfluidic device. Early examples of such microfluidic interconnects were compatible with chips based on glass and silicon. In the late 1990s, Gray et al. developed a technique for the insertion of standard capillary tubes into a Si microfluidic chip using an injection-molded plastic coupler [76]. They demonstrated liquid-tight connections for pressures up to 414kPa. Later, another adhesive-free and reworkable interconnection technique for Si chips was demonstrated by Pan et al. [161]. Following the fabrication of flanges in Si using a combination of DRIE and isotropic etching, they connected elastomeric tubings using a heat shrink tubing sleeve. They reported a leak-free sealing up to a maximum test pressure of 200kPa. Other insertion-based fluidic connections were used for plastic microfluidic chips. For example, Chen et al. reported pressure capabilities as high as 40MPa using a threaded stainless steel needle inserted into a COC chip [162].With the increasing popularity of PDMS in the early 2000s, new studies and techniques emerged to achieve reliable and reversible macro-to-micro interfaces to PDMS-based chips, particularly the ones that comprise fluidic architectures with relatively higher I/O complexity (e.g. “microfluidic processor”). For such applications, press-fit connectors, which are based on compression sealing between the PDMS and the inserted tubing (or needle), were preferred because they are easy to plug/unplug and compatible with moderate pressures. As a prominent example, Quake et al. used this type of connections in a nanoliter-scale nucleic acid processor that is capable of processing different samples in parallel (Fig. 8a) [163]. Soon after, Christensen et al. used 20 gauge needles inserted into PDMS in order to study failure mechanisms of press-fit interconnects [164]. They demonstrated viable connections for pressures ranging from 100kPa to 700kPa. More recently, Lee and Park introduced an in-plane interconnection technique that enables a lateral liquid flow to prevent loss of particles (i.e. due to sedimentation) typically observed in out-of-plane interconnections [165].Owing to its conformal sealing property, PDMS is also widely used as a gasket material for reversible fluidic interconnections inserted into LOC devices that are made of other materials, such as plastics, glass, and SU-8. As an early example, Chiou and Lee developed a PDMS casting technique to achieve minimal dead-volume and in-plane connections to glass microfluidic chips. They demonstrated reliable operation for pressures up to 1MPa [166]. Later, another “plug and play” type of interconnection technique was introduced by Perozziello et al. [167]. They integrated custom-made PDMS rings in PMMA microfluidic chips and demonstrated 750kPa pressure capability and reusability for inserted metal tubings. More recently, Lo and Meng fabricated SU-8/Parylene C microfluidic chips having chambers filled with PDMS for lateral insertion of needle interconnects [168]. Evander and Tenje integrated PDMS O-rings into PMMA chips in order to plug rectangular capillaries (Fig. 8b) [169]. Although the techniques mentioned above enabled reversible and reliable interconnections for numerous applications, injection and handling of very small volumes (1–20μL) still remained as a challenge. van Swaay et al. recently addressed this issue and developed reusable connectors that have reservoirs for holding low-volume samples (Fig. 8c) [170].Fluidic connections for insertion are typically plugged manually to the ports, the locations of which vary from design to design. There has been recent efforts for standardizing such interconnects. Inspired from conventional USB connectors in electronic devices, Chen and Pan developed a microfluidic connector, “fit-to-flow (F2F) interconnects”, which enabled self-aligned and reversible connections to microfluidic chips (Fig. 9a) [171]. They inserted the tubings into a PDMS socket and plugged the microfluidic chip into the socket. The fluidic connection was realized either by interfacial adhesion between the PDMS and the chip surface (maximum leakage pressure of 58.6kPa) or by applying a negative pressure (i.e. vacuum) around the interconnects (maximum leakage pressure of 336kPa). More recently, Scott et al. introduced another standard for world-to-chip interfacing, which is based on a conventional D-subminiature connector (Fig. 9b) [172]. They fabricated male and female connectors using replica molding of PDMS and tested the connectors at pressures up to 103kPa.Insertion-based reversible interconnects allow for easy and fast interfacing to LOC devices because they do not require custom-designed fixtures or frames for applying a significant compression force to ensure leak-free connections. However, these connections are typically not reliable at high pressures and not compatible with simultaneous plugging of high-density connections. Instead, contact-based connections have been developed, particularly to be used in automated tools with high density I/O ports. This type of world-to-chip interfaces comprises a soft intermediate element, such as an O-ring, a PDMS gasket, or a silicone tubing, and a fixing mechanism to compress the tubings against a flat area of the microfluidic chip. A paper by Snakenborg et al. provides a theoretical model and experimental comparison of such connections [173]. Several companies provide reusable microfluidic connectors based on this principle, such as inline and circular Multiflux® connectors from Dolomite Microfluidics (UK) [88], and fluidic probes from Cor Solutions (USA) [174].In the early 2000s, Yang and Maeda developed a novel fluidic/electrical socket having an easy locking mechanism for compression (Fig. 10a) [175]. The socket supported the connection of 10 silicone tubings simultaneously, where each can withstand a pressure limit of 200kPa. In addition to direct contact of a silicone tubing, techniques based on the compression of a PDMS gasket were also extensively employed [176,177]. As an early notable example in 2001, Nittis et al. developed a microfluidic assembly that allowed non-permanent coupling of capillary tubings to silicon/glass chips using an intermediate elastomeric sealing layer [178]. More recently, Cooksey et al. demonstrated a PDMS-based vacuum manifold, which potentially allows the connection of hundreds of fluidic interfaces simultaneously (Fig. 10b) [179]. In this study, a conformal contact is achieved between the PDMS manifold and the PMMA chip. Then, a negative pressure is applied to the distributed vacuum network on the manifold, providing a net force between the manifold and the chip to withstand an average of 101kPa liquid pressure.Alternatively to PDMS sealing layers, O-rings are also commonly used for both single and multiple fluidic interconnections. An early paper by Han and Frazier presented the reliability aspects of microfluidic systems having O-rings at the fluidic interfaces [180]. Later, Bhagat et al. studied the effect of temperature on the sealing performance of the O-ring and reported pressure compatibility as high as 1.7MPa at 80°C [181]. Kortmann et al. introduced a spring-loaded connector that can apply a variable force to the fluidic interface having an O-ring sealing [182]. This technique allowed reliable and automatic interconnections to a PMMA chip for pressures as high as 2MPa. The co-authors of this study later addressed the issue of higher dead volumes typically observed in connections based on O-rings and reduced the dead volume to 18nL using miniaturized O-rings [183]. More recently, a high-density fluidic connection technique based on flanged PTFE tubings instead of O-rings or gaskets was introduced by Wilhelm et al. (Fig. 10c) [184]. The authors demonstrated simultaneous connection of 100 chemically-inert and zero dead volume chip-to-world interfaces that withstand pressures up to 630kPa.As an alternative to compression mechanisms using screws, vacuum, or mechanical locks, Atencia et al. recently introduced a novel concept called “magnetic connectors” (Fig. 11) [185]. This simple-to-use and reversible fluidic connection technique employs a ring magnet on one side of the microfluidic chip and a disc magnet on the other side, providing an interfacial force in the range of 2–15N. The authors compared the rupture pressures for magnetic connectors that have different sealing layers, such as adhesive tapes, PDMS gasket, or O-ring, and reported reliable sealing for pressures from 250kPa (O-ring) to 500kPa (polyimide tape). SFC Fluidics (USA) is currently providing similar magnetic connectors under the brand name of QuickConnect® [186].Fluidic connections that are based on insertion of a tubing or contact using a gasket under compression are easy-to-use, reversible and allow for multiple connections. These connections do not however typically support applications where high-pressures (more than 1MPa) occur. In order to enhance the robustness and the reliability of fluidic connections, the microfluidic community has developed various bonding techniques involving adhesives. The main challenges of using adhesives are the risk of clogging tubings and microfluidic channels with adhesive, the time required for the application and curing of the adhesive, and the limited compatibility of some adhesives with chemicals and solvents.Dry adhesive films are employed to eliminate the risk of clogging. As a recent example, Glavan et al. used strong double-sided adhesive tapes to seal the microfluidic ferrules to a paper-based microfluidic device (Fig. 12a) [137]. For applications that require higher pressures of liquids, IDEX Health and Science (formerly Upchurch Scientific) provides pre-formed epoxy adhesive rings for high-quality (pressures up to 6.9MPa) bonding of their NanoPort™ connectors to rigid chip surfaces [187]. Alternatively, Koesdjojo et al. used a polycaprolactone film to bond NanoPorts to plastic chips at a lower temperature (around 60°C) [117].Other adhesive bonding techniques have been introduced for integration of fluidic connections to glass/silicon microfluidic chips. In the late 1990s, Bings et al. drilled the edges of glass chips using a 200μm diameter tungsten carbide drills and glued fused-silica capillaries into the holes using the CrystalBond™ thermoplastic adhesive [188]. Soon after, Meng et al. introduced the concept of “micromachined silicon couplers” in order to standardize the connections to MEMS fluidic devices and increase the yield and efficiency of the fluidic assembly process [189]. They applied the CrystalBond™ to thousands of micromachined couplers using a wafer-level spray coating step and reported almost 9MPa pressure capability for couplers bonded by thermoplastic bonding. Pattekar and Kothare develop an epoxy-based gluing technique to bond Teflon capillaries to anodically-bonded glass/silicon chips [190]. They demonstrated a reliable fluidic interface at pressures above 2MPa and temperatures as high as 275°C. A high-viscosity epoxy was used by Tiggelaar et al. to glue in-plane fluidic connections to glass microreactor chips that can work at remarkably high pressures (up to 69MPa) [191].In order to avoid clogging of microchannels by liquid adhesives, other novel techniques and materials have been introduced. For example, Murphy et al. developed a solder-based chip-to-tube connection technique for high-pressure microreactors (Fig. 12b) [192]. In this method, they formed circular metal patterns around the fluidic openings of anodically-bonded silicon/glass chips and bonded metal ferrules to these patterns using an intermediate solder layer. Microfluidic devices assembled with this technique were used at temperatures from −78 to 160°C and pressures up to 20MPa. Hartmann et al. used a localized UV light to control the wicking of a UV curable glue that is applied to the gap between the interconnect channel and the inserted capillary [193]. Parylene deposited in vapor-phase was also used to fix in-plane fluidic connections. Johnson et al. demonstrated that interfaces between polyimide tubings and silicon/glass chips sealed by Parylene C can withstand pressures as high as 827kPa (Fig. 12c) [194]. More recently, a novel macro-to-micro interfacing technique was developed by our group (Fig. 12d) [195]. In this case, tapered conduits are inserted to a cover prior to bonding the cover to a substrate carrying microfluidic structures. Following bonding of the cover to the substrate in the presence of conduits, an epoxy is applied to a network of distribution channels to ensure a leak-free interface between the conduits and the chip.As discussed in the previous sections, conformal sealing properties of PDMS can be used for insertion- or contact-based interfacing to LOC devices. Typically, these interfaces are sufficiently good for many applications but some studies also employed adhesives to enhance the reliability of such fluidic connections. As an example in 2003, Chen et al. embedded stainless steel interconnect tubes into a PDMS chip using a block of epoxy resin for better mechanical stability [196]. The same year, Li et al. studied the application of an epoxy glue to a PDMS gasket for fluidic interfacing to rigid microfluidic chips and reported a maximum leakage pressure of 683kPa [197]. Later, Mu et al. developed an epoxy-assisted interconnection technique for PDMS-based microfluidic chips and demonstrated robust interconnects (compatible with pressures up to 1.8MPa) that are free of contamination and clogging [198]. More recently, Wang et al. introduced a new microfluidic tubing method for PDMS microfluidic devices used for controlled synthesis of polymeric nanoparticles [199]. After the insertion of a plastic tubing into the PDMS device, the authors of this study applied a glue and then an additional layer of uncured PDMS. They reported that an irreversible interconnection with both glue and cured PDMS can sustain pressures as high as 4.5MPa.The fluidic interconnects, which we discussed in the previous sections typically require openings that are etched or drilled in the microfluidic substrate or cover layer, or require flat surfaces for contact-based interfacing, or adhesives for a permanent and robust assembly. Alternatively, 3D microfluidic ports can be integrated monolithically using injection molding, welding, or 3D printing. These techniques have the potential to reduce the cost and time required for post-processing steps for integrating the fluidic ports.One of the main advantages of injection molding is that it enables high volume manufacturing of 3D structures that are typically much thicker than those achieved by other micromachining techniques. This allows monolithic integration of sufficiently thick connectors that are compatible with commercial fluidic fittings. As a notable example, Mair et al. fabricated COC chips having threaded and integrated ports using injection molding [200]. They reported maximum burst pressures up to 15.6MPa. Similar molding techniques for monolithic integration of connectors were later applied to microfluidic chips based on PDMS [201,202] and OSTE polymer [203]. Welding and bonding were also employed. For example, Ng et al. used ultrasonic welding in order to attach PMMA connectors to PMMA chips [204]. Sabourin et al. permanently attached a deformable tubing to PMMA microfluidic chips during UV-assisted thermal bonding of PMMA layers [205]. In addition, Puntambekar and Ahn introduced a flanging technique for thermoplastic tubings permanently integrated into microfluidic chips fabricated by direct bonding of glass or plastic substrates [206].As discussed in Section 2.5, rapid prototyping techniques, particularly 3D printing technology, offer more flexibility in the final shape of the microfluidic designs and materials used [142]. Recently, Paydar et al. employed a multi-material 3D printing technique to fabricate microfluidic interconnects comprising a rigid plastic for the main body and a flexible elastomer for the O-ring (Fig. 13a) [207]. This customizable and easy-to-use connector was tested and withstands pressures in excess of 400kPa. Also recently, Dentry et al. developed a 3D-printed acoustofluidic chamber having integrated ports in order to interface a surface acoustic wave (SAW) device directly with the working fluid (Fig. 13b) [208]. Such printing technologies hold great promise for easy fabrication of microfluidic devices comprising integrated ports that are compatible with commercial fittings and tubings.Many LOC devices utilize liquid/particle control or sensing techniques based on optical, magnetic, or electrical principles and these devices therefore need power and electrical connections. LOC applications based on electrical principles, such as electrochemical- or impedance-based sensing, particle manipulation based on dielectrophoresis, electrokinetic separation, electroosmotic flow generation, droplet manipulation by electrowetting, make use of integrated electrodes, which are patterned inside the microfluidic structures. Although various fabrication techniques are available for high-resolution patterning of electrodes on common substrates used in microfluidics (e.g. silicon, glass, plastics, PDMS, and paper), the necessity of electrical interfacing in addition to fluidic connections brings additional reliability issues, fabrication challenges, and packaging costs. Moreover, the number of independently addressable electrode sets is limited by the number of contacts that can be allocated in a given footprint. Furthermore, for many LOC applications, the chips are used only once to avoid cross-contamination between samples and cleaning steps before reuse. This implies that electrical connections, as well as fluidic connections, should preferably be non-permanent and easily pluggable.In the MEMS/microelectronics industry, permanent electrical connections such as the ones based on wire bonding, flip-chip bonding, soldering, or application of a conductive paste/film are often preferred because the devices are meant to function for extended durations. But temporary interconnects are still desirable for characterization and testing or for chips and circuit boards that are required to be changed or plug/unplugged frequently. Such reusable interconnects constitute a large market in the electronics industry and there are numerous well-established standards, such as USB, Ethernet, HDMI, and PCMCIA. Nevertheless, there are not yet widely-accepted standards for electrical connections in LOC devices to the best of our knowledge. A few companies, including Micronit Microfluidics (The Netherlands) [209] and microLIQUID (Spain) [210], produce chip holders that provide both fluidic and electrical connections, but these are compatible with only a limited number of devices or applications. So far, the community working on LOC devices have adopted some of the standard connections used for electronic devices or implemented custom-designed fixtures. Here, we discuss the use of card edge connectors and spring-loaded contacts, as well as some of the advanced packaging techniques developed for integration of active sensors, and recently emerged technologies for electrical connections.Edge connectors/sockets are used in almost every electronic device that needs a wired data and power connection. Various widely-accepted standards are available to plug small and portable devices, such as SD and microSD memory cards and SIM cards used in mobile phones. Such connectors are convenient for some LOC devices because they enable easy and reliable plugging without using custom-made fixtures. Typically, the chip is plugged into the socket by sliding while the mechanical alignment is achieved through the edges of the chip. The contact pads on the microfluidic chip are allocated on one side of the device and the patterning of them is typically done together with the microelectrodes. A majority of commercial connectors have standard contact pitch of 1.27mm or 2.54mm, but some special connectors have contacts with smaller spacing. For example, HSEC8 edge connectors from Samtec (USA) [211] have 0.8mm pitch spacing for up to 30 contacts and connectors for microSD cards have 1.1mm pitch for 8 contacts. Other connectors with smaller pitch spacing (e.g. 0.5mm) also exist but these require thinner mating substrates (e.g. less than 0.3mm), which may not be compatible with standard thicknesses of silicon, glass, or plastic substrates.Edge connectors have been used in several LOC applications. For example, Temiz et al. used a 20-way edge connector in order to interface a silicon chip to external electronic circuits used to generate and sense signals in cyclic voltammetry experiments (Fig. 14a) [130,212]. Misiakos et al. developed a portable bioanalytical device for real-time protein and DNA detection [213]. They placed microfluidic chips having electrical contacts into reusable cartridges, inserted fluidic connections using a PDMS gasket, and plugged the assembled cartridge to an edge connector for electrical interfacing. Citflik et al. developed a high-pressure compatible fluidic and electrical interfacing technique [108]. In their method, fluidic ports were interfaced with a PMMA adapter having an O-ring and the electrical interfacing to a PCB was achieved using a 8-lead microSD connector. Another connector with 26 contacts was used by Wu et al. for droplet manipulation based on electrowetting on dielectric (EWOD) [214]. More recently, Novo et al. developed an microfluidic immunoassay that utilizes autonomous capillary pressure for liquid flow and integrated photodiodes for optical detection, which are wire-bonded to a PCB and connected to the main device using an edge connector [215]. Similar electrical contacting principles are also used in commercial devices, such as hand-held glucometers working based on electrochemical sensing. Recently, Nie et al. fabricated paper-based analytical devices having printed electrodes and contact pads compatible with such commercial glucometers (Fig. 14b) [216].Standard edge connectors are very convenient for rapid testing of LOC devices and for some commercial devices that require a few electrical and fluidic connections. But the number of connections is limited by the width of the socket and it is typically not possible to distribute the contact pads on the other sides of the chips, or to arrange them in an array format. Alternatively, spring-loaded contacts (or Pogo pin) enable the arrangement of contact pads and fluidic connections in any format, which simplifies the routing of interconnecting wires. Pogo pins are typically mounted on a fixture or a PCB and temporary electrical connections are realized by compressing the fixture towards the chip vertically. Several companies, such as Interconnect Devices, Inc. (acquired by Smiths) [217] and Preci-Dip (Switzerland) [218], provide individual spring-loaded contacts or multi-contact assemblies arranged in standard arrays or custom-designed formats. These contacts typically have minimum pitch spacing larger than 1mm, contact resistance less than 50mΩ, and current rating of several amps. Some companies, such as Fixtest (Germany) [219], Emulation Technology (Canada) [220], E-tec Interconnect (Switzerland) [221] and Omron (Japan) [222], provide specialized spring contacts for applications that require pitch spacing less than 1mm.Pogo pins are generally mounted on plastic housings that are also used for interfacing with fluidic ports. As a notable example in 2006, Park et al. used Pogo pins mounted on a circular Plexiglas ring to study electric signal-guided assembly of biomolecules onto conductive inorganic surfaces (Fig. 15a) [223]. They patterned gold electrodes and SU-8 microchannels on a Pyrex wafer and sealed the microfluidic structures by pressing a cover having a PDMS gasket. This non-permanent sealing and fluidic/electric interconnection technique allowed them to test 6 devices on the wafer simultaneously. A similar electrical/fluidic interface was presented by Illa et al. to interface a COC microfluidic chip with integrated gold electrodes for electrochemical applications [224]. As another example for the use of pin contacts in compact platforms, Do and Ahn introduced a LOC device for point-of-care testing based on a polymer microfluidic device and a chip housing having pin contacts to interface electrochemical sensing electrodes [225]. Pogo pins can also be assembled on PCBs. Kanagasabapathi and Kaler fabricated glass chips having metal electrodes to study different electrode materials and dielectric coatings for dielectrophoretic liquid actuation in open space [226]. For easy electrical interfacing, they fabricated a PCB having a cut-out region for visual inspection and Pogo pins arranged to align with the pads patterned on two sides of the chip (Fig. 15b). Another electrical interface with 90 Pogo pin was recently implemented by Wheeler et al. for an automated digital microfluidic platform (Fig. 15c) [227,228]. This study demonstrated that tens of independent electrodes can be connected to a peripheral device in an easy and automated manner.Most of microfluidic chips are electrically passive in the sense that they do not comprise transistors for actively switching or processing electrical signals. Generation, detection, or processing of electrical signals is accomplished using external electronic circuits, which are connected to the chips via sockets or pogo pins. These connectors limit the performance of the overall system and the number of integrated electrodes that can be addressed independently. Since the introduction of the μTAS concept in the early 1990s, many research efforts have been dedicated by MEMS/microelectronics and microfluidics communities to integrate on-chip sensing and signal processing functionalities to LOC devices. Significant part of this research has comprised the use of ISFET (ion-sensitive field-effect transistor) technology for sensing and CMOS (complementary metal–oxide-semiconductor) technology for sensing and signal processing. Prominent examples of this effort for different applications can be found in papers from Bausells et al. [229], Thewes et al. [230], Guiducci et al. [231], Ghafar-Zadeh [232], and Hierlemann and Baltes [233].Hybrid integration of CMOS chips with microfluidics can be favorable for many biological and chemical sensing applications that require highly-parallel and sensitive measurements. For high-density arrays, for example, the number of external I/O connections can be minimized using electronic addressing techniques (e.g. row and column selection). Despite these advantages, materials used in the CMOS fabrication are not always compatible with the chemicals and reagents involved, thus various post-CMOS processing steps have to be applied [234]. Moreover, packaging of CMOS-based sensors is a major challenge because fluidic connections and channels have to be implemented on a very small chip surface (CMOS chips are typically much smaller than LOC devices) and electrical I/O connections have to be protected from the liquids. In the academic community, CMOS chips are typically connected to packages via wirebonds. Such wirebonds are protected by an insulating layer (e.g. epoxy or parylene) and typically PDMS-based microfluidic structures (straight channels or reservoirs) are then interfaced to the surface of a CMOS chip. There has been also some recent activity to embed CMOS chips into larger substrates and to route the CMOS I/O pads to the periphery of the carrier using a metal patterning step [235,236]. Although thousands of CMOS chips can be manufactured at a low-cost using wafer-level batch processing, these post-processing and integration/packaging steps can reduce the yield and rise the overall cost considerably. Hence, many promising research prototypes of LOC devices with active circuits could not be commercialized, except a few successful examples used in specific applications, such as i-STAT® (Abbott Point of Care, USA) blood analyzer system [237] and Ion Torrent™ (Life Technologies, Thermo Fisher Scientific) DNA sequencing device [238].Merging microfluidics with CMOS electronics is promising to enable a new generation of LOC systems that have on-chip addressing/multiplexing, sensing, and data elaboration functionalities. Besides the packaging issues, a key factor for the widespread use of such systems, particularly in the life sciences field, is the disposability of the assay substrate at a low cost. Recently, Temiz and Guiducci addressed this issue by developing disposable sensing layers that can be aligned and temporarily attached to the electronics through flexible interconnections (Fig. 16a) [239,240]. This approach decoupled the fabrication of the sensor and the CMOS electronics, but still allowed high-density electrical connections in an array format, which is not possible to achieve using standard sockets or pins. In the fabrication of these replaceable chips, flexible microcontacts were realized by deposition of metal and parylene layers inside trenches etched in a silicon substrate. Then, the metal layer on the frontside of the Si wafer was patterned to form the microelectrodes, and the backside of the substrate was etched to create a housing for the placement of the CMOS chip and to release the parylene-based flexible microcontacts. Other promising advanced packaging techniques for sensor integration have been developed. As a notable example based on the integration of an optical image sensor, Moon et al. developed an integrated point-of-care device that merges a microfluidic chip with a lensless imaging platform using a CCD (charge-coupled device) image sensor (Fig. 16b) [241]. In this technique, electrical connections of the CCD sensor were connected to a PCB using a standard chip package and the microfluidic chip comprising a chamber with inlet/outlet openings was mounted on the package using a 760μm thick protection glass. The benefits of hybrid integration have been demonstrated in many other research laboratories, but the commercialization and wide-spread use of such advanced LOC systems can be through the development of new materials and techniques in the packaging technologies.Recently, new interconnection technologies have emerged for microfluidic devices, such as wireless power delivery, energy conversion, and use of liquid metal connections and through-silicon-vias (TSVs) as alternatives to conventional metal wires. In 2011, Qiao et al. introduced a novel LOC device that can be powered wirelessly [242]. They integrated the microfluidic chip to a flexible plastic substrate having an RF antenna, which is patterned using a low-cost roll-to-roll printing technique. An electrical power at 13.56MHz was transmitted using a commercial RFID (Radio Frequency Identification) reader and 10V DC was generated on the device. The authors of this study used the generated power to manipulate beads and proteins using dielectrophoresis. More recently, another novel power delivery technique based on energy conversion was developed by Peng et al. [243]. In this technique, the authors integrated piezoelectric elements on a microfluidic device and generated voltage outputs over 40V by actuating the piezoelectric elements by human fingers. They successfully demonstrated basic manipulations of droplets, such as transport, merging, splitting, using EWOD phenomena. Development of such energy harvesting techniques for LOC devices will potentially relax the constraints on the electrical connections and will pave the way for autonomous and energy-efficient microfluidic systems based on electrical principles.Utilization of liquid metal is also emerging as an alternative to conventional microelectrodes and electrical contacts. A recent review paper by Cheng and Wu provides an excellent overview of liquid–metal based microfluidic devices [244]. As a prominent example for the use of liquid metals in the interconnects, Zhang et al. introduced a new packaging technology for hybrid integration of CMOS and microfluidics [245]. They embedded a CMOS chip into a PDMS layer having separate microfluidic structures for electrical interconnections and for biological/chemical samples. Galinstan, a commercial liquid metal alloy, was injected through stainless steel tubes to the microfluidic channels aligned to the contact pads of the CMOS chips. The tubes were then left in the holes to facilitate electrical connections between the CMOS chip and the peripheral devices. Another recent study by Gao and Gui employed a liquid metal as non-contact electrodes in electroosmotic pumps [246]. Liquid metal injected to microchannels is promising to be a simple and rapid technique for realizing electrodes and electrical contacts in LOC devices.Although still premature for LOC applications, an emerging interconnection and 3D packaging technology based on TSVs might lead a new paradigm shift in the microelectronics industry. There has been an extensive research and industrial activity on multi-layer stacking of devices and connecting them using TSVs [247]. In order to remove the heat from 3D chip stacks, a microfluidics-based chip cooling strategy has been introduced recently by several research groups [248,249]. Here, microchannels structured on the substrate of CMOS devices are used to deliver a cooling liquid to the stack of chips while having the layers electrically connected using high-density TSVs. If this technology becomes adopted and standard in the microelectronics industry, similar principles can be adopted for the fabrication of high-performance LOC devices with high-density electrical connections. Another pioneering concept pursued by IBM researchers is to combine packaging with power delivery using electrochemical energy conversion in 3D microfluidic networks in similar way to the vascularization of human brain [250]. Such packaging schemes inspired from biology hold great promises to overcome interconnection-related problems in future supercomputers and potentially LOC devices.LOC devices have demonstrated their benefits in many applications where small amounts of liquids and micron- and nano-sized particles are controlled in great precision and analytes are detected with high sensitivity. While there is a consensus within the LOC community that there is no one-fit-for-all sensing or actuation technology, type of material, architecture or fabrication strategy, we believe that choices made in the sealing approaches and fluidic/electrical connectors of LOC devices will play an important role for the widespread use and commercialization of these devices. We advocate developing LOC devices as a “system” taking into consideration high-throughput fabrication, packaging, and interfacing of the devices.Numerous techniques and materials have been used for fabricating and sealing LOC devices, but many of them could not be applied in commercial products. For example, PDMS microfluidic devices or silicon-based (e.g. CMOS) sensors are widely adopted in the academic community because they are easy to apply for proof-of-concept purposes, but typically manufacturability and economy of scale are not as favorable as plastic chips. Connecting the device to the outside world is another important aspect. Some sensing/actuation techniques are particularly preferred in the microfluidics community because they relax requirements for external connections. For example, manipulation of particles using an externally-applied magnetic field and detecting analytes using fluorescence microscopy are extensively used. These optical and magnetic methods are relatively easier to apply because they typically do not require a direct interfacing to the liquids, unlike electrical-based techniques. But with the recent advances in packaging and interfacing techniques, hybrid systems with electrical sensing/actuation promise to offer new possibilities for LOC devices. Along these lines, sealing of microfluidic structures during or post-fabrication (e.g. needing certain special surface treatments) coupled with the choice of the fluidic or electrical interfaces are critical, and impose special considerations in the choice of materials, sensing/actuation principles and in the sought application.Overall, we believe that market needs and commercialization will continue to drive creativity and innovation in the area of LOC devices and will help spreading this technology further.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
