@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Numerical simulations of the 10-year-old head response in drop impacts and compression tests

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A computational study of the 10 YO child head response in drop and compression were conducted.The biomechanical response and head injury criteria were used for analyzing the injuries.ICP may reflect the overall energy level of the impact event and degree of motion of the skull/brain.The σvin the brain can basically capture the location of a subdural hematoma and impact position.The locations of high εpare consistent with many clinical studies where the locations of DAI took place.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Pediatric head finite element model,Child cadaver test,Fall accident reconstruction,Skull fracture,Brain injury,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Background and objectiveStudies on traumatic injuries of children indicate that impact to the head is a major cause of severe injury and high mortality. However, regulatory and ethical concerns very much limit development and validation of computer models representing the pediatric head. The purpose of this study was to develop a child head finite element model with high-biofidelity to be used for studying pediatric head injury mechanisms.MethodsA newly developed 10-year-old (YO) pediatric finite element head model was limitedly validated for kinematic and kinetic responses against data from quasi-static compressions and drop tests obtained from an experimental study involving a child-cadaver specimen. The validated model was subsequently used for a fall accident reconstruction and associated injury analysis.ResultsThe model predicted the same shape of acceleration–time histories as was found in drop tests with the largest discrepancy of −8.2% in the peak acceleration at a drop height of 15 cm. Force–deflection responses predicted by the model for compression loading had a maximum discrepancy of 7.5% at a strain rate of 0.3 s−1. The model-predicted maximum von Mises stress (σv) and principal strain (εp) in the skull, intracranial pressure (ICP), maximum σv and maximum εp in the brain, head injury criterion (HIC), brain injury criterion (BrIC), and head impact power (HIP) were used for analyzing risks of injury in the accident reconstruction.ConclusionsBased on the results of the injury analyses, the following conclusions can be drawn: (1) ICP cannot be used to accurately predict the locations of brain injury, but it may reflect the overall energy level of the impact event. (2) The brain regions predicted by the model to have high σv coincide with the locations of subdural hematoma with transtentorial herniation and the impact position of an actual injury. (3) The brain regions with high εp predicted by the model coincide with locations commonly found where diffuse axonal injuries (DAI) due to blunt-impact and rapid acceleration have taken place.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Traumatic head injury has become one of the most severe threats to children's lives, due to its high incidence and fatality rate. In the U.S., approximately 19% of all traumatic pediatric deaths result from head injury [1], as do approximately 75% of trauma-related hospitalizations of children [2]. Early-age head injuries may lead to mental problems that can last for a lifetime, and this brings heavy burdens to families and society. Additionally, it has been reported that at similar impact loading conditions, children will sustain more severe injury outcomes than adults [3]. Therefore, studies on pediatric head injury mechanisms and corresponding protective means have been popular in recent years.Mechanisms of injury for children's heads are different from those of adults, and information for adequate description of these differences has been insufficiently available and difficult to obtain. While a number of studies using cadaveric tests and computer simulations have been conducted to elucidate mechanisms of injury in adult heads subjected to falls, impacts, and blast waves [4–10], ethical concerns have limited the availability of child-cadaver specimens for the same types of tests. In the available literature published since 1980, there have been only six experimental studies on the mechanical responses of pediatric heads. Included in these studies are tests conducted by McPherson and Kriewall [11], Margulies and Thibault [12], and Davis et al. [13], which focused on the properties of pediatric cranial bones, and tests by Weber [14,15], Prange et al. [16], and Loyd [17], which focused on overall head responses.Despite difficulties in obtaining sufficient numbers of cadaveric specimens of children, great progress has been made in the development of numerical models of pediatric heads representing children of many ages. To date, a number of reports have been published regarding models representing heads of infants and children from 0 to 3 years of age. For example, Klinich et al. [18] built a finite element model (FEM) representing the head of a 6-month-old (MO) infant. This model was used for investigation of skull injuries incurred during usage of backward child-restraint systems. To study brain injuries due to shaking, falling, and impact, Roth et al. [19–21] developed a series of FEMs for children 17 days, 6 months, and 3 years of age. Li et al. [22] used principal component analysis and regression analysis to establish parameterized geometric models representing the heads of newborn, 1.5-MO, and 3-MO infants. These models could be applied in studies of accident reconstructions. The same authors developed a model representing the head of a 6-MO to analyze young children's injuries due to falls [23].Mizuno et al. [24] constructed a 3-year-old (YO) full-body FE model with a rigid head by scaling the 50th percentile-adult model of the Total Human Model for Safety (THUMS). Using CT images, Ruan et al. [25] developed a 6-YO, full-body model that included a head with anatomical details. To the best of our knowledge, no head models for 9- to 15-YOs are available. Within this age range, the sizes of the heads of 12- to 15-YO children are similar to those of fifth-percentile females. Thus, 12- to 15-YO pediatric heads can be approximated by using the fifth-percentile female model, such as the THUMS 5th percentile female model and the female model being developed by the Global Human Body Modeling Consortium (GHBMC).Heads for 9- to 11-YO children cannot be replaced by heads of children of other ages nor of adults. Furthermore, 9- to 11-YO children have higher chances of injury during traffic accidents. Knowledge of this higher incidence has resulted in particular regulations regarding testing and protective means for this age group [26]. Therefore, there is a great need for a high-biofidelity head model representing 9- to 11-YO children.To improve the safety of children in the aforementioned age range, Wayne State University (WSU), under a financial sponsorship of Toyota Motor Corporation, developed a high quality, 10-YO full-body FEM, which was named Collaborative Human Advanced Research Model-10 YO (CHARM-10). Models for some of the main body parts, such as the neck, chest, and extremities, have been validated [26–28]. However, validation for the head model remains incomplete. In this study, the mechanical responses of the CHARM-10 head FEM were validated against results obtained from compression and drop tests on cadaveric specimens in the age range of 9 to 10 years. Additional analyses were conducted regarding injuries predicted by the model in drop-loading conditions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study, a modified FEM representing a 10-YO head was validated against quasi-static compression and dynamic drop test data. The validated model was then used for a falling accident reconstruction and injury analysis. The model validation on kinematic responses demonstrated high biofidelity and was capable of capturing acceleration–time histories in drop tests and force–deflection responses with sufficiently small discrepancies in compression tests. The largest drop test discrepancy for peak acceleration was −8.2% at the drop height of 15 cm, and the force–deflection responses in the compression tests had a maximum discrepancy of 7.5% at the strain rate of 0.3 s−1. Despite the high biofidelity, this model lacks validation with experimentally obtained brain responses, which is a substantial limitation. In the future, the model should be refined to include available pediatric experimental data of brain responses.The model-predicted σv and εp in the skull, ICP, maximum σv and εp in the brain, and kinematics-based head injury criteria (HIC, BrIC, and HIP) have been used for analyzing the risks of injury in accident reconstruction. Based on the current results of injury analysis, the following conclusions can be drawn: (1) ICP cannot be used to accurately predict the location of brain injury, but it may reflect the overall energy level of the impact event. (2) The brain regions predicted by the model to have high σv coincide with the locations where subdural hematoma with transtentorial herniation and impact occur. (3) The regions predicted by the model to have high εp coincide with locations commonly found where DAI due to blunt-impact and rapid acceleration took place.