@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Predicting protein-binding RNA nucleotides with consideration of binding partners

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A method to predict protein-binding sites in RNA from sequence data alone is proposed.Protein-binding sites in RNA are predicted with consideration of protein in addition to RNA.This is the first sequence-based prediction of protein-binding sites in RNA at the nucleotide-level.The prediction method achieved an accuracy of 79.2% and MCC of 0.48 in independent testing.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
RNA–protein interactions,Binding sites,Binding partners,Sequence-based prediction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In recent years several computational methods have been developed to predict RNA-binding sites in protein. Most of these methods do not consider interacting partners of a protein, so they predict the same RNA-binding sites for a given protein sequence even if the protein binds to different RNAs. Unlike the problem of predicting RNA-binding sites in protein, the problem of predicting protein-binding sites in RNA has received little attention mainly because it is much more difficult and shows a lower accuracy on average. In our previous study, we developed a method that predicts protein-binding nucleotides from an RNA sequence. In an effort to improve the prediction accuracy and usefulness of the previous method, we developed a new method that uses both RNA and protein sequence data. In this study, we identified effective features of RNA and protein molecules and developed a new support vector machine (SVM) model to predict protein-binding nucleotides from RNA and protein sequence data. The new model that used both protein and RNA sequence data achieved a sensitivity of 86.5%, a specificity of 86.2%, a positive predictive value (PPV) of 72.6%, a negative predictive value (NPV) of 93.8% and Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC) of 0.69 in a 10-fold cross validation; it achieved a sensitivity of 58.8%, a specificity of 87.4%, a PPV of 65.1%, a NPV of 84.2% and MCC of 0.48 in independent testing. For comparative purpose, we built another prediction model that used RNA sequence data alone and ran it on the same dataset. In a 10 fold-cross validation it achieved a sensitivity of 85.7%, a specificity of 80.5%, a PPV of 67.7%, a NPV of 92.2% and MCC of 0.63; in independent testing it achieved a sensitivity of 67.7%, a specificity of 78.8%, a PPV of 57.6%, a NPV of 85.2% and MCC of 0.45. In both cross-validations and independent testing, the new model that used both RNA and protein sequences showed a better performance than the model that used RNA sequence data alone in most performance measures. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first sequence-based prediction of protein-binding nucleotides in RNA which considers the binding partner of RNA. The new model will provide valuable information for designing biochemical experiments to find putative protein-binding sites in RNA with unknown structure.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Interactions among proteins and RNAs play an important role in a variety of biological activities such as the post-transcriptional gene regulation, alternative splicing, translation, and infections by RNA viruses [1]. Despite advances in experimental techniques to probe molecular interactions, the mechanism of RNA–protein interactions is not fully understood. Thus, computational approaches to studying RNA–protein interactions and their interaction sites help understand the interaction mechanism and select the best possible activators and inhibitors in rational drug design. Computational methods to quantify and calculate structural and sequence features can also be useful for protein–RNA interaction models that depend on numerical parameters representing the features [2–5].In recent years several computational methods have been applied to predict RNA-binding sites in proteins. For instance, RNABindR uses a naïve Bayes classifier to predict RNA-binding amino acids in a protein sequence [6]. catRAPID estimates the binding propensity of protein and RNA molecules by combining secondary structure, hydrogen bonding and van der Waals contributions [7]. Chen and Lim [8], and PPRint [9] use support vector machines (SVM) to predict RNA binding sites in a protein sequence. With an exception of catRAPID, these methods predict RNA binding sites in protein sequences rather than protein binding sites in RNA sequences, and do not consider interacting partners of a protein when predicting RNA-binding amino acids. Thus, they always predict the same binding sites for a given protein sequence even if the protein binds to different RNAs. catRAPID predicts protein–RNA binding sites at the level of sequence regions rather than at the level of amino acids and nucleotides and often predicts an entire RNA sequence as a binding site even for an RNA sequence of 50 or more nucleotides, so the resolution of binding sites predicted by catRAPID is low.Predicting the protein-binding nucleotides is much more difficult than predicting the RNA-binding amino acids. One reason for this is that for a sequence of the same length there are fewer RNA sequence patterns than protein sequence patterns. Another reason is that nucleotides show much lower interaction propensities than amino acids in protein–RNA interactions. Thus, it is difficult to distinguish binding nucleotides from non-binding nucleotides.In our previous study [10,11], we developed a redundancy removal method which removes redundant data in a training dataset based on sequence features instead of sequence similarities. The feature-based redundancy removal method constructs a redundancy-free, yet larger training dataset with representative sequence fragments than the standard sequence-based redundancy removal method. The prediction model trained with a dataset constructed by the feature-based redundancy removal method found protein-binding nucleotides with a reasonably good accuracy (86.4% in a 5-fold cross validation and 68.1% in independent testing). However, the model used RNA sequence data alone and did not use protein sequence data at all. As an extension of the previous study, the primary focus of this study is to predict protein-binding sites in RNA with consideration of a binding partner of RNA. This paper presents an improved method to solve the problem of predicting protein-binding nucleotides with consideration of a binding partner and comparative analysis of two methods for predicting protein-binding nucleotides from sequence data.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
So far many computational studies in protein–RNA interactions have focused on finding RNA-binding sites in protein instead of finding protein-binding sites in RNA because finding protein-binding sites in RNA is a more difficult problem and shows a lower accuracy on average. In our previous study we developed a method that predicts protein-binding nucleotides from a given RNA sequence. However, the model used RNA sequence data alone and did not use protein sequence data at all. In an effort to improve the prediction accuracy and usefulness of the previous method, we developed a new method that predicts protein-binding sites in RNA with consideration of a binding partner of RNA.In this work we identified effective features of RNA and protein for predicting protein-binding nucleotides and developed a support vector machine (SVM) model to predict protein-binding nucleotides using RNA and protein sequences. For comparative purpose, we built another SVM model that predicted protein-binding nucleotides using an RNA sequence alone. The new model that used both RNA and protein sequences achieved a sensitivity of 86.5%, a specificity of 86.2%, a positive predictive value (PPV) of 72.6%, a negative predictive value (NPV) of 93.8% and a Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC) of 0.69 in a 10-fold cross validation. In independent testing, it achieved a sensitivity of 58.8%, a specificity of 87.4%, a PPV of 65.1%, a NPV of 84.2%, and MCC of 0.48. The other model that used RNA sequence alone showed a sensitivity of 85.7%, a specificity of 80.5%, a PPV of 67.7%, a NPV of 92.2% and MCC of 0.63 in a 10-fold cross validation, and a sensitivity of 67.7%, a specificity of 78.8%, a PPV of 57.6%, a NPV of 85.2% and MCC of 0.45 in independent testing (see the results section for details). Both in cross-validations and independent testing, the new model that used both RNA and protein sequences was better than the model that used an RNA sequence alone in most performance measures. The new model is also capable of predicting different binding sites for a given RNA sequence when its binding partner is changed.To the best of our knowledge, the new model is the first attempt to predict protein-binding RNA nucleotides with consideration of the binding partner (i.e., protein) of RNA from sequence data only. The new model will be useful in guiding biochemical experiments to find protein-binding sites in RNA when sequences are the only available data.