@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Open source EMR software: Profiling, insights and hands-on analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The categorization of literature articles suggests the lack of adequate information from an implementer perspective.A more elaborated, hands-on study of individual OSS can reveal useful information to potential implementers, yielding better informed decisions.OSS in healthcare informatics still lag behind established open source systems in several aspects, in particular security, usability and developers support.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Open source software,EMR,EHR,Security,Usability,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundThe use of open source software in health informatics is increasingly advocated by authors in the literature. Although there is no clear evidence of the superiority of the current open source applications in the healthcare field, the number of available open source applications online is growing and they are gaining greater prominence. This repertoire of open source options is of a great value for any future-planner interested in adopting an electronic medical/health record system, whether selecting an existent application or building a new one. The following questions arise. How do the available open source options compare to each other with respect to functionality, usability and security? Can an implementer of an open source application find sufficient support both as a user and as a developer, and to what extent? Does the available literature provide adequate answers to such questions? This review attempts to shed some light on these aspects.ObjectiveThe objective of this study is to provide more comprehensive guidance from an implementer perspective toward the available alternatives of open source healthcare software, particularly in the field of electronic medical/health records.MethodsThe design of this study is twofold. In the first part, we profile the published literature on a sample of existent and active open source software in the healthcare area. The purpose of this part is to provide a summary of the available guides and studies relative to the sampled systems, and to identify any gaps in the published literature with respect to our research questions. In the second part, we investigate those alternative systems relative to a set of metrics, by actually installing the software and reporting a hands-on experience of the installation process, usability, as well as other factors.ResultsThe literature covers many aspects of open source software implementation and utilization in healthcare practice. Roughly, those aspects could be distilled into a basic taxonomy, making the literature landscape more perceivable. Nevertheless, the surveyed articles fall short of fulfilling the targeted objective of providing clear reference to potential implementers. The hands-on study contributed a more detailed comparative guide relative to our set of assessment measures. Overall, no system seems to satisfy an industry-standard measure, particularly in security and interoperability. The systems, as software applications, feel similar from a usability perspective and share a common set of functionality, though they vary considerably in community support and activity.ConclusionMore detailed analysis of popular open source software can benefit the potential implementers of electronic health/medical records systems. The number of examined systems and the measures by which to compare them vary across studies, but still rewarding insights start to emerge. Our work is one step toward that goal. Our overall conclusion is that open source options in the medical field are still far behind the highly acknowledged open source products in other domains, e.g. operating systems market share.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The potential of using information technology in healthcare has been promoted widely in the literature, and benefits of such use have been predicted or reported in several studies [1,2]. However, there is a general consensus that despite those benefits in terms of care quality and efficiency, the adoption of electronic healthcare technology by health providers is still limited [3,4]. The primary barriers to adoption have been financial, and most physicians have cited financial issues like lack of capital and uncertain return on investment as substantial hurdles [5,6]. Other difficulties also loom persistently in the relevant reviews, including interoperability and training of information technology personnel [6].The seemingly obvious answer to the financial barriers is to employ open source software (OSS) rather than commercially proprietary systems. As Kantor et al. [7] noted back in 2003, OSS may turn-out to be the force that helps overcome these and several other barriers to the use of electronic medical records (EMR) in primary care and in the rest of the healthcare system. They referred to three explicit barriers: excessive cost, the transience of vendors, and the lack of common data standards. The absence of software licensing prices suggests that OSS reduces electronic medical software ownership and development costs. OSS also minimizes vendor lock-in risk as the customer can always use an alternative solution. Moreover, authors of open-source applications are known for embracing standards [7]. OSS is further more transparent to all stakeholders, on the source code level at least, which serves to increase its credibility, an important element in sensitive systems such as those related to healthcare.Open source electronic health records have already gained momentum [8]. And OSS adoption and diffusion in healthcare have been advocated by various reports from academic and business communities in recent years [9–13].From an implementer standpoint, OSS is a valuable source for informed decision making. A healthcare provider who intends to adopt medical software cannot revise a proprietary system beforehand, and whether the intended system is open source or otherwise, starting from scratch or adopting an existent product, the available OSS options could and should serve the implementer in this major task. For that purpose, accessible, informative, and practical guides are much needed to facilitate the movement toward more satisfactory rate of adopting information technology in healthcare; however, only little has been produced in the literature that can fit this need. The most relevant published reviews are either general in nature or limited in the number of systems or depth of treatment they cover, as our survey revealed. One part of our endeavor in this paper is to explore the extent to which the literature provides an adequate profile of existent, active and competent open source healthcare applications.Whether to adopt available solutions or look for better alternatives is a design decision that needs thorough understanding of healthcare industry practices and standards on one hand, and adequate examination of the existing products with respect to those practices and standards on the other hand. Toward the latter objective, we are also taking a small step in a small-scale study, focusing only on OSS systems, to complement our review and contribute to filling the gap in the literature relative to the needs of potential implementers.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Open source software has gained great success in a large variety of application fields; the same potential for within the healthcare domain is anticipated and progressively being approached. Still no widespread deployment of OSS healthcare applications was reported in the literature, nor does compelling evidence exist of their superiority compared to more matured commercial systems in this field. Nonetheless, OSS should provide a viable and valuable option when intending to build or adopt an open source suite for a healthcare organization. OSS can provide the base, either as a set of building blocks or as an open resource of ideas and guidance, to construct larger, more comprehensive healthcare solutions. Toward that end, available OSS applications are not yet adequately analyzed and compared to provide such guidance for potential implementers.In-depth investigation of OSS alternatives is necessary, as few studies in the literature analyze the available OSS options beyond reporting their status and profiling their spectrum. In this study, we undertook the task of surveying the literature from the perspective of an implementer with respect to a set of most popular OSS alternatives available on the Internet. Our induced taxonomy of the literature revealed the need outlined above. Moreover, and probably more importantly, we conducted a (hands-on) study, implementing the set of applications locally on separate virtual machines, to examine the systems more closely. We set several measures as a comparison basis, and scored each system accordingly. In agreement with other studies in the literature, many OSS applications are found to be lacking in some aspects, more notably security and interoperability. Our study also revealed the lack of enough developers’ support, as we envision OSS as a source of building blocks, reference material, as well as consumer commodity.Summary pointsWhat was already known?•Open source software can have great potential in health informatics, especially in resources-constrained environments.Yet, many barriers have been reported in literature that hinders wide adoption of OSS in the healthcare industry.Many articles have discussed medical OSS from different aspects, mostly as a vehicle to conduct healthcare studies, or as a limited review of individual software.What this study has added?•The categorization of literature articles suggests the lack of adequate information from an implementer perspective.A more elaborated, hands-on study of individual OSS can reveal useful information to potential implementers, yielding better informed decisions.OSS in healthcare informatics still lag behind established open source systems in several aspects, in particular security, usability and developers support.