@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Fast and accurate identification of fat droplets in histological images

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new method for identifying fat droplets in histological images is presented.Adjacency statistics are utilized as shape features.Fat droplets are identified with high sensitivity and specificity.Adjacency statistics greatly improve the identification of clustered fat droplets.The method can be quickly executed on standard computers.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Steatosis quantification,Histological image analysis,Shape features,Texture features,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Background and objectiveThe accurate identification of fat droplets is a prerequisite for the automatic quantification of steatosis in histological images. A major challenge in this regard is the distinction between clustered fat droplets and vessels or tissue cracks.MethodsWe present a new method for the identification of fat droplets that utilizes adjacency statistics as shape features. Adjacency statistics are simple statistics on neighbor pixels.ResultsThe method accurately identified fat droplets with sensitivity and specificity values above 90%. Compared with commonly-used shape features, adjacency statistics greatly improved the sensitivity toward clustered fat droplets by 29% and the specificity by 17%. On a standard personal computer, megapixel images were processed in less than 0.05s.ConclusionsThe presented method is simple to implement and can provide the basis for the fast and accurate quantification of steatosis.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Steatosis, the abnormal retention of fat in cells, is a common disease of the liver. Liver steatosis can have a variety of causes, such as obesity, diabetes, and alcohol abuse. Due to the growing problem of obesity among the Western population, steatosis is expected to become ever more widespread [13]. Severe steatosis increases the risk of liver dysfunction after surgery. It is, therefore, frequently assessed in order to decide whether to perform an extended liver resection or whether to accept a liver graft.The gold standard for the assessment of steatosis is the histological evaluation of tissue samples. Here, steatosis is most often assessed in routine stains, such as hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). Under the microscope, steatosis becomes visible as separate or clustered fat droplets in the cytoplasm of cells. Because fat is dissolved in the course of the normal histological processing, these fat droplets are actually empty spaces within the tissue. Nevertheless, they can usually be distinguished from other empty spaces, such as vessels or tissue cracks, by their distinctive roundish shape (Fig. 1).Steatosis is typically assessed in terms of a semiquantitative scoring system that captures the percentage of cells with fat droplets [2]. Recent studies have shown that the results are often only poorly reproducible. In [5], no significant correlation could be demonstrated between 4 pathologists from 3 countries. In [6], nearly a quarter of 75 specimens were scored differently in a second assessment.Errors in the assessment of steatosis can lead to inappropriate treatment decisions. For this reason, several image analysis methods have been proposed in order to automate and improve steatosis measurements.The main operation of these image analysis methods is the identification of fat droplets. Afterwards, the amount of steatosis is simply quantified as the area fraction occupied by the fat droplets. Although the resulting values differ from the semiquantitative scoring system, they often provide a good correlation with biochemical measurements of the fat content of the tissue [10,4].Most methods for the identification of fat droplets start with some kind of thresholding operation in order to segment all empty spaces within the tissue. The resulting segments, called “blobs”, are then classified into either fat droplets or other empty spaces by their shape. Here, the existing methods generally assume that fat droplets have a distinctive circular shape. In [5], the size or arc length of a blob is required to be similar to a circle which covers its area in order to be classified as a fat droplet. In [11,10,9,4], fat droplets are identified by applying static thresholds to the size and roundness or eccentricity of a blob.The assumption of a circular shape generally holds true for images of mild steatosis where fat droplets are clearly separated and every droplet is represented by an individual blob. In images of severe steatosis, however, multiple fat droplets in close proximity often coalesce into single blobs, thereby exhibiting all kinds of complex or elongated shapes (Fig. 2). In these cases, the reliance on the roundness as a classification criterion produces severe classification errors.The method proposed in [9] appears to be the only one to tackle this problem. Here, clustered droplets are separated prior to the classification with a combination of distance and watershed transformations. When applied to whole-slides images, these operations are computationally very expensive. In [9], this problem is solved by utilizing a large-scale grid-computing environment which is generally not available in clinical practice.In this paper, we present a new method for the identification of fat droplets in histological images. This method directly identifies both separate and clustered fat droplets with high accuracy. At the same time, this method is very fast and can be quickly executed on standard personal computers.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we have presented a new method for the identification of fat droplets in histological images. This method is innovative in that it utilizes adjacency statistics as shape features. Adjacency statistics are very simple statistics on neighbor pixels.In an empirical evaluation, the method accurately identified fat droplets with sensitivity and specificity values above 90%. In addition, the method proved to be fast. On a standard personal computer, megapixel images were processed in less than 0.05s.Adjacency statistics generally enabled a more accurate identification of fat droplets than the commonly used size and eccentricity features. This was particularly obvious for clustered fat droplets that occur in images with severe steatosis. When adjacency statistics were used instead of the size and eccentricity features, the sensitivity toward clustered fat droplets significantly improved by 29%. The specificity also improved by 17%. The superiority of adjacency statistics was shown to be independent of the training set size.Fig. 7shows examples of image analysis results obtained with the size and eccentricity features or adjacency statistics. In both cases, the classifier was trained with all 2000 example blobs. All recognized fat droplets are highlighted in yellow. With the size and eccentricity features, clustered fat droplets and other empty spaces are often misclassified. With adjacency statistics, nearly all structures are identified correctly.A major advantage of the presented method is that it accurately identifies clustered fat droplets without separating the individual droplets. The latter approach can significantly increase the complexity of the method and its execution time [9].The accurate identification of fat droplets is the prerequisite for the accurate measurement of steatosis in histological images. However, we did not investigate how well steatosis measurements on the basis of the presented method correlate with measurements obtained by visual inspection or biochemical analysis. Also, we did not investigate how the measurements are affected by variations in the stain, or to what extent the measurements are predictive for postoperative complications. These questions should be addressed in future work.Additional future work should be dedicated to evaluating whether adjacency statistics can be beneficial in other applications where complex shapes have to be recognized.The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.