@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
LabPush: A pilot study of providing remote clinics with laboratory results via short message service (SMS) in Swaziland, Africa – A qualitative study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
This study seeks to assess factors facilitating as well as factors hindering the adoption of mobile devices in the Swazi healthcare.This study evaluated the end-users of the LabPush system in Swaziland.This study provides end-users perspective, prompt patient care, reduced bouncing of patients, technical support, better communication, willing participant and social influence were facilitators of the adoption m-health in the Swazi healthcare.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Qualitative study,Remote clinics,Laboratory results via short message service (SMS),Swazi healthcare,Turnaround time (TAT),LabPush,mhealth,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
BackgroundDeveloping countries are confronting a steady growth in the prevalence of the infectious diseases. Mobile technologies are widely available and can play an important role in health care at the regional, community, and individual levels. Although labs usually able to accomplish the requested blood test and produce the results within two days after receiving the samples, but the time for the results to be delivered back to clinics is quite variable depending on how often the motorbike transport makes trips between the clinic and the lab.ObjectiveIn this study, we seek to assess factors facilitating as well as factors hindering the adoption of mobile devices in the Swazi healthcare through evaluating the end-users of the LabPush system.MethodsA qualitative study with semi-structured and in-depth one on one interviews were conducted over two month period July–August 2012. Purposive sampling was used; participants were those operating and using the LabPush system at the remote clinics, at the national laboratory and the supervisors of users at Swaziland. Interview questions were focused on perceived of ease of use and usefulness of the system. All interviews were recorded and then transcribed.ResultsThis study had aimed its primary focus on reducing TAT, prompt patient care, reducing bouncing of patients and defaulting of patients which were challenges that the clinicians have always had. Therefore, the results revealed several barriers and facilitators to the adoption of mobile device by healthcare providers in the Swaziland. The themes Shortens TAT, Technical support, Patient-centered care, Mindset, Improved communication, Missing Reports, Workload, Workflow, Security of smart phone, Human error and Ownership are sorted by facilitators to barriers.ConclusionThus the end-users perspective, prompt patient care, reduced bouncing of patients, technical support, better communication, willing participant and social influence were facilitators of the adoption m-health in the Swazi healthcare.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Developing countries are confronting a steady growth in the prevalence of the infectious diseases, along with a raising burden from chronic diseases like HIV/AIDS and Tuberculosis [1–3]. HIV cases have been reported in almost all parts of the world, a majority of the cases reported are in sub-Saharan Africa. Swaziland is one of the countries in this region and it has the highest prevalence of HIV at 26.3% [4]. There is considerable interest worldwide to explore the challenges and opportunities of digital health care solutions, often referred to as ehealth – the use of information and communication technologies (ICT) to enhance the quality and safety of health care. In 2005, the World Health Assembly (WHA 58.28) passed an ehealth resolution that acknowledged, “ehealth is the cost-effective and secure use of information and communications technologies in support of health and health-related fields, including health-care services, health surveillance, health literature, and health education, knowledge and research,” and urged member states to develop and implement ehealth technologies [5,6]. Since then, implementing ehealth technologies has become a main priority for many countries. ehealth is said to be improving quality and safety of healthcare and there is now considerable international interest in exploiting its potential in healthcare solutions [7,8].On the one hand, the Electronic Health Record systems (EHRs) are increasingly being used in many developing countries and the benefits of e-health are becoming more obvious [9]. On the other hand, researchers are investigating the potentials of the mobile health (mhealth) – the use of mobile devices such as cellular phones, tablet PC that allows guidelines, checklists and protocols to be hardcoded onto mobile devices. This facilitates coordination of care, care standardization and evidence based medicine (EBM) into the hands of community health workers. Mobile technologies are widely available and can play an important role in health care at the regional, community, and individual levels [10,11].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
