@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A Chaikin-based variant of Lane–Riesenfeld algorithm and its non-tensor product extension

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A parameter-dependent Refine-and-Smooth subdivision algorithm.A unifying framework for primal/dual univariate and bivariate subdivision schemes with tension parameter.A generalization to quadrilateral meshes of the univariate family of subdivision schemes with cubic precision.A non-tensor product extension of the interpolatory 4-point and the dual approximating 4-point subdivision schemes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Subdivision,Refine-and-Smooth,Tension parameter,Non-tensor product,Bivariate cubic precision,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this work we present a parameter-dependent Refine-and-Smooth (RS) subdivision algorithm where the refine stage R consists in the application of a perturbation of Chaikin's/Doo–Sabin's vertex split, while each smoothing stage S performs averages of adjacent vertices like in the Lane–Riesenfeld algorithm (Lane and Riesenfeld, 1980). This constructive approach provides a unifying framework for univariate/bivariate primal and dual subdivision schemes with tension parameter and allows us to show that several existing subdivision algorithms, proposed in the literature via isolated constructions, can be obtained as specific instances of the proposed strategy. Moreover, this novel approach provides an intuitive theoretical tool for the derivation of new non-tensor product subdivision schemes that in the regular regions satisfy the property of reproducing bivariate cubic polynomials, thus resulting the natural extension of the univariate family presented in Hormann and Sabin (2008).

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The beginning of subdivision for surface modeling goes back to 1978 when the generalizations for bi-quadratic and bi-cubic B-spline surfaces to quadrilateral meshes of arbitrary topology were published simultaneously by Catmull and Clark (1978) and by Doo and Sabin (1978). Then, in 1980 Lane and Riesenfeld (1980) provided a unified framework to represent for alln∈N, degree-(n+1) uniform B-spline curves and their tensor product extensions via a subdivision process where each subdivision step consists in applying one refine stage (aimed at doubling the number of given vertices) followed by n smoothing stages which modify the vertices position but not their number. In formulas, each subdivision step consists in the application of the subdivision operatorSnR, where R and S denote the refine and smoothing operators, respectively. All processes of this kind are named Refine-and-Smooth (RS) algorithms, and the one proposed by Lane and Riesenfeld is certainly the simplest example that can be found in the literature since the refine operator R is given by the subdivision scheme for linear splines, while each smoothing operator S averages adjacent vertices in the current data set. Twenty years later, Stam (2001) on the one side and Zorin and Schröder (2001) on the other side, proposed independently a generalization of the Lane–Riesenfeld algorithm to arbitrary meshes, and showed that Doo–Sabin and Catmull–Clark schemes are nothing but the first two members of a family of surface subdivision schemes (also known in the literature as the family of midpoint subdivision schemes), which generalizes uniform tensor product B-spline surfaces of any bi-degree to quadrilateral meshes of arbitrary topology. The n-th member (n∈N) of such a family is shown to produce aCncontinuous limit surface, except at extraordinary vertices (i.e., vertices of valence other than 4) where the continuity is alwaysC1. Exploiting Reif's criterion in Reif (1995), Zorin and Schröder were able to show theC1-smoothness of the limit surfaces at extraordinary vertices for the first 8 family members. A general analysis tool to proveC1smoothness for anyn≥1appeared only with the publication of Prautzsch and Chen (2011).Since the family of midpoint subdivision schemes relies on a smoothing operator S performing midpoint averages (exactly as the standard Lane–Riesenfeld algorithm), it is made of an alternation of dual/primal members, corresponding to the application of an odd/even number n of smoothing stages, respectively. Indeed, when an odd number of smoothing stages is applied, the resulting subdivision scheme is featured by rules performing a vertex split; in contrast, the univariate/bivariate scheme obtained by the operatorSnRwith n even, recursively subdivides a given mesh via an edge/face split operation.The goal of this work is to present a new constructive approach to design univariate and bivariate families of alternating primal/dual subdivision schemes with tension parameter in a unified framework. The approach is based on an RS subdivision algorithm where the refine stage consists in the application of a perturbation of the standard subdivision scheme for quadratic splines, while each smoothing stage usually performs averages of adjacent vertices. Therefore, in the univariate context, the refine stage is based on a parameter-dependent variant of Chaikin's corner cutting algorithm (Chaikin, 1974), whereas in the bivariate context on an analogous modification of Doo–Sabin's algorithm for polyhedral meshes with arbitrary faces (Doo and Sabin, 1978). Considering n smoothing stages as in Lane–Riesenfeld algorithm, this novel RS algorithm allows us to derive families of curve and surface subdivision schemes whose structure and properties are very similar to those of the B-spline schemes. In fact, the members of each family are also enumerated by n, and higher values of n give schemes with wider masks and support, higher continuity and higher degree of polynomial generation. The main difference is that, when suitably setting the tension parameter, all schemes from the new family are able to reproduce cubic polynomials, whereas the B-spline schemes have only linear precision. Moreover, exactly as B-spline schemes, the new schemes can be conveniently implemented using repeated local operations that only involve direct neighbors of the newly inserted or updated vertices. In the univariate context, this new construction provides a whole family of tension-controlled curve subdivision schemes, whose first two members coincide with the well-known interpolatory 4-point and dual 4-point schemes with tension parameter, presented via isolated constructions in Dyn et al. (1987, 2005), respectively. In addition, the new family contains the family of subdivision schemes with cubic precision proposed in Hormann and Sabin (2008), as a special subfamily. The generalization of the tension-controlled univariate family to quadrilateral meshes of arbitrary topology yields a family of non-tensor product schemes with tension parameter. If considering a specific setting of the free parameter, we show that the new family results in a subfamily of non-tensor product subdivision schemes reproducing bivariate cubic polynomials. The first member of the resulting subfamily (corresponding ton=1smoothing stages) coincides with the interpolatory subdivision scheme for quadrilateral meshes with arbitrary topology already presented in Deng and Ma (2011), but not yet analyzed. Differently, the second family member obtained by means ofn=2smoothing stages, is a completely new dual approximating subdivision scheme for quadrilateral meshes of arbitrary topology, whose properties are deeply investigated.The content of this paper is organized in six sections. Section 2 provides the background on d-variate subdivision schemes and reminds some existing results related to the Refine-and-Smooth mechanism. In Section 3 a new family of Refine-and-Smooth (RS) univariate subdivision schemes with tension parameter is introduced and its main properties are analyzed. Section 4 extends the idea presented in Section 3 to design a new family of tension-controlled RS subdivision schemes for quadrilateral meshes of arbitrary topology. In Sections 5 and 6 special attention is addressed to the description and the analysis of the first two family members resulting from the proposed construction. Conclusions are drawn in Section 7.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper we presented a new constructive approach to design tension-controlled univariate and bivariate families of alternating primal/dual subdivision schemes in a unified framework. The approach is based on a Refine-and-Smooth subdivision algorithm that originates from a parameter-dependent variant of the Lane–Riesenfeld algorithm. The first two family members obtained in the univariate case are two well-known schemes with tension parameter, proposed in the literature via isolated constructions. Differently, the first two family members obtained in the bivariate case are an interpolatory and a dual approximating scheme for quadrilateral meshes with arbitrary topology never investigated before. In particular, the member corresponding to the choicen=1has been shown to be a non-tensor product extension of the interpolatory 4-point scheme with tension parameter (Dyn et al., 1987), whereas the one corresponding to the choicen=2an analogous extension of the dual approximating 4-point scheme (Dyn et al., 2005). The tuning of the tension parameter to maximize the degree of polynomial reproduction, provided in the univariate case a revisitation of the family of Hormann–Sabin's schemes with cubic precision (Hormann and Sabin, 2008), whereas in the bivariate case the proposal of a novel family of non-tensor product subdivision schemes that in the regular regions fulfill the property of bivariate cubic precision.