@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Increased efficiency of direct nanoimprinting on planar and curved bulk titanium through surface modification

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Direct nanopatterning of titanium using nanopatterned diamond based stamps.Quantify nanopillar matrix imprint depth with regards to feature size and density.An account of a novel method of reducing the imprint load required to emboss titanium.TEM and EELS analysis following our load reduction treatment.The first demonstration of nanopatterning curved, bulk titanium.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Nanoimprint,Implant,Metal,Stem-cell,Topography,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this work the direct transfer of nanopatterns into titanium is demonstrated. The nanofeatures are imprinted at room temperature using diamond stamps in a single step. We also show that the imprint properties of the titanium surface can be altered by anodisation yielding a significant reduction in the required imprint force for pattern transfer. The anodisation process is also utilised for curved titanium surfaces where a reduced imprint force is preferable to avoid sample deformation and damage. We finally demonstrate that our process can be applied directly to titanium rods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Direct nanopatterning of metal is a technology with applications in electronics and optics where high throughput, low cost and low emission methods for the mass production of circuitry [1], mass storage media [2] and optical devices [3] is concerned. Here the adoption of the technology for the bio-engineering application of implant surface modification is examined.Dalby et al. have shown that disordered arrays of nanopits may stimulate bone formation from bone marrow stem cells upon an implant’s surface [4]. This work was carried out on PMMA substrates using hot embossing. Thus to translate the original findings to an implant relevant material such as titanium, it is necessary to find an efficient way of introducing such precisely engineered nanotextures onto large areas of curved titanium. There are several methods derived from the microelectronics industry which may be considered for achieving such controlled topographical alterations. Methods such as: chemical etching [5], electrochemical machining [6], electro-discharge machining [7], imprinting [8], laser modification [9], oxidation [10] and reactive-ion-etching (RIE) [11]. Nanopatterning for cell interaction may also benefit from the ability to control both nanofeature anisotropy and aspect ratio. As a result of these prerequisites imprinting, oxidation and laser modification are currently the three favourable approaches. However, laser modification will induce stress gradients and chemical changes to the titanium which is reported to be problematic for load bearing applications and is thus not suitable as an osteologic interface [12]. This paper examines direct nano-imprinting as a method for achieving the goal of creating an efficient titanium implant patterning system and ultimately reports an advancement in the process efficiency through surface oxidation.During compression, materials deform elastically before inducing permanent plastic deformation. Two seperate parameters are important for analysing a material’s behaviour in these two deformity regions. Resistance to elastic deformation can be quantified by the Young’s modulus (in units of GPa) and resistance to plastic deformation can be quantified by the Knoop hardness (in units of HK). For this reason both the Young’s modulus and Knoop hardness were considered when selecting the stamp material.The required stamp material needed to be harder than titanium (which has a Knoop hardness of 139HK [13]) so that it would induce permanent deformation of the titanium and at the same time exhibit low elastic deformation under compression. A low elastic deformation of the stamp during the imprint, enables the titanium to reach its plastic deformation region with negligible distortion of the nanofeatures in the stamp. Further requirements set by the lithographic patterning approach is (1) the availability of the stamp material in a wafer format and (2) the ability to transfer the pattern to the substrate by an etch process. Several materials were considered of which diamond is the material with the highest values of Young’s modulus (1050GPa [14]) and Knoop hardness (7000HK [15]); thus the expected to be the ideal candidate for imprinting titanium with the least degradation.We used 2μm of ultra-nanocrystalline diamond (UNCD) grown by chemical vapour deposition (CVD) on a ∼520μm silicon carrier wafer from Advanced Diamond Technologies Ltd. Detailed information about the material and the stamp fabrication can be found in our earlier paper [16]. The UNCD wafer was scribed into 1×1cm2 samples and subjected to RCA cleaning (SC-1), followed by ultrasonic solvent cleaning. Nanofeature stamps were then created from the samples using conventional electron beam lithography (EBL) with negative tone electron sensitive resist, hydrogen silsesquioxane (HSQ). An Al discharge layer was required above the resist to prevent e-beam deflection due to charge build-up on the surface [17]. Several stamps were produced with this process and the pattern written varied in design but consisted of arrays of circular pillars. After EBL and HSQ development, the HSQ was used as an etch mask for RIE with a mixture of oxygen and argon gas. The etched diamond nanopillars were typically 225nm high. Fig. 1displays a scanning electron micrograph of some typical stamp features.In order to explore the capabilities of direct nano-imprinting, two different forms of titanium substrate were prepared: (1) discs and (2) rods. Both substrates were cut from the same commercially pure 10mm diameter titanium rods (supplied by Righton Ltd.).(1)The discs were cut from the stock rod with a thickness of 6mm. One face of each of the discs was polished using a seven stage chemical mechanical polishing process on a Buehler MotoPol 2000 polishing machine. The first four stages used increasingly finer grades (220, 500, 800 and 1200) of wet SiC grit paper. The three subsequent stages used a soft Kemet Chem-H polishing pad with 1μm diamond slurry and colloidal silica for more prolonged polishing to remove the micro-scratches remaining from previous abrasive stages.1Electronic Supplementary Information (ESI) available: Ti polishing parameters; Ti AFM roughness scan; EELS plots; TEM dark field images; Nanoindentation plots; EBSD kernel average misorientation maps.1The arithmetic average (Ra) titanium roughness achieved after the final polish stage was measured by AFM (over a scan area of 25×25μm) to be <3nm.1Longer sections of the rod (∼4cm in length) were cut and prepared with the same grinding and polishing stages as for the discs. In this case an AFM was used along a 25×2μm length of the rod and yielded an arithmetic average roughness of <18nm.Anodisation is an electrolytic passivation process that is used to increase the thickness of the native oxide layer on metal parts, such as titanium. An electrolyte consisting of 0.3M oxalic acid and reverse osmosis water was continually stirred, while being maintained at a temperature of ∼17°C. A platinum wire mesh (supplied by Goodfellow Cambridge Ltd.) was used as a cathode and the titanium work piece to be anodised acted as an anode. The anode voltage was slowly ramped up from 0V to the desired level over a period of approximately 5min. After anodisation the titanium discs were removed from the electrolyte and thoroughly rinsed in RO water before being dried in a nitrogen stream.Direct imprinting of titanium was performed using a manual hydraulic press supplied by Specac Ltd. The stamp and titanium work piece were mounted between two 5×25×25mm tungsten carbide/cobalt sheets (supplied by Goodfellow Cambridge Ltd.) to allow the load to be distributed over a larger area, thus preventing sinking into the underlying hydraulic press plates. Loads between 100 and 800kg were applied with a hold time of 30s for each load.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Direct imprinting offers distinct advantages over other reported methods of introducing precision engineered patterns onto the surfaces of titanium. Direct imprinting is a one-step process that does not introduce any contamination to the sample; however, the imprint forces required to produce patterns over large areas may be too high for practical purposes. With this in mind we have demonstrated a novel way of dramatically reducing the press load forces required for direct nanoimprinting of titanium surfaces, by using anodisation to increase the TiO2 layer thickness. It is suggested that thin native TiO2 layers inhibit movement of dislocations. However, by increasing the TiO2 layer thickness through the addition of amorphous titania via anodisation, dislocation density can be reduced and thus the propagation of dislocations improved. We further demonstrated imprinting of non-planar surfaces. Rods were anodised in the same way as planar titanium work pieces, and then rolled over a diamond stamp. Unlike imprinting planar surfaces, roller imprinting occurred progressively as the rod rolled across the linear contact area. This meant that a much lower overall force was needed, since only a small contact area was imprinted at a time. As a result of both the anodisation and small contact area, imprinting of UNCD nano-pillars was achieved at a load of 3.5kg. It is advised that roller imprinting is moderately paced in order to allow a hold period to combat the effects of elastic recovery and stress relaxation.