@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Sentiment analysis: Bayesian Ensemble Learning

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel ensemble learning methodology is proposed for polarity classification task.A selection strategy is studied to reduce the search space of candidate ensembles.The proposed model has been shown to be effective and efficient in several domains.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Sentiment analysis,Polarity classification,Ensemble learning,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The huge amount of textual data on the Web has grown in the last few years rapidly creating unique contents of massive dimension. In a decision making context, one of the most relevant tasks is polarity classification of a text source, which is usually performed through supervised learning methods. Most of the existing approaches select the best classification model leading to over-confident decisions that do not take into account the inherent uncertainty of the natural language. In this paper, we pursue the paradigm of ensemble learning to reduce the noise sensitivity related to language ambiguity and therefore to provide a more accurate prediction of polarity. The proposed ensemble method is based on Bayesian Model Averaging, where both uncertainty and reliability of each single model are taken into account. We address the classifier selection problem by proposing a greedy approach that evaluates the contribution of each model with respect to the ensemble. Experimental results on gold standard datasets show that the proposed approach outperforms both traditional classification and ensemble methods.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The amount of textual data available on the Web has proliferated in the last few years, affecting not only ICT industries but also business companies and public services. Governments grasp citizen-generated text to be aware of public opinions for policy establishment [1], market analysts take advantage of product/service reviews for strategic analysis and commercial planning [2] and e-learning systems capture the student sentiment to adapt teaching resources and methodologies [3]. Considering that the current technological progresses enable an efficient storing and retrieval of huge amount of data, the key point is now on methodologies for extracting information and creating knowledge from raw sources. In the context of Big Data, social media represent an emerging challenging sector: the natural language expressions of people can be easily reported through blogs and short text messages, rapidly creating unique contents of huge dimensions that must be efficiently and effectively analyzed to create actionable knowledge for decision making processes. The massive quantity of continuously contributing texts, which should be processed in real time in order to take informed decisions, calls for two main radical advancements: (1) a change of direction in the research, i.e. from data-constrained to data-enabled paradigm and (2) the convergence to a multi-disciplinary area that takes advantage of psychology, sociology, natural language processing and machine learning. A potential leverage towards novel decision support systems is represented by the transformation of qualitative data from user-generated contents to quantitative information when making decisions. In this context, the extraction of this subjective information is crucial to create structured and actionable knowledge to be used by either a decision support system or a decision maker. The knowledge embedded in user-generated contents has been shown to be of paramount importance from both user and company/organization points of view: people express opinions on any kind of topic in an unconstrained and unbiased environment, while corporations and institutions can gauge valuable information from raw sources. In order to make qualitative textual data effectively functional for decision processes, the quantification of “what people think” becomes a mandatory step. We approached this issue as a polarity detection task aimed at classifying texts as positive and negative. In particular, we propose a Bayesian Ensemble Learning approach that takes advantage of multiple classifiers to predict the sentiment orientation of user-generated contents. The contribution of the paper is two-fold, i.e. a novel ensemble learning methodology to improve the performance of the polarity classification task and a model selection strategy able to radically reduce the search space of candidate ensembles. The investigation results in an effective and efficient paradigm suitable for polarity detection both in well-formed scenarios (reviews) and social media environments (Twitter).The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, a literature review is reported to highlight the position of the paper with respect to the current state of the art. In Section 3, the proposed ensemble learning approach is described. The experimental settings to compare the proposed approach with the state-of-the-art techniques have been reported in Section 4, while datasets and evaluation measures are described in Section 5. Computational results are discussed in Section 6 and time complexity analysis is reported in Section 7. Finally, in Section 8 conclusion and future research are outlined.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
