@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Finite element analysis of width effect in interface debonding of FRP plate bonded to concrete

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Description of a damage evolution model for FRP-concrete.Validation of the model with the predictions of Chen and Teng׳s model.Application of the damage evolution model to debonding process of FRP-to-concrete.Investigation of the width effect of FRP sheet on debonding process of FRP-to-concrete.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
FRP plate,Concrete,Debonding,Width ratio,Failure process,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A three-dimensional meso-mechanical model to study the debonding of FRP-to-concrete is described and then verified in this paper. The influence of the width of the FRP on the load-carrying capacity is investigated to understand the debonding mechanism of failure in such systems. Numerical simulations show that the progressive debonding of FRP plate bonded to concrete occurring beneath the FRP plate can be divided into four stages: elastic-deformation stage, the elastic-softening stage, the elastic-softening-debonded stage and softening-debonded stage. The numerical simulations indicate the development of high stress/strain gradients at the interface as a consequence of the relative slip between the FRP and the concrete. With the increase of the width of FRP plate, the interfacial bond strength and the slope of the initial elastic deformation of the load-global slip of FRP-to-concrete increases, the global slip is lower when increasing FRP width at the same stress level, by contrast, the total ultimate interfacial slip decreases with the increase of FRP plate width, and the interfacial ductility of FRP-to-concrete and the utilization efficiency of FRP plate also reduce. The reinforcement efficiency of the bonding of FRP plate in strips is higher than that of the bonding of FRP plate as a whole. In addition, the bending stress is of significant influence on the maximum principal stress at the loading end and near the plate edge and the debonding of FRP-to-concrete starts in the concrete beneath FRP plate near the edge of FRP plates and loading end. Numerical results on debonding of FRP-concrete visually reproduce the temporal evolution and spatial distribution of microcracking in FRP-to-concrete and reveal the distribution patterns of stress and strain in FRP plate and concrete, which is in good agreement with the existing experimental results in laboratory. Numerical simulations show that the numerical approach in the present study provides a useful tool for enhancing our understanding of debonding failure process and mechanism of FRP-concrete and our ability to predict mechanical performance and reliability of these FRP plate bonded to concrete structures.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Strengthening reinforced concrete members using fiber reinforced polymers (FRP) has emerged as an efficient method to address strength deficiency problems. This approach has shown significant advantages compared to traditional methods, mainly due to the outstanding mechanical properties such as high tensile strength and stiffness of the FRP composites. However, the retrofitted members often exhibit brittle failure modes due to separation or debonding of the FRP composites from the members.In typical strengthening applications, FRP composite plates are bonded to the tension side of the concrete beam to act as external reinforcement. The FRP composite plates contribute tensile forces to the internal moment resistance, which results in an increased load-carrying capacity of the concrete beam. The stress transfers from concrete to the FRP composite plate through the bond between the FRP composite plate and the concrete. Thus, the bond between the FRP composite plate and the concrete plays a critical role in this strengthening method, which controls the efficacy of the repair by providing effective stress transfer from the existing structures to externally bonded FRP plates and keeping integrity and durability of the composite performance of FRP-to-concrete hybrid structures. Debonding along the FRP-concrete interface can lead to premature failure of the structure. In order to safely and efficiently take advantage of the strengthening technique, some testing methods have been performed to study the bonding property and interfacial behavior of FRP-to-concrete. One of the common testing methods is single shear test in which an FRP plate is bonded to a concrete prism or block and is subject to tension.The mechanical performance and durability of FRP in strengthening applications depends primarily on the bond with the structure. The bond mechanism between FRP and concrete is quite complex and is affected by a number of variables, including but not limited to FRP and concrete dimensions, concrete properties and adhesive properties. The bond stress is transferred only in a limited active area, which leads to local shear stress concentration. Stress concentration may also result from the discontinuity near the ends of FRP. Consequently, further understanding of the bond is essential. This paper reports a numerical study of the effect of FRP plate width on bond performance and debonding behavior of FRP and concrete by single shear test. The distribution of stress and strain along the plate width in FRP plate and concrete during debonding of FRP-to-concrete is also studied.There have been substantial experimental investigations on the bond between the FRP composite plate and the concrete in shear tests [1–9]. A recent survey showed that many different experimental set-ups have been used for determining the FRP-to-concrete bond strength and there is a great variation in test configurations, laminate types, adhesive types and specimen dimensions, but no consensus on a standard test procedure has been reached. Chen and Teng [6] classified the existing shear test set-ups into the four types, viz., double-shear pull tests, double-shear push tests, single-shear pull tests; and single-shear push tests. Yao et al. [8] renamed the four test methods as far end supported double-shear tests, near end supported double-shear tests, far end supported single-shear tests, and near end supported single-shear tests. Moreover, all these four tests may also be referred to as pull tests as the plate is always directly pulled by a tensile force. Within each test method, small variations in the test set-up such as the height of the support block in a near-end support single- or double-shear test may also have significant effects based on a recent stress analysis [10].In the last decades, altogether twelve shear anchorage strength models including empirical models, fracture mechanics model [11] and design proposals [12–14] have been advanced [15]. Chen and Teng [6] compared the performance of eight of the models and pointed out the drawbacks of some of these models in predicting the experimental bond strengths. Based on the nonlinear fracture mechanics solution for FRP-to-concrete bonded joints [11] and the regression of a large number of test data, Chen and Teng [6] proposed a simple ultimate bond strength model(1)Pu=0.427βPβlfc′bpLewhereβP=(2−bp/bc)/1+bp/bc, bpis the width of the bonded plate and bcis the width of the concrete member in mm,βl={1L≥Lesin(πL2Le)L<Le, L is the bond length, Leis the effective bond length in mm andLe=Eptp/fc′in which tp(mm) and Ep(MPa) is the thickness and Young׳s modulus of the bonded FRP plate, respectively.fc′is the cylinder concrete compressive strength.Recently, numerical methods such as Finite Element Method (FEM) and Boundary Element Method (BEM) have been widely used in the study of debonding of FRP-concrete structures due to the easy implementation of numerical test set-ups compared with the complex test set-ups in laboratory. Initially, linear elastic FEM was employed to study the stress distribution in the bond interface. For example, Chen et al. [16] studied the elastic stress distribution in the interface using FEM based on linear elastic analysis. With a further investigation, more attention was gradually shifted to the nonlinear FE analysis of the concrete-to-FRP interface, aiming at the simulation of the entire debonding process. Ghosh et al. [17] used the Voronoi cell finite element model to study decohesion at multiple fiber interfaces and an inverse problem was also solved to calibrate the cohesive-zone parameters. Wong and Vecchio [18] carried out numerical simulation on debonding as the failure of the interface elements between the FRP and the concrete through the introduction of the interface elements into the model. Lu et al. [19] presented a meso-scale finite element model and simulated the entire debonding process in single shear tests of FRP-to-concrete bonded joints by directly modeling the cracking and failure of concrete elements adjacent to the adhesive layer to avoid the use of interface elements. Caporale et al. [20] studied the behavior of unidirectional fiber-reinforced composites in which the matrix and the fibers are considered homogeneous, isotropic and linearly elastic with imperfect interfacial bonding using finite element method. Kushch et al.[21] developed a finite element model of progressive debonding in fiber reinforced composite based on the cohesive-zone model of interface and provides detailed analysis of the progressive debonding phenomenon including the interface crack cluster formation, overall stiffness reduction and induced anisotropy of the effective elastic moduli of composite. Chen and Teng [22] performed a 3D finite element analysis on the stress distributions in a typical shear test set-up for FRP-to-concrete. Freddi and Savoia [23] studied the problem of debonding of FRP plates glued over a concrete element using boundary integral equations and performed numerical simulation on FRP-concrete debonding problems using boundary element method.The real stresses near FRP-to-concrete interface are in three dimensional stress states due to the difference of width between FRP plate and concrete and the difference of the elastic modulus and Poisson׳s ratio of FRP, adhesive and concrete. However, in the early numerical analysis the numerical model on FRP-to-concrete was assumed to be in plane stress state and a coefficient of width ratio was introduced to study the effect of various widths of FRP plate and concrete [19,24–26], which is obviously different from the real three dimensional stress states. So far, compared with the substantial two dimensional studies on FRP-to-concrete, the three dimensional studies on debonding of FRP plate bonded to concrete are seldom [27–29]. Furthermore, the well-known fact is that strength of FRC is greatly affected by its meso-structure and elastic interactions between FRP plate and concrete. Reliable evaluation and prediction of damage onset/accumulation requires the quasi-random geometry model statistically close to the meso-structure of specific FRP bonded concrete. Thus, numerical simulations of far end supported single-shear tests on FRP bonded to concrete with various FRP plate widths were performed in this paper to investigate the stress distribution of FRP end with an applied stress. The progressive debonding process of FRP-concrete, the stress transfer evolution along the FRP composite plate and the failed elements distribution in the FRP-concrete are visualized through numerical simulation. Finally, the debonding mechanism of FRP-concrete is also analyzed.The three dimensional Realistic Failure Process Analysis (abbreviated as RFPA3D) code based on RFPA2D model [30–32] is developed to describe and predict the deformation and fracturing of 3-D brittle materials by considering the heterogeneity of materials. In RFPA3D, the model is numerically discretized into regular cubic elements. Each cubic element has 8 nodes with three degrees of freedom per node. The heterogeneity of the material is taken into account by assigning different properties to the individual elements according to the real material structure. Modified Mohr–Coulomb strength criterion with tension cut-off [33,34] was adopted in the model, where a stressed element can damage in shear or in tension. A stiffness degradation approach that a micro-fracturing occurs when the stress of an element satisfies a strength criterion was employed. The degradation of the material properties after element failure was introduced in the model to simulate strain-softening and discontinuum mechanics problems in a continuum mechanics mode. In addition, the failed elements were recorded in the model to simulate acoustic emission or seismicities associated with the progressive fracture process.In order to reflect the heterogeneity of brittle disordered materials at a meso-level, the mechanical parameters including strength and Young׳s modulus of the mesoscopic material elements, which are assumed as homogeneous and isotropic, are assumed to follow the Weibull distribution [35] as defined in the following statistical probability density function(2)f(u)=mu0(uu0)m−1exp[−(uu0)m]where u is the scale parameter of individual element such as strength or Young׳s modulus and the scale parameteru0is related to the average of element parameter, the shape parameter m reflects the degree of material homogeneity and is termed as a homogeneity index. According to the Weibull distribution and the definition of homogeneity index, a larger m implies that more elements with the mechanical properties approximated to the mean value and a more homogeneous disordered media. In previous paper [36–38], how the homogeneity index affects the macroscopic mechanical response of numerical specimens has been discussed and it is found that the homogeneity index is an important parameter of Weibull distribution to control the macroscopic response of numerical specimen.It needs to be pointed out that, as the element sizes used for the plain concrete prism in the present numerical model are much smaller than the maximum aggregate size, a true meso-mechanical model requires the modeling of the meso-level internal structure of concrete, with the difference between the cement mortar and aggregate explicitly considered. The present model is, however, not intended as such a meso-mechanical model. Instead, the present model aims to use small elements to accurately track the development and propagation of cracks and the elements are still intended to represent the average performance of concrete. Hence, the effect of microstructure such as aggregates, cement mortar and pores in the concrete is homogenized in the model.As we know, the FRP plates in reinforced concrete structures are normally used to carry tensile stresses. The stress–strain laws of the FRP plates (glass fiber or carbon fiber reinforced plastic ones) used in civil engineering are almost linearly elastic up to its ultimate strength. Thus, in the paper, the FRP composites and plain concrete are both considered as brittle materials and are analyzed at meso level, and their stress–strain relationship can be described with an elastic damage constitutive law. Compared to plain concrete, FRP composite plate has much higher tensile strength, relative low elastic modulus and extremely low residual strength. The model is numerically divided into regular cubic elements and the elements are considered to be elastic and its elastic properties can be defined by Young׳s modulus and Poisson׳s ratio. The stress–strain curve of the element is considered linear elastic until the given damage threshold is attained, and then is followed by a constant residual strength. For FRP composite plate, the constant residual strength is assigned to be an extremely small value approaching to zero in terms of its full brittleness. The modified Mohr–Coulomb criterion with tension cut-off is used as damage threshold so that the failure of the elements may be either in shear or in tension.In elastic damage mechanics, the elastic modulus of element may degrade gradually as damage progresses. The elastic modulus of damaged material is defined as follows.(3)E=(1−D)E0where D represents the damage variable. E and E0 are elastic modulus of the damaged and the undamaged material, respectively. Here the element as well as its damage is assumed isotropic elastic, so the E, E0 and D are all scalar.When the mesoscopic element is under uniaxial tensile stress, the constitutive relationship that is elasto-brittle damage with given specific residual strength is shown inFig. 1. Herein tensile stress shall be referred to as positive and compressive stress as negative for sign convention. No initial damage is incorporated in this model, at the beginning the stress–strain curve is linear elastic and no damage occurs, i.e. D=0. When the maximum tensile stress is reached and beyond the strength of the element, the tensile induced damage of element occurs.According to the constitutive relationship of mesoscopic element under uniaxial tension as shown in Fig. 1, the damage variable of element D can be expressed as(4)D={0ε<εt01−ftrεE0εt0≤ε<εtu1ε≥εtuwhereftris the residual uniaxial tensile strength andftr=λft0in which λ is the residual strength coefficient andft0is the uniaxial tensile strength at the elastic limit strain (threshold strain)εt0.εtuis the ultimate tensile strain of the element, which indicates that the element would be completely damaged when the tensile strain of element attains this ultimate tensile strain. The ultimate tensile strain is defined asεtu=ηεt0, in whichηis called ultimate tensile strain coefficient.It is assumed that the damage of mesoscopic element in multiaxial stress field is also isotropic elastic, and therefore the above-described constitutive law for uniaxial tensile stress can be extended to three-dimensional stress states. Under multiaxial stress states the element still damages in tensile mode when the equivalent strainε¯[39] of the combination of major tensile strain attains the aforementioned threshold strainεt0. The constitutive law of element subjected to multiaxial stresses can be easily obtained only by substituting the strainεin Eq. (4) with equivalent strainε¯.(5)D={0ε¯<εt01−ftrε¯E0εt0≤ε¯<εtu1ε¯≥εtuwhere the equivalent strainε¯=〈ε1〉2+〈ε2〉2+〈ε3〉2in whichε1,ε2andε3are the three principal strains,< > stands for the positive part of a scalar and<x>=(x+|x|)/2.Mohr–Coulomb criterion as expressed follows is used as the damage threshold for the damage of elements subjected to compressive and shear stress.(6)F=kσ1−σ3≥fc0whereσ1andσ3are major and minor principal stress respectively, fc0 is uniaxial compressive strength, k is a constant andk=(1+sinϕ)/(1−sinϕ), in whichϕis the internal friction angle. It needs to be pointed out that the value ofσ3andσ1respectively indicate the magnitude of maximum and minimum compressive stress when these two principal stresses are both compressive since compressive stresses are negative and tensile stresses are positive.Similarly, a compressive constitutive law is used when the element is under uniaxial compression and damaged in shear mode according to the Mohr–Coulomb criterion. The damage variable D can be described as follows.(7)D={0ε>εc01−fcrεE0ε≤εc0wherefcris residual uniaxial compressive strength and is defined asfcr=λfc0.When the element is under multi-axial stress state and satisfies the Mohr–Coulomb criterion, the shear damage occurs, and the effect of other principal stress in this model during damage evolution process is considered. When the Mohr–Coulomb criterion is met, the minor principal strain (maximum compressive principal strain)εc0at the peak value of minor principal stress is calculated.(8)εc0=1E0[−fc0+kσ1−μ(σ1+σ2)]In addition, it is assumed that the damage evolution is only related to the maximum compressive principal strainε3. Therefore, the maximum compressive principal strainε3of damaged element is used to substitute the uniaxial compressive strainεin Eq. (7). Thus, Eq. (7) can be extended to biaxial or triaxial stress states(9)D={0ε¯>εc01−fcrε¯E0ε¯≤εc0From the above derivation of damage variable D, which is generally called the damage evolution law in damage mechanics, as well as Eq. (3), the damaged elastic modulus of element at different stress or strain levels can be calculated. The unloaded element keeps its original elastic modulus and strength. That is to say, the element will unload elastically and no residual deformation is incorporated in the numerical model. It must be emphasized that when D=1, it can be calculated from Eq. (3) that the damaged elastic modulus is zero, which would make the system of equations ill-posed, therefore, in this model a relatively small number, i.e. 1.0e-05 by default is specified to the elastic modulus under this condition. At any event, the damage of elements in tension is preferential to that in shear.As we know, acoustic emission (AE), accompanied by crack opening, is predominantly related to the release of elastic energy within the bulk of the brittle disordered materials. One method of observing microcracking during brittle material deformation experiments is by monitoring the acoustic emission (AE) or microseismic events produced during deformation to detect the onset and the evolution of stress-induced cracks and analyze the spatial and temporal progression of microcracks [20,40]. Locker [41,42] has analyzed catalogs of AE events recorded during loading tests in rock in terms of the information they give about the accumulated state of damage in a material. And combine this measured damage state with a model for the weakening behavior of cracked solids, which shows that reasonable predictions of the mechanical behavior are possible. Based on this understanding, as an approximation, it is reasonable to assume that the AE counts are proportional to the number of damaged elements and the strain energy released from damaged elements are all in form of acoustic emission [43]. In this model, a single AE event represents a micro-crack forming event to indirectly assess the damage evolution, and the AE energy release is related to the strain energy of element before and after its damage. Therefore, the AE counts are counted by the number of damaged elements and the energy releases are calculated from the strain energy release of damaged elements. Based on this assumption, the cumulative AE counts, N, and cumulative AE energy release can be realistically simulated with above-mentioned numerical model [44].The cumulative damage,ω, in a given volume of rock, due to local failures can be defined as the ratio of the volume of failed rock, Vf, to the total volume, V,(10)ω=VfV=ve⋅∑1sniN⋅ve=1N∑1sniwhereveis the volume of single element, s is the number of calculation steps, niis the number of damaged elements in the ith step and N is the total number of elements in the model.For an elastic-perfectly brittle material, the energy, ef, released by the failure of each element can be calculated from the element peak strength,(11)ef=(λ−1)σ022λEvewhereσ0is the peak strength of the element and E is the elastic modulus of element.The cumulative seismic energy can then be obtained by(12)∑ef=∑(λ−1)σ022λEve=(λ−1)ve2λ∑σ02EThus by recording the counts of damaged elements, the acoustic emission or microseismicities associated with the progressive failure can be simulated in the model that allows elements to fail when overstressed. In addition, the simulation of crack initiation and propagation in this investigation is just as the method used in smeared crack model, the crack is smeared over the whole element, which has the advantage of leaving untouched the mesh topology. No special singular element is adopted. When the stress state of an element meets the damage threshold, the element will damage in tensile or shear mode. Only when the maximum tensile strain of the damaged element attains a given ultimate tensile strain, the damaged element will become totally cracked. One of the main features of this kind of model is that there is no need for a pre-existing crack to simulate the crack initiation and propagation. The numerical model can simulate the initiation, propagation, and coalescence of multiple cracks effectively and easily and this allows us to investigate the collective behavior of interacting elements and the emergence of a complex macroscopic behavior.In this section, numerical model is validated by comparing with the predictions of Chen and Teng׳s practical engineering model [6] as illustrated in Eq. (1). Concrete cubic specimens of 90mm×50mm×36mm were used in the simulations to save the computational efforts. The material properties for the concrete, GFRP used in Specimens III-7 and III-8 are adopted based on the experimental data [8,45]. The uniaxial compressive strength and elastic modulus of concrete cubic specimens are 34.3MPa and 27.5GPa, respectively. The nominal thickness for the GFRP strips was 1.27mm. The uniaxial tensile strength, elastic modulus and ultimate tensile strain of the GFRP composites are 351MPa, 22.5GPa, and 1.56%. Correspondingly, the physical and mechanical parameters adopted in the simulation at a meso-scale for the concrete and GFRP according to the physical and mechanical parameters such as strength and elastic modulus of concrete and GFRP at a macroscopic scale are determined by trial and error. The physical and mechanical parameters adopted in the simulation are listed inTable 1. It should be noted that the given mechanical parameters represent the mechanical properties of the material used in the simulations at a meso-scale.Table 2 shows the comparisons of bond strength with two different GFRP widths obtained from the numerical simulations with RFPA3D and the predictions of Chen and Teng׳s model. A maximum difference of 6.5% is observed between the simulation results and the predictions of Chen and Teng׳s model.Fig. 2 shows the numerically simulated FRP debonding in the concrete, in which the debonded FRP above the concrete block is not shown to facilitate the examination of the debonding surface of the concrete block. It can be seen that the numerical simulations agree reasonably well with theoretical prediction and experimental observations [8], which illustrates that RFPA3D code is effective in simulating the mechanical behavior of FRP-to-concrete.Fig. 3 shows the geometrical configuration and boundary conditions of the numerical model for a far end supported single-shear test of FRP plate bonded to concrete. The numerical model has a geometry of 70mm×50mm×35mm in this study. The specimen has been discretized into a 70×50×35 (122,500 cubic elements) mesh. The plain concrete block of nominal dimensions, length (70mm), width (50mm), and height (35mm) was used. The external FRP plates with a dimension of 70mm in length, 1mm in thickness and various widths of 8mm, 16mm, 24mm, 32mm and 40mm, are bonded on the middle upper surface of the plain concrete block. The concrete block was placed in the fixture and external load was applied to the FRP plate. The right side of the numerical model is fully constrained and the bottom of the numerical model is restrained to allow a horizontal displacement along the loading direction. The macroscopic material properties of the plain concrete are as follows: uniaxial compressive strength,fc=30MPa, elastic modulus, E=30GPa and the ratio of uniaxial compressive strength to uniaxial tensile strength is 10. The modulus of elasticity and ultimate tensile strength of the reinforced FRP plate in the primary direction of E-glass fiber is taken as 30GPa and 640MPa, respectively [46]. The physical and mechanical parameters of the numerical model at meso-scale are listed inTable 3. The justification of the values of all parameters adopted in the numerical model can be referred to Xu et al. [47,48] for the clarity.In this study, a perfect bond between FRP plate and the concrete is assumed, viz., the use of interface elements is avoided, instead, debonding is directly simulated by modeling the cracking and failure of concrete elements adjacent to the FRP plate. The advantage of this approach is that the debonding behavior can be predicted and the process and mechanism of debonding can be better investigated using an appropriate constitutive model for concrete, without recourse to an interfacial bond-slip model. The approach also provides a useful way for understanding the debonding failure process and mechanism as only limited experimental observations of the debonding failure process can generally be made due to the microscopic details involved in and the suddenness of a debonding failure. In addition, as described above, we aims to use small elements representing the average performance of concrete to track the development and propagation of cracks, and thus the effect of microstructure such as aggregates, cement mortar and pores in the concrete is averaged in the model.In the numerical computation, an external tensile displacement at a constant rate of 0.002mm/step along the longitudinal direction of FRP plate was applied and the stress as well as the deformation in each element was computed to simulate the complete debonding failure process of the FRP bonded to concrete. It is noted that the displacement loading mode is equivalent to displacement control in the analogous servo-controlled laboratory test. At each step, the stress states in some elements may satisfy the strength criterion. Such elements are damaged and weakened according to the rules specified by the strength criterion. The stress and deformation distribution throughout the specimen are then adjusted instantaneously to reach a new equilibrium state.As stated above, the debonding failure of FRP-to-concrete in laboratory is affected by a number of variables, such as the height of support, loading offset, the bond length and the width of FRP and concrete. The width effect of FRP plate on debonding of FRP-to-concrete is only investigated in this paper, meanwhile, only the debonding failure occurred in the concrete a few millimeters beneath the FRP-concrete interface is considered in the simulations, while shear tension failure that tends to occur only when the plate is relatively thick and the failure that rarely occurs in the laminate and adhesive materials are not discussed in this paper. In view of the symmetry of the numerical model in terms of geometry and loading and boundary conditions in the X–Y plane, thus it is reasonable to analyze the stress and strain of one half of the numerical model. In the following sections, the stress and strain data of only one half of the numerical model are analyzed.Numerical simulations show that the debonding process of FRP plate bonded to concrete and the applied load versus global slip curves under various widths of FRP plates have a similar pattern. For conciseness and clarity, the typical evolution of tensile stress field and deformation field and induced AE activities in debonding process of FRP-to-concrete with a FRP plate width of 24mm is shown inFig. 4, which is corresponding to the six points O, A, B, C, D and E in the applied load versus global slip curve of FRP as shown in theFig. 5. It can be obviously seen that in the initial stage of loading, significant bond stresses concentrated and developed near the loaded end of FRP plate in which the distribution of stress and deformation is basically uniform at a macroscopic scale (step 2 in Fig. 4) though some elements of concrete with a low strength beneath the FRP plate damaged and failed in tension as shown in Fig. 5. Meanwhile, it can also be seen that the stress and deformation is approximately zero up to a large distance from the loading end (step 2 in Fig. 4). As the tensile load on FRP plate increases, there is a rapid increase in deformation on approaching the loading end, meanwhile, the bond stresses increase, the effective bond zone expands and the tensile stress of FRP transferred inward. The region of high strain gradient appears to be gradually shifted inward along the length of the FRP plate (step 10, 20 and 32 in Fig. 4). More weak concrete elements near the FRP-to-concrete interface are damaged as shown in Fig. 4 and 5 and the stress in FRP-to-concrete redistributes and transfers under the high tensile stress as can be seen in Fig. 4. Further increases in tensile stress lead to a further stress transfer inward along the FRP-to-concrete and a further increase in the elongation and coalescence of the failure sites, which results in a significant increase of failed elements. When the maximum bond stress reaches the local bond strength, clusters of micro-cracking near the interface commences due to the damage of concrete elements (step 44 in Fig. 4). The bond stresses near the loaded end then decrease, and the effective bond zone continues to expand towards the free end. Finally, the bond stresses close to the loaded end are very small when full debonding happens, indicating the formation of a macro-crack. Finally, the eventual failure of the specimen is symbolized by disintegration of the specimen without obvious element failure events (at step 50 in Fig. 4). This macro-crack corresponds to the surface of the debonded concrete layer observed in a laboratory test. Afterwards, the effective bond zone moves away from the loaded end towards the free end as the macro-crack propagates towards the free end. It is needed to be noticed that there is a significant spatial variation in the axial stress in the FRP plate, where it is expected to be uniform for completely homogeneous material. The fluctuations in the axial stress were found to be due to material heterogeneity in the FRP plate and concrete at a meso-scale. Based on the simulated stress and displacement deformation field evolution along the length FRP plate, the deformation distribution can thus be divided into three main zones: the unstressed zone, the stress transfer zone and the fully debonded zone.Fig. 6 shows the final numerical failure result and an experimental result [45] about FRP bonded concrete is also presented. It can be seen that The numerical simulations are in good agreement with the observed results in laboratory [45]. The results indicate that AE events induced by elements failure can be taken as the precursor of macro-fracture of the specimens and acoustic emission is very useful in characterizing the different stages of microstructural damage.It can be seen from Fig. 5 that the load response versus global slip is essentially linear at the initial stage of loading which is shown as segment OA. With a continuous increase in the applied load, the macroscopic response of FRP-to-concrete is nonlinear (segment AB) up to peak load and the load approximately fluctuates near a constant load (segment BD) up to failure. The final failure of the FRP-to-concrete was abrupt which is shown as segment DE and produced by debonding, resulting in a complete separation of the FRP plate from the concrete block. Based on the applied load versus global slip response and the simulated stress evolution along the length FRP plate, the deformation and debonding process can thus be divided into four stages, i.e., elastic stage (segment OA), elastic-softening stage (segment AB), elastic-softening-debonded stage (segment BD) and softening-debonded stage (segment DE), which is accordance with the analytical analysis [10]. It can be found that the simulated debonding failure of the specimen experienced initial damage, damage development and complete separation of the FRP composite from the concrete substrate, which is in good agreement with the experimental findings by Mohamad et al. [49]. Compared with the experimental applied load versus global slip response curve of FRP plate bonded to concrete by Mohamad et al., we can find that the simulated applied load versus global slip curve of FRP plate bonded to concrete in single shear is very similar with the experimental response curve in shape though there is the slight difference of load level and global slip in magnitude due to the variation of material properties. The agreement between numerical simulation and experimental result indicates that the numerical model in this study is suitable to simulate the cracking and debonding failure process of FRP plate bonded to concrete.Fig. 6 shows the simulated applied load versus global slip curves under various widths of FRP plates. It can be easily seen that the greater the width of FRP plate, the greater the slope of the initial elastic deformation of the load-global slip. That is, the stiffness of FRP plate has a great influence on the initial stiffness of FRP-concrete. It follows that we should take into account the stiffness of the adhesive layer and concrete as well as the stiffness of FRP plate while designing the stiffness of FRP-to-concrete interface. Interfacial bond strength increases with the increase of FRP plate width, moreover, the global slip is lower when increasing FRP width at the same stress level, by contrast, the total ultimate interfacial slip decreases with the increase of FRP plate width. It can be seen fromFig. 7, the difference of the global slip under various widths of FRP plates mainly lies in the elastic-softening-debonded stage where the debonding induced macro-cracks transfer from the loading end to the free end. The increase of the width of FRP plate will reduce the ductility of the FRP-concrete interface and lead to the decrease of the interfacial slip during the softening-debonded stage, which is consistent with the existing experimental findings [50].Here we define the ratio of the stress at the middle of FRP plate to the tensile strength of the FRP as stress ratio and the ratio of FRP plate width to concrete width as width ratio of FRP-to-concrete, Wp/Wc. The tensile strength of FRP plate is that listed in Table 3.Fig. 8 shows the curve of the stress ratio in FRP plates with respect to width ratio. It can be seen from Fig. 8 that stress ratio decreases with an increase in width ratio. It is indicated that the strength of FRP plate with a larger width will be less utilized. The reason for this is that the concrete on both sides of bonded FRP has a positive constraint on FRP and the concrete acted on both sides of bonded FRP providing restriction decreases with the increase of the FRP plate width, which indirectly illustrates the reinforce efficiency of the bonding of FRP plate in strips is higher than that of the bonding of FRP plate as a whole [10].Fig. 9 shows the maximum principal stress distribution in FRP plate with various widths along longitudinal direction at the edge (Y=W/2) and the middle (Y=0) of the FRP plate. The applied load levels are corresponding to point A in Fig. 5. Clearly, the stress distribution in non-bonded end of FRP plate decreases with the increase of FRP plate width at the same load level since the applied load gradually transfers from the non-bonded end to the bonded end of FRP plate. Furthermore, the maximum principal stress at the midpoint edge of non-bonded FRP plate is correspondingly smaller than that of at the midpoint of FRP plate width due to the Poisson׳s effect. The distribution curves of the maximum principal stress at the midpoint of FRP plate width are similar. That is to say, the maximum principal stress from the FRP plate end (X=−10) to the loading end increases slowly but decreases sharply from the loading end (X=0). When X is about 10mm, the maximum principal stress curves become smoothly flat and gradually tend to level off. Similarly, the distribution curves of the maximum principal stress at the edge of FRP plate width are also similar. The maximum principal stress from the FRP plate end (X=−10) to the loading end increases slowly and then increases sharply and reaches up to the peak value at the loading end (X=0). The distribution characteristics of the maximum principal stress are similar to that of the maximum principal stress at the midpoint of FRP plate width. There are some variations between the maximum principal stress near the edge of the loading end at the bonded part of the FRP plate and the corresponding maximum principal stress at the midpoint of FRP plate, which may be due to the end effect near the loading end to some extent. The difference of the stress between at the plate edge and at the midpoint of plate width gradually decreases along the longitudinal direction from loading end to free end of FRP plate, the end effect on the distribution of the maximum principal stress decreased gradually. Thus, the location of strain gauges in the laboratory tests should be mounted in the center as possible to avoid the end effect.Fig. 10 is the distribution curves of the maximum principal stress at 2mm (X=2mm) from the loading end along the FRP plate in the transverse width direction at the load level corresponding to point A in Fig. 5. It is clearly seen that the maximum principal stress along the width direction is non-uniform due to the non-homogeneity of material at meso-scale and the difference of elastic modulus between FRP and concrete. From the midpoint to the edge of the plate along the plate width direction, the maximum principal stress is approximately unchanged, and then gradually increased and peaked at the edge of the plate. Therefore, two-dimensional finite element analysis based on either plane stress or plane strain assumption seems to be inappropriate due to the difference from the three dimensional real stress states.The tensile failure of FRP plate near the FRP-to-concrete joint is rarely found due to its extremely high tensile strength and substantial experimental data show that most experimental joints failed in the concrete a few millimeters beneath the concrete and adhesive interface. As stated above, the Mohr–Coulomb criterion with a tension cut-off and the maximum tensile strain criterion are respectively taken as the damage criterion in shear and in tension in the RFPA3D model. Since the shear stress is the main bond stress in the FRP-to-concrete, the following stress analysis on the width effect of FRP plates in the concrete are discussed in terms of the maximum shear stress and the maximum tensile strain in the concrete near loading end.There are microporosity comprising some or all of open pores between grains, triple-junction voids between crystalline phases, grain boundary voids and open microcracks in the concrete, which leads to the non-homogeneity of mechanical properties of materials. In order to reflect the non-homogeneity of materials, the homogeneity index, m, of the concrete was taken as 2 as hereinbefore made. But it also caused a large fluctuation of stress distribution curves in the concrete; meanwhile, the computational capacity of the computer limits the further refinement of the numerical model to obtain more accurate results, which makes it very difficult to accurately describe the stress and strain distribution in the concrete.Fig. 11 shows the distribution of the maximum shear stress in the concrete with different homogeneity index but the same mean mechanical parameters at a mesoscale along FRP plate transverse direction at X=2mm and at the same load level. Clearly, it can be seen that the higher the homogeneity index of the concrete, the more homogeneous the concrete specimen is, and the less the stress in concrete fluctuates. Therefore, in order to easily compare the data among different and accurately describe the characteristics of stress in concrete, we set the homogeneity index of concrete, m=100, took the concrete as approximately homogeneous materials in the following simulations. Meanwhile, the mean uniaxial compression strength and the mean elastic modulus of the concrete are correspondingly set with trial and error method to 30MPa and 30GPa, respectively, to keep the same macro-mechanical properties of concrete with a homogeneity index of 2.Fig. 12 is the maximum shear stress and tensile strain distribution curve in concrete at the midpoint of the FRP plate along the longitudinal direction at the load level corresponding to point A in Fig. 5. It is seen from Fig. 12a that the maximum shear stress distribution at the midpoint of the FRP plate in concrete follows a similar pattern. That is, the maximum shear stress in concrete peaks at the loading end (X=0), decreases gradually and levels off along the FRP longitudinal direction. There is an extreme point at the free end (X=60) due to a sudden stiffness change from FRP plate to concrete at the free end. The peak value of the maximum shear stress decreases with an increase in FRP plate width. Moreover, the smaller the FRP plate width, the faster the peak value of the maximum shear stress decreases. The maximum shear stress distribution curve becomes stable at about X=10. In the smooth stable section in the curves, opposite to the loading end, the maximum shear stress increases with the increase of FRP plate width at the same X-coordinate. Therefore, the distribution of the maximum shear stress in concrete will become more uniform along the longitudinal direction besides the loading end by increasing the width of FRP plate. Fig. 12b shows the maximum tensile strain in concrete along the FRP plate longitudinal direction, which is similar to the distribution of the maximum shear stress with the exception of the peak of the maximum tensile strain is not in the concrete at the loading end (X=0), but in the concrete of about 2mm (X=2) from the loading end where tensile failure firstly occurred.Fig. 13 shows the maximum shear stress and tensile strain distribution curve in concrete of 1 mm beneath interface and 2mm from the loading end along the transverse direction at the initial stage of loading at the load level corresponding to point A in Fig. 5. It is seen from Fig. 13 that the maximum shear stress and the maximum tensile strain distribution have the same distribution patterns. The maximum shear stress and the maximum tensile strain increase slowly from the midpoint (Y=0) of FRP plate width to the edge of the FRP plate along the transverse direction, peak near the edge of the FRP plate and then gradually drop to zero at the edge of the concrete. It follows that FRP-concrete debonding starts in concrete near the edge of FRP plates. Prior to the peak, the maximum shear stress and the maximum tensile strain in concrete beneath the FRP plate along the transverse direction are basically uniformly distributed. The wider the FRP plate is, the larger the range of the uniformly distributed the maximum shear stress and the maximum tensile strain. The distribution of the maximum shear stress and the maximum tensile strain in the concrete beneath the FRP plate along the transverse direction will become more uniform with the increase of FRP plate width. Off the peak, the maximum shear stress and the maximum tensile strain gradually drop to zero from the edge of the FRP plate to the edge of the concrete, which is in accordance with the experimental findings that the width of the concrete stripped off the FRP-to-concrete is slightly larger than the width of the FRP plate. Meanwhile, different FRP-to-concrete width ratios also lead to the non-uniform distribution of the peak of the maximum shear stress and the maximum tensile strain. It is found in this paper that the peak of maximum shear stress and the maximum tensile strain increases with the increase of FRP plate width when the FRP-to-concrete width ratio is less than or equal to 0.36, and the peak of maximum shear stress and the maximum tensile strain decreases with the increase of FRP plate width when the FRP-to-concrete width ratio is greater than 0.36, which is in agreement with the former findings [27,28].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
