@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Orthostatic stress causes immediately increased blood pressure variability in women with vasovagal syncope

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Nonlinear dynamic analysis shows sympathetic and vagal activities fluctuations.Hemodynamic analysis did not show any statistical differences between subjects.Blood pressure variability showed the highest differences between CON and SYN.In patients, systolic blood pressure variability increased immediately after tilt-up.Healthy women show a stable sympatho-vagal balance during orthostatic phase.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Autonomic regulation,Orthostatic stress,Nonlinear dynamics,Heart rate variability,Blood pressure variability,Respiratory cycle,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The cardiovascular and respiratory autonomic nervous regulation has been studied mainly by hemodynamic responses during different physical stressors. In this study, dynamics of autonomic response to an orthostatic challenge was investigated by hemodynamic variables and by diverse linear and nonlinear indices calculated from time series of beat-to-beat intervals (BBI), respiratory cycle duration (RESP), systolic (SYS) and diastolic (DIA) blood pressure. This study included 16 young female patients (SYN) with vasovagal syncope and 12 age-matched female controls (CON). The subjects were enrolled in a head-up tilt (HUT) test, breathing normally, including 5min of baseline (BL, supine position) and 18min of 70° orthostatic phase (OP). To increase the time resolution of the analysis the time series were segmented in five-minute overlapping windows with a shift of 1min. Hemodynamic parameters did not show any statistical differences between SYN and CON. Time domain linear analysis revealed increased respiratory frequency and increased blood pressure variability (BPV) in patients during OP meaning increased sympathetic activity and vagal withdrawal. Frequency domain analysis confirmed a predominance of sympathetic tone by steadily increased values of low over high frequency power in BBI and of low frequency power in SYS and DIA in patients during OP. The nonlinear analysis by symbolic dynamics seemed to be highly suitable for differentiation of SYN and CON in the early beginning of OP, i.e., 5min after tilt-up. In particular the index SYS_plvar3 showed less patterns of low variability in patients reflecting a steadily increase in both BPV and sympathetic activity. The proposed dynamical analysis could lead to a better understanding of the temporal underlying mechanisms in healthy subjects and patients under orthostatic stress.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Vasovagal syncope (VVS) is a temporal loss of consciousness due to a reduction in cerebral blood flow by an orthostatic stress being the women the more probably population to report syncopal episodes [1]. In clinical practice evaluation of autonomic function associated with VVS is routinely performed by means of the head-up tilt (HUT) test. The HUT test, in which the subject undergoes a change of position very quickly from supine to certain tilt or orthostatic phase (OP), causes a reduction in venous return leading to diminished stroke volume and cardiac output. To maintain blood pressure, the reduction in stroke volume must be compensated for by reflex mechanisms that increase total peripheral resistance. Otherwise, blood pressure falls leading to cerebral hypoperfusion and syncope [2]. VVS has been studied from different points of view using unmedicated or medicated HUT to understand its underlying physiological mechanisms or to predict possible syncopal episodes. In 2013, Forleo et al. published a review of HUT experimental protocols for diagnosing VVS where among other issues it is reported that the sensitivity of the test increases as the duration of the OP increases [3]. From the signal processing point of view, acquired cardiovascular and respiratory time series have been analyzed mainly by linear techniques and by some nonlinear techniques using one temporal window at supine, tilt and recovery phases. Furthermore, in analysis of cardiovascular variability, indices derived from linear techniques have been standardized [4] but in the case of nonlinear indices their usefulness is still under research.In 1997, Lipsitz et al. [5] studied a cohort of healthy subjects, in a HUT test protocol, with a maneuver of paced breathing followed by spontaneous breathing. The authors found highly periodic blood pressure rhythms in those healthy subjects that later developed syncope, suggesting an unstable physiological control network that predisposes individuals to circulatory collapse. Nowadays, researches point out that clinicians should be aware of the prognostic implications of the variability in blood pressure [6]. In fact, Rickards et al. in 2014 published a review focused on blood pressure and cerebral flow variability in different health status as risk of stroke, myocardial infarction and end-organ damage from hypertension, among others [7]. In the review, blood pressure variability analysis was performed just close to the syncope event and for healthy subjects. Consequently, more research needs to be done to validate the usefulness of BP variability to improve health outcomes to avoid detrimental consequences on vital organs [7–9].We hypothesize that univariate linear and nonlinear analysis of segmented cardiovascular and respiratory time series, as performed in this study, may reveal changes in the dynamic of the autonomic regulation response in healthy females and in female patients with VVS, facing an orthostatic challenge. Accordingly, in the present study, under an unmedicated HUT test protocol and including healthy subjects and VVS patients, the aim is three-fold: first, to increase the temporal resolution of the analysis of the HUT test response by a segmentation procedure of cardiovascular and respiratory time series; second, to find representative indices by diverse linear and nonlinear techniques that evidence the time course of fluctuations of sympathetic and vagal activities in both subject groups and third, to elucidate the importance of changes in blood pressure variability for VVS patients and healthy subjects.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper the dynamics of the autonomic nervous system were studied by linear and nonlinear processing techniques on cardiovascular and respiratory time series. To increase the temporal resolution of the analysis, the time series were segmented to dynamically assess the autonomic response in healthy subjects and VVS patients under orthostatic stress. The dynamical analysis of systolic blood pressure variability by SD seemed to be the most adequate to reveal alterations in the autonomic response of young female patients as early as the first 5min after tilt-up. The finding raises the possibility that early abnormalities within the regulation of the vascular system might play a crucial role in the pathogenesis of VVS and plausibly, leading to a functional disturbance of the cerebral blood circulation and oxygen supply. The proposed dynamic analysis could lead to a better understanding of the temporal subjacent mechanisms in healthy subjects and patients under orthostatic stress.