@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The evaluation of a novel haptic-enabled virtual reality approach for computer-aided cephalometry

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Computer-aided cephalometric systems tend not to be practical and intuitive.A new haptic-enabled landmarking approach for 3D cephalometry is proposed.Several experimental tests were conducted to evaluate the proposed approach.Haptic technologies facilities the landmark selection process in 3D cephalometry.The haptic user interface allows the user to feel and touch the virtual patient's skull.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Cephalometry,Haptic technologies,Cephalometric values,Landmark selection,Task completion time (TCT),

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Background and objectiveIn oral and maxillofacial surgery, conventional radiographic cephalometry is one of the standard auxiliary tools for diagnosis and surgical planning. While contemporary computer-assisted cephalometric systems and methodologies support cephalometric analysis, they tend neither to be practical nor intuitive for practitioners. This is particularly the case for 3D methods since the associated landmarking process is difficult and time consuming. In addition to this, there are no 3D cephalometry norms or standards defined; therefore new landmark selection methods are required which will help facilitate their establishment.This paper presents and evaluates a novel haptic-enabled landmarking approach to overcome some of the difficulties and disadvantages of the current landmarking processes used in 2D and 3D cephalometry.MethodIn order to evaluate this new system's feasibility and performance, 21 dental surgeons (comprising 7 Novices, 7 Semi-experts and 7 Experts) performed a range of case studies using a haptic-enabled 2D, 2½D and 3D digital cephalometric analyses.ResultsThe results compared the 2D, 2½D and 3D cephalometric values, errors and standard deviations for each case study and associated group of participants and revealed that 3D cephalometry significantly reduced landmarking errors and variability compared to 2D methods.ConclusionsThrough enhancing the process by providing a sense of touch, the haptic-enabled 3D digital cephalometric approach was found to be feasible and more intuitive than its counterparts as well effective at reducing errors, the variability of the measurements taken and associated task completion times.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Cephalometric analysis is a standard auxiliary diagnostic tool used in oral and maxillofacial surgery. Conventionally it is performed on the 2D lateral radiograph of a patient's head. However, this only represents a composite of the patient's skull on the sagittal plane. Most patients with congenital and acquired cranio-maxillofacial deformities are asymmetric and, as a consequence, the deformity is three-dimensional [1]. Therefore, conventional 2D cephalometry is not ideal for deformity analysis, diagnosis and treatment. It is also time-consuming and with accuracy depending on the specialist's ability to locate landmarks and measure all of the cephalometric variables consistently.Research suggests that 3D cephalometry has the potential to achieve more precise diagnosis and analysis of cranio-maxillofacial deformities over conventional 2D radiographic approaches [1–4]. Other work comparing 2D and 3D cephalometry [5–11] reports that tracing a 3D model is both difficult and time consuming as some landmarks are hard to identify on 3D models. Also, there is no standard set of cephalometric variables or standards that exist for 3D cephalometric measurement and diagnosis. Therefore, new landmark selection methods are required to both improve diagnosis and to facilitate the establishment of new reference norms and standards [12]. The literature also highlights that there is a need to improve modern computer-based interactive cephalometric system usability, user friendliness and intuitiveness to facilitate easier and more accurate 2D and 3D cephalometric analyses.This research attempts to resolve the issue of providing effective 3D cephalometric analysis through the use of haptic technologies in order to overcome many of the difficulties and disadvantages of current landmarking methods. Using the sense of touch in this way to enhance the user experience could potentially enrich the usability and intuitiveness of cephalometric computer-based systems.Therefore the aim of this study was to evaluate the feasibility and effectiveness of using haptics in computer-aided cephalometric analysis.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A novel haptic-based approach to enhance the landmarking selection process in digital cephalometric analysis has been presented and evaluated. This provides the user with a sense of touch while interacting with the virtual environment to identify cephalometric landmarks. The proposed approach was justified in a series of experimental trials involving a range of users. The results demonstrated that a haptic-enabled approach is feasible in 2D, 2½D and 3D environments and that benefits were obtained in the reduction of measurement errors, lower variability and reduced task completion times. User feedback validated that these benefits were directly associated with the enhancement of the landmarking process using haptics which, in turn, facilitated a more intuitive and practical identification of cephalometric metrics when supported by a sense of touch.Future work will consider a complete statistical analysis of the accuracy and errors of the data, including errors made when superimposing or digitizing 3D models as well as the use of more 3D cephalometry case studies and the intra-observer analysis of a complete orthodontic treatment. The analysis and evaluation of the system as a teaching and learning tool as well as an expert knowledge capture and retrieval tool are also part of planned future work.None declared.