@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Crashworthiness analysis and design of multi-cell hexagonal columns under multiple loading cases

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Different cross-sectional configurations of multi-cell hexagonal tubes are compared.The multi-cell configurations are subjected to both axial and oblique loads.COPRASis used to select the best configuration considering multiple loading angles.Multi-objective optimization is conducted considering multiple loading cases.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Multi-cell hexagonal tube,Oblique impact,Crashworthiness,Complex proportional assessment,Multiobjective optimization,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Multi-cell thin-walled structures have proven fairly effective in energy absorption and have been extensively used in vehicle engineering. However, the effects of multi-cell configurations and oblique loads on the crashworthiness performance have been under studied. This paper aims to investigate the crash behaviors of different multi-cell hexagonal cross-sectional columns under axial and oblique loads comprehensively. The modeling results are first validated by comparing with the theoretical and experimental data. It is found that for the same cell number, the number of corners plays a significant role in enhancing energy absorption. Second, a multicriteria decision-making method, namely complex proportional assessment (COPRAS), is used to select the best possible sectional configuration under multiple loading angles. Finally, the Kriging modeling technique and multiobjective particle optimization (MOPSO) algorithm are employed to optimize the dimensions of such a cross-sectional configuration. The results exhibit that an optimized multi-cell sectional tube is more competent in crashworthiness for multiple load cases (MLC).

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With increased customer demand and government regulation, more and more attention has been recently drawn to improvement of structural crashworthiness for reducing occupant fatalities and injuries. On the other hand, growing concern in fuel consumption and environment sustainability pushes the vehicle structures lighter and lighter. As a result, thin-walled structures, especially the multi-cell columns are widely used as an energy absorber in vehicle structures. To date, substantial studies [1–8] have been conducted with differently shaped mono-cell hollow and filled tubes. It has been shown that foam-filled tubes are more efficient in energy absorption than the hollow columns.Nevertheless, Zhang and Cheng [9] pointed out that the multi-cell columns with different configurational sizes could absorb about 50–100% more energy than the foam-filled columns with the same weight. Besides, the state-of-the-art extrusion process allows to fabricate multi-celled tubes in a single piece of component straightforward nowadays, making fabrication of arbitrary cross-sectional members relatively easily without increasing too much cost [10]. Over years, considerable studies have been conducted on the energy absorption of multi-cell tubes by using analytical, numerical and experimental methods. For example, Bai et al. [11] proposed a new analytical model to predict the mean crushing strength of hexagonal multi-cell thin-wall structures under quasi-static crushing, which was validated by the experimental test and literature data. Chen and Wierzbicki [12] derived a theoretical formula for calculating the mean crushing force of foam-filled double-cell and triple-cell columns, which agreed with the simulation results well. Kim [10] proposed some new multi-cell configurations with four square cells at corners and found that energy absorption of these columns can be improved substantially over the conventional column. Zhang and Zhang [13] studied the crash behaviors of different multi-cell sections under axial load and improved the Chen and Wierzbicki׳s formula of mean crushing load. Alavi Nia and Parsapour [14] investigated the crashworthiness of single cell and multi-cell tubes, and showed that adding partitions at corners does help improve the crash behaviors. They also revised Zhang et al.׳s formula so that it could be applied to the tubes with unequal cell size. Najafi and Rais-Rohani [15] studied the energy absorption characteristics of thin wall tubes with different multi-cell and multi-corner configurations under axial quasi-static loading condition. These aforementioned multi-cell tubal structures have well exhibited their superior abilities in absorbing crash energy under axial loading.On the other hand, a vehicle rarely encounters a completely axial load, but rather likely experiences in oblique loading in real life crashing events. In practical design of vehicle, the bumper system requires to endure as large as 30° loading angle to the longitudinal axis [16]. For this reason, crashworthiness design should take into account the oblique loading. In this regard, Song and Guo [17] compared the crash behaviors of windowed and multi-cell square tubes with the same weight under axial and oblique loading conditions. The results indicated that the multi-cell and windowed columns perform better at the axial loading angle but even worse at small oblique angles than conventional tubes. Tran et al. [18] extended the analytical solutions from pure axial quasi-static to dynamic oblique loading conditions, by proposing an oblique impacting coefficient and taking into account the inertia effect, which were validated by the numerical results. Li et al. [19] numerically studied the crash behaviors of functionally graded foam-filled tubes in comparison with the uniform foam-filled counterparts under oblique loads. They revealed that impact angle affects the crashworthiness drastically and needs to be considered in optimization. Reyes et al. [16,20,21] studied the crashworthiness of foam-filled aluminum tubes under quasi-static oblique loads; and they confirmed that the mean and peak loads decrease with the impact angles as more severe bending reduces loading bearing capacity.While there have been some studies available on the crashworthiness of multi-cell tubes, few has systematically compared the energy absorption of different cross-sectional configurations. Further, it remains to be clarified how a loading angle affects the energy absorption of multi-cell hexagonal tubes, and how the multi-cell configurations can be optimized for better absorbing energy under oblique loads?The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the numerical modeling techniques and validation, followed by crashworthiness comparison of different multi-cell tubes in Section 3. Section 4 describes the optimization of multi-cell tubes and Section 5 draws some conclusions.Alavi Nia and Parsapour [22] compared the energy absorption of multi-cell thin-wall tubes made of aluminum with triangular, square, hexagonal and octagonal sections subjected to quasi-static loading. They found that the hexagonal column absorbs more energy than the other sectional configurations. From their studies, the hexagonal thin-walled tube is a comparatively better choice for design of vehicular components. For example, Honda employed complex hexagonal extruded cross-section members for the front side rail of its new hybrid passenger car, namely Insight [23]. Therefore, this study focuses on the crashworthiness of different multi-cell hexagonal tubes, as shown in the schematic of cross-sections inFig. 1. Besides, the one singly-walled tube (Fig. 1a) and two doubly-walled tubes (Fig. 1b and e), and four multi-cell tubes (Fig. 1c, d, f and g) were constructed by connecting the outer and inner walls through six ribs with different configurations. As such, seven different cross-sectional configurations were considered for the comparative study: i.e. (a) S1: single tube; (b) S2: bitubal tube I; (c) S3: corner ribs connecting the outer and inner walls, (d) S4: middle ribs connecting the outer and inner walls, (e) S5: bitubal tube II; (f) S6: ribs connecting the outer corners with the middle inner walls; (g) S7: ribs connecting the middle outer walls with the inner corners. These seven columns with the same outer side width of B=36mm, inner side width of C=18mm (if any) and axial length of L=180mm are assigned with different wall thicknesses to maintain the same mass (Fig. 1).The commercial explicit non-linear dynamic finite element analysis (FEA) code LS-DYNA was employed to simulate the crash behaviors of the above mentioned multi-cell hexagonal columns under different loading angles. As shown inFig. 2, the finite element (FE) model was comprised of the differently sectional tubes, the striker with mass of 600kg and the base used to constrain the bottom end of the tube. At different loading cases, the striker with different incident angles θ impacted on the top end of the tube at an initial velocity of v=15m/s. The outer, inner and rib walls of the multi-cell columns were modeled using the Belytschko–Lin–Tsay reduced integration shell elements with five integration points across the thickness. The reduced integration technique and hourglass control were employed to avoid volumetric locking and spurious zero energy deformation modes, respectively. The mesh size of 1.5mm was selected for tube specimens based on a mesh convergence study. “Automatic node to surface” algorithm was employed to simulate the interfaces between the tube and striker as well as between the tube and rigid base. Meanwhile, the contacts between the column walls, with and without ribs and inner walls, were modeled with “Automatic single surface” contact to avoid interpenetration during crushing. The value of Coulomb friction coefficient for all the contact surfaces was set at 0.15 [13].The material of multi-cell columns is aluminum extrusion AA6061 with the following mechanical properties [13]: the density=2700kg/m3, Poisson’s ratio=0.33, Young’s modulus=68GPa, initial yield stress=71MPa, ultimate stress=130.7MPa and the power law exponent of 0.18. The constitutive behavior of the thin-walled structure was based on an elastoplastic material model 123 in LS-DYNA with piecewise linear plastic hardening. The engineering stress–strain curve of the material is shown inFig. 3[13].The numerical results of single-wall tube (S1) under axial quasi-static impact can be validated using a close-form formula of the mean crushing force, which was developed based on the super folding element method as calculated by [13](1)Favg-S1-static=136.037kσ0B0.2t1.8where σ0 denotes the flow stress of tube material, and t is the wall thickness of the tube. The coefficient k is given as the ratio of the effective crush distance to initial length, and is identified as 0.79 for single wall tube in this validation study [13].In addition, the theoretical formulae [24] of the mean crushing force for single tube S1 and multi-cell tube S4 were employed to validate the effectiveness of the FE model under dynamic loading conditions.(2)Favg-S1-Dynamic=λ136.037kσ0B0.2t1.8(3)Favg-S4-Dynamic=λ42.45kσ0B0.5t1.5According to Hou et al. [25], the strain rate does not have much influences on aluminum alloy and can be neglected. Therefore the dynamic coefficient λ is introduced to consider the inertia effect, which is set as 1.1 here [26–28]. The coefficient k is identified to the effective folding length obtained from the simulation for correlation analysis, which is given as 0.66 here for multi-cell section S4. The comparisons of the mean crushing force versus displacement of single cell tube S1 and multi-cell tube S4 along the axial direction are shown inFig. 4, where t=0.7mm, 1mm, 1.5mm and 2mm are considered, respectively. Obviously, the FEA results agree fairly well with the theoretical solutions for both single cell tube S1 and multi-cell tube S4.To further validate the FEA results of single-cell tube, crushing behavior and deformation mode of tube S1 are also compared with the experimental results reported in literature [13]. The axial quasi-static test was conducted by utilizing the test machine with 100kN capacity. The loading speed is 0.5mm/s. FromFig. 5, it is seen that the FE simulation is in good agreement with the experiment in terms of force–displacement curve (Fig. 5a), energy absorption–displacement curve (Fig. 5b), and deformation pattern (Fig. 5c). Therefore, the FE modeling established in this paper is considered sufficiently accurate for further comparative analyses and design optimization of different multi-cell columns under both static and dynamic loading conditionsTo quantitatively evaluate the crashworthiness of different configurations and optimize their performances under axial and oblique loads, three design criteria, namely energy absorption (EA), peak crushing force (Fmax) and crushing force efficiency (CFE), will be considered in the paper.Energy absorption is a key indicator to measuring energy absorption capabilities for different structures, which can be calculated from the following formula:(4)EA=∫0δF(x)dxwhere F(x) denotes the instantaneous crushing force in the axial direction, δ is the crash distance, which is taken as 120mm or 2/3 of the original tube length (L=180mm), here.Peak crushing force (Fmax), defined as the maximum value ofF(x), is an important indicator to safety and directly related to the deceleration experienced by the vehicle and occupants.The average crushing force (Favg) is also a key indicator defined as(5)Favg=EAδ=∫0δF(x)dxδTo evaluate the average (Favg) and peak (Fmax) force at the same time, crushing force efficiency (CFE) is defined as a ratio of the average to peak force, defined as(6)CFE=FavgFmax×100%Obviously, the higher the energy absorption (EA), the better the performance of energy absorbing structure. Besides, if the CFE value approaches unity, the deceleration will be minimized, which is also desirable for design of absorber. Note that a large peak force could lead to a high deceleration, which could be detrimental to the occupant safety.In this study, the tube with the highest crashworthiness under axial and oblique loads will be selected from these seven different sectional configurations in terms of the aforementioned design criteria. However, these criteria often mutually conflict with each other [29,30]. For such a multicriteria decision making (MCDM) process, the complex proportional assessment method (COPRAS) [31] was adopted herein. The method has been widely used in solving the problem of the design selection for its simplicity [32–36]. For completeness, the procedure is described in certain detail as follows:Step 1: Generate an initial matrix X to map the alternative designs to the criteria(7)X=[xij]mn=[x11x12x1nx21x22x2n⋯⋯⋯⋯xm1xm2xmn]wherexijdenotes the performance value of the ith design alternative against the jth design criterion, and m and n is the number of design alternatives and the number of design criteria (or performance indicatros), respectively.Step 2: Normalize the decision matrix.The normalized decision matrix R is derived to obtain the dimensionless values of different criteria so that all of them become comparable.(8)R=[rij]mn=xij∑i=1mxijStep 3: Determine the individual weightages of different criteria and the procedure is described as follows [37]:•Compare every two criteria at a time. Obviously, the total comparison set is N=(n(n−1)/2).For any two compared criteria, assign a score of three (3) to the more important criterion, while give the other a score of one (1). If the two criteria are of equal significance, assign a score of two (2) for both. Repeat this for all the other comparison sets.Then sum the total score achieved for each criterion by the formulation:∑i=1mwij=Wjwjis the weightage of the jth criterion and can be obtained as a function of total score for each criterion divided by the global total scoreG=∑j=1nWj.Table 1 illustrates an example for identifying different criteria, i.e., Fmax, EA and CFE.Step 4: Compute the weighted normalized decision matrix D by(9)D=[yij]mn=rij×wjwhere rijdenotes the normalized performance value of the ith alternative for the jth criterion.Step 5: Sum up the beneficial and non-beneficial attributes, respectively.The weighted normalized values in the D matrix consist of both beneficial and non-beneficial attributes. A low value of a non-beneficial attribute (e.g. Fmax) is preferable for the selection. On the other hand, a great value of beneficial attribute (e.g. EA) is desirable. These sums were obtained by the following two equations, respectively:(10)S+i=∑i=1my+ij(11)S−i=∑i=1my−ijwherey+ijis the beneficial attribute,y−ijis non-beneficial attribute.Step 6:Determine the minimal value ofS−i:(12)S−min=minS−iStep 7: Calculate relative significance or priority (Q).For each candidate alternative, their priorities were calculated based on the notion of relative significance Qi. The relative significance value Qiof the ith alternative can be determined mathematically as below:(13)Qi=S+i+∑i=1mS−iS−i∑i=1m(1/S−i)Step 8: Determine the quantitative utility (U).The values of the quantitative utility Uiresult in a complete ranking between the alternatives and can be calculated as(14)Ui=QiQmax×100%where Qmax indicates the maximum value of the relative significance. The larger the degree of the quantitative utility, the better performance the design alternative. The design alternative with utility value of 100% is considered to be the best design evaluated by this method.The crashing responses of these seven different sectional topologies are compared under axial and different oblique loads angles (θ=10°, 20°, 30° here), respectively. For the axial loading case, all these multi-cell tubes develop progressive deformations as depicted inFig. 6. The corresponding crashing force vs. displacement curves are plotted inFig. 7a and the peak values are compared inFig. 8a. For the single wall structure, the instantaneous force increases to the initial peak, then quickly decreases and follows in a number of fluctuations with a relatively low value corresponding to the progressive folding. In comparison with the single tube S1, the double tubes S2 and S5 have a more severe fluctuation with a larger range after reaching the initial peak force and their periods of the folding are longer, corresponding well to the fact that their folding lengths (the distances between two adjacent plastic hinges) are longer and the folding numbers are less as shown in Fig. 6. On the contrary, for the multi-cell sections with connecting ribs, their crashing forces after peak force tend to be more stable within a narrow fluctuation range. This might be attributed to the decrease in the length of folding as shown in Fig. 6. Furthermore, the peak crashing forces of multi-cell columns, though much thinner in the wall thickness to maintain the same weight, are generally comparable to that of single-wall section due to the presence of the connecting ribs. The results imply that the crashing capabilities of the tubes are reinforced by the internal ribs for the doubly-walled columns, which create the interaction between inner and outer walls that benefits the stable development of folding deformation during impact. Furthermore, their crashing forces are more stable than the other sections. However, the multi-cell tubes S3 and S6 do not perform as well as S4 and S7, because the corner number of S3 (N=12) is much less than S4 (N=24) and S7 (N=18), and though S6 has the same number of corners as S7, its thickness (t=0.58) is too thin in relation to S7 (t=0.64).Fig. 8b reveals that under the axial loading condition, multi-cell tubes have greater ability to absorb energy. Specifically, under the same mass, multi-cell tubes have higher EA than the other sections. This is because increasing number of corners in the multi-cell configurations requires more energy to deform as hinges. Furthermore, of these multi-cell sections with connecting ribs, section S4 has the highest EA than the other sections, which is closely related to its largest number of the corners. To be specific, there are 12, 18 and 18 corners in S3, S6 and S7 respectively, whereas S4 has 24 corners.As for CLE shown in Fig. 8c, the values for multi-cell tubes are also much higher than the doubly-walled tubes and singly-walled tube without connecting ribs. The results further demonstrate that the multi-cell configurations can be indeed more efficient energy-absorbing structures.For the oblique loading condition with a small incident angle (θ=10°), the progressive folding is still observed in Fig. 6, which is fairly similar to those at θ=0°. Fig. 6 indicates that under a relatively small impact angle, the tubes are still able to efficiently absorb energy through developing folds in the axial direction. As displayed in Fig. 7b, when the loading angle increases from 0° to 10°, nevertheless, the difference between the initial peak force and the successive ones become much smaller and the crashing force after the initial peak fluctuates within a considerably smaller range. Similarly to the situation of θ=0°, the multi-cell tubes bear the larger forces than the singly-walled and doubly-walled columns. Further, Fmax and EA decrease in all sections when incident angle θ changes from 0° to 10°. Interestingly, Fmax decreases more than EA does, explaining why the CLE in the case of θ=10° is larger than that of θ=0° (as depicted in Fig. 8c) as the EA represented the value of Favg (given as Eq. (5)).From Fig. 8b, one can see that less energy can be absorbed under relatively large oblique angles θ=20° and 30° for all the columns. The reason lies in that the oblique loads with larger angles change the deformation mode from axial progressive folding dominant to global bending dominant (as shown in Fig. 6), which is regarded as the less efficient deformation pattern in terms of energy absorption. In the case of θ=20°, the impact force reaches a peak load and then decreases sharply due to the global bending (Fig. 7c). Although section S4 has more corners than section S7, S7 is thicker than S4, which plays a more important role under large impacting angles. Also since S3 and S6 have much thinner walls than S1, their crashworthiness performances are less preferable than S1 in such an oblique loading case. Doubly-walled columns S2 and S5 dissipate less energy than S1 under the loading angle 20°, which is because the decreased energy due to a thinner thickness overtakes the increased energy from the addition of corners.When it comes to θ=30°, the crashing force responses of all tubes are similar to the results observed from the 20° impacting angle (Fig. 7d). Furthermore, the Fmax and EA decrease more significantly as seen in Fig. 8a and b, respectively. Interestingly, from Fig. 7d, S1 takes a considerably longer time to reach the initial peak force, indicating that it allows longer deformation before the global bending.In conclusion, when the singly-walled, doubly-walled and multi-cell tubes are subjected to small loading angles, such as 10°, all of the columns collapse progressively and dissipate a relatively large amount of energy. When the incidental angle θ further increases, for example up to 20° or 30°, however, all of the tubes tend to buckle globally, which is regarded as a less efficient deformation mode and their load bearing and energy absorbing capacities decrease dramatically. Multi-cell columns generally have better performances under all different loading angles than the singly-walled tube with the same mass. Moreover, multi-cell columns S4 (with the most corners) and S7 (with the largest thickness) of all the multi-cell specimens are more preferable than S1 (singly-walled tube with thickest wall of all tubes). On the contrary, the multi-cell sections S3 and S6 even perform worse than section S1 in some cases due to their overly thinner walls.In this study, the complex proportional assessment (COPRAS) method will be adopted to select the sectional configuration of tubes with best crashworthiness performance. In addition to high energy absorption capacity and crashing force efficiency, a good energy absorber should also develop a low peak force to prevent severe damage and injury during a collision. Thus, all of the three criteria EA, Fmax and CLE at these four different loading angles of 0°, 10°, 20°, 30° need to be considered as the design criteria for selecting the most suitable one from these seven candidate tubes. Of these 12 crashworthiness measures, EA and CLE are the beneficial attributes and require higher values, whereas Fmax is a non-beneficial attribute and requires a lower value. Seven different sectional configurations are considered as the candidates herein. Thus, the decision matrix of such multicriteria decision-making (MCDM) problem consists of seven alternative tubes and 12 measures are presented inTable 2.After determining the decision-matrix, the analysis is conducted following the procedure introduced in Section 3.2. In this study, we assumed that EA and Fmax are equally important and CLE is relatively less important, because its value can be somewhat determined by the other two factors. According to Step 3 of the procedure, the weights for EA, Fmax and CLE are assigned as 0.09848, 0.09848 and 0.05303, respectively. To obtain the dimensionless values of different crashworthiness measures, the normalized matrix was generated by Eq. (8) and their corresponding weighted normalized matrix is developed using the identified criteria, as shown inTable 3. Then, from Eqs. (10) and (11), the weighted normalized values for beneficial (S+i) and non-beneficial attributes (S−i) are summed, as given inTable 4. The relative significance or priority value (Qi) for each alternative sections is formulated by Eq. (13), as summarized in Table 4. As a result, Table 4 exhibits the value of quantitative utility (Ui) for each alternative tubes, and the final ranking of tubes from S1 to S7 is obtained as 5-6-3-1-7-4-2. This means that the best choice of these seven alternative sections under multiple load conditions is S4, which will be optimized further in the subsequent section.According to the aforementioned comparative analyses, tube S4, which comprises of six ribs connecting the middles of outer and inner walls, performs best under multicriteria and multiple loading cases. Thus, a further optimization is carried out to find the best possible design when the impact angle varies from 0° to 30°, with the interval of 10°.Fig. 9 provides a flowchart of the optimization for clarification.As an energy absorber, the thin-walled tube is expected to absorb as much energy as possible. Therefore, EA is identified as an objective function and needs to be maximized. Meanwhile, Fmax should be constrained under a certain level, as a great impact force likely leads to a high deceleration and thus causes severe injury or even death of the occupants. As shown in Eqs. (15) and (16), the dimensionless efficiency coefficientsdEAanddFare utilized respectively for EA and Fmax to normalize these two design criteria.(15)dEA=1−EA−EALEAU−EAL(16)dF=Fmax−FLFU−FLwhereEALandEAUdenote the minimum and maximum of EA for all the considered sampling points, respectively.FLandFUare the minimum and maximum of peak crashing force, respectively. After such normalization, the values of both EA and Fmax will vary between 0 and 1.To account for the effect of different loading angles, the weighting factorλiis implemented to reflect the relative importance of individualdEA,ianddF,i, and its sum for all load cases should satisfy the following condition:(17)∑i=1pλi=1,λi≥0where p denotes the number of load cases considered (p=4 herein) andλ1,λ2,λ3andλ4represent the weight factors for loading angle θ=0°, 10°, 20° and 30°, respectively. As a result, two weighted normalized indicators can be formulated as:(18){dEA,λ=∑i=1kdEA,iλidF,λ=∑i=1kdF,iλiwheredEA,1,dEA,2,dEA,3anddEA,4denote the values of normalized energy absorptiondEAat the loading angle θ=0°, 10°, 20° and 30°, respectively.dF,1,dF,2,dF,3anddF,4represent the corresponding values of crashing peak forcedF.Based on these two weighted normalized criteria, the optimization problems for multiple load cases (MLC) can be determined mathematically as Eq. (19), in which the thicknesses of outer wall t1, inner wall t2, ribs t3 and the distance between the outer and inner walls l are defined as the design variables (as seen inFig. 10).(19){min{dEA,λ(t1,t2,t3,l),dF,λ(t1,t2,t3,l)}s.t.0.8≤t1,t2,t3≤1.54≤l≤17Crashworthiness optimization usually requires a large number of nonlinear FE runs. As an effective approach, surrogate modeling has been extensively applied [38–43]. Of various surrogate forms, Kriging model has proven to be particularly promising for the highly nonlinear problems [6,39,44–47] and will be employed herein to approximate EA and Fmax functions for each cases. Then, the crashworthiness objectives, i.e.dFanddEA, are calculated using Eqs. (15) and (16), respectively.The first step of surrogate modeling technique is to sample the design space. Design of Experiment (DoE) has been a widely-used technique to address how to select minimum number of training points for mapping the entire design space properly. In this study, the optimal Latin Hypercube sampling (OLHS) [48,49] is employed to generate 80 training points, because it can efficiently generate uniformly-distributed sampling points. Then, the EA and Fmax at these training points are evaluated using FEA. Based on the simulation results, the Kriging models of EA and Fmax under different loading cases are constructed.To evaluate the fitting accuracies of the Kriging surrogate models, five extra validation points are generated in the design space. The relative error (Re) between the FEA resultsffea(x)and Kriging approximationsfkrg(x)at these validation points can be expressed as:(20)Re=|ffea(x)−fkrg(x)ffea(x)|The Res of EA and Fmax for each loading scenario are depicted inFig. 11. It can be seen that all the Kriging models consistently provide the acceptable approximation for performing the following design optimization.In this study, the multiobjective particle swarm optimization (MOPSO) algorithm is implemented to generate the Pareto frontiers for the optimization problem described in Eq. (19). The MOPSO algorithm proposed by Coello et al. [48,50] has been successfully employed to solve the numerous crashworthiness optimization problems such as functionally graded foam-filled structures [29] and the sheet metal forming problems [51], which has demonstrated the major advantages of fast convergence and well-distributed Pareto frontier, over other multiobjective optimization algorithms, such as NSGA [52], PEAS etc. [53,54].We set the weighting factors in Eq. (18) as follows to conduct the optimization for these four different single loading cases (SLC), where only one impact angle is considered in each design case, separately.Case I (θ=0°): λ1=1.0, λ2=0.0, λ3=0.0, λ4=0.0Case II (θ=10°): λ1=0.0, λ2=1.0, λ3=0.0, λ4=0.0Case III (θ=20°): λ1=0.0, λ2=0.0, λ3=1.0, λ4=0.0Case IV (θ=30°): λ1=0.0, λ2=0.0, λ3=0.0, λ4=1.0In order to obtain the reliable Pareto frontiers, the accuracy of Pareto solutions are iteratively checked and the corresponding Kriging models are updated consistently [55–57]. Then, the converged Pareto sets subjected to the different single impact angles θ=0°, 10°, 20° and 30° are obtained and the normalized valuesdEAanddF(used for MOPSO) are converted to the absolute values for comparison of these different SLCs (as shown inFig. 12). For each load case, the Pareto frontiers comprise of two competing criteria ofdEAanddF, which implies that one of the objectives cannot be further improved without sacrificing the other. Specifically, if the designer would like to pay more attention on the energy absorption, thendFhas to be compromised and becomes higher, vice versa. Furthermore, when the impact angle increases, the Pareto curve moves toward the upper-left region in the Pareto plots (Fig. 12), indicating that the corresponding energy absorptiondEAhas a non-beneficial decrease whereasdFhas a beneficial decrease. In brief, the loading angles have a significant effect on the location and range of the Pareto frontiers and thus on their crashworthiness performances.As depicted in Fig. 12, we adopted the minimum distance selection method (MDSM) [58] to obtain the knee points for different loading cases. From these knee points, the outer wall becomes thicker when the loading angle increase from 0° to 30°. This is because the thicker outer wall is able to more effectively enhance the resistance of the bending deformation, even with thinner inner and rib walls, and thus improve the crashworthiness performances. In other words, the outer wall plays a more important role in resistance of the oblique loads than inner wall and rib wall.Although the Pareto solutions under four separate loading cases are of considerable implication, the optimum for one single load case may not perform well for other loading conditions, placing inferiority to the energy absorber under different loading scenarios in practice. To take into account the effects of multiple load cases, the weighting factor method is adopted in the optimization problem, in which the weight factor (λ) is used to reflect the relative importance and/or occurence probability of each loading angles. To investigate the effect of weight factors on the optimization problem, the following design cases are considered here:Case I: λ1=0.10, λ2=0.20, λ3=0.30, λ4=0.40Case II: λ1=0.25, λ2=0.25, λ3=0.25, λ4=0.25Case III: λ1=0.40, λ2=0.30, λ3=0.20, λ4=0.10The MLC Pareto frontiers of these three different design cases are plotted inFig. 13. The Pareto frontier moves down and right when the smaller impacting angles (i.e., 0° and 10°) are emphasized, in which the larger Fmax and EA occur (Fig. 13).To compare the results of SLC and MLC designs, these three MLC and four SLC optima are illstrated inFig. 14a–d, for the four different load cases, respectively. As expected, the SLC solutions can dominate other solutions in the corresponding objective spaces. That is to say, the specific SLC designs are able to simultanously enhance the EA and lower the Fmax compared to the MLC designs. However, the optimum of SLC only favors a specific single loading case. When the tube is subjected to other loading angles the crashworthiness will definitely deteriorate. For example, the Pareto solution of SLC I, is for the pure axial impact (0°), which unsurprisingly outperforms the other solutions in the objective space of θ=0° (as seen in Fig. 14a), but produces worse Fmax and EA under other oblique loading cases (as shown in Fig. 14b–d). Note that the Pareto solutions to MLC I, II and III are all located not far from the corresponding SLC Pareto frontiers in these four objective spaces (as per load cases). In other words, while MLC designs cannot obtain the optimum solutions for each specific single case, they help attain the best possible solution in a weighted manner.The selection of weight factors for different loading angles has a great effect on the optimal solution. Taking MLC III (Fig. 14a) as an example, the Pareto solution located fairly close to the optimum generated by SLC I, whereas the solutions obtained by the other cases are far away. It can be explained that as long as a heavy weight is placed to load case I (e.g. λ1=0.40), the emphasis of MLC III will be mainly on the axial impact which can be optimized to a better performance. Thus MLC III is close to SLC I in the Pareto space. Similarly, MLC I places the heaviest weight to SLC IV (θ=30°), thus its Pareto solution is close to SLC IV as shown in Fig. 14d. The trend of MLC II is not very clear, because it emphasizes all the load cases equally.According to the above analysis, the optimum design is highly dependent on the given weighting factors, and thus the selection of weighting factors for different loading cases is of critical importance in the mulitobjective design of multi-cell columns under the multiple impact angles. Realistic determination of weighting factors for different load cases should follow the statistical data and/or occurrence frequency under multiple impact angles in real life, which is however beyond the scope of this study. The authors are suggested to refer to [59].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
