@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
uSIMPK. An Excel for Windows-based simulation program for instruction of basic pharmacokinetics principles to pharmacy students

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A pharmacokinetics simulation teaching program is described.It is written in VBA in Excel for Windows.The program covers a wide variety of basic pharmacokinetic content.Students have responded favorably to its use.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Pharmacokinetics,Pharmacy education,Visual Basic for Applications,Microsoft Office,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Pharmacokinetics can be a challenging topic to teach due to the complex relationships inherent between physiological parameters, mathematical descriptors and equations, and their combined impact on shaping the blood fluid concentration vs. time curves of drugs. A computer program was developed within Microsoft Excel for Windows, designed to assist in the instruction of basic pharmacokinetics within an entry-to-practice pharmacy class environment. The program is composed of a series of spreadsheets (modules) linked by Visual Basic for Applications, intended to illustrate the relationships between pharmacokinetic and in some cases physiological parameters, doses and dose rates and the drug blood fluid concentration vs. time curves. Each module is accompanied by a simulation user's guide, prompting the user to change specific independent parameters and then observe the impact of the change(s) on the drug concentration vs. time curve and on other dependent parameters. “Slider” (or “scroll”) bars can be selected to readily see the effects of repeated changes on the dependencies. Topics covered include one compartment single dose administration (iv bolus, oral, short infusion), intravenous infusion, repeated doses, renal and hepatic clearance, nonlinear elimination, two compartment model, plasma protein binding and the relationship between pharmacokinetics and drug effect. The program has been used in various forms in the classroom over a number of years, with positive ratings generally being received from students for its use in the classroom.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Pharmacokinetics (PK) constitutes an essential foundational component of entry-to-practice pharmacy curricula. It has roots in biopharmaceutics and impinges extensively into clinical therapeutics. The field incorporates physiological concepts and mathematical descriptors in combination to provide a formative understanding of the relationship between independent pharmacokinetic parameters and on other dependent parameters, and the resultant blood fluid concentrations of drug achieved after drug administration. In pharmacy curricula, the concept of the drug concentration vs. time relationship is integral to an understanding of the relationship between the dose, and drug efficacy and toxicity. This is in turn associated with practical issues in the clinical realm of drug use, such establishing dosing rates and dosing intervals, both fundamental considerations in designing individualized dosing regimens.The approaches taken in the instruction of PK have the potential to vary widely. Figures are a useful component of PK textbooks [1–4] as they allow for a visualization of discreet changes in PK parameters on the concentration vs. time curve. Because of the complexity in all of the factors working in concert to make up the concentration vs. time curve, a compartmental approach provides a good starting point for introducing the topic to students. Compartmental equations simplify the understanding of PK, and more importantly, allow for the ability to predict the concentrations achieved at any time after administration of drug, once individual constants have been determined.An intrinsic challenge to teaching PK is related to its association with mathematic relationships incorporating rates of drug movement, volumes and clearances [5,6]. Consequently, delivery of the content in the classroom has the potential to gravitate toward mathematical relationships. There is no denying that this is a necessary educational component, because these mathematical components link the physiological variables to drug movement, and ultimately, the observed blood fluid concentrations. However, if overemphasized, the student may lose sight of the physiological considerations and perhaps fail to recognize the importance of considering PK in the clinical use of drugs. Conversely, too little emphasis on the mathematical components might lead to a failure to become adept with the “tools” of PK (i.e. equations) and their utility in tailoring of individualized dose regimens. Many PK equations are aimed at deriving a concentration of drug at a particular instance in time, sometimes making it difficult for the student to realize the overall concentration vs. time profile of a particular drug in a patient. Graphical figures may provide for visualization of how factors may affect the concentration vs. time curve, but these are limited by their static nature. The availability of a computer simulation program [7] can potentially provide a greater breadth of exposure to this topic.The purpose of this article is to describe and present an overview of a computer simulation program designed to assist in the teaching of basic PK to undergraduate students (named uSIMPK). It was developed to bridge the gap between PK constants and discrete concentration vs. time relationships, thus allowing a more encompassing view of the relationships. This manuscript focuses on the description of the program, an overview into how it is used in the classroom to illustrate concepts.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
