@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Toward automated classification of acetabular shape in ultrasound for diagnosis of DDH: Contour alpha angle and the rounding index

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
New method to calculate alpha angle for DDH classification from ultrasound (2DUS).New modality-independent rounding index (M) to quantify acetabular rounding.Proposed indices tested on 114 scans and gave 95.7% AUC for normal vs dysplastic.Indices are modality independent and extendable to modalities like CT and MRI.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Developmental Dysplasia of the Hip (DDH),Classification of DDH,2D ultrasound,Alpha angle,Acetabular coverage,Rounding index,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Background and objectivesThe diagnosis of Developmental Dysplasia of the Hip (DDH) in infants is currently made primarily by ultrasound. However, two-dimensional ultrasound (2DUS) images capture only an incomplete portion of the acetabular shape, and the alpha and beta angles measured on 2DUS for the Graf classification technique show high inter-scan and inter-observer variability. This variability relates partly to the manual determination of the apex point separating the acetabular roof from the ilium during index measurement. This study proposes a new 2DUS image processing technique for semi-automated tracing of the bony surface followed by automatic calculation of two indices: a contour-based alpha angle (αA), and a new modality-independent quantitative rounding index (M). The new index M is independent of the apex point, and can be directly extended to 3D surface models.MethodsWe tested the proposed indices on a dataset of 114 2DUS scans of infant hips aged between 4 and 183 days scanned using a 12MHz linear transducer. We calculated the manual alpha angle (αM), coverage, contour-based alpha angle and rounding index for each of the recordings and statistically evaluated these indices based on regression analysis, area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) and analysis of variance (ANOVA).ResultsProcessing time for calculating αAand M was similar to manual alpha angle measurement, ∼30s per image. Reliability of the new indices was high, with inter-observer intraclass correlation coefficients (ICC) 0.90 for αAand 0.89 for M. For a diagnostic test classifying hips as normal or dysplastic, AUC was 93.0% for αAvs. 92.7% for αM, 91.6% for M alone, and up to 95.7% for combination of M with αM, αAor coverage.ConclusionsThe rounding index provides complimentary information to conventional indices such as alpha angle and coverage. Calculation of the contour-based alpha angle and rounding index is rapid, shows potential to improve the reliability and accuracy of DDH diagnosis from 2DUS, and could be extended to 3D ultrasound in future.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Developmental Dysplasia of the Hip (DDH) is a common congenital musculoskeletal condition affecting up to 3% of the population [1], characterized by a lax or dislocated hip joint, which if not treated early enough leads to premature osteoarthritis. About 1/3 of hip replacement surgeries in patients less than 60 years old are due to DDH [1]. Diagnosis of hip dysplasia is usually based on the shape of the acetabulum (the “socket” of the ball-and-socket hip joint) and the position of the femoral head relative to it. Although DDH can be diagnosed on physical examination via Ortolani and Barlow maneuvers, these are highly subjective and lack sensitivity for mild dysplasia [2–5], hence image aided diagnosis is preferred. Ultrasound imaging is recommended over radiographs since it avoids ionizing radiation and can visualize cartilage, while femoral heads are non-ossified in infancy and thus not visible on radiographs [2].Ultrasound diagnosis of DDH most commonly uses the Graf technique, which is based on measurement of a bone angle (alpha) and a soft tissue angle (beta) from a coronal 2D ultrasound image of the hip. The Graf technique classifies alpha angles greater than 60° as normal and less than 43° as severely dysplastic [6]. A fundamental limitation of this approach is that it uses a 2D image to represent a complex 3D structure, leading to subjectivity in measurement and consequently high inter-scan variability. Since the ultrasound probes are handheld, no two ultrasound scans are exactly alike and a slight variation in probe orientation can give a vastly different view of the acetabulum. Jaremko et al. [7] have shown that this variability can lead to incorrect classification of DDH in half of infants and up to three-quarters of neonates. Another source for inter-observer variability in the Graf technique arises from variations in manual selection of the apex point. The apex point, which marks the separation of the ilium and the acetabulum, is used as the vertex to calculate the alpha and beta angles. The radiographic angles most similar to the alpha angle, the center-edge angle (CEA) and acetabular angle (AA), also have values dependent on definitions of lateral acetabular margin [8].Other indices that could avoid these difficulties, and consider other aspects of the deformity of hip dysplasia, have been investigated. An alternate technique that measures a γ-angle in ultrasound images to assess the femoral head coverage was proposed by Yavuz et al. [9]. Supplementary measures to the alpha angle such as arc length, coverage and acetabular radius of curvature have been examined by Cheng et al. [10]. These methods of quantifying acetabular rounding had higher inter-observer variability than alpha angle and femoral head coverage.All of these alternative indices quantifying DDH are still susceptible to inter-scan and inter-observer variance as they depend on manually determined landmarks. This study proposes an alternative method of ultrasound image processing: instead of the user making measurements on the image, he/she supervises generation of the acetabular surface contour, and indices of dysplasia that are geometric properties of the acetabular shape are automatically generated. We propose two such automated indices: a contour alpha angle αCand the rounding index M.The rounding index M is based on kurtosis and skewness of acetabular convexity, a way to mathematically quantify the intrinsic rounding of the acetabulum that can classify the acetabular shape. The index is independent of apex point (or any other manual landmarks) and hence is less subjective. It is modality-independent and can be easily computed from 2D contours of the acetabulum derived from any imaging modality. The index can also be extended to surface models generated from 3D ultrasound [11,12].In this study, we assess the feasibility and potential value of automated 2D ultrasound image processing in DDH by this approach, measuring reliability and diagnostic accuracy of: (i) a contour-based alpha angle (αA); and (ii) the rounding index (M), compared to conventional ultrasound indices of DDH, namely alpha angle (αM) and acetabular coverage (AC).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
