@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Finite element implementation of a non-local particle method for elasticity and fracture analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A new finite element implementation scheme for non-local particle methods is proposed.10-particles element is developed to describe both local pair-wise and non-local multi-body particle interactions.The new scheme is verified to be accurate, efficient and robust in simulating elastic and fracture problems.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Particle method,Finite element,Poisson׳s ratio,Elasticity,Fracture,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A finite element formulation for a non-local particle method is proposed in this paper for elasticity and fracture analysis of 2D solids. The model is based on a new particle method which incorporates a non-local multi-body particle interaction into the conventional pair-wise particle interactions. The non-local particle method is capable of modeling solids with arbitrary Poisson׳s ratio. Finite element formulation is proposed for the implicit solution of elasticity and fracture problems under static/quasi-static conditions, which is very efficient compared to the direct explicit solution in particle dynamics. Energy minimization principle is used to develop a new finite element with both local pair-wise and non-local multi-body particle interactions. The developed finite element formulation is verified with classical finite element simulation of some benchmark problems. Fracture simulation using the proposed particle-based finite element formulation is demonstrated. Some conclusions and future work is drawn based on the current investigation.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Numerical simulations of crack initiation, propagation and branching are a computationally intensive process. Difficulties are often encountered in the continuum-based finite element method to simulate the crack propagation problems due to the continuum mesh refinement for a moving crack. The problem becomes much more complicated when random cracking occurs in the simulation domain and tracking of arbitrary crack initiation and propagation is very difficult in the conventional continuum-based simulation framework. Many numerical models have been proposed to overcome these difficulties, such as the particle method [1–3]. Particle-based models represent materials by a system of particles and simulate the underlying physics on the level of micro-mechanical interaction rules among those particles. The basic idea is very similar to the idea behind the molecular dynamics. The governing law of the dynamics of particles is Newton׳s equations of motion. These equations are usually discretized in time and do not involve spatial derivatives that require the hypothesis of continuity of the material. Thus, particle-based methods are discontinuous formulation of solids which are especially suitable for simulation of crack growth, deflection and branching problems. Many existing particle-based studies have been proposed for the simulation of dynamic fracture of heterogeneous materials, such as rock [4,5], concrete [6–8], ceramics [9], and refractory metals [10].The successful application of particle models lies in the accurate description of the interaction rules between particles. For the conventional particle-based models, where only normal springs are employed as the axial linkage between particles, it is known that the fixed Poisson ratio issue (e.g. 1/3 in 2D and 1/4 in 3D cases)is an intrinsic problem for both regular [11,12] and irregular [13] particle packing. To eliminate this restriction on the Poisson׳s ratio and extend its application in a wider range of materials, several attempts have been tried by introducing various particle interaction rules to the conventional lattice models through adding additional freedoms to the particles or springs, including (1) the non-central shear-type interactions where particle rotation degree of freedom is added [14,15]; (2) the beam-liked interactions where both springs׳ rotation and bending deformations are considered [7,8]; (3) the angular-spring interactions where the springs׳ rotation is considered [2]. Although these approaches relax the restriction on the Poisson׳s ratio, they generally cannot model the arbitrary Poisson׳s ratios, for example, greater than 1/3 in 2D or 1/4 in 3D cases. This upper bound in Poisson׳s ratio further prevents the lattice models to be applied in elastic-plastic materials, due to the difficulties in satisfying the incompressible assumption at plastic stage (i.e., Poisson׳s ratio is 0.5).The novel volumetric-compensated particle model(VCPM) [16] has been recently proposed to further improve the Poisson ratio׳s restriction by introducing a non-local multi-body particle interaction into the conventional lattice model. This is done by treating the solid as a collection of regularly distributed deformable particles that inter-connected each other by a network of normal springs. The novelty of the VCPM lies in two aspects: (1) the particles are treated as deformable bodies which can store volumetric strain energies; and (2) the corresponding non-local multi-body particle interactions caused by the particles׳ volume change effects are included only through the pair-wise normal spring interactions, which greatly facilitates the computation. It is shown that by additionally considering the particles׳ volume change effects, VCPM can model the full range of Poisson׳s ratio of elastic solid. If the volume incompressible assumption at plastic stage is considered in the particle interactions, VCPM can be extended to simulate elastic-plastic solids where the plasticity are fully described by the particle interactions [16]. One of the most important benefits of the particle-based simulation is that it can describe the fracture of materials by directly incorporating a cohesive type law into the particle interactions, like the virtual internal bond (VIB) model proposed by Gao [13].Following the conventional lattice model, explicit solution methods [17] can be employed for the simulations in a particle system. The explicit methods for the simulation of static and quasi-static problems is very time consuming and expensive since a very slow loading rate is required. Thus, in order to solve this problem, an implicit method using finite element formulation is proposed in this paper for the application of VCPM to static/quasi-static problems. This is done by employing the energy minimization concept of the atomic-scale finite element method (AFEM) developed by Liu et al. [18]. It has been shown that by directly solving the system equation, the static simulations of atoms can be achieved using the finite element formulation with multi-body potentials. The current work is for a particle system with multi-body potentials for the static and fracture analysis.The paper is organized as follows. First, the basic concept and formulations of the VCPM is briefly discussed, including the derivation of the relationship between microstructural parameters, e.g. spring stiffnesskn, volume change parameter T, and the elastic constants(E,ν). Next, finite element formulation using the implicit numerical techniques is proposed for the VCPM simulation under static and quasi-static cases, where a new 10-particles element is developed. Following this, the numerical algorithm is validated through simulations of two elastic problems with the consideration of the full range of Poisson׳s ratio of elastic solid. Finally, the application of the implicit implemented VCPM for brittle fracture is presented to demonstrate the robustness of the proposed numerical algorithm. Several conclusions and future work are drawn based on the proposed study.A complete discussion of the VCPM model is given by Chen [16] which is summarized below. The basic idea of the VCPM model is to discretize a solid body into small deformable particles that are packed in a regular lattice manner and inter-connect by a network of normal springs. In this paper, we only focus on the densest packing of equal-sized spheres, i.e., hexagonal lattice in 2D, as shown inFig. 1(a). Other regular lattice styles, like simple cubic lattice etc., can also be applied in VCPM and followed the same derivation procedure as hexagonal lattice [16]. In Fig. 1(a), the particles at their initial stage are interacting with its neighbors through normal forces, which are represented by normal springs. Thus, a unit cell or a basic element that periodically repeats the discrete model can be obtained to calculate the strain energy, as shown in Fig. 1b.Compared with the conventional lattice models, the strain energy stored in VCPM unit cell is composed of two parts: the energy stored in the local pair-wise normal springsUsand the energy associated with the volume change of the particleUv, which can be expressed as(1)Ucell=Us+UvThese energies are given by the following relations(2)Us=∑N=0512kn(δlαN)2=∑N=0512knR2(εαN)2=∑N=0512knR2ξiεijξjξnεnmξm(3)Uv=12VcellT(εv)2=12VcellT(εii)2whereknandδlαNrepresent the stiffness and the length change of a half spring between particleαand its six neighbors;εαN=δlαN/Ris the strain stored in the half spring; R is the radius of the particle;ξidenotes the i-th component of the springs׳ normal vector n;Vcell=23R2is the volume of the unit cell in 2D case; T is the volume change parameter that might serve a similar function as the bulk modulus; andεvis the volumetric strain of the particle induced by the applied normal contact forces from its six neighbors.εvcan be written asεii=ε11+ε22andεii=ε11+ε22+ε33=(1−2v/1−v)(ε11+ε22)for plane strain and plane stress problems, respectively.The stress tensor of the unit cell can be obtained through the Cauchy-Born rule [19], and it can be written as(4)σij=1Vcell∂Ucell∂εij=∑N=05knR2ξiξjξnεnmξmVcell+Tεiiδijwhereδijdenotes the Kronecker delta function. Eq. (4) can be served as a numerical constitutive law which describes the macroscopic stain-stress relationship of material through its microstructure information and microscopic constitutive law. The equivalent elastic modulus can be obtained directly from this numerical constitutive law and expressed as(5)cijnm=1Vcell∂2Ucell∂εij∂εnm=∑N=05knR2ξiξjξnξmVcell+TδijδnmBy comparing Eq. (5) with the continuum expression of the elastic tensorcijnmfor 2D problems, the relationship between VCPM parameters (spring stiffnessknand volume change parameter T) and elastic constants (Young׳s modulus E and Poisson ratio v) can be obtained as follows:(6)kn=4E3(1+ν)T=E(4ν−1)2(1+ν)(1−2ν)for the plane strain problems and(7)kn=4E3(1+ν)T=E(3ν−1)(1−ν)2(1−2ν)2(1+ν)for the plane stress problems.From Eqs. (6) and (7), Poisson ratio can be written as(8)ν=3kn+8T43kn+16Tforplanestrain(9)ν=16T±83knT+3kn2+23kn32T+33knforplanestressThus, for different pair-wise and non-local interaction coefficients, the Poisson ratio range of VCPM can be−1<ν≤(1/2).The key factor for the numerical implementation of VCPM model is to accurately define the interaction force between the particles. For an equilibrium system under static/quasi-static loadings, the force acting on each particle must satisfy the equilibrium conditions. The forces on the half springs between particleαand its six neighbors, which can be expressed as(10)fαN=∂Ucell∂δlαN(N=0,1,...,5)Since the volumetric strain energyUvinUcellin Eq. (10) is defined by volumetric strainεv, it should be rewritten in terms ofδlαNas(11)εv=ΔVV≈(23R/3)∑N=05δlαN23R2=∑N=05δlαN3RThis is done by equivalently transforming the volumetric strain stored in particle to that of all the six neighboring half springs. Then, by applying Eq. (10) and defining the whole spring length change asδLαN=δlαN/2, the spring forces (or interaction forces) between particleαand its neighbors can be obtained(12)FαN=12knδLαN+39T∑N=05δLαN(N=0,1,...,5)Given Eq. (12), it is found that the spring force can calculated either from particleαor its neighbor particleβ(as shown in Fig. 1a). Thus, the final interaction force between particleαand its neighbor particleβcan be defined as(13)Fαβ=12knδLαβ+318T(∑N=05δLαN+∑M=05δLβM){T=TforplanestrainT=(1−2ν)2(1−ν)2TforplanestressIn Eq. (13), the particle interaction force consists of two parts: the spring-related part that comes directly from the pair-wise particle interactions and the volume-related part that is associated with the volume changes of those two particles in pair. Since the volume change of a certain particle arises from its connected neighbors, the force acting on each individual particle is actually non-local. This non-local feature of the VCPM model shares a similar concept as that in the state-based linear peridynamic solid (LPS) model [20–22], where the particle interactions (the force scalar state) are also found to be consisted of two parts: the pair-wise interactions (the extension scale state term) and the volume-change related interactions (the dilatation term). Thus, the following developed finite element implement scheme for the VCPM model can also be applied to the peridynamic model.Following the numerical solution method for conventional lattice models, explicit solution scheme of VCPM model can be easily obtained by applying the Velocity Verlet method [17](or other integration methods) to Newton׳s equations of motion that governs the motions of all particles. However, this type of explicit scheme usually is conditional stable and requires a very small time step for numerical stability. This is not very efficient for static problems since a very long computing time would be required to get the final equilibrium results. In order to solve this problem, an implicit method is proposed in this section by employing the energy minimization concept of the atomic-scale finite element method (AFEM) developed by Liu et al. [18]. A new 10-particles element is constructed and implemented in the ABAQUS finite element program [23] via its UEL subroutine.In numerical methods for static problems, e.g FEM and molecular dynamics (MD), the main task for the simulations is to obtain the equilibrium configuration of the discrete systems (nodes in FEM or atoms in MD) that corresponds to a state of minimal energy. Since the VCPM model partitions the solids into particles, it shares the same energy minimization process as FEM and MD, which will be done with respect to the particles rather than nodes (FEM) or atoms (MD).The energy minimization process can be expressed as(14)∂Utot∂x=0whereUtot=∑Ucell−∑i=1NF¯i⋅xidenotes the total energy of the VCPM discrete system;F¯iis the external force exerted on particle i;x=(x1,x2,...,xN)Tis the position of particles. The Taylor expansion ofUtotaround an initial guessx(0)=(x1(0),x2(0),...,xN(0))Tof the equilibrium state gives(15)Utot(x)≈Utot(x(0))+∂Utot∂x|x=x(0)⋅(x−x(0))+12(x−x(0))T⋅∂2Utot∂x∂x|x=x(0)⋅(x−x(0))By substituting Eq. (15) into Eq. (14), the following equilibrium equation will be obtained:(16)Ku=Pwhereu=x−x(0)is the particles׳ displacement;K=(∂2Utot/∂x∂x)|x=x(0)is the stiffness matrix;P=(F¯i−(∂Utot/∂x))|x=x(0)is the non-equilibrium force vector. It is observed that Eq. (16) is identical to the governing equation of classical FEM if the particles are taken as nodes. Thus, the numerical solution schemes used in FEM can be readily applied in the current VCPM simulations.Based on the energy minimization concept introduced in previous section, a FEM element that captures the characteristic of the stiffness matrix and the force vector in Eq. (16) can be constructed. This is done by subdividing the total energyUtotinto unit cells, whereKelementandPelementcould be derived according to the expressions in Eq. (16). For those lattice models that only pair-wise particle interactions are considered,KelementandPelementcan be obtained directly via the FEM string element since only pair-wise interactions are included (i.e., only local neighboring nodes affect the particle force). However, for those lattice models that non-local multi-body interaction are involved, like the used VCPM model, a new FEM element should be defined since there is no conventional FEM element can capture the non-local dependence of energy that arises from the multi-body interaction (as shown in Eq. (14)).From the definition of spring force in Eq. (13), it is found that each particle in the VCPM would interact with its six nearest-, six second nearest- and six third nearest-neighbor particles. Thus, following the particle-based finite element formulation in Eqs. (16), a 19-particles element (as shown inFig. 2a) should be constructed to calculate the stiffness matrixKand the resultant forcesPthat exert on the central particle#1. However, according to the principle of force superposition for the central particle#1, this 19-particles element can be further subdivided into six 10-particles elements as shown in Fig. 2b. For each 10-particles element, the forces on the central particle#1is then calculated according to Eq. (13).And the position change of the central particle#1influences only the energy stored in the central unit cellαand one of its six neighbor unit cells.According to Eq. (16), the 10-particle element stiffness matrix and the non-equilibrium force vector can be expressed as(17)Kelement=[(∂2Ucell∂u1∂u1)2×2(12∂2Ucell∂u1∂ui)2×12(12∂2Ucell∂ui∂u1)2×12(0)12×12]=[(∂Fspring∂u1)2×2(12∂Fspring∂ui)2×12(12∂Fspring∂ui)2×12(0)12×12](18)Pelement=[(F¯1−∂Ucell∂u1)2×1(0)12×1]=[(F¯1−Fspring)2×1(0)12×1]where i ranges from 2 to 10 in∂2Ucell/∂x1∂xi.F¯1is the external force exerted on the central particle in this element.Fspringis the interaction force between the central particle and one of its six neighbors as defined in Eq. (13). Since the 10-particles element is constructed on the central particle, the global stiffness matrixKwould be in the order of N, where N is the total number of the particles in the system. It has been proved that for this order N stiffness matrix, the computational effort to solveKu=Pin Eq. (16) is also on the order of N[18], which makes it a suitable numerical scheme for large-scale static or quasi-static problems.In this section, several numerical examples are simulated by using a rectangular plate model to verify the proposed implicit solution of the VCPM for the simulating of elasticity. The computational efficiency of the proposed solution method is tested first. Then, its implementation is tested and verified by examining whether the proposed method can fully capture the features of the VCPM model, including the convergence, the full range of Poisson ratio modeling and the preservation of rotational invariance. The model setup is described inFig. 3. The top edge of the model is fixed in both the x-direction and y-direction. Without loose of generality, same Young׳s modulusE=69GPais used in all the numerical simulations unless otherwise indicated. The results are then compared with those from the classical FEM by using the same geometry and mesh conditions.The main purpose of current research is to propose an efficient solution scheme for the application of non-local particle-based models (including VCPM model) in simulating static problems. Thus, the efficiency of the proposed implicit solution method, a 10-particles element for VCPM model, is tested first by comparing with the classical finite element method and the explicit solution method (Velocity Verlet method) used in [16]. The plane strain condition is employed, where pure tensile loading (with a total displacement ofΔy=-5×10−4m) is applied on the bottom edge of the model showed in Fig. 3. Poisson׳s ratio is set asν=0.3for the simulations. All simulations are done on a personal computer with 1×3.4GHz CPU and 16GB memory. While for the explicit VCPM simulations, a time step of 10−8s and a loading rate of 5m/s that is applied at the plate׳s bottom boundary are used to ensure the computational stability.Fig. 4 shows the computational times of the simulations with different total particle numbers. It is observed that the CPU times for all methods show a linear dependence on particle/node number N. Since only one time step is needed for the proposed implicit method to find system׳s final equilibrium state while 104 steps are required for the explicit method, therefore, the computational efficiency for the proposed implicit method is significantly improved and is comparable to the classical finite element analysis with same node numbers, indicating its suitability for large scale static simulations.To test the correct implementation of the proposed implicit method, the convergence characteristic of the VCPM model is simulated with different particle sizes by using the same tensile model as the above efficiency test. The results are summarized inTable 1 andFig. 5, where the convergence rate of the FEM model is also plotted to make the comparison. As can be seen in Fig. 5, FEM model generally predicts better results than the VCPM model under the same particle/node number. This may be attributed to the boundary effect in the VCPM model, where the particles near the free surfaces always have a weaker interaction than those in the interiors due to the lack of neighbors (as shown in Eq. (13)). However, for the convergence rate (the slop of the curve in Fig. 5), it can be seen that with the increasing of particle number, the VCPM model exhibits a faster convergence rate than the FEM model at the beginning. Then, when the particle number is larger than 12524 (corresponding to particle radiusr=8.33×10−5m), the two methods show a similar convergence rate, which indicates the reduction of the boundary effect in the VCPM model. This decrease in the boundary effect is not unexpected, since the energy contribution (or the non-local effect) for the boundary particles reduces as the particle number increases. Thus, in the following elasticity analysis, in order to make a better comparison with FEM results, the particle radiusR=5×10−5m, which is small enough for the convergence and for the reduction of boundary effect, is employed for all of the simulations. The total number of particles of the model is thus 34,673.As discussed in Section 2.1, the VCPM is capable of modeling the full range of Poisson׳s ratio of an elastic solid. To further verify this capability by using the proposed implicit method, same tensile model as that used in the convergence test is conducted with different Poisson׳s ratio values. The numerical results, which are calculated according to the definition ofν=−εx/εyfor plane stress problem andν=−εx/(εx−εy)for plane strain problem, are plotted inFig. 6 together with the theoretical value. It is shown that for both plane strain and plane stress problems, the numerical results are all in good agreement with the theoretical values.The displacement simulation results predicted by the VCPM for plane strain and plane stress problems and their comparison with FEM results are shown inFigs. 7 and 8. Two cases with different Poisson ratios are considered, which areν=0.1andν=0.4. It is observed that the VCPM has almost the identical displacement distribution with that from the FEM. This comparison verifies the proposed finite element implementation for the investigated condition.Keeping rotation invariance is one of the most important requirements for lattice models. Thus, the bending of the rectangular plate model is also simulated to verify the preservation of rotation invariance of the VCPM by using the proposed implicit method. A uniformly distributed force is applied on the beam׳s left boundary in Fig. 3 with a resultant force of173KNin the positive x direction. Poisson ratio is set asν=0.3for both plane strain and plane stress problems. The displacement field results predicted by the VCPM and the FEM are showed inFigs. 9 and 10. As the contour plots cannot give a quantitative comparison between the VCPM and FEM results, the displacement distributions along the model׳s left boundary are also collected to make quantitative comparison. The results are given inFig. 11. From Figs. 9–11, it can be seen that the displacement field predicted by VCPM is almost identical to that of FEM. The errors on the maximum displacementsuxanduyobtained from the two predicted results are less than 0.6%, indicating that the rotation invariance is well preserved for VCPM and the correct implement of the proposed implicit method.Particle models are widely used in simulating of dynamic crack growth due to their discrete description of materials. Several demonstration examples are shown in this section to see the capability of the proposed finite element formulation for the fracture problems. In addition, the effect of the regular lattice system (Perfect hexagon structure) employed in the VCPM on the crack propagation is also tested at the same time by examining the crack growth path in the fracture analysis. The hexagonal mesh is robust since it represents the most compact packing of the particles to describe the simulated body. However, one deficiency is inherently derived for this type of regular mesh geometry to simulate fracture, which would result in a preferential fracture propagation direction that deviates from the true crack path [12]. For those lattice models that only consider local axial interactions (nearest-neighbor interactions), such a mesh bias problem is always unavoidable due to the models׳ inherent anisotropy in the fracture surface [24]. The error reduction for this issue can be achieved through two ways: the mesh refinement by using much smaller particles; and the consideration of more neighbor layers׳ interactions (e.g. the ‘horizon’ concept in the peridynamic theory) [12,21]. The mesh refinement will not essentially reduce/remove the mesh bias problem at the particles׳ local environment, however, it may reduce the macroscopic crack path deviation to some extent due to the more accurate description of the particle interactions in the materials. In view of this mesh bias issue, we need to exam if the VCPM model could macroscopically capture the true crack path first, before it can be applied in more complicate systems.Interfacial debonding in a double cantilever beam (DCB) specimen using the VCPM model is tested first. The geometry of the pre-cracked DCB model with initial crack length of 50mm and the boundary condition setup are shown inFig. 12. The model׳s right-end boundary is fixed in bothx−direction andy−direction. An opening displacement load is applied on the left segments of the model׳s left-end boundary. Because the purpose of this example is to demonstrate the capability of fracture modeling, the simple bond-based critical force failure criterion is adopted. Thus, the broken of the springs occurs when(19)Fn≥FcwhereFnis the normal force andFcis the critical normal force defined by the failure criteria. Within the linear elastic fracture mechanics, for a given material, the above critical force criterion can be derived from the material strength throughFc=2Rσs/3(where R is the particle radius). And it can also be readily related to the critical energy/elongation criterion based on the material properties, such as the fracture toughnessKIc=Yσsπa(whereais the initial crack length) and the critical energy release rateGIc~KIc2.During the simulation, the system׳s equilibrium states are evaluated according to Eq. (17) in each iteration step and the corresponding spring forces are calculated according to Eq. (13). Whenever the force of an equilibrated spring exceeds the critical one in Eq. (19), it is deleted and excluded in the following iteration steps. To accurately capture the broken springs during each iteration step, the simulation load and time increments cannot be chosen arbitrarily and should be small enough to avoid the physically unmeaningful solutions. In the current simulation, the material parameters of model are set asν=0.3andE=3.4GPawith particle radiusR=5×10−5m; the springs׳ critical force is set asFc=600N; and the time increment is chosen asΔt=1×10−4s. The crack growths at different loading stage are showed inFig. 13, where the crack is visible as the opening of crack surface and the propagation of the crack tip due to the broken of springs. With regard to the obtained crack growth path, it can be concluded that the proposed implicit solution method can describe the delamination process of the DCB specimen. Since there are only normal springs in the VCPM, a more sophisticated spring fracture criteria, like the cohesive criteria used in virtual internal bond (VIB) model [13], can also be implemented in the model for more realistic modeling of the fracture process of DCB specimen, which needs further investigation.The quasi-static tensile fracture of an epoxy plate(8.25cm×8.25cm)with 31 randomly distributed holes in plane stress condition [25] is also simulated to test the robustness of the proposed implicit finite element formulation for predicting the fracture pattern of the elastic-brittle materials. The geometry of the simulation model is shown inFig. 14. During the simulations, the button edge of the model is fixed in both x- and y-directions, while a uniaxial tensile loading is applied on the model׳s top edge in the y-direction with a total displacement ofΔ=0.05cm. Following Ostoja-Starzewski and Wang [26], the Young׳s modulus of the epoxy plate is set asE=3.26GPa, while the Poisson ratio is adopted asυ=1/3. Two different mesh resolutions (as shown in Fig. 14b and c) with particle radius ofR=4.125×10−2cmandR=1.375×10−2cmare investigated to assess the mesh dependence of the fracture pattern. The epoxy׳s tensile strength is set asσs=62.89MPa. From Hooke׳s law, the failure strainεmaxand the corresponding displacement threshold for the fracturermaxcan be obtained:(20)rmax−r0r0=εmax=σsEwherer0is the initial equilibrium spacing between contiguous particles.Following the same fracture simulation procedure as that used in the previous section, the final crack patterns for those two different mesh resolutions can be obtained, which are shown in Fig. 14e and f. The HLPM simulation result [26] is also given in Fig. 14 to make a comparison with the current VCPM simulation results. It can be observed that the cracking patterns in the plate are very similar in the two mesh resolution cases. The cracks in both cases generally agree with the experimental result (Fig. 14a) and the HLPM simulation result (Fig. 14d). This mesh size independence is well consistent with Wang׳s investigations by using the HLPM model.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A new finite element formulation for a non-local multi-body potential particle method is proposed in this paper. It is shown that by using the implicit solution method, the proposed formulation has the potential to effectively simulate elasticity and fracture under static/quasi-static loading conditions. In light of the study, the following conclusions can be drawn:(1)The new finite element formulation is directly based on the discrete particles in the simulated system and uses only the first and second order derivatives of the system׳s energy, thus it does not contain any approximations as those used in conventional FEM (e.g., shape functions) and keeps the discontinuous nature of the particle methods.The new formulation can be applied in all particle-based models. For those models where only pair-wise interactions are considered, the classical FEM string elements can be directly employed to simulate the particle-discrete systems under the framework of this formulation. While for those models where non-local multi-body particle interactions are involved, new elements should be constructed to capture the non-local dependence of energy that arises from the multi-body interactions.By using the implicit solution method, the new formulation with its N-order nature and only one time-step requirement for the calculation significantly increases the computational efficiency of the particle models in simulating large scale static problems.The regular hexagonal particle packing employed in this study for the implement of the new formulation has no apparent qualitative effect on crack initiation and propagation characteristics when the meshes are fine enough (or the particle sizes are small enough). Clearly, smaller particle sizes are usually preferable for most particle models for the convergence of the system and the reduction of the mesh bias problem.The fracture simulations presented in this paper only employ the simplest tensile fracture criterion to demonstrate the capability of the new finite element formulation for fracture problem, further work on the implement of a more sophisticated fracture criterion (e.g. the cohesive traction-displacement criterion) is required for a more realistic description of the materials׳ fracture process. In addition, since the proposed formulation shares the same theoretical framework with the classical finite element method, its extension to a hybrid particle-finite element algorithm also needs further study and validation.