@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Overconstrained mechanisms based on planar four-bar-mechanisms

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Particular four-bars have coupler quads homothetic throughout the motion.This property can be transferred to 3-space and defines a spatial mechanism.Any saturated chain of quads defines chains of interlinked spatial mechanisms.This construction delivers new overconstrained mechanisms.They generalize the well-known Fulleroid linkages.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Special planar four-bar mechanism,Homothetic coupler quadrangles,Overconstrained mechanisms,Fulleroid linkages,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We study a particular class of planar four-bar mechanismsFBM(Q)which are based on a given quadrilateral (quad)Q=a0a1a2a3. The self-motion ofFBM(Q)consists of two different parts – one is the motion of an anti-parallelogram whilst the other one is a pure translation with circular paths. We will refer to this translatoric part in this paper only and demonstrate that this translatoric self-motion has the following property: At any moment the positions of the corresponding four coupler points form quads homothetic to Q. This property can be used to define spatial one-parametric motions of an extruded version of the four-bar mechanism which again generate quads of coupler points homothetic to Q. As the next step we take an arbitrary “saturated chain” of quads in space (each vertex shares a vertex with another quad of the set) and define the corresponding one-parametric spatial motions. Then all can be parametrized by the same parameter t. We will show that these partial motions can be interlinked by spherical 2R-joints without locking the one-parametric self-motion. This way the construction delivers a series of new (overconstrained) mechanisms which generalize results on so-called “Fulleroid” linkages. An example based on four quads in space (in planes of a tetrahedron) is worked out in detail.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The aim of the paper is to generalize the construction of highly overconstrained mechanisms consisting of rigid bodies linked by 1R- or spherical 2R-joints.11A 2R-joint is called “spherical” if its two rotary axes intersect in a point.Based on the famous Heureka mechanism and its generalizations (see Stachel, 1991, 1992 and Röschel, 1995, 1996a, 2001) the so-called Fulleroid mechanisms have been studied in the last years by Kiper et al. (2008), Kiper (2008), Wohlhart (1997, 2001, 2007) and Röschel (2010, 2012).The considerations are based on an observation on special planar four-bar mechanisms: In Section 2 we will define special four-bar mechanisms based on quadrilaterals (quads) and work out an interesting property. In Sections 3 and 4 the planar results are embedded into space and yield further generalizations of the so-called Fulleroid linkages. In Section 5 the results are worked out in detail for a special example based on quads in the faces of a tetrahedron. Section 6 is devoted to the study of bifurcations of the mechanism's self-motions.Leta0,a1,a2,a3be the vertices of a quadrilateral (“quad”) Q in the Euclidean plane. The midpoints of the pairs of pointsai−1ai(with indices modulo 4) are the pointsbi:=(ai−1+ai)/2– see Fig. 1.22In the three-dimensional Euclidean space (or the plane) we use coordinates with respect to a given Cartesian coordinate frame.Due to our construction the midpointsb0,…,b3form a parallelogram with sides parallel to the diagonals of the quad.The eight pointsaiandbidefine four trianglesbiaibi+1(shaded in Fig. 1) which can be viewed as rigid bodiesΣilinked via rotary joints in the pointsbi(i=0,...,3). The corresponding planar mechanism is a parallel four-bar mechanism (see Wunderlich, 1970) which we call parallel (or special) four-bar mechanismFBM(Q)based on the quad Q. Basically, the self-motion ofFBM(Q)consists of two different parts – one is the motion of an anti-parallelogram whilst the other one is a pure translation with circular paths. We will refer to this translatoric part in this paper only and call itζ(Q,t). Underζ(Q,t)the pointsbiform parallelograms at any momentt∈I⊂Rof the motion.We will describe the self-motionζ(Q,t)as the composition of partial one-parametric motionsζi(t)of the systemsΣiwith respect to a fixed world-coordinate frameΣ⁎. We will denote the rotational angles ofζibyϕi(i=0,...,3). As opposite bars of a parallel four-bar mechanism rotate with the same angular velocity, we can take(1)ϕ0(t)=ϕ2(t):=t∈I:=[0,2π]⊂R.Forζ1andζ3we will takeϕ1(t)=ϕ3(t):=−t. The rotationsρi(t)ofΣiabout the centeraithen are parametrized by(2)ρi(t):Σi→Σ⁎p→ρi(p,t):=ai+R(ϕi(t))(p−ai)with(3)R(ϕi(t))=(cos⁡t(−1)i+1sin⁡t(−1)isin⁡tcos⁡t).They determineζi(Q,t)up to some further translational parts. Fig. 1 displays such poses of the four-bar mechanism. The segmentsa0b0anda3b0are rotated by ±t – see Fig. 2. Att=0we haveai⁎(0):=ρi(ai,0)=ai(i=0,...,3). The straight lines through the initial pointsa3⁎(0)a0⁎(0)and the corresponding positionsa3⁎(t)a0⁎(t)are parallel for allt∈[0,2π]. Their distances are scaled by the factorcos⁡t. As the same holds for the other pairs of coupler points and their positions the quads formed by the coupler points are similar to the initial one. At any moment there exists a corresponding center of homothety.Now we will add translational parts of the partial motions such that this center of homothety is kept in its place. We choose a pointf⁎inΣ⁎and define the partial motions via(4)ζi(t):Σi⟶Σ⁎p⟶ζi(p,t):=aicos⁡t+f⁎(1−cos⁡t)+R(ϕi(t))(p−ai).Withbi=(ai−1+ai)/2we have(5)ζi−1(bi,t)=ai−1cos⁡t+f⁎(1−cos⁡t)+12R(ϕi−1(t))(ai−ai−1)ζi(bi,t)=aicos⁡t+f⁎(1−cos⁡t)+12R(ϕi(t))(ai−1−ai).According to (3) we getR(ϕi−1(t))+R(ϕi(t))=2Icos⁡t(with the unit matrix I). Therefore, we haveζi−1(bi,t)−ζi(bi,t)=o∀t∈[0,2π](i=0,...,3) – the point paths ofbiunderζi−1(t)andζi(t)coincide ∀t. So the partial motionsζi(t)(4) can be used to describe the translatoric self-motionζ(Q,t)of the mechanism. These partial motionsζi(t)have parameterizations by linear combinations of{1,sin⁡t,cos⁡t}– the partial motionsζi(t)are Cardan-motions (see Bottema and Roth, 1979). This way we have generated the translatoric self-motionζ(Q,t)of this four-bar mechanism by composition of four linked Cardan motionsζi(t). The point paths of the pointsaiunderζi(t)are(6)ai⁎(t)=ζi(ai,t)=aicos⁡t+f⁎(1−cos⁡t).These paths are parts of straight lines through the center of homothetyf⁎– see Fig. 2. This observation yieldsTheorem 2.1Given a quadQ=a0a1a2a3in the Euclidean plane and the parallel four-bar mechanismFBM(Q)based on this quad. Then for any choice of a pointf⁎the described translatoric self-motionζ(Q,t)(t∈[0,2π])of this special planar four-bar mechanism moves the four coupler points such that their positions at any timet∈Iform quadrilateralsQ⁎(t)homothetic to the initial quad. The center of these homotheties is the pointf⁎.Remark 2.2Due to our construction we haveQ⁎(−t)=Q⁎(t)∀t∈I–ζ(Q,t)andζ(Q,−t)result in the same series of quads for all t.Remark 2.3A scaled copy of the quad Q (scaling factorσ∈R−{0}) will be calledσ(Q). The corresponding four-bar mechanismFBM(σ(Q))performs a parallel self-motionζ˜(σ(Q),t˜)parametrized by the rotation anglet˜∈[0,2π]. The corresponding coupler points again describe quads homothetic to the initial. According to our considerations the scaling factors with respect to the initial quadQ=a0a1a2a3take on the valuesσcos⁡t˜.Therefore, for(7)cos⁡t=σcos⁡t˜both translatoric self-motionsζ(Q,t)andζ˜(σ(Q),t˜)produce quads of coupler points of the same size and can be linked via rotary joints in these coupler points without locking the self-motion. The corresponding mechanisms admits a one-parametric self-motion. It can be parametrized by thoset=t(t˜)ort˜=t˜(t)which deliver real solutions in (7).33Forσ≥1there exist positions ofζ(σ(Q),t˜)with coupler quad congruent to Q. The corresponding parameters are given byt˜=arccos⁡(1/σ).This planar mechanism consists of eight rigid bodies linked via twelve rotary joints. According to the Cebyshev–Grübler–Kutzbach formula the theoretical degree of freedom44Given a mechanism consisting ofn>1rigid bodies linked byk>0independent joints – each with a numberfi(i=1,⋯,k)of free (and independent) joint-parameters (e.g. angles of rotation, ⋯). Then the “theoretical degree of freedom” F of this mechanism counts the theoretical number of free real parameters which fix the relative positions of all bodies with respect to one reference body. In the d-dimensional Euclidean space this number takes on the valueF=(n−1−k)d(d+1)/2+∑i=1kfi. This formula is called “Cebyshev–Grübler–Kutzbach” formula (see Beyer, 1963, p. 102 ford=3). Mechanisms withF≤0are supposed to be rigid. But F is a theoretical number which does not allow for redundancies or geometric properties of the bodies and the corresponding joints. If a mechanism withF≤0still admits a self-motion of one or more free parameters it is called “overconstrained”.of this mechanism takes on the valueF=−3. It is obviously overconstrained. Fig. 3illustrates an example forσ>1showing two different positions of its one-parametric self-motion. The initial quadQ=a0a1a2a3shows up in a scaled copy in each position of that self-motion.The homothety of Section 2 can be applied with respect to any centerf⁎fixed in space. The homothety then additionally translates the plane of the quad Q in space. This allows to extend the parametrization of the partial Cardan motionsζi(t)into space. Owing to (4) we get(8)ζi(t):Σi⟶Σ⁎pi⟶ζi(pi,t):=aicos⁡t+f⁎(1−cos⁡t)+R(ϕi(t))(pi−ai)with 3-dimensional spacesΣi,Σ⁎55The vectors in Eq. (8) now have three components whereas the z-coordinate of the vectorsaiis 0 throughout.and the rotational matrices(9)R(ϕi(t)):=(cos⁡t(−1)i+1sin⁡t0(−1)isin⁡tcos⁡t0001).Again the partial motionsζi(t)(8) have parameterizations by linear combinations of{1,sin⁡t,cos⁡t}– they are Darboux-motions (see Bottema and Roth, 1979). The former trianglesbiaibi+1will be extruded to orthogonal triangular prisms and deliver rigid bodiesΣi. The systemsΣi−1andΣican be linked via rotary joints (1R-joints) without blocking the partial Darboux-motionsζi−1(t)andζi(t). The rotary axes of the 1R-joints contain the pointsbiand are orthogonal to the plane of the initial quad. Fig. 4(left) exhibits the mechanism in three positions of the described one-parametric motion. This one-parametric motion of the mechanism will be namedζ(Q,t)again.This observation yieldsTheorem 3.1The described embedding of the planar translatoric self-motion of the four-bar mechanismFBM(Q)based on a given planar quad Q and a pointf⁎fixed in space yields a one-parametric motionζ(Q,t)consisting of interlinked Darboux-motions. The point paths of the pointsa0,a1,a2anda3are straight lines through the given centerf⁎. At any moment the positions of these four points form a quadrilateral homothetic to the initial one. The center of all these dilations is the pointf⁎.Remark 3.2We start with a planar quad Q and apply the result of Theorem 3.1: This yields a corresponding spatial mechanism with the one-parametric motionζ(Q,t). According to Remark 2.3 we can choose a realσ∈R−{0}which determines a corresponding four-bar mechanismFBM(σ(Q)). For that four-bar mechanism we again apply Theorem 3.1 and get a one-parametric motionζ(σ(Q),t˜). For both mechanisms the four described vertices form quads homothetic to the initial one at each moment of the motion (the center of all these dilations is again the pointf⁎). Eq. (7) determines pairs(t,t˜)with coincident positions of the vertices of the two quads. Forσ>1there exist real posesζ(σ(Q),t˜=arccos⁡(1/σ))in which the coupler points form a quad congruent to the initial quad Q.Given two different (planar) quadsQj=a0,ja1,ja2,ja3,j(j=1,2) in planesεjwith a common pointa0,1=a0,2and a pointf⁎in the three-dimensional Euclidean spaceE3– see Fig. 4 (right). According to Remark 3.2 we choose two realsσ1,σ2≥166We will demand the existence of a non-overlapping pose of the correspondingFBM(σj(Qj))with coupler points fitting the vertices of the quadsQ1andQ2. Therefore, we have to assumeσ1,σ2≥1.and determine the corresponding parallel four-bar mechanismsFBM(σj(Qj))(j=1,2). According to Theorem 3.1 together with the fixed pointf⁎both can be used to define one-parametric motionsζ1(σ1(Q1),t1)andζ2(σ2(Q2),t2). The point paths of the pointsai,junderζi(σi(Qi),t)are straight lines through the fixed pointf⁎. We will interlink these two motions via the common point path ofa0,1=a0,2. This conveys some “law of transition”t2=t2(t1)of the rotation anglest:=t1andt2and yields a parametrization of the second motion byt=t1:ζ2(σ2(Q2),t). The quadsQ1,Q2will be dilated with centerf⁎– their planes keep a constant angle underζ1(σ1(Q1),t)andζ2(σ2(Q2),t). Therefore we can interlink the two systems by a spherical 2R-joint with its two axes orthogonal to the planesε1,ε2of the two quads without locking these motions. These axes keep constant angle and intersect in the common pointa0,1=a0,2. This spherical 2R-joint is symbolized by an arc in Fig. 4 (right).Now we generalize to a series of n (planar) quadsQj=a0,ja1,ja2,ja3,j(j=1,...,n;∈N,n≥3) in planesεj. The set of vertices contains 4n points and is denoted byV:={ai,j|i=0,⋯,3;j=1,⋯,n}.We will call this set{Q1,⋯,Qn}of planar quads inE3a saturated chain of quads if it has the following properties:•Any vertex from the set V is coincident with at least two different quads.The set interpreted as a framework of vertices and edges of the quads is connected.Remark 4.1This definition is weaker than the usual definition of saturated chains by Harborth and Möller (2007). In our case it would be possible that a vertex belongs to more than two different quads or that two quads share more than one vertex.77In general the planesεjof the quadsQjdetermine a (not necessarily convex) polyhedronP⁎. The vertices of the quads then are situated on straight lines through the edges of that polyhedronP⁎.Now we proceed like before: To each quadQjwe can assign a suitable scaling factorσj≥1and a corresponding parallel four-bar mechanismFBM(σj(Qj))(j=1,⋯,n). We demand the existence of a non-overlapping pose of the correspondingFBM(σj(Qj))with coupler points fitting the vertices of the quadQj.Just like in Sections 3 and 4 the fixed pointf⁎together with the four-bar mechanismsFBM(σj(Qj))can be used to define spatial motionsζj(σj(Qj),t)for allj=1,⋯,n. As all can be parametrized by the same time-parameter t we have got a one-parametric self-motion of this configuration. Neighboring systems (with their joint vertex within the saturated chain of quads) can be interlinked by spherical 2R-joints without locking the self-motion of the mechanism.88The one-parametric self-motion (guaranteed by construction) can physically be confined.The spherical 2R-joint degenerates to a single rotary joint if the two neighbor planes coincide.In general we get 4n rigid bodies interlinked by 4n rotary joints (1R-joints coming from the rotary joints of the four-bar mechanisms) and 2n spherical 2R-joints (interlinking the four-bar mechanisms). According to the Cebyshev–Grübler–Kutzbach formula the theoretical degree of freedom (see Beyer, 1963, p. 102, and footnote 4) takes on the value(10)F=6(4n−1−4n−2n)+4n+2⋅2n=−6−4n.As the mechanism admits at least the one-parametric self-motion of our construction we haveTheorem 4.2The described construction based on any saturated chain of n quads in space yields new mechanisms consisting of 4n rigid bodies linked via 1R- and 2R-joints. Though the classical degree of freedom of these mechanisms in general takes on the valueF=−6−4n, the mechanisms admit at least a one-parametric self-motion. All these mechanisms are highly overconstrained.Remark 4.3These new examples can be viewed as generalizations of Fulleroid mechanisms (see Wohlhart, 2007; Kiper, 2008; and Röschel, 2010, 2012).Remark 4.4According to Section 3 the rigid parts of the mechanism perform Darboux-motions with respect to the world-coordinate frame. The relative motions of different bodies are special one-parametric motions studied by the author in Röschel (1996b). In general they are rational of degree 4.We study a particular example with a saturated chain of four quads in the faces of a basic tetrahedronP⁎– see Fig. 5. Each quadQ1,⋯,Q4of the set shares two vertices with a particular neighbor and meets the other neighbors in exactly one further vertex. With realsσ1,⋯,σ4(all ≥1) we can proceed as before. The “initial” pose of the correspondingFBM(σj(Qj))is displayed in the right part of Fig. 5.Fig. 6displays the mechanism based on the configuration of Fig. 5 at three different positions of its self-motion.The mechanism presented here consists of 16 rigid (prismatic) bodies which are interlinked by 16 rotary joints and 8 spherical 2R-joints. According to (10) and Theorem 4.2 the theoretical degree of freedom takes on the valueF=−22. As the mechanism admits at least the one-parametric self-motion of our construction it is overconstrained.The basic quads of the saturated chain from Section 4 define some parallel four-bar mechanismsFBM(σj(Qj))and corresponding one-parametric motionsζj(σj(Qj),t)(j=1,⋯,n). The extremal positions of the four-bars with respect to the distance from the centerf⁎are obtained at valuest∈{uj,vj}.99In our example (see Fig. 5) the extremal positions of the four-bar mechanismsFBM(σ2(Q2))andFBM(σ3(Q3))both arrive at the same timet=u2=u3andt=v2=v3.According to Remark 2.2 we have bifurcations of the self-motions at these extremal positions: For each of the partial motionζj(σj(Qj),t)we can reverse the direction of rotation at that moment. As the corresponding quads of the coupler points do not change (see Remark 2.2) this can be performed without blocking the mechanism.1010This is a theoretical result. The self-motions of the physical model will be limited by several constraints. It can happen that not all of these theoretical options can really be implemented as bodies may interfere with each other and collide.As one partial motionζ1(σ1(Q1),t)has to be used as the reference motion, we have got2n−1different branches of the self-motion for the corresponding overconstrained mechanism. This delivers:Theorem 6.1The kinematic chain based on a saturated chain of quadrilaterals theoretically admits a one-parametric self-motion with at least2n−1different branches. The bifurcations arrive at the extremal positions of the underlying four-bar mechanisms.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
