@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Scheduling prioritized patients in emergency department laboratories

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A semi-online patient scheduling problem in the pathology laboratory is studied.The problem is formulated as a semi-online hybrid shop scheduling problem.A genetic algorithm is developed for solving the problem.Several experiments are conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of the approach.The approach reduces waiting time of patients and improves operations efficiency.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Health care management,Patients scheduling,Emergency department laboratory,Triage,Genetic algorithm,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This research focuses on scheduling patients in emergency department laboratories according to the priority of patients’ treatments, determined by the triage factor. The objective is to minimize the total waiting time of patients in the emergency department laboratories with emphasis on patients with severe conditions. The problem is formulated as a flexible open shop scheduling problem and a mixed integer linear programming model is proposed. A genetic algorithm (GA) is developed for solving the problem. Then, the response surface methodology is applied for tuning the GA parameters. The algorithm is tested on a set of real data from an emergency department. Simulation results show that the proposed algorithm can significantly improve the efficiency of the emergency department by reducing the total waiting time of prioritized patients.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Accurate and quick treatment of patients is the most important aim of the health care systems [1], especially at emergency departments, as such departments are dealing with life and death situations on a daily basis, an inefficient patient treatment procedure can end up in pernicious results. After shifting the patients to emergency department, their initial information is taken by a nurse and then, they are categorized according to the severity of their conditions in order to determine their treatment procedure. Some patients may need to go to emergency laboratories to take some medical tests. Scheduling and coordinating the patients in the emergency laboratories in an efficient manner has a major role in improving the performance of the emergency department and providing a more reliable system. In this way, the priority of the patients determined by a triage factor becomes important. Triage is the process by which the urgency of the patient condition is determined. The assessment of the patients’ medical needs is usually performed by a triage officer using an established plan or system which consists of 5 levels [2,3]. For each level of the triage factor system, a related weight in form of special number is assigned to a patient by an expert who takes the information about the severity of each patient health condition; the higher the weight is, the most severe the patient health condition is. The aim of using triage is to protect endangered human lives by granting priority to the most urgent patients with immediate needs while paying enough attention to other patients in order to attain the most overall outcome of the available resources [4].In this research, and as a real case study, an emergency department of a hospital is studied, which uses the five-level triage system. The aim of this study is to improve the efficiency of the emergency department by minimizing the total waiting time of prioritized patients in the emergency department laboratories. Since the environment of emergency department is based on accidental entrance of patients who suffer from an accident or are in a critical state, for some patients who need medical tests at laboratories, the tests do not usually require any predecessor action (such as fasting before taking tests, etc.). Additionally, at most laboratories, there is no predetermined route of tests for patients’ tests. Hence, the emergency department patients scheduling at laboratories can be formulated as an open shop scheduling problem. Open shop scheduling problems mainly consist of processing n jobs on m machines without any pre-determined sequence of operations. Moreover, in real world situations, in most of the production floors and even in laboratories, we seldom see just one machine (place) for processing one job. While classical open shop scheduling models commonly consider only one machine at each stage for processing a job, in flexible open shop scheduling models, there may be more than one machine at each stage to increase the throughput and capacity of the shop floor, to balance the speed of the stages, to either eliminate or to reduce the impact of bottleneck stages on the overall shop efficiency [5]. The laboratories we consider can have parallel places or multiple staff for doing the same test. The objective of scheduling patients in the emergency department laboratories is to minimize the total waiting time of the patients with emphasis on their triage factor which leads to minimizing total weighted completion time of jobs in a flexible open shop scheduling problem.Since open shop scheduling problems are categorized as NP-hard problems [6,7], there is no exact method which can be used for solving real-sized problems in a reasonable amount of time. In this research, a genetic algorithm (GA) is proposed as a solution approach. Response surface methodology as an efficient tool is employed to optimize the GA parameters. The algorithm is then tested on a set of real data collected from an emergency department to show the efficiency and superiority of the proposed method.The remainder of this of this paper is organized as follows. The related literature review is provided in Section 2. The mathematical model is presented in Section 3. Section 4 describes the proposed genetic algorithm. In Section 5, the efficiency of the proposed approach is investigated and finally, Section 6 draws some conclusions from this study.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this research, a novel approach has been presented for scheduling patients at emergency department laboratories considering triage factor. The scheduling of patients has been modeled as a flexible open shop scheduling problem and a mixed integer linear programming model has been developed with the objective of minimizing the total weighted completion time of patients. The aim of the proposed approach is to grant higher priority to the most urgent patients (i.e. patients with higher triage factor) while achieving the most overall outcome of the resources by paying enough attention to other patients. A genetic algorithm (GA) has been proposed to solve the problem and its performance has been enhanced by optimizing the parameters using response surface methodology. In order to show the superiority of the proposed approach, it has been applied to a real emergency department. A comprehensive computer simulation of the application case has been implemented. Simulation experiments reveal that the proposed approach improves the performance of scheduling patients in the emergency department and makes efficient use of available resources.