@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Convergence and accuracy of displacement based finite element formulations over arbitrary polygons: Laplace interpolants, strain smoothing and scaled boundary polygon formulation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Three displacement based finite element formulations over arbitrary polygon are investigated.Discusses the capability of extending scaled boundary polygon formulation for higher order polygons.Direct computation of stress intensity factors within the framework of scaled boundary formulation.A simpleMatlab®routine is presented for each of the formulations considered to compute the stiffness matrix.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Polygonal finite elements,Scaled boundary polygon formulation,Strain projection,Patch test,Linear elastic fracture mechanics,Generalized stress intensity factor,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Three different displacement based finite element formulations over arbitrary polygons are studied in this paper. The formulations considered are the conventional polygonal finite element method (FEM) with Laplace interpolants, the cell-based smoothed polygonal FEM with simple averaging technique and the scaled boundary polygon formulation. For the purpose of numerical integration, we employ the sub-triangulation for polygonal FEM and classical Gaussian quadrature for the smoothed FEM and the scaled boundary polygon formulation. The accuracy and the convergence properties of these formulations are studied with a few benchmark problems in the context of linear elasticity and the linear elastic fracture mechanics. The extension of scaled boundary polygon to higher order polygons is also discussed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The finite element method (FEM) is a versatile technique for the numerical approximation of solutions of partial differential equations (PDEs). Traditional FEM simulations rely strictly on tetrahedral or hexahedral meshes in 3D (or triangular, quadrilateral meshes in 2D). In generating a FE mesh, a balance is required between the accuracy and the flexibility in the mesh generation. For example, triangulation of a domain is relatively easy when compared with quadrangulation, whilst the quadrilateral mesh is more accurate than the triangular mesh. It is relatively easy to construct interpolants over standard shapes, viz., triangles and tetrahedrals. The use of standard shapes, viz., triangles (or quadrilaterals) and tetrahedrals (or hexahedral) simplifies the approach, however, allowing only a few element shapes can be too restrictive, because•it may require sophisticated meshing algorithm to generate high-quality meshes, especially with quadrilaterals, for meshing complex geometries;it may require complex remeshing to capture topological changes, for instance due to discontinuous surface growth.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, we compared three different displacement based finite element formulations over arbitrary polygons. The accuracy and the convergence properties of different approaches were studied with a few benchmark problems from linear elasticity. From the numerical examples, it is seen that the Polygonal SBFEM yields the most accurate results. Although, the Polygonal FEM yields optimal results, the numerical integration should be carried out accurately to improve the results, as discussed in [24]. The numerical integration over polygons/polyhedras can be improved by modifying the shape function derivatives as discussed in [62,48]. The results from the Polygonal nSFEM are stiffer and yield sub-optimal convergence in both the displacement norm and the energy norm. It is noted that for this study, we had employed cell-based smoothed FEM, whilst other smoothing techniques are possible. The Polygonal SBFEM eliminates the need to compute the shape functions or to employ special numerical integration technique. Only the boundary of the polygon is discretized and the stiffness matrix is computed directly. Moreover, an extension to higher order shape functions along the boundary of the polygon is straightforward. When applied to linear elastic fracture mechanics, the scaled boundary polygon formulation yields accurate results. It is noted that the polygonal SBFEM does not require enrichment of the approximation basis and the stress intensity factors can be computed directly. This approach can readily be combined with the extended FEM. By combining the scaled boundary formulation with the XFEM, a priori knowledge of the asymptotic fields is not required.