@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Mechanical properties of graphene based nanocomposites incorporating a hybrid interphase

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The mechanical behavior of graphene based nanocomposites is investigated by a multi-scale structural mechanics approach.Graphene is modeled in atomistic scale utilizing spring elements.A hybrid interphase is considered between graphene and epoxy matrix.Numerical results demonstrate the stiffness reinforcing ability of graphene.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Nanocomposite,Molecular,Graphene,Polymer,Interphase,Adhesion,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The elastic mechanical properties of graphene monolayer based nanocomposites considering a hybrid interphase region between reinforcement and matrix is being investigated via a multi-scale finite element approach. At the first level analysis, the proposed method uses atomistic representation of graphene to extract its elastic mechanical behavior. The output is then utilized on the second level analysis where a representative volume element (RVE) of the nanocomposite is under consideration. The RVE is considered as a three phase composite structure subjected to small strains. The reinforcing phase, i.e. graphene, is modeled in molecular detail via spring based line elements while the reinforced phase, i.e. epoxy, is modeled using continuum mechanics assumptions via the use of solid finite elements. Finally, the third and intermediate phase known as interphase is approached using solid finite elements as well as a hybrid concept. According to this concept, it is considered that the region between the two constituent materials presents anisotropy which is dependent on the distance from graphene and bounded by the surrounding mechanical properties. The influence of imperfect bonding between components is also investigated by introducing an adhesion coefficient within the adopted interphase property equations.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Single-layer graphene sheets are the one atom thick two dimensional layers of carbon that are predicted to possess exceptionally high mechanical, thermal and electrical properties. With such properties, graphene sheets are considered as ideal materials for composite reinforcement. The investigation of nanomaterial properties is a very active field of research. The investigation of a matrix material reinforced with a nanomaterial such as graphene has recently attracted the attention of numerous researchers due to the exceptional properties of graphene. Evidently, computational mechanics could pose a distinct advance on the research of such a scientific field in comparison with corresponding experimental or analytical approaches since they may treat effectively nanoscale effects. At the same time, however, difficulties arise when nanoscopic and macroscopic formulation concepts should be included in a single computational model.Plenty of experimental and theoretical studies which are related with the investigation of the mechanical properties of carbon nanotube (CNT) based composites have been performed in the last few years [1–4]. All these approaches investigate the role of CNTs mainly as reinforcing agents of polymer matrix composites. An experimental effort has recently been made to explore the effect of CNT nanoparticles on metallic alloys [5]. On the other hand, the theoretical investigation of CNT–polymer composite systems has been extensively performed via analytical [6–8] and molecular dynamics (MD) [9–11] based methods. A micromechanical formulation linking MD and continuum mechanics approaches has been recently proposed [12]. Finite element approaches has been also introduced [13–24] in the effort of exploring CNT–polymer systems. These finite element based methods may be divided in continuum mechanics studies [13–16], in which all phases are treated as continuum media, and semi-continuum mechanics studies [17–25], in which the CNTs are treated as atomistic structures. The performance of such composite material systems is critically controlled by the interphasial characteristics between the CNTs and the polymer matrix material. The adhesion among the two phases may be derived by complicated phenomena such as chemical bonding, electrostatic and van der Waal׳s interactions, mismatch in the coefficient of thermal expansion and radial deformation induced by atomic interactions. Some of these complicated nanoscale interphasial mechanisms have been investigated via MD [9] as well as experimental observations [10]. In these studies it has been proved that load transfer between CNTs and a polymer matrix is significant and specifically higher than that observed on most carbon fiber reinforced polymer composite systems. In view of the difficulty to define experimentally the interphasial bonding properties between the CNT and the surrounding polymer, several theoretical techniques have been proposed which are mainly based on computational mechanics [26]. Several researchers have used a continuum interphase of an arbitrary chosen, however, modulus of elasticity [14]. Others have utilized exclusively van der Waal׳s interactions to simulate CNT–polymer interphase [17–21]. Finally, some have discretely applied distance dependent stiffness variations, bounded by composite components, for that purpose [22–25]. Special interest presents a proposed approach [27,28] in which a hybrid model is developed for the interphase between a multi-walled CNT and a polymer.In contrast with CNT based composites there are fewer studies related with graphene reinforced polymeric materials. Some experimental attempts have been made [29–32] to estimate the mechanical response of graphene–epoxy composites. More are the similar efforts related with graphene nanoplatelets [33–36], the production of which seems to be more approachable. Little has been made at a theoretical level as well. Mechanical properties of nanocomposites consisting of epoxy matrix reinforced with randomly oriented graphite platelets have been studied by the Mori–Tanaka approach in conjunction with molecular mechanics [37]. An analytical study based on nonlocal theory of elasticity has recently been introduced [38] in order to test the stability of composite laminates made of isotropic graphene layers interlaid with bonding agents. A MD based approach [39] has been proposed to characterize multilayer graphene reinforced epoxy composites. In another attempt, a molecular mechanics based approach has been developed in order to simulate interface hydrogen molecules attached to graphene and thus predict the properties of graphane [40]. The finite element method seems to be more attractive in dealing with graphene based composites due to its low computational cost derived by the fact that during modeling the exclusion of some atomistic effects may be permitted. Still, to the author׳s best knowledge, in the finite element approximations of the specific problem [41–43], van der Waal׳s interactions have been exclusively used to simulate interphasial phenomena.In the present study, a three dimensional, linear, multi-scale, finite element model is proposed for the simulation and characterization of an epoxy material reinforced with a single-layer graphene. The graphene is treated as a molecule and therefore modeled according to its atomistic structure and interatomic force field appearing between carbon atoms. The epoxy matrix material is modeled as a continuum medium which has typical isotropic properties. In order to approximate effectively the load transfer between the two phases a practical numerical treatment is followed: interphase region is considered as a continuum medium of specific thickness while its mechanical properties are considered as hybrid meaning that are dependent and bounded by the material properties of the basic composite components, i.e. graphene and epoxy. Furthermore, it is assumed that interphasial properties vary exponentially with normal distance and that are correlated with an imperfect bonding parameter [27,28]. In order to define the interphasial property bounds originating from graphene, a numerical study is conducted beforehand in which all anisotropic elastic properties of graphene are defined. According to the proposed model, it is obvious that the anisotropy of graphene leads to a similar anisotropic behavior of interphase close to the reinforcement which, however, is reduced to isotropic near the matrix.The aim of the present work is to evaluate the stiffness properties that a graphene reinforced polymer may provide by utilizing a computationally efficient numerical scheme. Due to the linear character of these mechanical properties the adoption of nonlinear interatomic potentials was avoided. However, the home-made finite element code, which is extended here to incorporate the hybrid interphase concept, has been successfully used in the past [23] in conjunction with the modified Morse interatomic potential to predict the nonlinear stress–strain behavior of CNT–rubber composites.The single-layer graphene, denoted asG, is analyzed in atomistic detail in a global Cartesian coordinate system(x,y,z). Therefore, the positions(x,y)of all required carbon atomscare defined on the planez=0according to the well-known molecular structure of graphene. The distance between bonded carbon atoms is taken equal tor=0.1421nmwhile the thickness of graphene is indirectly defined astG=0.34nm, i.e. the interlayer distance of graphite. The whole graphene nanostructure may be divided into a series of sub-moleculesc−c−c−cconsisted of three chemical bonds as illustrated inFig. 1.The interatomic force field observed within such a sub-molecule under small strains may be simulated via the use of three different types of two-noded, line, spring elements interconnecting specific carbon atom pairs. These spring elements present three degrees of freedom per node, i.e. three translations. The specific method has recently been presented in every detail and has been validated via a stability analysis concerning graphene nanoribbons [44]. The 6×6 stiffness matrix of those elements is generally expressed in the global coordinate system(x,y,z)as(1)Ke=[ke−ke−keke]where superscriptedenotes the type of element. The 3×3 coefficient matrixkeis diagonal while its diagonal terms are equal to the stiffness of the element along the three directions. All the utilized spring elements are analyzed in corresponding three dimensional local coordinate systems the normal of which is aligned withzglobal axis.Three basic interatomic interactions, i.e. bond stretching, bond angle bending and bond angle torsion, have to be simulated. Firstly, a spring element denoted as2cand analyzed in the(x¯,y¯,z¯)local coordinate system (Fig. 1) is utilized for the simulation of bond stretching interaction. Thex¯-axis of the specific local coordinate system coincides with the line that connects two bonded atoms. The 3×3 coefficient stiffness matrix for the specific element, expressed in(x¯,y¯,z¯), is(2)k¯2c=[kx¯000ky¯000kz¯]=[kr00000000]wherekris the bond stretching force constant.Secondly, a spring element denoted as3cand expressed in the(x⌢,y⌢,z⌢)local coordinate system (Fig. 1) is used for the representation of bond angle bending interaction. Thex⌢-axis of the specific local coordinate system coincides with the line that connects two opposite atoms in ac−c−cmolecular structure. The 3×3 coefficient stiffness matrix of this element expressed in its local coordinate system is(3)k⌢3c=[kx⌢000ky⌢000kz⌢]=[kθ/r02000kθ/r020000]wherekθis the bond angle bending force constant.Finally, the bond angle torsion interaction is approached via the use of a spring element denoted as4cand analyzed in the(x˜,y˜,z˜)local coordinate system. Thex˜-axis of the specific local coordinate system coincides with the line that interconnects the opposite carbon atoms of ac−c−c−cmolecular structure. The specific element coefficient stiffness matrix in(x˜,y˜,z˜)is(4)k˜4c=[kx˜000ky˜000kz˜]=[00000000kτcos2(π/6)r02]wherekτis the bond angle torsion force constant. The force constants used in the present study arekr=652nNnm−1,kθ=0.876nNnmrad−2andkτ=0.278nNnmrad−2[44].It should be noted that the utilized spring elements influence the deformations of the nodes that interconnect and thus may model near-neighboring effects only.The graphene based composite is analyzed using both atomistic and continuum formulations. A triple-layered composite material is assumed in which single-layer graphene is positioned in the middle as reinforcing agent. The upper and lower matrix material, denoted asM, is considered to be epoxy. The upper and lower thickness of the matrix material is considered to have the same finite value. Infinite composite length along in-plane directions is assumed. An interphase, denoted asI, is considered between the two basic phases. Summarizing, the nanocomposite under consideration is a triple layered composite of infinite in-plane size in which the reinforcing agent, i.e. graphene is attached between two epoxy layers of finite thickness. Therefore, in order to simulate the corresponding RVE special constraints, discussed in detail in the following, are required on its transverse boundaries to represent the infinite in-plane size while the outer in-plane boundaries of the two epoxy layers should remain force-free in accordance with their finite thickness.The nanocomposite is analyzed according to a global coordinate system depicted inFig. 2.The infinite problem may be represented by using a periodically repeated RVE of finite in-plane area defined bylx,lyand by applying appropriate boundary conditions. Specifically, the vertical RVE planes which are parallel in the undeformed state should be coupled to remain parallel during deformation as well. This is required as shear stresses on these boundaries must be zero due to symmetry. Furthermore, due to the symmetry of the infinite problem, it is evident thatlxshould be chosen equal toly. Note in Fig. 2 that the in-plane size of the RVE is inevitably equal to the size of the graphene monolayer. Therefore, and because of the atomistic modeling of graphene within RVE one may accomplish only thatlx≈ly.The volume fractionVfof the composite may be calculated by using the following equation:(5)Vf=VGVCwhereVGis the volume of graphene within the RVE andVCis the total volume of the RVE. The interphase volume is included into the matrix assuming that the weaker bonding of the matrix material is influenced. Since graphene and RVE have the same in-plane size, last equation may be rewritten to the following form:(6)Vf=tGtCwheretGandtCare the thickness of graphene and RVE, respectively.From the last equation and for a given volume fraction, the thickness of the RVE may be estimated and thus the full geometric definition of the model may be accomplished.The microstructure of the graphene is developed on planez=0according to the formulation explained previously. Given that the mechanical properties of graphene are size-dependent in nanoscale, the chosen in-plane size of graphene should be sufficiently large in order to behave as being infinite in size (size convergence).As for the matrix, a continuum isotropic modeling is preferred from a molecular one in order to avoid the significantly high computational cost and complexity. Three dimensional, hexahedral, solid, finite elements are used for the discretization of the matrix. These elements have eight nodes and three degrees of freedom per node, i.e. three translations. Isotropic material properties have been assumed to represent the material behavior of the epoxy matrix. The values of Young׳s modulus and Poisson׳s ratio are taken equal toEM=3GPaandνΜ=0.34, respectively [34].The interphase is a significant part of any composite as it is responsible for the load transfer from the matrix to the reinforcement. As it was previously mentioned, the nanostructure of graphene is developed alongz=0while its thickness is considered indirectly. Therefore, from a physical point of view, it is assumed that the interphasial interactions take place along a normal distance equal to±0.5tGfrom the atomistic structure of graphene. Therefore, an interphase of a total thickness equal totGis assumed to be present within RVE fromz=0+toz=+0.5tGas well as fromz=0−toz=−0.5tGas depicted in Fig. 2. This selection of interphasial thickness in previous works [22–25] was found to lead to comparable estimations concerning CNT–polymer composites with other analytical [8] and MD based [11,12] predictions. Since graphene can be seen as an unrolled CNT, the same interphasial zone is selected here. Evidently, the adoption of a higher interphasial thickness would lead to an increase of the nanocomposite stiffness. The effect of interphasial thickness on nanocomposite stiffness is discussed in detail elsewhere [8]. Since it is difficult to simulate in detail a phase where different and complex molecular phenomena are present, an efficient numerical scheme is proposed which is expected to represent sufficiently the corresponding overall load transfer characteristics. The interphase is discretized like the matrix by using three dimensional, eight-noded, hexahedral solid finite elements. In addition, it is assumed that interphasial properties are varying according the following exponential based equation:(7)pijI(z)=Aze−Cz+Bwherepdenotes a mechanical property andi,j=x,y,z. The mechanical propertypmay correspond to Young׳s modulus, shear modulus and Poisson׳s ratio, i.e.p=E,G,ν. Evidently, ifp=Ethere isi=jwhile ifp=G,νthere isi≠j. This exponential law has proven its ability to model well experimental findings concerning not only the interphasial stress and strain fields of CNT–polymer nanocomposites [27] but their interphasial viscoelastic behavior as well [28]. Thus, this hybrid concept seems very attractive in order to simulate interphasial zone between graphene and epoxy since except being capable of wrapping corresponding experimental findings it also permits efficient modeling which is the main purpose of the present effort.The parametersA,BandCin Eq. (7) are constants which may be fully defined by using the following compatibility and continuity conditions:(8)pijI(+0.5tG)=pijI(−0.5tG)=pijM(9)pijI(0+)=pijI(0−)=kpijG(10)dpijI(z)dz|z=+0.5tG=dpijI(z)dz|z=−0.5tG=0Parameterk, in Eq. (9), is a discontinuity coefficient which influences the quality of adhesion between matrix and reinforcement. This coefficient takes values fromk=0representing total deboning between the main phases, tok=1corresponding to perfect bonding.The combination of Eqs. (7)–(10) leads to the interphasial property variation depicted inFig. 3.At the first level analysis an almost square single-layer graphene material is solely examined using the atomistic formulation analyzed above. Thus, by applying appropriate boundary conditions the anisotropic mechanical properties of graphenepijGare estimated versus its size defined by its mean lengthl¯=(lx+ly)/2wherelx≈ly. The minimum graphene size which leads to a convergent mechanical behavior is selected for the next level of the analysis so that a rather reduced computational effort will be required.In the second level analysis the RVE is to be modeled. The in-plane size of the RVE is chosen to be identical with the size of the graphene reinforcement. Its thickness is predicted by the known volume fraction and Eq. (6). The interphase behavior is formulated according to Eqs. (7)–(10) and by using the anisotropic graphene propertiespijGas well as the isotropic matrix propertiesνijM=0.34,EiiM=3GPaandGijM=EiiM/[2(1+νijM)]. Overall, a hybrid, anisotropic, distance dependent interphasial behavior is utilized. By imposing suitable boundary conditions on the RVE, the anisotropic propertiespijCof the nanocomposite, versus volume fractionVfand adhesion parameterk, are predictable.The varying behavior of in-plane properties of graphene is an essential issue when studying in nanoscale since the mechanical response of graphene for small sizes is strongly size-dependent [44,45,47]. Several models of almost square single-layer graphene sheets of lengthlxandlyalongxandy-axis, respectively, are developed. All the tested graphene geometries and corresponding discretization are provided in detail inTable 1. The nodes of graphene that are not loaded or fixed are kept force-free in all directions includingz-axis.Fig. 4 depicts the spring element model utilized for the analysis of the smallest graphene sheet under consideration. It should be noted that the hexagonal arrangement of carbon atoms in graphene leads to an in-plane asymmetry which may be clearly observed by the geometric difference between its armchair and zigzag edges. This minor crystal asymmetry between the two directions leads to corresponding differences in stiffness response which is more evident for small graphene sizes up to 10nm. This phenomenon is extensively discussed using sufficient bibliographic evidence elsewhere [44,45]. When continuum instead of molecular mechanics modeling is followed [13], the contribution of such an anisotropic behavior of the nano-reinforcement may not be clearly reflected on the composite response.The results concerning the elastic mechanical properties of graphene for simplicity reasons are provided with respect to average lengthl¯.The Poisson׳s ratiosνijG, withi=x,yandj=y,x, may be calculated via the following formula:(11)νijG=(Δlj/lj)(Δli/li)whereΔliis the imposed displacement alongi-axis on facei=li. Additionally,Δljis the arisen length decrease alongj-axis on facei=lidue to the fixed condition applied on facei=0. The above mentioned formula and consequent explanations, which were expressed in such a way for reasons of brevity, may be explicitly clarified by settingi=xandj=yto understand the calculation ofνxyG. Similarly, if the above explanatory paragraph is rewritten by usingi=yandj=xthen the calculation ofνyxGbecomes clear.Fig. 5 depicts theνxyGandνyxGvariations of the graphene sheet with respect to its average length.Generally, the Poisson׳s ratioνxyGgets lower values thanνyxG. Furthermore,νxyGvariation is slightly ascending whileνyxGvariation is descending.The Young׳s moduliEiiG, withi=x,y, may be computed from the following equation:(12)EiiG=(∑n=1Nfin)/(ljtG)Δli/liwherefinis the reaction alongi-axis of nodendue to the imposed displacementΔlialongi-axis on facei=li. In addition,Nis the total number of nodes that are fixed and belong on facei=0.Fig. 6 illustrates theExxGandEyyGvariations of graphene with respect to its average length.The higher the graphene size the higher the Young moduli. Both Young׳s modulus variations are ascending, however the Young׳s modulusEyyGseems to be almost stable and higher thanExxG.The shear moduliGijG, withi=x,yandj=y,xorj=z, may be estimated via the relationship(13)GijG=(∑n=1Nfjn)/(ljtG)Δlj/liwherefjnis the reaction alongj-axis of nodendue do the imposed displacementΔljalongj-axis on facei=li. The ratioΔlj/licorresponds to the shear strain observed in graphene due to the applied shear displacementΔljalongj-axis whileliis the graphene length alongi-axis. Eq. (13) becomes applicable for the calculation of the out of plane shear modulusGxzGorGyzG, by settingj=zas well asi=xori=y, respectively.Fig. 7 depicts theGxyGandGyxGbehaviors of graphene with regard to its in-plane average size. It is obvious, thatGxyGdecreases whileGyxGincreases as the graphene average length maximizes. It is obvious thatGxyGpresents slightly higher values.Finally,Fig. 8 depicts theGxzGandGyzGbehaviors of graphene versus its size. In this caseGxzGincreases whileGyzGdecreases as graphene becomes larger. The shear modulusGyzGremains a little higher for all graphene sizes.As a general conclusion, an almost square graphene monolayer presents anisotropic behavior. Even in-plane properties along different directions have small but definite differences. Furthermore, overall mechanical behavior almost seems to converge beyond 10nm. Thus, the geometric characteristics of the 4th graphene model presented in Table 1 are selected for the next level analysis of the RVE. The specific size is preferred as it leads to a tolerable computational cost.Table 2 includes some qualitative comparisons of the predicted elastic properties of graphene with corresponding predictions from the literature. Good agreement can be observed between the present estimations and those presented in studies [47–50] concerning Young׳s modulus. Comparable prediction involving Poisson׳s ratio may be found in studies [47,48] in which the in-plane special anisotropy of finite size graphene sheets was observed as well. Nevertheless, the present method leads to higher values of in plane Poisson׳s ratio of the graphene in comparison with ab initio method [45].The elastic mechanical properties of the composite are investigated versus volume fraction as well as several cases of interphasial status. Three different adhesion coefficients are tested, i.e.k=0.33,0.66,1.00, while an extra numerical investigation is being conducted in which the interphasial zone is assumed to be totally absent, i.e. replaced by pure matrix. The results concerning the last case study may be compared with the rule of mixtures (ROM) expressed as(14)pijC=VfpijG+(1−Vf)pijMwhere the ROM is utilized only for qualitative comparison reasons since it is more applicable for composite materials made up of continuous and unidirectional fibers. Moreover, such an analytical rule cannot include atomistic effects. On the other hand, the inverse ROM should be preferred for transverse properties. However, it is not as accurate as ROM because the equal stress assumption is not entirely valid since parts of the matrix are shielded from stresses by the reinforcements. Thus, given that the stiffness of graphene reinforcement is extremely higher than epoxy, the use of inverse ROM is avoided. Despite the indirect assumption of graphene thickness within nanocomposite its whole stiffness may be transferred to the matrix since interphase and graphene atz=0have common nodes. ROM is comparable only with the case where interphasial region, fromz=0+toz=+0.5tGand fromz=0−toz=−0.5tG, has the properties of epoxy (two-phase composite). This situation is indicated in the following as “no interphase”. Evidently, if this specific region is assumed to be hybrid and thus to possess stiffness contributions from graphene the overall composite stiffness is expected to increase with volume fraction in a different manner.The Young׳s moduliEiiCand the shear moduliGijCof the composite may be computed by applying appropriate boundary conditions analogous with those used in graphene analysis. By simply replacing superscriptGwithC, Eqs. (12) and (13) become appropriate formulas for the calculation of Young׳s moduliEiiCand the shear moduliGijCof the nanocomposite, respectively. However, special attention should be given on the originally vertical parallel faces of the RVE which should remain parallel during elastic loading as well. This may be achieved via nodal coupling.Fig. 9 shows a finite element model used for the analysis of the RVE. In addition,Table 3 presents analytical information about the discretization of the nanocomposite models under consideration. It should be mentioned that the graded interphase described by exponential property curves is incorporated via the use of a sufficient number of hexahedral solid elements alongz-axis which have a piecewise constant stiffness predicted through Eq. (7) and by using aszthe distance from graphene to their center. Moreover, interphasial zone is connected with graphene on planez=0by using common nodes between interphase solid elements and graphene line elements. This kind of joining may be followed since both kinds of elements are three dimensional while they have three degrees of freedom per node. However, the discretization of interphase should be compliant with the atomistic structure of graphene with respect to nodal positions (Fig. 9).Both in-plane Young׳s moduli of the composite should be computed, despite the already defined corresponding property difference for graphene alone, since the load transfer through the anisotropic interphase in not known a priori. The variation of the nanocomposite Young׳s modulusExxCversus volume fraction and for various interphase cases is presented inFig. 10.It is evident that the higher the interphase stiffness the higher the composite stiffness. This may be explained byFig. 11, which illustrates the contours of von Mises stress of the interphasial region under a small stretching deformation alongx-axis. It may be observed that when adhesion coefficientkbecomes higher, stresses tend to concentrate more intensively within interphase, fact that proves the increase of its load transfer ability. Note that under small loads the highest stresses are observed around the stiffer interphasial region near the graphene reinforcement (Hook׳s law). However, it should be mentioned that the assumption of a graded interphase leads to a gentle and not an intensive discontinuity of stresses between the two main phases and thus the possibility of debonding is generally reduced.Generally, similar variations may be observed inFig. 12 for the Young׳s modulusEyyCwhich increases linearly too as volume fraction increases. When absence of interphasial region is assumed the numerical predictions are almost identical with the estimations based on ROM. TheEyyCvalues are slightly higher thanExxCones due to the equivalent characteristic of graphene reinforcement.The variation ofGxyCandGyxCproperties versus volume fraction are presented inFigs. 13 and 14, respectively.The variations present again a linear ascending behavior which maximizes as adhesion stiffness gets higher values. The shear modulusGxyCremains a little higher for all volume fractions and interphase cases.Finally, corresponding data concerningGxzCandGyzCis illustrated inFigs. 15 and 16, respectively. It should be mentioned that at this pointGxzCandGyzCproperties are not generally described in composite reinforcement theory using ROM and thus the corresponding estimations are included in Figs. 15 and 16 only for indicative reasons. The shear modulusGxzCis higher thanGyzCexcept for the case in which interface is considered absent. Note that shear moduli behaviors seem to increase almost linearly as the volume fraction increases as well due to small volume fractions considered.From previous figures, it becomes apparent that a stiffer interphase leads to a stiffer nanocomposite. Nevertheless, this fact does not indicate that interphase adds strength to the nanocomposite. On the contrary, when interphasial stiffness is higher, debonding is more likely to happen since stress concentrations become more intensive (Fig. 11).All provided data versus volume fraction may be also expressed with respect to weight percentage of reinforcement by considering the mass of carbon atom, i.e.mc=1.9943×10−26kgas well as a typical density for epoxy matrix material equal toρM=1200kg/m3and adopting Eq. (6) as well as the information included in Table 1. Then, despite the uniqueness of the nanocomposite geometry selected here, some qualitative comparisons with similar predictions found in the literature are approachable. For qualitative comparison reasons and due to the lack of similar works, some research evidence is provided inTable 4 which however is related with a different dispersion and geometry of the graphene based reinforcement. From the data provided in Table 4, good agreement may be observed between the proposed method and other experimental and theoretical studies concerning comparable nanocomposite structures.It should be mentioned that the mean value of the proposed Young׳s moduliExxCandEyyCis characterized as stiffness in Table 4.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Interphasial interactions between a nano-reinforcement and a matrix are difficult to be simulated due to the presence of complicated molecular phenomena. Thus, a numerical efficient model is required to treat such problems. In the present study, a three dimensional, multi scale, hybrid finite element method has been proposed for the prediction of the elastic mechanical properties of graphene based nanocomposites. The analysis has taken place in two levels during which the macroscopic and the atomistic scales have been combined. Atomistic modeling has been followed for the graphene while matrix and interphase have been represented in a continuum manner. However, interphase has been modeled according to the output of first level analysis in which properties of graphene have been predicted. Its behavior has been assumed anisotropic, exponentially varying and bounded by the properties of the neighboring phases. The numerical results have shown that•graphene may increase significantly the overall stiffness of the matrix material even for small volume fractions,linear enhancement of the reinforced component is observed as volume fraction increases,adhesion along reinforcement is a key property; the stronger the bonding, the better load transfer, andby assuming the absence of interphase, numerical results converge to ROM based estimations.