@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Global–local finite element stress analysis of thick laminate multi-bolt joints in large-scale structures

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A global–local modeling technique of multi-bolt single-lap thick laminate joints is described.The contact stress is concentrated to the shearing plane.The stress distributions along the circumstantial direction of the layers with the same ply angles are similar.The out-of-plane stress in thick laminate single-lap joint contributes a lot to the strength.The effectiveness of the global–local procedure in reducing the computation effort is quite obvious.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Global–local,Thick-laminate,Stress analysis,Multi-bolt,Large-scale structures,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Accurately accessing the three-dimensional stress distribution through the thickness surrounding the bolt hole is necessary to identify the most effective multi-bolt single-lap joint design in large-scale thick laminate structures. To decrease computing time and resources, a two-dimensional to three-dimensional global–local finite element numerical method is presented, in which both the local zone selection strategy and boundary constraints applying method are discussed in detail. And both the contact stress and the stress components around the fastener hole are analyzed by using the proposed global–local method. Through analysis, it is found that the contact stress is concentrated in the layers that are close to the shear plane; theσ11is much higher than other stress components; most of the stress components conform cosine distribution around the fastener hole; the out-of-plane stress and interlaminate shear stress are quite high in the layers close to the shear plane; the stress distributions of different layers are depended on the ply angles of the specified layer; the effectiveness of the global–local model procedure in reducing the computation effort is obvious and this methodology is applicable to other detailed stress/strain analysis problems in large-scale structures.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Thick-section laminate materials are increasingly used in aviation primary load carrying structures to substitute the traditional metal materials [1]. Though the application of composite increases the structural integrity, composite structures are usually joined together by a number of bolts in single-lap way in aviation applications, because bolted joining is more reliable, promising to transfer higher load, easier to be assembled and disassembled, more tolerant to environmental effects and tending to prevent delamination.The joint strength of the composite mechanical joints mainly depends on the stress state around the fastener hole, which is complex and concentrated because of the discontinued fiber, discontinued geometry, free-edge effect [2] and load eccentricity. Therefore, efficient and accurate methods to access stress distribution through the thickness are needed to design effective thick-section laminate joints.After obtaining the surface strain using the experimental method such as the strain gages and Digital Speckle Pattern interferometry [3], the stress state on the surface of the joint plate can be addressed by incorporating the measured surface strain results and the material elastic properties. But those methods cannot be used to determine the inner stress fields, especially the stress close to the faying surface, which is normally the most dangerous location in single-lap mechanical joints. To get the three-dimensional (3D) stress field at joint area, some researchers used embedded transducers to measure the strain and stress along the thickness around the bolt hole [4,5], but this technique is often expensive, time-consuming and difficult to maneuver. Moreover the embedded transducers will bring about measuring error, which is uneasy to be eliminated.Some scholars studied the stress state using numerical methods, such as the two-dimensional finite element method and three-dimensional finite element method. The two-dimensional (2D) finite element method can be efficient for the displacement and stiffness analysis of composite laminates structures, but it fails to accurately predict the three-dimensional stress state in the joint area [6]. Furthermore, Reissner–Mindlin [7,8] type theories, namely First Shear Deformation Theory (FSDT) [9], account for transverse shear deformations, but have limited accuracy in predicting interlaminar stresses, and cannot accurately estimate rapid change of slope of the displacement fields across layer interfaces due to variation of mechanical properties with thickness. Thus, applying FSDT will lead to very inaccurate conclusions as far as local response of thick layered structures is concerned [10,11].With the development of the numerical technique, as long as a correct 3D finite element model with sufficient refined meshes of the whole composite joint is modeled, the detailed stain and stress condition in the joint area can be obtained. The 3D finite element method was already successfully applied in the European Commission project Bolted joints in composite aircraft structures (BOJCAS) to develop advanced numerical design methods for bolted joints in composite aircraft structures [12–15]. However, the application of this technique in large scale structures will often severely tax even today's computing resources due to the presence of geometry nonlinearity, contact nonlinearity, material nonlinearity and the coupling of them. Therefore, the 3D global finite element method cannot meet designer's requirements on the optimization of multiple variables when dealing with multi-bolt joints problems of large scale components in aircraft structures.Hence, combining the advantages of the 2D finite element method and 3D finite element method, and developing an efficient and accurate procedure for the multi-bolt single-lap joints design in thick laminate is necessary to identify effective configurations for aircraft structures subjected to combined in-plane and out-of-plane loading conditions.The global–local method had been extensively applied in various engineering problems [16–24]. Global–local analysis research areas include methods such as substructuring, submodeling, exact zooming and hybrid techniques, among which, with the exception of the submodeling technique, all require that the analyst knows where the critical region is located before performing the global analysis [25]. For the multi-bolt mechanical joints problem, the critical region is not known previously, so the submodeling technique is the only appropriate method for the detailed stress analysis in multi-bolt joints. Using this technique, the global behaviors such as the load sharing of the multiple fasteners and the all-field displacements can be determined from the global model, and then a separate refined local model is used for the detailed stress analysis in the interested regions taking the global results as boundary conditions. This paper will present a two-dimensional to three-dimensional global–local finite element approach to predict the stress state in the critical region of the thick-laminate multi-bolt single-lap joints.Though composite materials have many advantages over traditional metal materials, they cannot substitute metal completely yet in civil aviation structures. The composite components still need to join together with other composite parts or with other metal parts. And it is an effective way to investigate the complex stress state around the fastener hole by using the global–local method. A typical six-bolt single-lap, metal to composite joints, which is shown inFig. 1, is used as an example to describe the global–local method introduced by this paper. The locations and dimensions tolerances in Fig. 1 conform to the general tolerance requirements for composite products HB 7741-2004.Six HST12 hi-lite fasteners (2 rows and 3 columns) are used to join the metal plate and the composite plate together. According to the Hi-Lite product specification [26], the nominal diameter of the pin is 8mm, the diameter of the collar is 12mm, and the material of the fasteners is Ti6Al4V.The Plate 2 is made of Ti6Al4V. The jig is made of 30CrMnSi. The composite plate is made with CYCOM 977-2-35%-24KIMS-198-600 carbon fiber/epoxy composite laminate [27], whose nominal cured ply thickness is 0.188mm and stacking sequence is [±45/0/0/±45/0/0/±45/±45/90/±45/±45/0/0/±45/0/0/±45]. The 0° direction of the laminate is associated with the principal load direction, which means the “1”, “2” and “3” directions of the unidirectional tape lamina with 0° are coincident with the “X”, “Y”, and “Z” directions of the coordinate system shown in Fig. 1, respectively. The “1”, “2” and “3” directions are the longitudinal, transverse and thickness directions of the unidirectional tape lamina. The mechanical properties of the uni-directional lamina, the Ti6Al4V and the steel are all shown inTable 1. As the thickness properties of the composite are very difficult to obtain, it is customarily assumed that the matrix properties apply in the thickness direction [28]. Therefore it can be said E22=E33, G12=G13 and v12=v13 apply for the unidirectional lamina.In order to include the influence of the jig, a two-dimensional model simulating the specimen under tensile load is shown inFig. 2. All the six degrees of freedom (DOF) of the nodes on the left end of jig are constrained. The notes on the right end of the laminate plate have RBE2 type multi-point constraint with the “Load node”. Thus, the motions of the notes on the right end of the joint are governed by the motions of the “Load node”. The “Load node” is fixed in two translational directions (Uy and Uz) and all three rotational directions (Rx, Ry and Rz), while a pull load is applied to the “Load node” in Ux direction.In Fig. 2, shell elements are used to simulate the two joint plates. Beam elements are used to simulate the fastener shank. Gap elements are used to simulate the contact relationship between the fastener shank and the fastener hole, the contact relationship between the fastener head/nut and the joint plates and the contact relationship between the two joint plates. Bush elements are used to simulate the non-uniform contact relationship between the hole and fastener shank rotational constraint between the hole and fastener. The detailed modeling method and the way to get the values of these parameters are described in Ref. [29]. The numerical results of both in-plane and out-of-plane deformation are validated through comparing with the experimental results.As the tensile load is 50kN, the deformation of the joint and load sharing of the six bolts are calculated by using the 2D FE model described in the last section, and the results are shown inFig. 3(a) and (c), respectively. It can be seen that the most upper-right bolt transfers the highest load, about 9630N in magnitude (9043N in x direction, 1156N in y direction and 3087N in z direction), thus, the area of the composite plate around this hole is selected to perform detailed stress analysis.There are certain rules for the selection of local three-dimensional model region from the global model after the interested location is defined. The first one is that the stress gradient should be low enough in both in-plane direction and out-of-plane direction at the boundary of the region; the second one is that there should be no other hard points in the local model region except the point in the center of the interested bolt hole. Therefore, there should be no displacement constraints or other loading points inside the area of local zone boundary. Under these prerequisites, the accuracy of results will be higher with the area of the local model being larger. Nevertheless, the calculating efficiency will be lower with the area of the local model being larger because more elements will be included in the FE model.Under these rules, the region of the local model is selected as shown in Fig. 3(c) and (d). The distance between the hole center and the right boundary of the local model is one time of the hole diameter. The distance between the hole center and the right boundary of the local model is half of the row distance. According to the similar rule, the distances between the two local zone boundaries along the y direction and the hole center are half of the column distance.The relevant location of the 2D global model and 3D local model of the composite plate together with the bolts is shown inFig. 4. The global model and local model are not coupled together. In the detailed 3D model, both the metal plate and the fastener are modeled as 8-node solid elements. Material properties are both homogenous isotropic titanium with elastic parameters shown in Table 1. The composite plate is modeled as eight-node solid elements and its material property is layered laminate.Since both the stresses and the stress gradients close to the shear plane are high, the meshes in this area are finer than the meshes in the other area. The mesh density and aspect ratio in the contact areas between the fastener shank and hole will affect the convergence of the simulation results, and the meshes in these areas are more refined than those in other areas. Thirty-two elements are equally distributed on the whole periphery of each fastener hole along circumferential direction. Thus, the aspect ratios of the elements surrounding the hole is 3, which is similar to the mesh convergence results of Rosales-Iriarte et al. [30] and McCarthy et al. [31]. The areas covered by the fastener head and nut are refined meshed. The modeling method of one element for per ply can provide a reasonable approximation of the through-thickness stresses.In order to incorporate the bolt load, by-pass load and load-eccentricity effects of single-lap joint, the displacement fields from the global model are used to constrain the 3D detailed model. The boundary constraints of both plates are shown inFig. 5. Both the translational displacements and rotational displacements of the global model are applied to the middle and outside boundary nodes of the plates' 3D model.The contact is defined using the direct constraint method in MSC.Marc. The method of defining contact table is used to define the contact relationship between the composite plate and the fastener in the joint. With the direct constraint method, detection of contact is done by checking if potential contact nodes are “in contact” with potential contact segments. The double-sided deformable–deformable method is used to control the contact process. The frictional coefficient between the composite plate and the steel fastener set to be 0.1 according to the results of Herrington and Sabbaghian [32].The three-dimensional contact stress distribution around the bolt hole is shown inFig. 6, from which it can be seen that the stress is severely concentrated in the layers that are close to the shear plane. Therefore, the seven layers of nodes and six layers of elements, which are most close to the shear plane, are chosen to analyze the stress distributions.1)Contact stressTo illustrate the calculation results of stress distribution surrounding the bolt hole, the coordinate system adopted is shown inFig. 7.The distribution of contact stresses between the fastener shank and the hole in the seven layer of nodes close to the shear plane (layer 1 is the closest to the shear plane, and layer 2 is close to layer 1) are shown inFig. 8. From which it is shown that(1)There are contact stresses distributed between 90° and 270°, and waveforms of the contact stresses of different layers are different.The waveforms of the contact stresses in ply 3, 4, 5 and 7 are close to cosine distribution. The peak values in ply 3 and 7 locate at 168.75°, in ply 4 at 180° and in ply 5 at 191.25°.The waveforms of the contact stresses in ply 1, 2, and 6 are saddle-shape, with two wave crests being at 135° and 225°. The peak value of the contact stresses in ply 1 is located at 225°, and the peak values in ply 2 and 6 are located at 135°. The crest values of the contact stresses in both ply 2 and 6 are located at 180°, and the crest value in ply 1 is located at 157.5°.The highest contact stress is 1552MPa according to the calculation results, and the contact stress is 252MPa (9630/(8×4.7)) if the contact stress is treated to be uniformly distributed along the plate thickness. The former is about six times of the latter, which means that degree of uneven distribution of the contact stress between the fastener shank and the hole is very high.Stress distributionFig. 9 illustrates the stress components, includingσ11,σ22,σ33,σ12,σ23andσ31, of the six layers of elements close to the shear plane around the bolt hole boundary (layer 1 is the closest to the shear plane, and layer 2 is close to layer 1). From which it can be seen that(1)The difference between the peak value of stress componentσ11and the peak values of the other stress components are very large. The highest absolute value ofσ11of all six layers is about 2000MPa, and that of the other five stress components are between 150MPa and 350MPa.The waveforms of the longitudinal stress,σ11, in all six layers elements around the hole from 0° to 360° conform to cosine distribution. The two layers with 0° ply angle, layer 3 and layer 4, have approximately the same phase, with crest value being at about 180°. The phases of the stress distribution waveforms in the two layers with +45° ply angle, layer 1 and layer 5, are 45° lagged behind of those in the layers with 0° ply angle. The phases of the stress distribution waveforms in the two layers with −45° ply angle, layer 1 and layer 5, are 315° lagged behind those in the layers with 0° ply angle. The peak tensile stresses ofσ11in all six layers are almost the same, about 1000MPa. The peak compressive stresses ofσ11in different layers are different, and that in layer 2 is the highest.The distributing of transverse stress,σ22, in the six layers is not so regular as that ofσ11. Theσ22in the first layer is much higher than those in the other layers.The distributions of the out-of-plane stress,σ33, in all six layers follow similar style, namely half cosine distribution between 90° and 270°. Theσ33in all the six layers are all compressive stress. The peak absolute values ofσ33in the 6 layers are at about 180°. The absolute values ofσ33in different layers decrease with the increase of the distance between the specific layer and the shear plane.The in-plane shearing stress,σ12, of all six layers elements around the hole conform to cosine distribution. The waveforms of theσ12in the two layers with 0° ply angle, layer 3 and layer 4, are similar, with peak absolute values being at about 180°. The phases of the stress distribution waveforms in the two layers with −45° ply angle, layer 2 and layer 6, are 45° lagged behind those with 0° ply angle. The phases of the stress distribution waveforms in the two layers with +45° ply angle, layer 1 and layer 5, are 45° ahead of those with 0° ply angle.The absolute values of interlaminate shearing stress,σ23in the first layer of elements are higher than those in the other layers of elements, and the highest value is at about 160°. The stresses,σ23, in all six layers are almost zero from 0° to 90° and from 270° to 360°.The absolute values of interlaminate shearing stress,σ13in the second layer of elements are higher than those in the other layers of elements, and the highest value is at about 190 °. The stresses,σ13, in all six layers are almost zero from 0° to 90° and from 270° to 360°.A Patran Command Language (PCL) based program has been developed to construct the 2D FE model and the 3D detailed FE model, which means the modeling time consumed is very short comparing with the computational time. To evaluate the efficiency of the algorithm proposed in this paper, a 3D global FE model of the same structure are calculated in the same computer with 2.53GHz CPU and 4GB Ram memory. The calculation time of the global–local method is 1732s (903s for the 2D global model and 832s for the 3D detailed model), and the calculation time of the 3D global model is about 149,382s (more than 41h). The latter one is about 85 times longer than the former one. Moreover, normally the 3D global model would take the risk of failing in yielding results because of the computer's capacity. Thus, the global–local FE technique introduced in this paper has overwhelming advantage over the 3D global FE method on stress analysis in composite multi-fastener joints.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study, a global–local finite element modeling method is introduced and applied to investigate the three-dimensional stress distribution around the fastener hole in thick-section laminate multi-bolt single-lap joints. From the numerical results of the models aforementioned, it can be concluded that the stress is unevenly distributed along the thickness direction, and it is concentrated in the layers close to the shear plane; the out-of-plane stress and interlaminate shear stress are quite high in the layers close to the shear plane; the stress distributions of different layers are depended on the ply angles of the specified layer; the effectiveness of the 2D global–3D local procedure in reducing the computation effort is obvious and this methodology is applicable to other detailed stress/strain analysis problems in large-scale structures.