@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Contact stiffness estimation in ANSYS using simplified models and artificial neural networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
ANN were applied to obtain the normal contact stiffness parameter instead of the traditional trial-and-error approach.Simplified 2D contact models were used to capture the main features of the original 3D contact problem.A correction factor is deduced to correctly correlate the 2D–3D contact solutions.Good agreement is obtained from the normal contact stiffness estimated from 2D models with the original 3D parameter.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Contact problem,Contact stiffness,Finite element,Neural network,ANSYS,Connecting rod,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The elastic contact problem, as implemented in some commercial software such as ANSYS, depends on the user choice of some parameters such as normal contact stiffness, penetration limit and contact algorithms. This work investigates the artificial neural networks (ANN) potential to predict the value of some parameters, avoiding the trial-and-error procedure to determine these values. Contact problems based on simple problems are used to train the neural network, so it can predict the normal contact stiffness for more complex problems. Some contact examples are evaluated, including the small end connecting rod contact problem, of great importance in automobile industry.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Systems with several parts interacting together are subject to mechanical contact. The contact problem is nonlinear since the contact region is not known beforehand, and the boundary conditions may change during the analysis. A limited number of contact problems is sufficiently well behaved to have an analytical solution, such as the Hertz contact [10]. For this reason, contact problems are solved with numerical techniques in general. The most used technique to treat structural nonlinearities is the Finite Element Method (FEM) [1,4,13,14,16,19,23,25] while the Boundary Element Method (BEM) has been recently employed in contact problems [3,7,17,18], just to cite a few of the recent works.There are several methods adapted to study the contact problem. In the case of FEM, the use of constrained minimization methods such as the Augmented Lagrangian Method is widely used to model the contact problem. In this case, the constraints of the minimization problem have physical equivalence, as non-penetration conditions (inequalities) or adherence (equality) [20,22].The definition of the contact parameters (normal contact stiffness, penetration limit, etc.) and the contact algorithms in commercial software are very conditioned to the user experience with contact problems, where experimentation is the usual form to choose the contact parameters. An alternative used in this work to avoid experimentation is to employ artificial neural networks (ANN), where some results of the contact solution are used to estimate the contact parameters. Some parameters that can be used in the ANN are the penetration level with the normal contact stiffness. The ANN are an important analysis tool, since they can interpolate a complex input/output data set [8,9].There is limited application of ANN in contact problems: in [2], an ANN is used to interpolate the contact parameters associated to a friction factor in multistage forging processes. In this type of process, the tools have restrictions in the allowed maximum stresses, hence the friction factor is an important design factor. The training set is composed by the calculated friction factor and its dependencies in the contact interface for each contact node in a finite element simulation. ANN are used to recover contact parameters of the applied force (both tangential and normal) and indenter width from tactile sensors in [5]. The training data are obtained from contact models constructed and solved with FEM. In [26], an ANN is used to map an imperfect tip shape for spherical indentation to the perfect spherical indenter, based on force-depth curves. In [28], a radial basis ANN is employed to obtain a model between some contact parameters such as contact pressure and sliding velocity and the corresponding wear coefficient. The ANN was trained from wear tests using the pin-on-disc technique.One of the motivations of this work is the study of an automobile connecting rod small end contact problem. This is an essential component in intern combustion engines due to the role in the transformation of the combustion energy in rotative movement, through the piston-crankshaft connection. The connecting rod is subjected to elevated cyclic loads, with high compressive stress due to the gas expansion, and high lateral tensile due to the inertia. Thus, the durability of this component is of utmost importance in engines [21]. Results of the contact region behavior may not be consolidated even for well known systems, as in combustion engines components. In [24], the results of the contact pressure in the connecting rod small end are not conclusive due to the discrepancy in the solutions calculated from different authors. Reference [15] has further improved the work in [24], where the stress concentration at the small end depends on a proper combination of the initial clearance between the small end and the gudgeon pin, the applied load and the material properties.The objective of this paper is to present a methodology to the estimation of contact stiffness, one of the main parameters of a contact problem in the commercial software ANSYS [1]. An ANN is employed to obtain the estimation of the contact stiffness based on the contact pressure and maximum penetration between elements. Several examples were analyzed to illustrate the benefits of the proposed approach.The remaining of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we present an introduction to the frictionless contact problem, and some considerations about the main contact parameters (normal contact stiffness, penetration limit, the Augmented Lagrangian Method contact algorithms). Section 3 contains the mathematical definition of the back-propagation ANN. Section 4 explains the methodology of the estimation of the normal contact stiffness. The results of the estimation of contact parameters using ANN are in Section 5. The benefits of the proposed approach are further detailed in Section 6. The concluding remarks are contained in Section 7.We present in this section the main aspects of the contact formulation using the Augmented Lagrangian Method and how this method is implemented in the ANSYS software. This section is restricted to the essential ideas to allow the reader to understand the role of the main contact parameters that the ANN should estimate in a contact analysis using this software.The contact problem can be formulated as a constrained minimization problem, where the objective function to be minimized is the total potential energyΠ(u)of the bodies in contact, and the constraints are given by non-penetration conditions between the bodies. Thus, the problem can be stated as(1)minΠ(u)subjecttogj(u)≤0,j=1,…,nwhere u is the optimization variable (displacement vector) andgj(u)represents one of the n non-penetration constraints that can be defined as•gj(u)<0: the bodies are separated;gj(u)=0: the bodies are in contact;gj(u)>0: there is penetration between the bodies.The total potential energyΠ(u)for the contact problem between two elastic bodies subjected to small deformations and small displacements (static problems) can be described as(2)Π(u)=ΠA(u)+ΠB(u)=12{uAuB}t[KA00KB]{uAuB}−{fAfB}t{uAuB}whereKiis stiffness matrix,uiis the displacement field,fiis the external force, i represents an elastic body (i=A or i=B) and t denotes matrix transposition. For convenience, these variables are simplified to K, u and f from now. Thus, the total potential energy is given by(3)Π(u)=12utKu−ftuSeveral constrained minimization algorithms can be used to solve the problem of Eq. (1) such as the Penalty Method, the Lagrange Multipliers Method and the Augmented Lagrangian Method. The results presented in this paper are based on the Augmented Lagrangian Method according to the ANSYS implementation. This leads to the requirement of setting some contact parameters that are described in the next subsections together with a brief description of the Augmented Lagrangian formulation.The Augmented Lagrangian method is considered as a hybrid method of Lagrange Multipliers method and Penalty method. For more details about these algorithms, refer to [12] for instance. The contact constraints are considered in this formulation using penalizing coefficients and Lagrange multipliers, penalizing the non-penetration restrictions violations in the same form of the Penalty method, and solving the constrained minimization problem through the solution of sequential unconstrained minimization problems with the updating of Lagrange multipliers in the solution process.The Augmented Lagrangian function is given by(4)Laum=Π(u)+λtg(u)+12r[g(u)]+2where[x]+representsmax(0,x), r is the penalizing coefficient andg(u)=[g1(u),g2(u),…,gn(u)]is the constraint vector andλis the Lagrange multipliers vector. It is easy to verify that the Augmented Lagrangian function incorporates a penalization term and a Lagrange multiplier term.The gradient of the Augmented Lagrangian function is given by(5)∇Laum=∇Π(u)+λt∇g(u)+r[g(u)]+∇g(u)which allows to verify that at the optimum pointu⋆, the penetration restriction fulfillsg(u⋆)=0. In this case we have(6)∇Laum=∇Πu⋆+λt∇gu⋆=0,∀rwhich satisfies the Karush–Kuhn–Tucker conditions [12]. Hence, the penalizing coefficient is not required to reach excessive magnitude, since r has no influence in the optimality condition∇Laum=0. This is a recognized advantage of the Augmented Lagrangian Method over the classical Penalty Method.The solution of the contact problem formulated as the minimization problem of Eq. (1) using the Augmented Lagrangian involves the minimization of the Augmented Lagrangian function of Eq. (4). In this case, the penalty coefficients and the Lagrange multipliers are updated in order to achieve the solution. The penalty term leads to a stiffness term, affecting the stiffness matrix, and the Lagrange multiplier term affects the load vector. This can be verified through the second derivative of Eq. (5). In this case, the penalty coefficient can be interpreted as the normal contact stiffness, named in ANSYS by the normal contact stiffness Kn. The contact penetration constraints can also be related to a specific parameter called TOLN. These two parameters are described in further subsections.The contact problem solution using these concepts involves successive minimization of the Augmented Lagrangian function. This reflects in a new equilibrium equation based on the null gradient condition and in penalty coefficient and Lagrange Multipliers updating in each iteration.In ANSYS [1], the contact pressure P in the Augmented Lagrangian Method is defined by(7)P={0ifg<0Kng+λi+1ifg≥0and the multiplier λi+1 is stated by(8)λi+1={λi+Kngif|g|>TOLNλiif|g|<TOLNwhere i denotes the specific iteration. If the penetration g is not superior to the penetration limit, the Lagrange multipliers will not be updated.Eqs. (7) and (8) reflect the ANSYS penalty coefficient and Lagrange Multipliers strategies of updates, featuring the specific software implementation. The contact problem can be incorporated in the potential function, by adding the contact terms in the main diagonal of the global stiffness matrix in the case of the Augmented Lagrangian Method. These terms are adjusted by the penetration level of each iteration in the finite element analysis. Other contact algorithms, as the Lagrangian multiplier method, reorganize the stiffness matrix in order to incorporate the Lagrange multipliers.The normal contact stiffness is one of the most important parameters in the contact problem, since it is responsible for the allowed penetration level of the bodies in contact. In ANSYS, the normal contact stiffness is selected by the user in two possibilities: (1) as a stiffness factor kn, which acts as a scale parameter of the contact stiffness Kn, or (2) by specifying the magnitude of the contact stiffness Kndirectly. Usually, the determination of the correct value of this parameter for each contact problem is not evident, and it is more intuitive to use the scale factor knin order to regulate the level of Kn. ANSYS calculates the value of Knthrough some parameters as the Young modulus, the contact area, and the scale factor kn.For high values of the normal contact stiffness, there will be a small penetration. However, values too large can cause numerical ill-conditioning of the stiffness matrix. It is desirable to find an appropriated normal contact stiffness so the final penetration is small and does not influence the analysis result negatively.Ideally, there should be no penetration between the contact bodies, because it characterizes a violation of the physics restrictions. Nevertheless, the most usual numerical techniques in the contact problem solution, such as penalty based methods, must imply in small penetration levels. The penetration limit is employed to quantify the acceptable penetration level of the contact bodies conjointly to the normal contact stiffness.The TOLN parameter is associated to the surface normal direction, and it depends on the depth of the finite element adjacent to the contact element. The depth is defined by h and is exemplified in Fig. 1. The allowable penetration TOLN is the product of the penetration limit factor FTOLN (defined by the user) by the average depth h of the adjacent finite element. If penetration is higher than the established limit, the solution is considered inappropriate. Alternatively, the desirable TOLN value can be specified directly by the user.The use of the FTOLN factor can be more advantageous than specifying a maximum level of penetration. For coarse meshes with larger finite element size, the calculated penetration with FTOLN will be proportionally larger. For refined meshes, with reduced finite element size, FTOLN will generate a reduced level of penetration.The study of the ANN is inspired in the functioning of the human brain, which is very efficient to process information. Amongst some characteristics, high-complexity, non-linearity and parallel processing are brain features. A neuron is capable of realizing complex operations like pattern and images recognition and is capable of learning from its environment [9].An ANN is a system made by numerous simple structure units called neurons, arranged in a layered structure. Particular properties of the ANN are processing information in parallel and learning by experience feature, which allows the ANN to re-utilize the acquired experience. The ANN can be trained to play a specific function through the adjustment between the neurons connections. The neurons receive the information from several sources, then they combine and propagate the information forward in the network.The back-propagation ANN is one of the main used algorithms in multilayer networks. Back-propagation ANN can use nonlinear activation function in the neurons, allowing a better model to be obtained with less neurons per layer. Also, a number of hidden layers is present, permitting the network to execute more complicated tasks. The higher the number of interconnections between the neurons, the higher the complexity of the network, which may provide a better interpolated model. Nevertheless, it becomes more difficult to describe the network behavior mathematically. Fig. 2represents a typical back-propagation ANN. The usual notation to the locations of neurons (or layers) of the ANN considers the neuron i is left to neuron j, which is left to neuron k.The variables in Fig. 2 are as follows:•qj=[q1,q2,…,ql]: neuron input vector. It can be the network input or another neuron output;wji=[w1,w2,…,wl]: neurons synaptic matrix (weight matrix). The notation wjiassociates the output of neuron i with the input of neuron j;vj: summation of all weights multiplied by the input;φ(vj): activation function;yj: neuron output.The training rule is based on the minimization of the network error [9]. It is desirable to minimize the mean square error (MSE) of the network and the expected output of the training set in function of the optimization variables (ANN weights wji). The error is calculated only for the most external layer, therefore a rule that update all the weights for all layers must be implemented. The back-propagation learning rule consists of two steps: a forward step, where the ANN weights are fixed and the input goes through the entire ANN. Then, a backward step is executed, using a learn rule to update the ANN weights.The error ej(n) of the output neuron j in iteration n is given by(9)ej(n)=tj(n)−yj(n)The MSE is defined by the sum of all the quadratic errors12ej2(n)for all the M neurons of the output layer, for every N input of the training set. The MSE is defined as(10)ϵ¯(n)=12N∑n=1N∑j=1Mej2(n)From [9], applying the chain rule, we obtain the following relation for the output layer:(11)∂ϵ(n)∂wji(n)=−ej(n)φj′(vj(n))yi(n)=δj(n)yi(n).whereφj′(vj(n))is the derivative of the activation function with respect to vj(n) andδj(n)is the local gradient of neuron j in iteration n[9].To the hidden layers neurons, it is clear that there is no expected output. In this case, the hidden layer neuron error is calculated recursively in function of the local gradient of the external layers. This is the main characteristic of the back-propagation ANN. The local gradientδj(n)for a hidden neuron is defined as [9](12)δj(n)=φj′(vk(n))∑kδk(n)wkj(n).The weight updateΔwji(n)can be expressed as(13)Δwji(n)=γΔwji(n−1)+(1−γ)η∂ϵ(n)∂wji(n)with0≤γ≤1. γ is called as moment term, and η is the learning rate, that is updated in each iteration by an empiric rule defined in [6]. The use of the learning rate and moment term can boost the ANN training convergence [9].The moment term has two roles: it tends to accelerate the error decreasing when the descent direction is stagnated, whenΔwjiassumes the same signal (plus or minus) in successive iterations. This term has also a stabilization effect, whenΔwjioscillates between positive and negative values [9,11,27].The normal contact stiffness factor is the most important parameter in a contact analysis, since its value influences the penetration level between the contact bodies. Higher Knwill result in lower penetration, but numerical ill-conditioning may arise. Higher values of the normal contact stiffness will also lead to an increase in the contact pressure, but only until the contact pressure reaches aKn⋆. From this point, the contact stiffness no longer affects the contact pressure.Adjusting Knrequires some trial-and-error estimate, which can require computational and analyst time. The dimensions of the problem (2D or 3D) may increase the difficulties to determine the normal contact stiffness. It is clear that the choice of the contact stiffness is highly related to the analyst experience in solving different contact problems.A model that provides Kn(or kn) given an acceptable estimate of the penetration between the bodies is highly desirable.In this work, the estimation of the contact stiffness can be performed by simplified models that captures the general aspects of the contact problem. The general dimensions of a 3D problem can be given by two views of the component: the frontal and the lateral view. The frontal view can be discretized in a 2D mesh, representing the main aspects of the original contact problem. This 2D contact problem is then solved and the maximum penetration (gmax) and the maximum contact pressure variation (ΔPmax) are obtained. The contact pressure variation is determined according to(14)ΔPi=Pi+1−Pi−1Pi−1where i is a specific configuration where the contact pressure was taken as shown in Fig. 3.It is evident that the calculated values of gmaxandΔPmaxfrom the 2D contact problem do not represent accurately the 3D problem results. Thus, in order to improve the estimation, the lateral view is used to calculate a correction factor f to put these parameters closer to the expected values of the original 3D problem.The correction factor, f, is obtained from the maximum penetration gBfound in the lateral view divided by the maximum penetration gAof the frontal view, assuming the same values of knin both models, i.e.,(15)f=gBgAUsing the simplified models, a data set of contact results is assembled. The maximum penetration and the maximum contact pressure variation are used to train an ANN. Both inputs are multiplied by the correction factor, f, before any action is performed, as illustrated in Fig. 4. Hence, the estimate of knfor the original 3D contact problem is the output of the network.With this formulation it is not necessary to solve the original 3D contact problem to find an estimation of the normal contact stiffness factor. The solution of both 2D contact problems represents a significant reduction in the computational time to find the normal contact stiffness factor.Let us remark that the ANN can be used to estimate the normal contact stiffness using the maximum penetration and the maximum contact pressure variation directly from the 3D contact problem. Nevertheless, to build a training set from the original contact problem can demand huge amounts of computational time.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The normal contact stiffness is one of the most important parameters of the contact problem when modeled by finite elements. This value normally depends on the experience of the analyst with contact problems, and this choice is crucial to the relevance of the contact solution. A small value may lead to a higher penetration and to a non-representative contact pressure variation. A high normal contact stiffness will can lead to a lower penetration and to a better contact pressure, but numerical ill-conditioning may occur.The use of multilayer ANN to estimate the normal contact stiffness factor of 3D contact problems was discussed in this work. Some of the contact responses such as the maximum penetration and maximum contact pressure variation were used as input to an ANN. These data was obtained from 2D simplified models which capture the main features of the original problem. Other types of models could be employed as well in order to assemble a training set for the ANN, for instance, different 3D analysis with similar geometry and loading may give important information about the maximum penetration and maximum contact pressure in the area of interest.This work shows that the trained ANN were able to estimate the contact stiffness for the original contact problem avoiding the trial-and-error method, saving significant time in order to adjust the contact stiffness value.