@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Stochastic stability analysis of steel tubes with random initial imperfections

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The buckling load variability of imperfect steel tubes is investigated.The imperfections are modeled as a non-homogeneous Gaussian stochastic field.Evolutionary power spectra are derived from experimental measurements.The imperfections can lead to a substantial reduction of the buckling load.The type of loading and the imperfections affect the failure modes of the tubes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Shell finite element,Stochastic fields,Evolutionary spectrum,Random imperfections,Buckling load variability,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, the effect of initial geometric imperfections on the buckling load of steel tubes (relatively thick cylindrical shells) under axial load and lateral pressure is investigated. The geometric imperfections are modeled as a 2D-1V non-homogeneous Gaussian stochastic field simulated using the spectral representation method. The evolutionary power spectrum of the non-homogeneous field is derived from available experimental measurements using the recently proposed method of separation. For the determination of the limit load variability of the tubes, a stochastic formulation based on Monte Carlo simulation is implemented. It is shown that the imperfections can lead to a substantial reduction of the buckling load and thus should be taken into account via a realistic description through stochastic field modeling.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The failure of shell-type structures is often due to buckling phenomena mainly triggered by the initial geometric imperfections which occur during the manufacturing process. Therefore, the study of imperfect shell structures raised the interest of many researchers in the recent years. The main issues when dealing with this problem are the big discrepancy between theory and experiment as well as the large scatter in the measured buckling loads. Both deterministic and probabilistic approaches have been used to address the aforementioned issues. It was soon realized that a realistic approach to the problem could only be achieved by taking into account the inherent randomness of the imperfect geometries [10,15,18]. Buckling analysis based on such approach allows for a robust modeling of the buckling load scatter produced by different manufacturing processes as well as of the observed dispersion of experimental results [8,9,12].Various methods have been developed to take into account the uncertainty in the geometry of the shell. Some methods use the Fourier series analysis of measured initial imperfections considering the series coefficients as random variables [5]. The idea of using two-dimensional Fourier series with random coefficients resulted from the analytical solution of the problem of stability of cylindrical shells which leads to the representation of buckling modes by series of this kind. These methods have in common that the limit load is computed analytically or semi-analytically. More recent research has proposed the use of stochastic fields to simulate the imperfections in conjunction with the finite element (FE) method to solve the stability problem [1–4,6,11,13,16,17,19–28,30–34].The quality of the results obtained from the stochastic approach depends largely on the existence of data (experimental measurements) validating the assumptions made for the probabilistic characteristics (probability distribution, correlation structure) of the initial geometric imperfections. Many researchers have dealt with this issue in recent years. The result of their investigations has led to the conclusion that the variance does not remain constant in space and therefore the stochastic field describing the geometric imperfections cannot be considered homogeneous. In addition, the histograms of the computed buckling loads show that the probability density function is highly skewed and hence buckling loads follow a non-Gaussian distribution [9,23]. It is thus evident that the existence of databanks is important in order to avoid false assumptions and to achieve a realistic simulation of initial imperfections. In this framework, a novel approach has been recently proposed for the estimation of the evolutionary power spectra of non-homogeneous stochastic fields [26]. This approach, called “the method of separation”, combines computational efficiency and accuracy as it achieves optimum simultaneous resolution in space and frequency domains.In the present paper, the effect of initial (out-of-plane) geometric imperfections on the buckling load of steel tubes (relatively thick cylindrical shells) under axial load and external lateral pressure is investigated. The stability analysis of relatively thick steel tubes under external pressure is important, e.g. for the design and construction of offshore pipeline members [35,36]. The buckling behavior of this type of structures in presence of random imperfections has been studied very scarcely in the literature, in contrast to the case of thin cylindrical shells. Although relatively thick shells under pure axial loading are not imperfection sensitive, the simultaneous application of external lateral pressure results in a strongly unstable post-buckling path. The reason is that, even for thin tubes, the inelastic deformation, which occurs at the maximum moment locations, enables the formation of a plastic collapse mechanism. Tube stiffness is lost and the tube exhibits sudden collapse. An immediate consequence is the strong sensitivity of the response on the amplitude of the initial out-of-roundness [14].The geometric imperfections are modeled as a 2D–1V non-homogeneous Gaussian stochastic field simulated using the spectral representation method [29]. The evolutionary power spectrum of the non-homogeneous field is derived from available experimental measurements [7] using the method of separation. For the determination of the limit load of the tubes, a stochastic finite element formulation based on Monte Carlo simulation (MCS) is implemented. Useful conclusions are derived regarding the effect of initial imperfections on buckling load variability and the necessity of using stochastic fields for a realistic representation of the imperfections is highlighted.Out-of-plane initial geometric imperfections of shells are usually modeled as 2D non-homogeneous Gaussian stochastic fields. In this paper, the evolutionary power spectra of the non-homogeneous fields representing the initial geometric imperfections are derived from experimental measurements using the method of separation [26]. This method is based on simple principles of stochastic process theory. It is easy to implement, computationally efficient and at the same time accurate with optimum simultaneous resolution in space and frequency domains in contrast to the other existing methods [3,26].The method of separation assumes that the available samples represent a separable zero-mean random field, thus the evolutionary power spectrum (EPS) can be decomposed into a frequency and a spatial part, which can be dealt with separately(1)S(κ,x)=Sh(κ)ch(x)An estimateS˜h(κ)of the homogeneous Fourier power spectrum in Eq. (1) can be obtained by the periodogram, where the integration over the frequency is done with a window as large as the sample length L(2)S˜h(κ)=E[12πL|∫0Lf(i)(x)w(x−L2)e−Iκxdx|2]Accordingly, an estimatec˜h(x)for the spatial envelope can be derived from the mean square of samples f(i)(x) as follows:(3)E[|f(x)|2]=2∫0∞Sh(κ)ch(x)dκ=ch(x)2∫0∞Sh(κ)dκThe estimate of the spatial envelope can then be obtained by replacing in Eq. (3) the analytical homogeneous spectrumSh(κ)and mean squareE[|f(x)|2]by the corresponding estimates(4)c˜h(x)=E[|f(i)(x)|2]2∫0∞S˜h(κ)dκThe imperfect geometry of the tube is represented by the spatial variation of the radius of the structure as follows:(5)r(x,y)=R+a0(x,y)+f(x,y)where r(x,y) is the varying initial radius at each point of the structure, R is the radius of the perfect cylinder, a0(x,y) is the mean function of the imperfections with respect to the perfect geometry of the tube and f(x,y) is a zero-mean non-homogeneous Gaussian stochastic field. From the statistical analysis of the measured imperfections, it follows that the assumption of normality is in accordance with the experimental data.The mean function a0(x,y) as well as the properties of stochastic field f(x,y) are derived from a statistical analysis of experimentally measured imperfections on a group of six tubes, contained in a data bank of initial imperfections [7]. The geometric and material properties of these tubes are presented inTable 1. The average thickness, Young modulus and yield stress have been used in the analyses. A typical pattern of measured out-of-plane geometric imperfections is plotted inFig. 1 for specimen 12Α-3-1. The assumption of non-homogeneity of the imperfections is mainly based on the physical interpretation that imperfections are attributed to the manufacturing process where there is a basic mechanism creating an average imperfection pattern followed by a small scatter around this pattern. This is also verified in a number of publications on the topic [9,21,24,26], some of which involve a larger sample size. The mean function a0(x,y) is calculated via ensemble averaging at each point of the unfolded cylinder. A plot of a0(x,y) is presented inFig. 2 where it can be observed that the mean value varies substantially along the two directions of the cylinder. At this point, it should be mentioned that, in order to be consistent with the assumption of a zero-mean random field used in the method of separation, the mean function a0(x,y) has been subtracted from each measured imperfection.For the simulation of the non-homogeneous field f(x,y) in Eq. (5), an evolutionary form of the spectral representation method is implemented. The EPS adopted in the present study is assumed to be uncoupled with respect to the axial and circumferential directions of the cylinder, as implied by the experimental measurements (refer to Fig. 1b). The assumption of spectral separability is valid for the case of geometric imperfections with narrow-band EPS, as shown in [24,26]. Therefore, the EPS of the stochastic field f(x,y) can be written as follows:(6)S(κx,κy,x,y)=Sx(κx,x)Sy(κy,y)whereSx(κx,x)andSy(κy,y)are two independent 1D power spectra for the axial and circumferential direction, respectively. The two power spectra are obtained using the method of separation for 1D random fields described in Section 2.1 and are strongly narrow-band as shown inFig. 3.Using the EPS of Eq. (6), samples of the non-homogeneous imperfection field can be generated using the spectral representation method as follows:(7)f(i)(x,y)=2∑n1=0N1−1∑n2=0N2−1[Αn1n2(1)cos(κ1n1x+κ2n2y+φn1n2(1)(i))++Αn1n2(2)cos(κ1n1x−κ2n2y+φn1n2(2)(i))]whereΑn1n2(1),Αn1n2(2)depend not only on the wave numbers but also on the positions x, y(8a)An1n2(1)=2S(κ1n1,κ2n2,x,y)Δκ1Δκ2(8b)An1n2(2)=2S(κ1n1,−κ2n2,x,y)Δκ1Δκ2and(9)κ1n1=n1Δκ1κ2n2=n2Δκ2(10)Δκ1=κ1uN1Δκ2=κ2uN2(11)n1=0,1,...,N1−1,n2=0,1,...,N2−1The parameter κju, j=1, 2, is a cut-off wave number defining the “active region” of the power spectral density function, beyond which the spectral power is supposed to be zero.φn1n2(j)(i), j=1, 2, represent the realization for the (i) simulation of the independent random phase angles uniformly distributed in the range [0,2π]. A sample function of the initial geometric imperfections and the corresponding imperfect cylinder are depicted inFig. 4. The comparison of Figs. 1 and 4 shows a very good agreement between measurements and simulations.The proposed approach comprises the following steps:i.Numerical treatment of available experimental measurements of initial geometric imperfections.Use of the method of separation (Section 2.1) for the computation of the EPS of the imperfections.Generation of sample functions of the imperfections using the spectral representation method (imperfect tubes to be used in the analyses).Selection of FE mesh size. Mesh convergence studies are performed to define the appropriate mesh size for the analysis, which combines accuracy and computational efficiency.Stochastic analysis of a number of imperfect tubes with different loading conditions (axial load, lateral pressure, combined axial load and lateral pressure) in the framework of MCS. In the nonlinear FE analyses performed, the load-displacement curve is obtained using a path-following strategy based on the arc-length method.Statistical treatment of the results: computation of buckling load variability.The mean material and geometric properties of the perfect cylinder are shown inFig. 5 along with the bilinear stress–strain curve modeling the behavior of the material. The boundary conditions are specified as follows: the base edge nodes of the cylinder are fixed against all translations while the top edge nodes are free. As mentioned previously, mesh convergence studies are performed first in order to determine an optimum FE mesh size satisfying the following two requirements: (i) accurate prediction of the buckling load and (ii) accurate representation of the gradients of the stochastic initial imperfection field.Fig. 6 presents the results of such a convergence study of an imperfect cylinder under axial loading, for different mesh sizes. Although there are no significant differences in the computed buckling loads, the differences in the computational cost are substantial. For a 113×181 mesh, the analysis required five times less computing time than that required for a 225×361 mesh. In addition, the average element size in the 113×181 mesh is smaller than a quarter of the periods of the stochastic field in the axial and circumferential directions corresponding to the upper cut-off frequency and thus provides sufficient accuracy. Therefore, the coarse mesh (113×181) will be used in the following analyses as it combines accuracy and computational efficiency.Fifty tubes with initial geometric imperfections produced by the spectral representation method have been analyzed using the nonlinear FE approach mentioned in Section 3 for six different loading cases: axial load, lateral pressure, combined axial load and lateral pressure with ratio of 5, 2.5, 1.75 and 1.25. For comparison purposes, nonlinear FE analyses of the perfect cylinder have also been performed.The histograms of the computed buckling loads Pualong with their mean value and coefficient of variation (Cov) are presented inFig. 7 for the different loading cases examined. The form of the histograms is different and the scatter of buckling loads around the mean value is moderate. In the case of axial load/lateral pressure ratio equal to 1.25, the buckling load Cov reaches the value of 7%. The load–displacement curves for an imperfect cylinder and various loading combinations are shown inFig. 8. It can be observed that the form of the load–displacement curve is highly sensitive to the ratio of axial load vs. lateral pressure. The limit load is reduced by increasing the lateral pressure (see also Fig. 7). In the case of pure axial compression, buckling is clearly elastoplastic and becomes gradually a bifurcation-type elastic one as external pressure increases.The failure modes of a randomly selected imperfect tube for three of the six loading cases mentioned above are depicted inFig. 9. It can be observed that the failure modes are affected significantly by the type of loading. There are three local buckles for axial load/lateral pressure ratio equal to 2.5 and only one local buckle for pure lateral pressure, indicating the complexity of the buckling phenomenon. It is also evident that local buckling is occurring in all loading cases. These observations confirm the importance of initial geometric imperfections which are responsible for the different failure modes.The significance of initial geometric imperfections is further highlighted through comparisons with the buckling behavior of the perfect tube obtained also with nonlinear FE analysis.Table 2 shows the lateral pressure and the corresponding limit load of the perfect tube. It can be observed that the limit (axial) load is much larger than that resulting from the stochastic analysis of the imperfect cylinders. Furthermore, by increasing the lateral pressure, the limit load increases instead of decreasing. However, the opposite happens in the imperfect cylinder where the limit load decreases with the lateral pressure (see Fig. 8). Therefore, the presence of initial geometric imperfections cannot be neglected. The failure modes of the perfect tube are depicted inFig. 10 for different loading cases. In the case of pure axial load (Fig. 10a), it is observed that the deformations are concentrated at the upper and lower ends of the cylinder, which is in contrast to the results obtained from the stochastic analyses (see Fig. 9). For pure lateral pressure (Fig. 10c), the perfect cylinder seems not to buckle unless a small defect is introduced to the geometry that leads to some kind of buckling initiation (Fig. 9). For axial load/lateral pressure ratio equal to 2.5 (Fig. 10b), a local buckling occurs near the ends of the cylinder and the failure mode is again substantially different to that of the imperfect structure.Finally, the stochastic interaction diagram is shown inFig. 11. The minimum and maximum values of the computed limit loads are presented in the same diagram along with the mean value for comparison purposes. It is evident that the variability is substantial especially for large lateral pressure which also leads to significant reduction of the buckling load.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, the effect of initial geometric imperfections on the buckling load of steel tubes under axial load and external lateral pressure was investigated. As demonstrated by the numerical investigations and the experimental results, the imperfections can lead to a substantial reduction of the buckling load and thus should be taken into account via a realistic description through stochastic field modeling. The buckling load variability due to the presence of initial imperfections is moderate. The failure modes of the tubes are significantly affected by the type of loading and the imperfections. In the case of pure axial loading, local buckling occurs near the middle of the imperfect tube, which is in contrast to the results obtained for the perfect structure where “elephant foot” buckling occurs. The effect of the variability of other mechanical properties such as the thickness of the tube and the yield stress of the material on the buckling load will be the subject of future work.