@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Identification of intrinsic electron trapping sites in bulk amorphous silica from ab initio calculations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Wide O–Si–O angles in bulk amorphous silica are shown to trap electrons.Trapped electron levels appear 3.2eV below the bottom of the silica conduction band.Estimated concentration of electron trapping sites is 5×1019.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Silica defects,Electron trapping,Device Reliability,Deep state traps,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Using ab initio calculations we demonstrate that extra electrons in pure amorphous SiO2 can be trapped in deep band gap states. Classical potentials were used to generate amorphous silica models and density functional theory to characterise the geometrical and electronic structures of trapped electrons. Extra electrons can trap spontaneously on pre-existing structural precursors in amorphous SiO2 and produce≈3.2eV deep states in the band gap. These precursors comprise wide (⩾130°) O–Si–O angles and elongated Si–O bonds at the tails of corresponding distributions. The electron trapping in amorphous silica structure results in an opening of the O–Si–O angle (up to almost 180°). We estimate the concentration of these electron trapping sites to be≈5×1019cm-3.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Electron trapping is known to have a dramatic effect on the performance and reliability of electronic devices employing SiO2 as gate insulator, providing a direct contribution to the electric field at the surface of the semiconductor channel [1]. So far, the dominant electron traps have been associated with impurity-related centres, in particular, the hydrogen-related network fragments [2–5]. However, little is still known regarding the possibility of intrinsic electron trapping in the a-SiO2 network.Our work stems from as yet unexplained electron trapping observed in device-grade oxides at an energy of 2.8eV below the conduction band of a-SiO2. These traps have initially been exposed using photon-stimulated tunnelling experiments on oxidised Si and SiC crystals [6–9]. Additional low-temperature capacitance [10] and Hall effect measurements [11,12] on 4H-SiC MOS devices revealed that the density of these electron trapping states can be as high as1014cm−2eV−1, with the measured trap density of1013cm−2 inside a 2-nm thick near-interface SiO2 layer [6,9] corresponding to≈5×1019cm−3 in terms of volume concentration. Notably, none of the established defects have such a high density in thermally grown a-SiO2. Several features, including the absence of a comparable density of electron traps in bulk a-SiO2 and strong sensitivity of electron trapping to the incorporation of nitrogen at the interface [13,14] suggest that electron trapping at 2.8eV deep centres can be taking place in the near interfacial oxide network.It has initially been suggested that these electron traps above the conduction band of silicon substrate crystals are correlated with oxygen deficiencies at the near-interfacial oxide [7,8,14]. However, later experiments on nitrided SiC/SiO2 samples make this link less obvious, particularly when taking into account the fact that the density of known O-deficiency centres(E′centres,Eδ′centres) rarely approaches the density range of1013cm−2 found for the 2.8eV deep electron traps. It is more likely that in O-deficient oxides these electron traps may be efficiently filled by electron tunnelling from the substrate while their density is not determined by the O-deficiency per se.There have been suggestions that electrons can be trapped in the bulk and at surfaces of silica [15] but new models of electron trapping centres started to appear only recently. It has been suggested by Bersuker et al., who used molecular models, that electrons can be trapped by Si–O bonds in a-SiO2 leading to their weakening and thus facilitating Si–O bond dissociation [16]. Further calculations by Camellone et al. have shown that electrons can spontaneously trap in non-defective continuum random network model of a-SiO2[17]. Recent calculations have also demonstrated that the two dominant neutral paramagnetic defects at surfaces of a-SiO2, the non-bridging oxygen centre and the silicon dangling bond, are deep electron traps and can form the corresponding negatively charged defects [18]. However, these theoretical predictions have not yet been confirmed experimentally, emphasising the challenges for identifying defect centres.In this paper we demonstrate that electrons can be trapped even in an idealised a-SiO2 matrix forming deep electron states in the gap. These states are not dissimilar to electrons trapped by Ge impurities inα-quartz [19], where the key to the electron trapping is the wide opening of the O–Ge–O angle. It turns out that the precursor sites with wide enough O–Si–O angles present in a-SiO2 structure facilitate spontaneous electron trapping at these sites. We identify a structural fingerprint for these electron trapping sites and use it to estimate the concentration of these sites in a-SiO2.The calculations presented in this work make use of both classical force-fields and ab initio theory. The ReaxFF [20] force-field was used to generate 20 models of amorphous SiO2 containing 216 atoms. ReaxFF was parameterised to reproduce the properties of various silica polymorphs, small silica clusters and silicon polymorphs. It allows the calculation of silicon atoms (and oxygen atoms) in varying oxidation states based on the instantaneous geometry. This is accomplished by assigning a charge dependent atomic energy and exploiting the electronegativity equalisation principle [21]. The more extended silica structures, containing between 8,640 to 401,760 atoms were generated using the BKS potential, which is a Buckingham potential parametrised for SiO2[22]. All the simulations using ReaxFF were performed using the LAMMPS code [23] and the parameters published by Fogarty et al. [24].To generate amorphous structures, molecular dynamics simulations were run using ReaxFF and BKS to melt and quench crystalline SiO2 structures into an amorphous state in a manner similar to previous calculations [25–27]. Starting from supercells with aβ-cristobalite structure, the system was equilibrated at 300K and pressure of 1atm. Maintaining the pressure at 1atm, the temperature was linearly ramped to 5000K (for the ReaxFF simulations) or 7000K (for the BKS simulations). The temperature was maintained at 5000K/7000K for 40ps and then brought down to 0K at a rate of 8K/ps. The resulting structure was then characterised by calculating basic geometrical properties, such as bond lengths, bond angles, density and total structure factor. The peaks calculated for the total structure factor appear at 1.61Å, 2.63Å and 3.08Å, in good agreement with the experimental data [28].Density functional theory (DFT), implemented in the CP2K code [29], was used to further optimise geometries of these structures and calculate their electronic structures. The HSE functional [30] was used to describe exchange and correlation. The CP2K code uses a mixed Gaussian/plane-wave basis set [31]. The Gaussian basis set employed for all atoms was a double-ζbasis set [32] in conjunction with the GTH pseudopotential [33]. The plane wave cut-off was set to 5440eV. The exception to this was for the calculation of hyperfine interactions, where the basis sets with contraction schemes (8831/831/1), (8411/411/11) were used for silicon [34] and oxygen [35], respectively. All geometry optimisations were performed to minimise forces on atoms to within 37 pN.Amorphous silica structures obtained using the ReaxFF force-field, as described in Section 2, were further optimised at the DFT level. The electronic structure of the systems was calculated and an average band gap of 8.9eV was obtained. The lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of one of these systems is shown in Fig. 1clearly indicating that this state is not completely delocalised over the entire system, but is rather localised over the longest Si–O bonds in the system.An extra electron added to the system occupies the LUMO of the neutral system, i.e. the localised state shown in Fig. 1. The energy minimisation with respect to nuclear coordinates causes a strong structural distortion around a single SiO4 tetrahedron shown in Fig. 2. The two Si–O bonds extend from 1.63Å and 1.64Å to 1.78Å and 1.82Å, respectively. The Si–O–Si angle between these two bonds widens from 125.31° to 172.85°. The remaining two Si–O bonds extend symmetrically from 1.63Å to 1.70Å. The resulting energy gain of 3.51eV indicates that the optimised structure is very stable. The spin density plot in Fig. 2 shows the electron localised into this wide angle. As the electron localises onto the Si atom, it repels the neighbouring oxygen atoms until the O–Si–O angle becomes almost flat.The electronic structure of this system exhibits a state located below the SiO2 conduction band minimum (CBM). The average position of this state, from the 20 models, is≈3.17eV below the SiO2 CBM and ranges from 3.12eV to 3.21eV below the CBM. The electronic density of states of one of the SiO2 systems in which an electron traps is shown in Fig. 3indicating that this is a deep electron trap. This state is the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and is mostly localised on the Si atom belonging to the open O–Si–O angle. Calculation of the Mulliken charge difference between the systems where the electron is just added and after the structural relaxation shows that the Si atom trapping the electron becomes more negatively charged by 0.24eV.The calculated values of the hyperfine splitting induced by this electron trap are shown in Table 1. The strongest hyperfine interaction is with the Si atom, however, there is a significant interaction with the nearby oxygen atoms. Interestingly, some of the hyperfine interaction values are similar to those for theE′centre in amorphous silica. This is not surprising considering the strong electron localisation on one Si atom.Further analysis of the geometric properties of this electron trap in 19 other a-SiO2 samples reveals that the O–Si–O angle on which the electron traps is the widest initial O–Si–O angle in the sample. Of the 20 models containing 216 atoms of SiO2, only 4 contained sited which trapped an extra electron. The geometrical properties of amorphous silica are distributions and the extremes of these distributions make up the extremes of the electronic bands. The bottom of the a-SiO2 conduction band is determined by these extremes of geometrical properties, which lead to localised Anderson-like states forming at the edge of the conduction band [37]. To investigate this point further, we introduced perturbations in our amorphous silica sample to make two other random O–Si–O angles the widest in two separate systems. One angle in one system was changed from 120.3° to 132.1°. An extra electron added into this system localised on the Si on which the angle was changed and caused the O–Si–O angle to open to 160.68°. Another angle in a separate system was changed from 121.3° to 132.0°. When the electron was added to this system, the O–Si–O angle opened to 164.5°. These results demonstrate that a wide O–Si–O bond angle serves as a very efficient precursor to electron trapping in amorphous silica. Further calculations indicate that creating a precursor fluctuation (i.e. opening an O–Si–O angle from an average value of 120° to≈133°) requires less than 0.5eV and is within the reach of thermal fluctuations.The widest existing O–Si–O angle provides a fingerprint for estimating the concentration of such sites in a typical a-SiO2 sample by analysing its structure. By analysing the twenty models of a-SiO2 we have determined that the presence of O–Si–O angle exceeding 132°, always leads to spontaneous localisation of extra electrons in a-SiO2. This angle is at the tail of the O–Si–O angle distribution in regular SiO2 structures. We then constructed three samples of amorphous SiO2, as described in Section 2, corresponding to typical device dimensions: 1:50×25×5nm3, 2:25×12.5×2.5nm3, and 3:12.5×7×1.5nm3. These samples included (401,760), (55,296) and 8,640 atoms, respectively. We searched these models for O–Si–O angles above the critical value to estimate the concentration of pre-existing electron trapping precursor sites. Remarkably, in spite of the difference in size and preparation, the concentration of electron trapping sites in all a-SiO2 models proved to be the same and equal to≈4×1019cm-3.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Our calculations show that intrinsic Si sites with wide O–Si–O bond angles in a-SiO2 can trap electrons. These electrons localise on Si atoms with an energy≈3.2eV below the bottom of the SiO2 conduction band. The estimated concentration of these electron trapping sites is≈5×1019cm−3. We correlate these states to electron trapping properties identified experimentally in MOS devices [38]. As has been demonstrated experimentally, tunnelling from Si or SiC substrates can be used to fill electron traps which lie 2.8eV below the bottom of the SiO2 conduction band. The density of these states is much too high to be attributed to defects which we know about. These electron traps are especially pronounced in 4H–SiC/SiO2 devices however, they seem to play a role in all devices containing SiO2 as the dielectric insulating material. For instance, these traps are expected to appear below conduction band of Si nanocrystals in the case of quantum confinement [39]. The concentration of the calculated electron traps approaches the experimentally observed value for the states filled by direct tunnelling. Populating such a density of electron traps via electron injection from an electrode through the SiO2 conduction band is inefficient because it requires dissipating about 3.5eV of the relaxation energy into phonons during the trapping process. This process is much less efficient than electron transfer to an opposite electrode.