@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A new method for IVUS-based coronary artery disease risk stratification: A link between coronary & carotid ultrasound plaque burdens

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Coronary risk stratification.Machine learning to link two arteries.56 grayscale features.Coronary tissue characterization.Classification accuracy 94.95% and AUC 0.95.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Coronary artery,IVUS,Carotid disease,B-mode ultrasound,Machine learning,Risk assessment,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Interventional cardiologists have a deep interest in risk stratification prior to stenting and percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) procedures. Intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) is most commonly adapted for screening, but current tools lack the ability for risk stratification based on grayscale plaque morphology. Our hypothesis is based on the genetic makeup of the atherosclerosis disease, that there is evidence of a link between coronary atherosclerosis disease and carotid plaque built up. This novel idea is explored in this study for coronary risk assessment and its classification of patients between high risk and low risk.This paper presents a strategy for coronary risk assessment by combining the IVUS grayscale plaque morphology and carotid B-mode ultrasound carotid intima-media thickness (cIMT) – a marker of subclinical atherosclerosis. Support vector machine (SVM) learning paradigm is adapted for risk stratification, where both the learning and testing phases use tissue characteristics derived from six feature combinational spaces, which are then used by the SVM classifier with five different kernels sets. These six feature combinational spaces are designed using 56 novel feature sets. K-fold cross validation protocol with 10 trials per fold is used for optimization of best SVM-kernel and best feature combination set.IRB approved coronary IVUS and carotid B-mode ultrasound were jointly collected on 15 patients (2 days apart) via: (a) 40MHz catheter utilizing iMap (Boston Scientific, Marlborough, MA, USA) with 2865 frames per patient (42,975 frames) and (b) linear probe B-mode carotid ultrasound (Toshiba scanner, Japan). Using the above protocol, the system shows the classification accuracy of 94.95% and AUC of 0.95 using optimized feature combination. This is the first system of its kind for risk stratification as a screening tool to prevent excessive cost burden and better patients’ cardiovascular disease management, while validating our two hypotheses.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
According to the World Health Organization, cardiovascular disease (CVD) is responsible for 31% of the death toll among all the diseases. This amounts to 17.5 million deaths, coronary disease accounts for 7.4 million deaths while cerebrovascular accidents (CVA) or stroke accounts for 6.7 million lives [1]. South-East Asia region is having a speedy occurrence of CVDs in the young and middle-aged groups of the population. It is estimated that between 2000 and 2030, about 35% of all CVD deaths in India will occur among those aged 35 years to 64 years, compared with only 12% in United States and 2% in China [2].Coronary artery disease and carotid artery disease are the two kinds of CVDs fundamentally caused by atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis is a progressive process which silently and slowly narrows the arteries, putting the blood flow at risk. It damages the endothelium, primarily due to deposition of plaque in the arteries. In the most severe cases of stable plaque, it also causes considerable blockage as shown in Fig. 1(left) that suddenly ruptures and allows blood to clot in the artery. This can further cause myocardial infarction or heart attack and stroke.Different imaging modalities have been adapted for screening coronary artery such as: computer tomography (CT) [3,4], OCT [5,6], IVUS [7–11], and elastography [12,13]. Each has its own advantages and disadvantages. Even though, CT is popularly known to quantify the coronary calcium, it possesses a threat due to CT radiation risk. Among the PCI procedures, angiography is normally used. This provides instantaneously an image of stenosis. This helps the cardiologist to proceed and take interventional procedures according to the severity of the patient. However it does not give the sufficient pathological and geometrical information on plaque burden and its composition or ability to characterize the plaque risk. On the other hand IVUS has advantages: It provide real-time grayscale images of coronary vessel wall region along with plaque morphology and its structures. Due to better signal penetration it provides accurate tomography of coronary plaque burden. This helps the cardiologist in: (1) exactly where the stent should be placed in coronary artery; (2) the assessment of condition of patients after an angioplasty or stenting procedure. The American College of Cardiology and the American Heart Association (ACC/AHA) guidelines for PCI state that: the limitation of angiography is overcome by IVUS. Further, with regards to the vulnerability of plaque, IVUS has a greater predicting ability toward vulnerable plaques. It measures all the morphological features (thin-cap fibro atheroma (TCFA), lipid core size and calcification patterns) at once, unlike the other imaging modalities such as OCT [14–16].Prior to planning stenting and percutaneous coronary intervention procedures, interventional cardiologists using IVUS are very interested in knowing which kind of patients are at high risk and vulnerable to coronary plaque rupture [17,18]. Thus coronary plaque morphology has been the key driver for risk stratification. This morphology has been explored to understand different components of plaque such as fibrous, fibrolipidic, calcified and calcified-necrotic. Even though the diagnostic and screening tools are useful, but, they do not predict the severity of the disease nor they offer information about the plaque progression. In our current study, we hypothesize that the above multiple plaque components in the coronary wall constitute a risk factor. Our approach in this study is to stratify this risk via grayscale tissue characterization of IVUS coronary vessel wall when taken along the coronary artery.The genetic makeup of the plaque buildup between coronary artery and carotid artery has shown lots of interest recently (see Fig. 1(left and right)). cIMT has been the biomarker and gold standard for measuring the cardiovascular events (CVE) [19–22]. Previous studies have demonstrated the relationship between cIMT and coronary artery disease and myocardial infarction and most of the authors showed the threshold on cIMT leading to CVE [23] (cIMT>1.15mm), [24] (cIMT>1.26mm), [25] (cIMT>0.8mm) and [26]. Recently, in [27], the authors showed that cIMT>0.9mm had significantly higher SYNTAX score, an angiographic grading tool used to determine the complexity of coronary artery disease. Recently, Suri's team developed the relationships between cIMT and coronary calcium volume [28,29] and further showed correlation (CC) between automated cIMT that includes carotid bulb plaque and coronary SYNTAX score of 0.467 (P<0.0001) [30]. Thus there exists a clear relationship between the cIMT and coronary artery disease severity and its risk. We thus hypothesize that cIMT biomarker has ability to characterize the cardiovascular disease and bears a link between carotid plaque burden and coronary plaque components due to the atherosclerosis disease. Even though, there have been recent studies [31,32] that shows that IMT is not related to MI/stroke risk, but these studies use IMT measurement manually and take into consideration only few sample points proximal to the bulb (see the detailed reviews by Suri's team regarding the engineering perspective on automated IMT estimation techniques [33–37]). As a result, this cIMT marker can be adapted as a possible gold standard for identification of the coronary risk of the patient.Having discussed the two hypotheses on coronary plaque component risk and carotid risk biomarker, we can leverage to model the risk assessment system via machine learning paradigm. This machine learning based risk stratification system uses tissue characterization of the coronary vessel wall, where the tissue characteristics can be computed in real time to predict the coronary risk such as MI or determine the high risk coronary patients. Previously Nicolaides and his team attempted to characterize the carotid plaques for the assessment of stroke [38–40]. Recently, Suri's team developed a morphological-based tissue characterization for stroke risk assessment on grayscale carotid plaques and can be seen in the current literature [41–48]. Keeping this spirits, this study is the first prototype of its kind for modeling the coronary risk assessment via a machine learning paradigm that utilizes grayscale tissue characteristics of IVUS-based coronary artery wall plaque and carotid cIMT as a ground truth. This is the first cross-link between coronary artery and carotid artery. This cross-link combination is implemented by an offline-based machine learning system where 56 novel features were extracted using IVUS coronary vessel wall images and then combined with the carotid plaque risk biomarker (cIMT) binary label for training the machine learning system. This cIMT risk biomarker can be either retrospectively measured (say by the neuroradiologist or the sonographer) or automatically measured. This cIMT biomarker provides the coronary risk label of 1/0, depending upon the carotid plaque burden measured via cIMT values. The offline training coefficients were then transformed by the online test IVUS coronary vessel wall grayscale features leading to prediction of the coronary artery risk label. For accuracy of risk classification, K-fold cross-validation paradigm is adapted, ensuring a fixed number of trials per fold. The performance is evaluated and ROC and AUC are determined based on SMV-kernel adapted.The layout of the paper is as follows: Section 2 presents the demographics and data acquisition. Section 3 describes the novel machine learning approach for risk assessment. Classification and risk stratification is presented in Section 3. Three sets of experimental protocols are presented in Section 4. We have shown all the results in Section 5 followed by performance evaluation in Section 6. A discussion on the results of proposed system and its interpretation is presented in Section 7, and finally we conclude the paper in Section 8.Fifteen patients were taken from a single-center study [49] between July 2009 and December 2010, with stable angina pectoris who underwent percutaneous coronary interventions using iMap (Boston Scientific®, Marlborough, MA) IVUS examination. All the fifteen patients are male between the ages of 36 and 81. The data sets were approved by Institution Review Board and Ethics Committee and consent from patients were also taken before the study. A combination dose of clopidogrel (75mg/d) and aspirin (100mg/d) were given to the patients, prior to performing coronary intervention procedure. Intravenous unfractionated heparin was also given to these patients prior to the procedure. This would obtain a partial thromboplast in time of less than 250s.Scanner equipped with a 7.5MHz linear array transducer (Aplio XV, Aplio XG, Xario, Toshiba, Inc., Tokyo, Japan) was used for Carotid ultrasonography examinations. All the scans are performed by expert sonographer with 15 year of experience. Patients were examined by taking the transverse scans to locate the carotid arteries, and then, a longitudinal image of the anterior and posterior walls was acquired by rotating the probe by 90°. cIMT was recorded from the high resolution image, approved by the American Society of Echocardiography Carotid Intima-Media Thickness Task Force. The mean pixel resolution of the database was 0.05±0.01mm/pixel.A 40-MHz IVUS catheter (Atlantis SR Pro; Boston Scientific) was used for coronary artery data acquisition. Cross section view of coronary artery was performed by automatic pullback of the catheter, at the speed of 0.5mm per second. Catheter obtains the images of vessel area of coronary artery on every heartbeat. Since we receive QuickTime IVUS videos, the IVUS frame quality was degraded compared to the original DICOM images [50].The machine learning system designed in this study is based on the data size derived from 15 subjects. Complete coronary artery images from coronary video of each patient were taken for analysis. Each subject consisted of an average of 2100 coronary artery frames. In each subject, we have removed the starting and end frames because they may did not contain any information about plaque morphology of the vessel wall region. Therefore on an average, we had 1900 frames per subject. Further each subject had some redundancy in frames i.e., there was no significant change in plaque morphology between every 10th frame. Due to this, we further optimized the data size by taking every tenth frame in about 1900 frames per subject. This resulted on an average of 190 frames per subject, totaling to 2865 frames corresponding to 15 subjects. On the basis of the second hypothesis, stoke-risk biomarker, (cIMT>0.9mm), 9 patients out of 15 were determined as high coronary risk patients while 6 were considered as low coronary risk patients. Thus, a total of 1508 frames were high risk coronary artery patient images and 1357 frames were considered as low risk coronary artery patient images out of a total of 2865 frames. Thus, our data size constituted a set of 2865 frames and not the number of subjects, i.e., 15. Note carefully, from here on, the data size referred in this study means a collection of 2865 frames and not the source of frames i.e., 15 subjects. Representative images of coronary high risk and low risk patients are shown in Figs. 2 and 3, respectively. Region of interest was determined using Img-Tracer™, user friendly software (courtesy AtheroPoint™, Roseville, CA, USA) discussed in Section 3.1.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
