@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Numerical analysis of neck and bulge propagation in anisotropic tubes subject to axial loading and internal pressure

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Bifurcation and postbifurcation of inflated hyperelastic thick-walled cylinders are analyzed.Necking and bulging motions are captured and, in general, localized bulging occurs first.Bulging mode of bifurcation is exploited in the context of aneurysm formation.Bulging is shown to propagate either axially or radially.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Neck,Bulge,Motion,Numerical analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Bulging/necking motion in doubly fiber-reinforced incompressible nonlinearly elastic tubes subject to axial loading and internal pressure is examined using a numerical procedure based on the modified Riks method. In particular, the materials under consideration are neo-Hookean models augmented with two functions, each one of them accounting for the existence of a unidirectional reinforcement. The functions endow the material with its anisotropic character and each one is referred to as a reinforcing model. We consider two cases for the nature of the anisotropy: (i) reinforcing models that have a particular influence on the shear response of the material and (ii) reinforcing models that depend only on the stretch in the fiber direction. Bifurcation and postbifurcation results show a very different qualitative behavior for the reinforcing models. Necking and bulging motions are captured. In general, localized bulging occurs first. Nevertheless, we find necking solutions during inflation in thin-walled cylinders under axial loading and internal pressure, although both highly elongated and inflated. We show that necking, under the conditions at hand, propagates both axially and radially, i.e. it is a combination of both axial and radial stretches. Furthermore, axial stretch at the necking zone is smaller than outside the necking region. In addition, necking motion is related to a decrease of pressure beyond the onset of necking. These features are easily identified with the necking solutions found during deflation from a highly inflated tube.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The onset of diverse phenomena can be triggered at large stress (strains) under both tension and compression loading conditions. This includes, for instance, kink band formation [20] and cavitation [12] in fiber reinforced materials; localization phenomena as nucleated by cracks and other stress-raisers (see the seminal work of [21], and [11]), propagating instabilities in structures (see [22–24] and references therein), etc. Different researchers have analyzed these mechanisms combining analytical, numerical and experimental works.Lately, a lot of attention has been given to the study of different boundary value problems in the context of large (strain) deformation stability theory [1–12]. More in particular, the onset of (bulging) bifurcation as well as the (quasi-static) propagation of different instability modes in thin-walled as well as thick-walled cylinders subject to axial loading and internal pressure has been the focus of different investigations (see, [1–10]). The analysis is well understood for closed-end tubes (to be more precise, one of the ends is closed but at the other end air is forced into the tube) made of isotropic elastomers as opposed to the analysis for open ended ones. It has been found that a necessary condition for a bulge to propagate axially is that the pressure-change in volume response of a section of a tube constrained to inflate uniformly has an up–down–up behavior (see for instance [9] and [22]). The so-called Maxwell line plays an important rule to determine the propagation pressure. For some materials, the response does not recover to a second stable branch, in which case the bulge keeps growing radially. The propagation of a bulge along a long party balloon has been described in [22], among others. There too, the initiation of the localized bulge occurs with the attainment of the peak pressure. Neck propagation has also been studied under different loading conditions for isotropic nonlinearly elastic materials among others (see [22–24] and references therein). Here, we extend those analyses for closed-end tubes to open ended tubes made of anisotropic materials under more complex loading conditions using a unified approach able to capture bifurcation and postbifurcation. We show that the qualitative description of the different motions for open ended tubes mimics the results given for closed-end tubes.Bifurcation conditions for open ended tubes were studied in [1] and [5]. Among the mechanical instabilities modes of hyperelastic cylinders, the bulging one is most likely to occur prior to other instability modes (see e.g. [1]). Formation of a localized bulge is a nonlinear (bifurcation) phenomenon and cannot be described by any linear theory. The analytical procedure that gives the onset of bulging does not distinguish between a bulge and a neck. It is necessary to follow the propagation of the instability to completely characterize the bifurcation mode. Indeed, the analysis of the motion has important applications (see [4,24]). Nevertheless, analytical postcritical behavior is difficult to be determined and in the literature there exist solutions only for very simple cases and are based on complicated mathematical machinery [7,10]. Postcritical behavior requires combination of theoretical and experimental analyses as well as numerical simulation not only to predict the instability at hand but more importantly to describe qualitatively the mechanics of the nonlinear phenomena associated with this process as we show in this paper.We consider a bifurcation phenomenon (see for instance [2]) in which the zero mode is sinusoidal with axisymmetric deformations. Under these circumstances, the onset of bifurcation has previously been related to a maximum pressure. Other authors have considered bifurcations in which the zero mode is not sinusoidal (see [7]). In that case, the onset of bifurcation may not be related to a maximum pressure.In [4] a numerical procedure to analyze bulging bifurcation of inflated hyperelastic (open ended) thick-walled cylinders based on the modified Riks method [17] was developed. Our attention was focused not only on the possibility to obtain an appropriate methodology but also on the possibility to implement that numerical methodology in a commercial finite element code. For that purpose, we specifically focus on the finite element code Abaqus/Standard which has implemented the Riks procedure. Indeed, this analysis enlightens new possibilities in several ways including scientific and professional practice. In [4], it was mentioned that the procedure can also follow postbifurcation and, furthermore, axial propagation of bulging was captured. An important application of this analysis is its relation with aneurysms formation and propagation in arterial wall tissue (see also, [1] and [15] as well as references therein). Previous work with respect to the bulging instability mode has shown that propagation of this instability is associated with either radial expansion or axial propagation depending on the material model at hand (see [7,9,10,15] for instance). Here we continue our previous investigations in this area (see [1–4]) and focus now on different material models. Our goal is to capture propagation of bulges and necks. Furthermore, by looking at different (prototypes) models available in the literature, we provide a qualitative description of necking as well as radial propagation of bulging. This assesses the (nonlinear) method capability and, furthermore, completes the previous analyses developed that focused on axial propagation of bulging [4].In the last few years there have been different studies in which the macroscopic response of fiber-reinforced materials has been analyzed in the context of anisotropic nonlinear elasticity. We focus here on orthotropic materials with two preferred directions (two families of fibers) which are mechanically equivalent and are symmetrically disposed. Arterial wall tissue is modeled with this class of constitutive equation showing significant stiffening behavior. It is common to work with a strain energy that is an isotropic base material augmented by reinforcements in what is referred to as the fiber directions, one reinforcement for each family of fibers. By symmetry, the same reinforcing model is used to characterize each family of fibers. Here, we follow the same procedure and define the strain energy in terms of a base neo-Hookean augmented with reinforcing models, which includes the so-called standard reinforcing model. Several different phenomena related to fiber-reinforced materials have been captured within this framework (see for instance [11,12] and [16]).In general (in three dimensions), two independent invariants are sufficient to characterize the nature of each family of fibers. For one family, these invariants are denoted by I4 and I5 while for the other family these invariants are denoted by I6 and I7. Nevertheless, we note that I6 and I7 are the analogues of I4 and I5, respectively. The invariant I4 (I6) is related directly to the fiber stretch. The standard reinforcing model is a quadratic function that depends only on this invariant. The other invariant, I5 (I7), is also related to the fiber stretch but introduces an additional effect that relates to the behavior of the reinforcement under shear deformations. The coupling between the two families is characterized by an additional invariant denoted by I8 in which we will not focus.Here, we investigate bifurcation and postbifurcation of a cylinder under inflation and axial load made of a neo-Hookean material reinforced with two families of fibers which are mechanically equivalent and are symmetrically disposed. We consider a reinforcing model that depends on I4 (I6), taken as a quadratic model, and compare these results with those for the corresponding I5 (I7) reinforcement. Our purpose is twofold: on the one hand, to analyze the influence of the anisotropic invariants on bulging and on the other hand, to describe the mechanics underlying propagation of the instability mode. Furthermore, results show a very different behavior for the models at hand. Necking is captured for the model depending on I5 (I7) reinforcement. It is shown that the axial stretch in the necking zone is smaller than the one outside the necking area. In addition, it is shown that motion of necking is a combination of both axial propagation and radial propagation. These are new results, although expected. On the other hand, axial stretch in the bulge zone is greater than outside the bulge zone for both axial and radial propagation of bulging. Indeed these simulations have to guide appropriate theoretical analyses able to describe these mechanisms.In Section 2 we introduce the basic equations including the bulging criterion. Analytical results with respect to the onset of bifurcation are given in Section 3. Numerical analysis of bifurcation and postbifurcation is given in Section 4. Necking and bulging motions are captured and their features are highlighted. Finally, main conclusions are given in Section 5.We consider a circular thin wall cylindrical membrane of radius R and thickness H in the reference configuration. The length of the cylinder is L and may be finite or infinite (L≫R). The cylinder is made of an anisotropic nonlinearly elastic material. In the context of nonlinear elasticity constitutive equations are given in terms of strain-energy functions that depend on certain deformation invariants. For a single family of fibers the independent invariants are, in the case of an incompressible material,(1)I1=trC,I2=tr(C−1),I4=M·(CM),I5=M·(C2M),whereC=FTFis the right Cauchy–Green deformation tensor, F is the deformation gradient,Tsignifies transpose, tr denotes the trace of a second-order tensor and M is a unit vector defined in the reference configuration that identifies the direction of fiber reinforcement. When there are two families of fibers, with the second family having directionM′in the reference configuration, then three additional invariants arise. These are(2)I6=M′·(CM′),I7=M′·(C2M′),I¯8=(M·M′)[M·(CM′)]=(M·M′)I8.Note that I6 and I7 are the analogues of I4 and I5, respectively, forM′, whileI¯8introduces a coupling between the two families (see [13]).The cylinder is first extended and then inflated so that prior to bifurcation it remains as a circular cylinder. Referred to cylindrical coordinates, the associated deformation gradient tensorFfor an incompressible material has componentsdiag(λθ−1λz−1,λθ,λz),whereλθ=r/R>0is the azimuthal principal stretch and λzis the axial stretch, so thatℓ=λzL. Because of the assumed incompressibility, the principal radial stretch isλr=λθ−1λz−1. Furthermore, the material is described with a strain energy functionW=W(λθ−1λz−1,λθ,λz). In this description we include isotropic materials as well as orthotropic materials with the axes of orthotropy coinciding with the principal axes of stress. In the latter case, one could think of a material with two preferred directions which are mechanically equivalent and are symmetrically disposed. For the tube at hand, the preferred directionsMandM′are disposed helically and symmetrically at an angle φ with respect to the axis of the cylinder. The fiberM, for instance, deforms according tom=FM. Hence,mgives the fiber deformed direction.If the deformed configuration maintains a circular cylindrical shape (with radius r, thickness h and length l) then(3)σθθ=λθ∂W^∂λθandσzz=λz∂W^∂λz,where we have introduced the notationW^(λθ,λz)=W(λθ−1λz−1,λθ,λz). The equilibrium equations for the membrane give the inflating pressure in the form(4)p=HW^θRλθλz,whereW^θdenotes∂W^/∂λθ; similarly, we will use the notationW^z,W^θθ, etc.The bulging/necking condition for a given material model is (see [1,5])(5)f(W^,λθ,λz,L/R)=λz2W^zz(λθ2W^θθ−λθW^θ)−(λθλzW^θz−λθW^θ)2+(2πRL)2λθ2λzW^zW^zz=0.The latter condition does not distinguish between a bulge and a neck, i.e. the bifurcation mode is characterized as bulging but it is not known, a priori, whether a neck or a bulge will develop.In this paper we consider the strain energy given by(6)W(I1,I4,I6)=c(I1−3)+g2∑i=4,6(Ii−1)2where c and g are the material constants and the quadratic standard reinforcing modelF(I4)=12(I4−1)2has been introduced. This reinforcing model depends only on the stretch in the fiber direction [14]. The standard reinforcing function is a prototype that was introduced in the 90s and that has been widely used by several authors to model qualitative mechanical behavior of fiber reinforced materials (see [11,12] and [16]). Nevertheless, more recently, micromechanics-based approaches that enable one to account for the behaviors of the individual constituents have been developed to obtain macromechanical strain energies for composite materials that have also the features of augmented isotropic functions with the so-called standard reinforcing model (see [18] for one fiber reinforcement and [19] for two families of fibers, as well as references therein). The fiber stretch invariants usingF=diag(λθ−1λz−1,λθ,λz), (1)3 and (2)1 are(7)I4=I6=λz2cos2φ+λθ2sin2φ.In addition, we also consider the strain energy function:(8)W(I1,I5,I7)=c(I1−3)+g2∑i=5,7(Ii−1)2,which includes the counterpart of the standard reinforcing model with respect of I5 (I7), i.e.G(I5)=12(I5−1)2. This reinforcing model has a particular influence on the shear response of the material (see [11,14] and [16]). The value of the invariants usingF=diag(λθ−1λz−1,λθ,λz), and the expression of I5 shown in (1) as well as the expression of I7 given in (2) are(9)I5=I7=λz4cos2φ+λθ4sin2φ.Here, our purpose is to investigate and compare the behavior of tubes made of either material model (6) or (8) subject to axial loading and internal pressure with regard to bulging/necking motion.In this section we completely characterize the behavior of the two models at hand with respect to the onset of bulging/necking. This will guide our numerical analysis of postbifurcation in Section 4.We focus first on the material model (6). Expanding the bulging condition (5) using (6) we find that asymptotic expressions for the associatedλθin the limit asλz→∞is given by−λθ8g2/16. It follows that for anyg>0the bulging instability criterion is satisfied for valuesλθ≥1when the cylinder is elongated with an axial stretchλz≥1. More specifically, the bulging condition (5) with the assumption of infinite length, i.e. whenL/R→∞can be written as(10)f=−116g2λθ8+34g2λz2λθ6+4516g2λz4λθ4+(12g2−gc)λθ6+(4gc−3g2)λz2λθ4+(4gc−g2−4c2)λθ4−3gc+6gcλθ2λz2+54gcλz2λθ2+16c2−24gcλθ2+24c2−12gcλz2+12c2λz4λθ4.Furthermore, by our previous argument, we can determine the value of the constant α such that the critical hoop stretch is αλzasλz→∞. Substituting in (10) it is sufficient to consider the higher order terms in λz, in particular, the first three terms, so that one can write(11)−116g2α8λz8+34g2α6λz8+4516g2α4λz8=0,from which one obtainsα=15(apart from the non-physical solutionsα≤0). Whence, and sincem=FM, the angle of the deformed fibers with respect to the axis of the tube for highly axially stretched cylinders tends to(12)tan−1(15tanφ)at the onset of bulging bifurcation.To show some numerical results we consider (6) withg=0.01candφ=30°. In Fig. 1we display the bifurcation curves in theλz−λθplane for a tube with (i) L/R=6 (solid line) and with (ii) L/R=12 (dashed curve). Values of pressure associated with the onset of the instability are shown in Fig. 2. We note, as expected, that the longer the length of the cylinder, the smaller the values of the hoop stretch and the pressure associated with the onset of bifurcation. These results are not highly modified for other values of g such asg=0.001c, although for greater values bifurcation can be avoided.The angle of the fibers associated with bifurcation is shown in Fig. 3. According to (12) the angle tends totan−1(15tan30°)=65.9°for infinitely long tubes asλz→∞. Convergence to this value is slow as it is shown in the figure. For instance, whenL/R=12one obtains an angle of 64.4° forλz=20.We now turn to the analysis of the resistance with respect to bulging generated by the reinforcing modelG(I5)in comparison with that generated by the modelF(I4). We follow in a parallel way the analysis developed previously.Expanding the bulging condition (5) using (8) we find that asymptotic expressions for the associatedλθin the limit asλz→∞is given by−λθ16g2/4. It follows, as it has been obtained for (6), that for anyg>0the bulging instability criterion is satisfied for valuesλθ≥1when the cylinder is elongated with an axial stretchλz≥1. The bulging condition (5) with the assumption of infinite length can be written as(13)f=(−14g2λθ16+18g2λz4λθ12+3514g2λz8λθ8+1892g2λz12λθ4)+2g2λθ12−90g2λz4λθ8−180g2λz8λθ4−2g2λθ10+6gcλz2λθ8+18gcλz4λθ6+6gcλz6λθ4−4g2λθ8+72g2λz4λθ4+8gcλθ6−8gcλz2λθ4−4c2λθ4+24gcλθ6λz2+252gcλz6λθ2−48gcλθ2λz2−144gcλz2λθ2+24c2λz2+16c2λθ2+12c2λz4λθ4.By the same argument given in Section 3.1, it is easy to show that the angle of the fibers at bifurcation for highly stretched cylinders tends totan−1(αtanφ). Now, taking the higher order terms in (13), it yields that150+66814/2.For the particular case ofφ=30°this implies an angle at bifurcation of≈59.7°.Forg=0.001candφ=30°bulging curves are shown in Figs. 4 and 5. Plots are provided for (8) in Figs. 4 and 5 which are corresponding to Figs. 1 and 2, respectively. Now, jumps appear in the plots. This is fully explained by looking at the values of the bulging criterion f vsλθfor fixed values of λz. In Fig. 6, values of f vsλθare shown forλz≈1.55andL/R=6. In this plot, it is shown that f is tangent to the abscissa axis. This feature gives the jump in Figs. 4 and 5. Similar jumps were captured in Figs. 7 and 8 of [2]. Nevertheless, since that paper provided an analysis to capture just the bifurcation, that jump could not be interpreted. Indeed, we show later here that for values of the axial stretch greater than the one associated with the jump the bifurcation mode changes from bulging to necking. More in particular, for values of the axial stretch less than the one associated with the jump, the mode of bifurcation has been found to be bulging. On the other hand, for values of the axial stretch greater than the one associated with the jump, the mode of bifurcation is either necking or bulging.For completeness, values of I5 (I7) against λzassociated with the onset of the bulging mode are given in Fig. 7. At last, the angle of the fibers at bifurcation is shown in Fig. 8. The angle tends to be≈59.7°for an infinitely long cylinder asλz→∞. Convergence is much faster in this case than for the model with invariants I4 and I6 because the order of the stretches with the higher order terms in the bulging criterion is now greater (16 for (8) as opposed to 8 for (6)).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Bulging/necking motion in doubly fiber-reinforced incompressible nonlinearly elastic tubes subject to axial loading and internal pressure has been examined. The numerical methodology has been implemented in a commercial finite element code, which clearly promotes the use of non-linear methods of design in modern mechanical sciences. The materials under consideration are neo-Hookean models augmented with two functions, each one of them accounting for the existence of a unidirectional reinforcement. These are prototypes that are useful to obtain qualitative descriptions of the bifurcation modes. We have considered two cases for the nature of the anisotropy: (i) reinforcing models that have a particular influence on the shear response of the material (model with I5 and I7) and (ii) reinforcing models that depend only on the stretch in the fiber direction (model with I4 and I6). Bifurcation and postbifurcation results show a very different qualitative behavior for the reinforcing models. Radial propagation of bulging has been captured for both models. Furthermore, in general, localized bulging occurs first. Nevertheless, necking solutions have been found for the material with I5 and I7 during inflation. It has been shown that necking propagates both axially and radially. Furthermore, axial stretch at the necking zone is smaller than outside the necking region. In addition, necking motion is related to a decrease of pressure beyond the onset of necking. These features are identified with the necking solutions found during deflation from a highly inflated tube.Aneurysms formation and propagation is an area in which a lot of effort needs to be done. It is clear that many factors affect these mechanisms. Highly accurate methods to characterize the mechanical response of biological tissues are required in modern analyses and modeling. Arterial soft tissue clearly is a complicated material that in situ is under non-homogeneous deformations. We have shown here that the instability mode and its propagation is quite sensitive to changes associated with both the material and the deformation. Physiological effects can take place within the body due to changes in deformation (among others). These changes, in addition, can trigger different modes of bifurcation along the artery that, in turn, can cause the sudden death of a patient. Dataset for aneurysm histopathology is a priority to evaluate the mechanics of aneurysm (see for instance [25] and references therein).The computational capabilities of the methodology developed give a lot of insight in the problem at hand. Furthermore, our presentation is not only novel but also opens a huge variety of applications in both mechanical sciences and professional practice. Suffice it to say that the analytical solution procedure that gives the onset of bulging bifurcation for isotropic materials requires the solution of a homogeneous fourth order ordinary differential equation with four second order boundary conditions (see [6]). Clearly, the numerical analysis shown here is of great interest for professional practice in modern engineering.