@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An approach on identification of equivalent properties of honeycomb core using experimental modal data

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An approach on determining the equivalent parameters of honeycomb core is proposed.Physical significances analysis of the core is necessary before identification.Equivalent parameters of the core can be accurately and efficiently predicted.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Honeycomb core,Equivalent elastic properties,Analytical–experimental,Dynamic characteristics,Parameter identification,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The honeycomb sandwich composite material has been widely applied in engineering due to its excellent mechanical performance. The elastic properties of honeycomb core is of crucial importance in efficient mechanical analysis. An approach on determining the equivalent elastic modulus of honeycomb core using experimental modal data is proposed in this paper. Based on analytically predicted elastic constants of the pure core, the initial finite element model of a honeycomb panel is constructed using a three-layer sandwich theory; according to errors that exist in analytically estimated equivalent parameters and the sensitivity analysis of modal frequencies with respect to system parameters, the out-of-plane shear moduli Gcxzand Gcyzare selected to be determined. Consequently, the two parameters are determined by minimizing an objective function which is formulated with vibration test and numerical modal data. Comparative investigations are conducted to illustrate that the initial values of the parameters with physical significance play an important role in the identification procedure. The presented method can provide accurate and reliable predictions of material constitutive parameters of honeycomb core.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Honeycomb sandwich composites are widely used in lightweight structures owing to their high strength and stiffness-to-mass ratio [1]. The honeycomb core principally carries the shear loads, the performance of which markedly affects the mechanical behavior of the composite. For reasons of numerical efficiency, the mechanical analysis of honeycomb sandwich panels during the design process is performed in terms of effective properties rather than by means of a direct computational model. Hence the cellular core is replaced by a quasi-homogeneous medium, and the sandwich structure can be analyzed by adopting sandwich theory. Predicting the elastic properties of honeycomb cores is of growing interest [2,3].The elastic properties of the homogeneous medium, by which the sandwich core is replaced in the mechanical analysis, can be determined by either experimental, analytical, numerical methods or a hybrid method which integrates any two of the previously mentioned three approaches.Experimental methods on testing the elastic properties of honeycomb cores has been developed. Young׳s moduli in the thickness direction were determined by compression tests [4]. Shear characterization of sandwich cores was carried out based on a sandwich beam subjected to Three Point Bending (TPB) [5], out-of-plane shear modulus was obtained according to a recently proposed methodology with TPB experiments, and Cunningham et al. [6] proposed a new measurement technique for estimating the shear strain in a totally enclosed core. Schwingshackl et al. [7] proposed a method for obtaining out-of-plane shear modulus by using a simple dynamic technique with four accelerometers. These methods can provide accurate material constitutive parameters; however, their disadvantages are also truly remarkable in terms of the cost of specimen fabrication and difficulties of test handling.In the past decades, many researchers have studied the equivalent stiffness of honeycomb cores analytically. The phenomenon of honeycomb skin effect was first assessed by Kelsey et al. [8]; the lower limit and the upper limit of the transverse shear stiffness of hexagonal honeycomb core were investigated. The cell wall is assumed to be a Timoshenko beam; neglecting shear deformation and axial extension/compression of the beams, the in-plane modulus and Poisson׳s ratio are determined by Gibson et al. [9]. An extension of earlier work has been developed by Masters and Evans [10] to derive expressions of elastic parameters based on the deformation of the honeycomb cores. In consideration of core face sheet constraints, Hohe and Becker [11] homogenized the microstructure to determine all elastic tensors and general honeycomb cores. Gibson׳s formulas are modified by Fu and Yin [12] through considering the extension and compression of the cell wall. The adhesive layer of honeycomb composites is taken into account by Jiang et al. [13] and the expressions of equivalent elasticity are derived. The so called analytical or theoretical method has been investigated abundantly for providing sophisticated equivalent elastic constants.Numerical method can avoid complicated derivations and extensive experiments, and is an efficient alternative mean for acquiring the orthotropic mechanical properties. A variety of methods has been developed for homogenization of honeycomb sandwich materials. The accuracy of nine different computational models is assessed by Burton and Noor [14] based on two-dimensional shell theories. Different detailed finite element models of a sandwich panel with the actual honeycomb core geometry are developed by Aydincak and Kayran [15], and comparative investigations are undertaken to evaluate the existing equivalent continuum models of honeycomb cores. A multi-scale finite element method and post-processing technique for considering the elastic mechanical problems of a honeycomb structure are presented by Liu et al. [16]. A homogenization method is introduced by Wang et al. [17] for linear elastic problems to analyze the complicated distribution of stresses and strains in the solid areas neighboring the cell edges due to the stress concentration. Because of the advantages of numerical method, finite element model of a Representative Volume Element (RVE) of more complicated honeycomb sandwich cores such as foam-filled [18,19] and corrugated cores [20] can be constructed to predict the equivalent elastic modulus.Idealization assumptions have to be made prior to homogenizing unit cell of the honeycomb core by the analytical and numerical methods, so that errors are inevitably introduced into the equivalent elastic parameters.Hybrid methods are verified more efficient to determine the elastic properties of the honeycomb cores. Shi and Tong [21] evaluated the analytical equivalent transverse shear modulus of a hexagonal honeycomb core by the finite element method using a three-dimensional model of the unit cell. The effective mechanical behavior of regular honeycomb core was studied by analytical means and correlated with experimental results [22]. Modal data can well reflect macro-mechanical properties of the honeycomb sandwich composites and can be measured by vibration test efficiently. Based on minimization of the discrepancies between the natural frequencies of finite element models with adjustable elastic properties and the corresponding experimental modal data, sophisticated identification techniques have been developed during the last two decades for estimating accurately the elastic properties of composite materials. Saito et al. [23] treated an aluminum honeycomb sandwich panel as an orthotropic Timoshenko beam and identified the corresponding parameters by solving the least squares problems by a non-linear optimization method. A mixed numerical–experimental characterization method is proposed by Schwaar et al. [24] based on minimizing the discrepancies between modal quantities computed with a highly accurate orthotropic shell FE model with adjustable elastic properties and the corresponding experimental data measured with a precise measurement setup formed by a scanning laser vibrometer with loudspeaker excitation. However, up to now, limited attention has been focused towards adopting analytical or numerical method to supply initial values of parameters in the procedure of identifying equivalent elastic constants.The initial value of parameters is of crucial importance in parameter identification problems, and a hybrid analytical–experimental approach on predicting equivalent elastic modulus of honeycomb core is proposed in this paper. The method consists in (1) determining the initial value of equivalent elastic parameters by using an analytical method; (2) according to the initial values obtained in step (1), discretizing the elasto-dynamic problem by using the finite element method for a honeycomb sandwich composite panel; (3) selecting the sensitive and inaccurate parameters by analyzing the internal architecture and the relative sensitivity analysis of natural frequencies with respect to equivalent parameters; (4) transforming the parameter identification into an optimization problem with constraints; and (5) estimating the parameters by minimizing the objective function of vibration test and numerical modal data. Then, the inaccurate elastic constants of the honeycomb core will be accurately and efficiently determined.In conventional sandwich analysis, the three-layer sandwich theory requires equivalent properties of a pure core and investigation on the equivalent homogenization of the unit cell is of primary importance.The unit cell of general cellular structure is shown inFig. 1. Each cell wall is assumed to be a Timoshenko beam of thickness t, length l (h), and Young׳s modulus Es; neglecting shear deformation and the axial extension or compression of the beams, the in-plane equivalent elastic properties are obtained through static analysis [1,12]. Particularly for the regular hexagon cells (θ=30° and h=l)(1)Ecx=Ecy=43(tl)3Es(2)Gcxy=32(tl)3Eswhere Ecx, Ecyare the in-plane equivalent Young׳s moduli, and Gcxyis the shear modulus. The out-of-plane modulus Eczis obtained by utilizing extension or compression stiffness equivalence in the z direction:(3)Ecz=23tlEsGcxzand Gcyzare the material parameters with maximum influence on the dynamic behavior, exact analytical expressions of which are unavailable due to the complexity of stress distribution in the sheared honeycomb core. The principles of minimum potential energy and minimum complementary energy are used for estimating the lower and upper bounds of the out-of-plane shear modulus [8], and for convenience in engineering applications a correction factor γ is introduced:(4)Gcxz=γ3tlGs(5)Gcyz=3γ2tlGswhere Gsis the shear moduli of the core material; the theoretical value of γ is 1, which is needed to be modified in practical engineering.Schwingshackl et al. [7] reviewed 15 published sets of analytical and experimental methods; it was found that Poisson׳s ratios νxy, νxz, and νyzrange from 0 to 1, this demonstrating a strong variability as regards their true values, but the Poisson׳s ratios have no effect on dynamic response of the honeycomb sandwich structure. The following values for Poisson׳s ratios of Gibson and Ashby [1] are selected:(6)vxy=1,vxz=vyz=0For analyzing dynamical characteristics of the honeycomb sandwich composite, the equivalent density of the cell in Fig. 1 is needed and easily shown to be(7)ρeq=833tlρsThe traditional model updating method is adopted for determining elastic modulus of honeycomb core, the essence of which is an optimization problem to minimize the discrepancies between the measured and predicted modal data. The objective function and the constraint is defined as(8){minJ(p)=εTWε=∥W1/2(zm−za(p))∥22s.t.p1≤p≤p2wherep∈ℝNis a vector of the selected parameters to be determined, zmandza(p)∈ℝnare, respectively, the experimental and analytical modal parameters, ε is the error of numerical modal data, W is a diagonal weighting matrix representing the relative weight of each error, and the superscript T denotes the matrix transpose. It is necessary to ensure that the measured and numerical data are paired in terms of the same mode, which can be achieved by carrying out a modal correlation using the modal assurance criterion (MAC) [25,26]. If a reasonable value pAexists in the domain of definition [p1,p2] for minimizing the objective function, then pAis the accurate solution of parameter identification. Using a gradient-based approach to solve the optimization problem Eq. (8), the problem at the jth iteration step is expressed as(9)W1/2(zm−zja)=Sj(pj+1−pj)where Sj=W1/2∂zaj/∂pjis the weighted sensitivity matrix of modal data with respect to structural parameters. When the experimental and numerical modal data (zmand zaj) are eigenvalues which are defined as the squares of the system natural frequencies, λj=ωj2 (zj—λj), the term ∂zaj/∂pjin the weighted sensitivity matrix may be determined by the following expression:(10)∂zja∂pj=ΦjT(∂K(pj)∂pj−zj∂M(pj)∂pj)ΦjwhereM,K∈ℝs×sare the mass and stiffness matrices respectively; Φjis the mode shape matrix at the jth step; and s is the number of Degrees Of Freedom (DOFs) of the model. It is available to obtain numerical approximations of the sensitivity matrix by the simple procedure of perturbing the parameters in turn by a suitably small quantity and determining numerically the change in the predicted eigenvalues.The iteration format of parameters to be identified is obtained:(11)pj+1=pj+(SjTSj)−1SjTW1/2(zm−zja)or(12)pj+1=pj+Gj(zm−zja)whereGj=(SjTSj)−1SjTW1/2is a transformation matrix, the weighted pseudo-inverse of the sensitivity matrix Sj, which is often ill-conditioned; under this condition, direct pseudo-inverse solution to Eq. (9) may yield poor estimation. In this case, the regularization method is applied to obtain stable solutions, and the transformation matrix is expressed as(13)Gj=(SjTSj+αI)−1SjTW1/2in which α is the regularization parameter that locates the corner of the L-curve obtained by plotting the norms∥pj+1−pj∥vs∥Sj(pj+1−pj)−W1/2(zm−zja)∥as α varies [27].The prediction of equivalent elastic parameters of the honeycomb core is modified by using the model updating method whose implementation procedure, shown inFig. 2, can be illustrated as follows:(1)initialize j=0, construct an initial finite element model of the honeycomb sandwich composite panel using the analytical equivalent elastic modulus of the core;select the elastic parameters p through relative sensitivity analysis using the initial finite element model;pair the experimental and numerical modal shapes using modal correlation analysis, calculate the modal assurance criterion (MAC) to achieve this;calculate the residual zm−zajbetween the experimental and numerical modal data, solve the iteration format Eq. (9), obtain the variation pj+1−pj;if the variables pjare converged, go to step (6); otherwise set j=j+1, go to step (2); the stop criterion is ‖pj+1−pj‖≤10−6;stop.The presented method is investigated on a honeycomb sandwich panel with experimental modal data. Geometric dimensions of the panel and the unit core are shown inFig. 3. The face sheet and the core are made of an aluminum alloy, the material properties of which are shown inTable 1. Elastic properties identification of the honeycomb core is conducted according to the procedure introduced in Section 2.For the purpose of measuring the dynamic characteristics of the honeycomb sandwich composite panel, an impact vibration testing is performed with the sample frequency of 2000Hz. The panel is hanged with soft ropes to simulate the Free–Free boundary condition for getting rid of boundary effects and the presence of any other errors. Arrangement of the accelerometer and excitation points is shown inFig. 4; 121 excitation points are arranged at the intersection point of the horizontal and vertical lines, and the accelerometer is located near the corner of the panel. Consequently, the modal frequencies and mode shapes of the honeycomb sandwich panel are obtained.In this study, initial finite element model of the honeycomb sandwich panel is constructed using Nastran, and the named SVS (Shell–Volume–Shell) model comprises three separate parts: two face sheets which are modeled using shell elements, and one honeycomb core which is homogenized to orthotropic volume can be modeled with solid elements. the full finite element model consisted of 726 nodes and 700 elements; the solid elements and the shell elements are connected by multiple point connections for avoiding DOFs mismatch of the interfacial nodes. The elastic properties of the orthotropic volume used for representing the core are derived from Eqs. (1)–(5), and shown inTable 2; the equivalent density is calculated by Eq. (7), ρeq=48.54kg/m3.InTable 3 the experimental data compared with the numerical modal frequencies of initial finite element model are presented. The error of each order of modal frequencies is calculated by(14)errori=fia−fimfim×100%where the subscript i is the order of modal frequency. And the mean error of N frequencies is defined as(15)Meanerror=∑i=1Nabs(errori)/NThe maximum error is 9.21%, and the mean error is 6.17%; results show that the equivalent elastic properties are not so accurate for reflecting the macro-mechanical characteristic of the honeycomb core. Comparison of the first four main mode shapes obtained from FE analysis with test data is shown inFig. 5. It is clearly seen that good mode shapes of the panel are extracted by impact vibration test and the experimental and numerical shapes are paired well from the visual inspection. However the equivalent elastic parameters predicted by analytical method can be used as an efficient initial value for the parameter identification, which will lead to more precise parameters and a more sophisticated numerical model of the panel.Parameter selection is a crucial step in parameter identification through model updating [28,29], and considerable mechanical insight of the structure is always needed for selecting proper parameters to be identified in order to ensure not only correlations between experimental and numerical modal data but also physical significance of the parameters.Generally, the honeycomb core is not strictly regular hexagon due to not very precise manufacturing; this will introduce errors into the analytical predictions of the equivalent properties; particularly the out-of-plane shear modulus is more susceptible to the irregular form; in addition, the effects of the connection between face sheet and the honeycomb core are not considered in previously introduced analytical method; therefore, the imprecise predictions of the two shear modulus are inevitable.Relative sensitivity analysis is an additional method for selecting parameters which has an advantage that it can avoid the influence of the quantity or unit used for parameters. This feature makes comparison of sensitivities for different parameter types available and effective. Relative sensitivity is defined as follows:(16)Sr=∂fi∂pjpjin which fiis the ith order of modal frequency, and pjis the jth element of the elastic parameter vector p. For the honeycomb core, the orthotropic material property contains nine independent elements, p=(E11, E22, E33, G12, G23, G31, μ12, μ23, μ31)T; consequently, ∂fi/∂pjis the sensitivity of ith order frequency with respect to jth element of vector p. The partial derivative ∂fi/∂pjcannot be calculated directly but using a chain rule(17)∂fi∂pj=∑m=16∑n=16∂fi∂Cmn∂Cmn∂pjwhere Cmnis element of the material stiffness matrix in mth row and nth column; ∂fi/∂Cmncan be calculated using the SOL200 solver in Nastran [30], which is an effective optimization module in the famous commercial finite element analysis code. Elements of the stiffness matrix for an orthotropic material are given via(18)C11=1−μ23μ32E22E33Δ,C12=μ12+μ13μ32E11E33ΔC22=1−μ13μ31E11E33Δ,C23=μ23+μ21μ13E11E22ΔC33=1−μ12μ21E11E22Δ,C31=μ31+μ12μ32E22E33ΔC44=G12,C55=G23,C66=G31in which(19)Δ=1E11E22E33|1−μ21−μ31−μ121−μ32−μ13−μ231|Hence, the stiffness matrix is function of the equivalent elastic parameters.Relative sensitivity matrix of the first four modal frequencies with respect to (w.r.t.) the seven equivalent parameters is calculated by using Eq. (16), and the result is shown inTable 4; three elastic parameters, the out-of-plane shear modulus Gcyz, Gcxzand the density ρeq, have greater impact on the dynamical characteristics. It is necessary to mention that the density of the honeycomb core is always supposed to be accurately predicted, so the shear moduli are selected to be determined.The measured data are obtained by using impact vibration test, which is accurate enough for measuring the dynamical characteristics of a panel. In order to ensure that the optimization problem has a unique solution and the solution has physical significance, the number of the equations should be greater than or equal to the number of the unknown parameters; this will result in over-determined equations; the first four measured natural frequencies were used in the parameter identification. In the identification procedure the weighting matrix is W=[diag(zm)]−2, for equalizing the effect of magnitude of each residual [25]; the regularization parameter is α=0, because the governing equation of uncertain parameter identification is well-posed. The shear moduli are positively correlated with the modal frequencies, and each order of the experimental frequencies is lower than corresponding order of the numerical results; even more, the shear performances in reality are weaker than the analytical values. Hence, the upper and lower bounds of the parameters to be identified are defined as follows:(20)0<Gcxz≤172.2MPa0<Gcyz≤258.3MPaAfter parameter identification by using the proposed approach, convergence of the out-of-plane shear modulus is illustrated inFig. 6: (a) is the iteration of parameter variations and (b) is the iteration of parameter values. Comparison of parameter values of the shear modulus between before and after identification is shown inTable 5. The ratio of parameter variation is calculated by(21)Ratio=pj−p0p0×100%where pjand p0 are respectively the identified and initial value of parameters. Results indicate that parameters (Gcxzand Gcyz) are converged after the eighth step of the iteration; after identification the ratio of parameter variations are respectively 44.8% and 58.8%, and the correction factor γ of the shear modulus is obtained. Convergence of the first four modal frequencies of the panel is shown inFig. 7. Comparison between experimental modal frequencies and identified results is presented inTable 6. The maximum error of the frequencies is no more than 4%, and the mean value of errors is reduced to 1.703%.In order to further explain that the initial values of the parameters are of crucial importance in the identification procedure, comparative investigations are conducted through two cases.Case I: Initial values of the shear modulus are assumed.Assume that the equivalent parameters of the honeycomb core are determined by the analytical method besides the out-of-plane shear modulus, and the initial guess values Gcxz=10MPa, Gcxz=1GPa, constraints for which are defined as(22)0<Gcxz≤210MPa0<Gcyz≤9GPawhich are large constraint conditions relevant to the initial guess values.After nearly 80 steps of iteration, the shear moduli converge; the convergence curve is shown inFig. 8, convergence of the first four modal frequencies is illustrated inFig. 9, identified results compared with the initial guess values are presented inTable 7, and comparison between experimental and identified modal frequencies is indicated inTable 8. It can be seen that the error of the first order frequency is even less than the identified results of Section 3.2.2, but the mean error is slightly larger and more steps are needed. Results show that, supposing known which parameters of the honeycomb core are inaccurate in advance, after identification, the parameters can converge close to the accurate values, even when the initial values of the parameters have large errors and extensive ranges of various parameter are defined.Case II: Three equivalent parameters are unknown.In this case, comparative study of parameter identification with different constraints is conducted assuming that three equivalent parameters are unknown. The initial parameters and the constraint conditions of the shear modulus are defined to be the same as those of the previous case. Another equivalent parameter, the density ρeq, is taken into account for making clear the necessity of determining the initial value of parameters by analytical method before parameter identification, the initial value of which is 20kg/m3; the upper and lower bounds of density are defined in two different constraint conditions as follows:(23)A:5kg/m3≤ρeq≤80kg/m3B:20kg/m3≤ρeq≤80kg/m3Under the two different constraint conditions, the parameter identification is performed. Comparison of convergence of the parameter variations is shown inFig. 10, and the initial and the identified values of three unknown parameters are presented inTable 9. The corresponding comparisons of convergence of the modal data, the experimental and the numerical modal frequencies, are respectively illustrated inFig. 11 andTable 10. When the equivalent density of the core is restrained to constraint condition A, parameters cannot converge to the accurate value and large error to the modal analysis results; on the contrary if the value of density varies in the relative narrow domain of constraint condition B, after identification, the results approximate to the true value and the numerical modal frequencies are calculated with evidently higher accuracy. It can be seen that, on increasing the number of parameters, the varying domains of parameters to be determined get more important to the identification problem, and the constraint conditions strongly depend on understanding the physical significance of parameters.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
An approach for predicting equivalent material constitutive parameters of honeycomb core has been proposed in this paper. The dynamical characteristics of a honeycomb sandwich composite panel linked with an initial numerical model using analytically predicted elasticity of the core are considered in this method. Inaccurate and sensitive parameters, out-of-plane shear moduli Gcxzand Gcyz, are selected to be determined through the minimization of an objective function constructed with experimental and numerical modal data. The following conclusions on the proposed method can be drawn:(1)the initial values of parameters play an important role in identifying the equivalent elastic constants of honeycomb core, and physical significances of the parameters should be considered by using analytical method before parameter identification;if the parameters of the honeycomb core are known to be inaccurate in advance, after identification, the presented method can provide accurate and efficient predictions of material constitutive parameters, even when large errors exist in the initial value of the parameters;when the number of the unknown factors increases, in order to improve the accuracy of the proposed method, the constraint conditions of parameters should be defined properly which strongly depends on the theoretical analysis of the core; otherwise, the identification results may fail to converge.