@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Potential error factors in 1D beam FE modeling for the early stage vehicle design

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Systematic study of the error factors in 1D beam concept modeling for the vehicle structure.Research on beam spot welds, flanges and discontinuities, cross-section geometry and deformations.Introduction of a novel cross-section deformation measure.Derivation of guidelines on good modeling practices to improve the concept stage.Successful application of the methodology to a couple of industrial case-studies.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Concept FE model,1D beam,Vehicle structure,Modeling error,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
When creating simplified models of the vehicle structure, 1D beam elements are normally used to obtain a small-sized and parametric representation of all beam-like parts. Despite its undoubted advantages, such an approach can introduce certain modeling errors. They are influenced by various factors such as cross-section deformations, spot welds, flanges, discontinuities and beam cross-section geometry. The aim of this paper is to perform a systematic study of these error factors and their potential impact on the model accuracy. Consequently, guidelines are given on good practices for overcoming the intrinsic limitations of 1D beam concept modeling techniques. For this purpose six different beam structures with idealized geometry are studied. Furthermore, three beam-like parts of a vehicle body are also investigated. The derived good modeling practices are applied to a couple of industrial case-studies, both at car body level. By giving a better insight of the potential pitfalls and their possible solutions, 1D beam concept modeling can become more accurate and reliable.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The automotive virtual prototyping process is becoming more and more demanding in terms of time, costs and product quality. Vehicle concept modeling is increasingly recognized as an important part of the design chain. It is used to identify and apply modifications already in the early design stages, leading to shorter development time, lower cost and better products. Thus various concept modeling methodologies are being actively developed. The methods based on concept Finite Element (FE) equivalent of the structure are among the most popular ones [1–14]. They principally aim to create a simplified beam, joint and panel (BJP) representation of the detailed FE model of an existing vehicle. In some cases it is also possible to start with a concept model “from scratch”. The resulting small-sized and parametric concept models are then used to perform fast structural optimization in order to improve the vehicle static and dynamic performance.Despite their advantages, the methods using simplified structure layout can introduce some errors related to the modeling of beams, joints, panels and the connections between them. This work is focused on the error resulting from the concept representation of beams. They are an important component group used to simplify the main load-carrying structure of the vehicle. Beam-like members are often the first to be simplified and added to the concept model and, normally, they are substituted with 1D beam elements [1–13]. This simplification leads to a significant reduction in the number of elements and nodes with respect to the initial shell mesh. However, it can cause various discrepancies between the detailed FE model and its concept equivalent. Concept models with 1D beams result stiffer than their detailed FE counterparts as they do not take into account the local cross-section deformations. Additional differences can occur because of factors such as flanges, spot welds, stiffeners and discontinuities in the reference FE model, which are heavily simplified or not considered in the concept model. The type of the 1D beam cross-section is also important as it influences the accuracy of approximating the real cross-section properties. Various solutions have been proposed to tackle these issues: better modeling alternatives [2,3,6,12], model updating [2,7–9], correction factors [1,5,6,13]. However, in all these works, the problem is only partially addressed and solved. Still no holistic approach exists. The purpose of this paper is to serve as a basis to improve 1D beam concept modeling by giving a better insight into its major bottlenecks. Based on the systematic study of various beam typologies, general guidelines are derived to reduce the modeling errors. Thus, the already fast BJP methods can also become more accurate and they can result in more reliable early-stage predictions.This paper is organized as follows. The used methodology is described in Section 2 and it is then applied to various idealized and non-idealized case-studies in Section 3. Based on the derived guidelines, an existing body-in-white (BIW) concept model is studied in Section 4.1. Finally, a hybrid detailed-concept FE model of a BIW is created and analyzed in Section 4.2.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper deals with the main factors that can cause errors in 1D beam concept models: the beam cross-section geometry, the incorrect approximation of spot welds and flanges, the presence of discontinuities and the lack of local cross-section deformations. As demonstrated on a set of idealized and non-idealized case-studies, these factors can generate significant discrepancies with respect to the detailed FE model in terms of geometrical similarity and structural behavior. Their better understanding is mandatory both for creating better concept models, and for assessing the performance of the existing ones. In this regard, the guidelines derived from the current study have been successfully applied for the qualitative analysis of a BIW concept model and for the quantitative analysis of a BIW hybrid model.The future work will be focused on an integral approach for 1D beam modeling and optimization handling that guarantees the accuracy of the concept model. Efforts will be dedicated to improve the connection between dissimilar elements, as well as to the development of an advanced cross-section deformation criterion. Finally, the behavior of 1D beam composite structures should be investigated, because of the increased problem complexity and relevance to the automotive industry.