@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Potentialities of steady-state and transient thermography in breast tumour depth detection: A numerical study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Steady state thermal contrast magnitude depends on the tumour diameter and depth as well as on the breast density.The Full Width at Half Maximum calculated at the surface of the breast enlarges as the tumour depth increases but also depends on the tumour diameter.Transient thermal contrast trends present three important characteristics including the response time, the transient peak and its corresponding observation time.The observation time is likely a potential time for tumour depth detection as it does not strongly depend on the tumour diameter or on the chilling temperature and its duration.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Depth detection,Steady state thermal contrast,Full width at half maximum (FWHM),Cold stress,Transient thermal contrast,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Breast thermography still has inherent limitations that prevent it from being fully accepted as a breast screening modality in medicine. The main challenges of breast thermography are to reduce false positive results and to increase the sensitivity of a thermogram. Further, it is still difficult to obtain information about tumour parameters such as metabolic heat, tumour depth and diameter from a thermogram. However, infrared technology and image processing have advanced significantly and recent clinical studies have shown increased sensitivity of thermography in cancer diagnosis. The aim of this paper is to study numerically the possibilities of extracting information about the tumour depth from steady state thermography and transient thermography after cold stress with no need to use any specific inversion technique. Both methods are based on the numerical solution of Pennes bioheat equation for a simple three-dimensional breast model. The effectiveness of two approaches used for depth detection from steady state thermography is assessed. The effect of breast density on the steady state thermal contrast has also been studied. The use of a cold stress test and the recording of transient contrasts during rewarming were found to be potentially suitable for tumour depth detection during the rewarming process. Sensitivity to parameters such as cold stress temperature and cooling time is investigated using the numerical model and simulation results reveal two prominent depth-related characteristic times which do not strongly depend on the temperature of the cold stress or on the cooling period.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Breast thermography is an adjunct diagnostic tool to mammography for breast cancer screening. It is a non-invasive, painless and relatively inexpensive procedure for early detection of breast cancer since it does not involve compression of the breast or exposure to radiation. It was first introduced into medicine after the observation that the skin temperature over a malignant tumour in the breast is frequently between 1 and 3°C hotter than the surrounding skin [1]. However, there are temperature variations of similar magnitude over a surface of a normal breast due to the disposition of subcutaneous veins [2]. Because of the complex vascular patterns in a breast, thermography images were subject to widely variable and subjective interpretations among image readers and this led to unacceptable rates of false positive and false negative results.In order to increase the sensitivity of thermograms and to reduce false positive and false negative diagnosis results, transient thermography was introduced. A clinical report by Nagasawa and Okada [3] stated that in order to differentiate breast cancer from benign breast disease, static thermography images should be captured during thermal recovery after applying cold stress. The recovery process can be visualised by sequential thermography or by digital subtraction thermography. Usuki et al. [4] subjected the breast to cold stress by using an alcohol mist and monitored the subsequent rewarming of the breast using a sequence of thermography images captured at different times. These thermography images were then compared for changes in temperature distribution patterns in order to pinpoint accurately the presence of a tumour and thereby reduce false positive results. Because of the large amount of temperature information that can be obtained from a single thermogram, computer analysis of thermography images has been undertaken. Based on theoretical models developed by Steketee [5] to describe thermal recovery of skin after cold stress, Ohashi and Ushida [6] used a digital subtraction technique referred to as μ-thermography to process a sequence of thermograms obtained every 15s in an attempt to visualise the thermal signature of cold tumours. Results of the clinical experiment showed that diagnostic accuracy improved from 54% in steady state thermography to 82% in dynamic thermography. However, due to the inherent difficulty in applying an even air flow distribution to a curved surface such as the breast, air flow produced thermal artefacts. Recently, Arora et al. [7] conducted a clinical study on the effectiveness of thermography in the detection of cancer in 92 women with dense breasts. Cool air flow was used during thermal imaging and results showed that digital thermal imaging can be useful in detecting breast cancer with 97% sensitivity. Previous clinical studies reported enhanced image thermal contrast of the breast after applying direct thermoconductive cooling methods to the breast. However, other clinical studies that have used ice water immersion of the extremities (hands or feet) as a neurovascular stimulus to identify non-responding blood vessels of a tumour, reported low rates of correlation between the results of cold tests and case histories and the growing evidence of false positives and false negatives [8].At the present, mammography is the gold standard technique for breast screening. However, it is not as effective for women with dense or surgically altered breasts, or women aged 40 and younger [9]. In the light of recent advance in infrared (IR) camera technology and image processing, there has been a resurgence of biomedical research interest in breast thermography [9–16]: currently, digital cameras with uncooled thermal detectors have a thermal sensitivity of 0.05°C compared to 0.01°C of those using cooled thermal detectors [15]. In addition to the increased thermal sensitivity and resolution of modern digital infrared, sophisticated image processing software using artificial neural network and bio-statistical analytical methods are being incorporated to help the clinician in the interpretation of thermograms, thus reducing the high incidence of false-positive results [17–20]. However, breast thermography is still limited by the false positive findings in cases of infection or inflammation of breast parenchyma. Further, thermography is technically limited for morbidly obese patients that preclude accurate recording of temperature from the interior of the breast [7]. Among other challenges of breast thermography are enhancing the thermal signature of small and deep seated tumours and predicting the diameter and the position of a tumour from the surface thermal map.Numerical simulations, based on Pennes bioheat equation, have been used to evaluate the temperature distributions over a breast with and without a tumour and to calculate the tumour induced thermal contrast. Numerical results have provided valuable information as to whether an abnormal area is present underneath the breast skin. It was also found that the steady state thermal contrast depends on both tumour depth and diameter but was too small to be measured for deep seated tumours [21–29].To assess the effectiveness of a cold stress test in breast thermography, Ng and Sudharsan [26] simulate the rewarming phase of a tumourous breast after using a lumped system analysis to calculate the depth of the cold layer induced by a step change in environmental temperature. The temperature pattern obtained after 60min of rewarming was almost comparable with the steady state temperature distribution. Further, subtraction of thermal profiles obtained after three time intervals of rewarming did not provide any additional information with respect to the steady state thermogram. On the other hand, Hu et al. [30] examined the influence of the airflow on the surface thermal signature of a breast cancer using a numerical model. It was found that the presence of tumour may not be clearly shown due to the irregularities of the skin temperature distribution induced by the air flow. Nevertheless, image subtraction techniques could be employed to eliminate the effects of the flow field and thermal noise and significantly improve the thermal signature of the tumour on the skin surface. In order to differentiate tumour-induced from the gravity induced surface thermal contrast, Jiang et al. [28] compared dynamic thermography responses after changing the ambient temperature from 25°C to 20, 15 and 10°C during cooling and switching back the ambient temperature to 25°C during rewarming. Results showed that tumour induced and deformation induced thermal contrasts have different transient time courses during cold stress and thermal recovery procedure. Unfortunately, none of the aforementioned numerical simulations has investigated the possibility of extracting information about the diameter or depth of a tumour from a thermogram at steady state or during recovery from cold stress.The characterisation of tumours based on the surface temperature profile over the malignant breast represents an ill-posed inverse heat conduction problem. In the late 70s, Chen et al. [31] studied the feasibility and limitations of determining interior information from surface temperature measurements. Earlier work of Feasey et al. [32], using a simple theoretical heat transfer analysis showed that, since the tumour has a higher metabolic rate than normal tissue, it would produce a hot spot on the breast surface. The diameter of the hot spot defined by the full width at half maximum (FWHM) was used to estimate the depth of a small heat source from the isothermal distribution of hot spots at the surface. To validate this result, Feasey et al. [32] performed an experimental study on a Perspex phantom into which they inserted a small resistance, and found that there is a linear relationship between the FWHM and the depth of the heat source. This dependence has also been inferred by the concurrent work of Draper and Boag [33] using surface temperature calculation [34]. A recent two-dimensional numerical study of skin surface temperature caused by internal sources under various physiological and environmental conditions, supported the theoretical work of Feasey et al. [32] and showed that the FWHM is strongly affected by the depth of a spherical constant temperature heat source [35]. At the present, advanced genetic algorithms are used to estimate tumour depth, diameter and heat generation from surface temperature distribution [36–39]. Estimation methodology involves the use of a numerical method such as finite difference, finite element or boundary element to solve the bioheat equation, and the use of genetic algorithms to solve the inverse problem. Although accurate tumour parameters were estimated for 2D and 3D breasts models, inverse problem algorithms are time-consuming and can hardly be used in practice.In this paper, we use a three-dimensional numerical breast model to obtain steady state temperature profiles at the surface of both the normal breast and the breast with a suspicious tumour. Two depth detection approaches are examined. The first is based on the magnitude of the steady state thermal contrast and how it is affected by the tumour depth and diameter and breast density. The second approach is based on the hot spot thermal profile obtained on the breast with a tumour. For this approach, the diameter of the hot spot, in terms of the FWHM, is extracted from the surface profile for different tumour diameters and depths. In order to investigate the effectiveness of a cold stress procedure for tumour depth detection, a transient numerical model is used to simulate direct cooling of the breasts at constant temperature and their subsequent thermal recovery. During the thermal recovery process, the dynamic change of the surface temperature is not captured at a constant time frame. Instead, the maximum temperature reached at the surface of the tumourous breast and the temperature at the surface of the healthy breast are continuously monitored and subtracted to yield a transient maximum thermal contrast. The efficacy of cold stress is assessed by comparing the transient contrast to the steady state thermal contrast. Further, the effects of the cooling temperature and the cooling duration on the transients are examined for different tumour diameters and depths.Heat transfer in biological tissues is a complicated process that involves heat conduction, blood perfusion and metabolic heat generation. Various models have been developed to describe the blood perfusion effect on tissue heat transfer. Among them, the Pennes [40] bioheat transfer equation is the earliest continuum model in which the effects of the blood flow are treated as a temperature-dependent heat source term. Other models have been proposed to overcome the shortcomings of Pennes model by considering the influence of blood flow in the vascular network on heat transfer. A critical review of bioheat transfer models can be found in reference [41]. However, Pennes has been proved to be valid for tissue perfused with vessels larger than 500μm [42]. The application of a vascular model for heat transfer in a female breast requires a detailed knowledge of the microvasculature network. Because of the difficulty in obtaining the diameter and the position of each vessel and because of the dependency of such architecture on individuals, Pennes bioheat Eq. (1) has been used to model heat transfer in the breast:(1)ρc∂T∂t=∇.k∇T−ωbρbcb(T−Ta)+Qmwhere ρ, c and k denote density, specific heat, and thermal conductivity of tissue; ρb, cbare density and specific heat of blood; ωb(ml/s/ml) blood perfusion rate; Qmmetabolic heat generation; Tais the supplying arterial blood temperature assumed constant and T the breast temperature.The heat loss at the surface of the breast due to radiation, air convection and evaporation of sweat can be expressed as [43]:(2)−k∂T∂nskin=hf(Ts−Tf)+σεTs4−Tf4+Qewhere n is the normal vector at the surface; hfis the convection heat transfer coefficient; Tsand Tfare the skin and the surrounding air temperature, respectively; ɛ is the skin emissivity, and σ the Stefan–Boltzman constant; Qeis the evaporative heat losses due to sweat secretion.As thermograms are sensitive to environmental changes in temperature, humidity and air circulation, they need to be captured under strict protocols in order to ensure useful and consistent thermal images. These protocols include laboratory -and patient- standardised procedures for the imaging process. The temperature of the imaging room should be maintained stable within the range of 18–22°C to promote vasoconstriction aided cooling and minimise the convective heat flow to the surface [43]. According to Amalu et al. [11], this temperature range does not promote shivering or perspiring. Additional heat generated by computer equipments and other devices must be kept away from the examination room in order to reduce thermal artefacts. Further, patients are ideally recommended to avoid other controllable factors that could potentially influence skin temperature such as alcohol consumption, large meals and tea or coffee intake, smoking, physical exertion, sun bathing and application of cosmetic preparations, prior to examination [14,15].So long as adequate protocols are followed, Draper and Boag [43] showed that total heat loss may be considered to be proportional to (Ts−Tf), provided that (Ts−Tf) is small. Thus the boundary condition at the breast surface is reduced to(3)−k∂T∂nskin=h0(Ts−Tf)where h0 is a constant called the surface conductance which is made up of radiative and convective components:(4)h0=hconv+hradBecause of the controlled environment, the heat loss due to evaporation may be negligible. According to Draper and Boag [43], the total heat loss is h0=10.4W/m2°C for still air and varies between h0=12 and 24W/m2°C when the breast surface is exposed to air speeds within the range of 0.2 to 2m/s. However, Osman and Afify [21] evaluated the combined heat transfer coefficient due to the effects of convection, radiation and evaporation, to be h0=13.5W/m2°C and this value is used in this study.A realistic model of the female breast was first proposed by Osman and Afify [21]. The breast was considered as a hemisphere with different layers of uniform thickness representing skin, fat, muscle and core (connecting tissue). In the middle area of the skin layer there is a very highly perfused area, the areola. In the middle of areola is the nipple. Although the breast may be considered hemispherical in the supine condition, the various layers consisting of the subcutaneous fat layer, the gland layer and the muscle layer are of unequal thickness. Sudharsan et al. [23] developed a two dimensional model geometry based on the anatomy of the breast [44] and then extended the analysis to a three-dimensional hemispherical breast model with and without tumours [25]. Amri et al. [29] have used a simplified three dimensional two-layer breast model shown in Fig. 1to study the effect of a variety of tumour diameters and depths on the thermal contrast at the breast surface. The model consists of a 5mm thick fat layer and a gland with thickness H of 45mm. Although a surface of a breast is far from being of regular shape, the validity of the approach has been well demonstrated through comparison of sensitivity analysis results with previously reported works [25,26,28] where a real geometry of the breast was used.In order to assess the effectiveness of static and transient thermography in revealing a thermal feature that could be related to a tumour's depth, the breast model of Fig. 1 was used in the simulation. The symmetry of the model allows us to simulate only the quarter of the structure of a length of L=20mm. As tumours are often found in the gland region, the suspected area has been modelled as spheres of various diameters underneath the fat layer and in the gland region. According to Gautherie et al. [45], the tumour diameter ϕ and metabolic rate Qmare related to τdby:(5)ϕ=0.01×exp[0.00213(τd−50)](m)(6)Qmτd=3.27×106(W⋅day/m3)where τd(days) is the time required for the tumour to double its volume. Tumour diameter values of ϕ=10, 20 and 30mm are considered in the simulations and the corresponding metabolic heat generation rate is calculated from above equations. The tumour's depth d is defined as the distance between the surface of the breast and the top of the tumour. To model deep seated-tumours, the thickness of the gland is increased. Tumour depths of 5, 7.5, 10, 15, 20 and 30mm are considered, and thermal parameters and metabolic rates for the various layers are taken from Ng and Sudharshan [24,25] as summarised in Table 1.The transmission line matrix (TLM) technique was used for the numerical solution of the problem. It is a well proven numerical technique for the solution of electromagnetic problems [46], mass and heat transfer [47] and computational mechanics [48]. In a previous paper [29], the authors have described the TLM numerical scheme for modelling bioheat transfer and have assessed its validity through comparing TLM results with one-dimensional analytical solutions and with two- and three-dimensional results obtained using different numerical techniques. For the sake of clarity, details of the TLM method are not covered in this paper.In order to evaluate the surface temperature alteration induced by the presence of a tumour, it is fundamental to obtain the steady state temperature at the surface of the breast with and without the tumour. To this aim, Pennes bioheat Eq. (1) was solved for steady state subject to the following boundary conditions:(7)−k∂T∂z=h0(Tf−T)atz=0andT=Tcatz=H(8)−k∂T∂x=0atx=0and−k∂T∂x=0atx=L(9)−k∂T∂y=0aty=0and−k∂T∂y=0aty=LThe surface was subject to a heat transfer coefficient of 13.5W/m2°C and an ambient temperature Tf=21°C. The rear of the breast model was assumed to be at the core body temperature Tc=37°C. At the interface between the tumour and the breast tissue, a perfect contact was assumed(10)Tb(x,y,z)=Tt(x,y,z)∂Tb∂n=∂Tt∂nSubscripts b and t denote breast and tumour, respectively.A transient TLM code was used to calculate the steady-state temperature distribution in breast models, with and without a tumour, using a mesh diameter Δl=0.25mm and a time step Δt=3s. These values were found to represent good numerical convergence. The tissue was initially at the core temperature T(x, 0)=Tcand the arterial blood temperature was assumed to be the same as the body core Ta=Tc.Current thermography diagnostics protocols are based on the qualitative search for hot or cold spots and/or asymmetric thermal patterns in the contralateral breasts. Therefore, in this work, the surface thermal alteration due to the presence of a tumour is evaluated numerically using the steady state thermal contrast, Css, defined as the difference between the maximum temperature reached in the presence of a tumour and the temperature at the surface of the healthy breast.(11)Css=max(Ttumour)−ThealthyFig. 2shows steady state thermal contrast Css values for tumours of various diameters located at different depth below the fat layer. As previously reported [29], the deeper the tumour is, the smaller the thermal signature on the breast surface. Fig. 2 also shows that, whatever the tumour diameter, steady state thermography is best suited to detect tumours at depths less than 20mm beyond which it is difficult to distinguish the tumour diameter and depth as they lead almost identical steady state thermal contrast Css. Thus, a small thermal contrast may indicate a deep tumour but cannot inform about its diameter. Although the tumour depth is the dominant factor influencing thermal contrast compared with the tumour diameter, Fig. 2 shows that for tumours at depths less than 15mm, a single Css value may correspond to different tumour diameters located at different depths. For example, a 0.6°C thermal contrast may indicate a 10mm tumour located at a depth of approximately 7mm, or a 20mm tumour at depth of 8mm or a 30mm tumour at depth of about 9.15mm. This is likely to lead to some ambiguities unless the tumour diameter can be estimated by palpation during clinical examination of the breast.The magnitude of the steady state thermal contrast is also affected by the change in the blood perfusion and the change of environmental parameters such as ambient temperature and the heat transfer coefficient [23–27,29]. Therefore, the physiological and environmental parameters have been chosen so as to provide the optimal conditions for obtaining a maximum steady state thermal contrast based on a study of Sudharsan and Ng [24].Nevertheless, breast density is an additional factor that affects temperature distribution on the surface of the breasts. A breast may be classified as the least dense when it is largely made up of fatty tissue, or the most dense when the glandular and fibrous tissue are predominant [49]. The thickness of the subcutaneous fat varies between 0.5 and 2.5cm [50]. However, there may be local variations in the thickness of the subcutaneous fat which may induce hot and cold patches in the thermal pattern over the surface of the breast of some women [51].A study of skin temperature distribution over buried heat sources showed that each centimetre thickness of fat causes a drop in skin temperature of about 1°C and that the decreases are not linear with thickness [33]. This observation was recently confirmed by a two-dimensional numerical study which has investigated skin surface temperature caused by internal heat sources under various physiological and environmental conditions [35].In order to investigate the effect of fat thickness δfat on the steady state thermal contrast, values of 0.5 to 2cm were used. Results of the inset plot in Fig. 3agree with the observation of Draper and Boag [33] that the surface temperature of the healthy breast Thealthy decreases nonlinearly with the increase in fat thickness. A linear approximation provided approximately a unit negative slope. Consequently, the temperature at the surface of a dense breast is higher than that of a fatty breast. This is mainly caused by the low value of the fat thermal conductivity, compared with that of the gland tissue, which causes the fat layer to act as a thermal insulator for the breast thus impeding heat transfer from the deeper breast layers towards the breast surface. As the thickness of the fat increases, the breast become more insulated and consequently morbidly obese women may not be ideal candidate for thermography.In the presence of a tumour in the gland tissue at a depth dfat beneath the fat layer, Fig. 3 showed that a dense breast would produce higher steady state thermal contrasts values compared with a least dense breast. The least dense breast would induce a maximum thermal contrast value of about 0.1°C for a tumour just beneath the fat layer. Beyond this depth, thermal contrast decreases nonlinearly as tumour depth increase. Results of Fig. 3 may infer that thermography screening of the least dense breasts (δfat=2cm) with a 10mm tumour at a depth of 3cm from the fat layer, requires the use of at least a 0.005°C sensitive IR camera to be able to detect a measurable thermal contrast.It has been shown that it is possible to extract tumour depth information from the surface temperature profile at steady state. As long as an isothermal temperature distribution can be found at the surface of a breast with a tumour, Feasey et al. [32] have demonstrated that the diameter of the tumour-induced hot spot defined as the Full Width at Half Maximum (FWHM) is strongly dependent on the tumour depth. To calculate the FWHM, Feasey et al. [32] defined the maximum as being the steady state thermal contrast, Css, where the temperature of the healthy breast is used as a reference. Results of Fig. 3a show hot spot diameters extracted from the temperature map at the surface of the breast with different tumour diameters located at different depths. An uncertainty of about 0.25mm corresponding to the numerical mesh size must be added to each FWHM calculation. Results of Fig. 4a show approximately a linear relationship between tumour's depth and the FWHM for depths less than 10mm. Nevertheless, it was impossible to extract numerically the FWHM for deep seated tumours whatever the tumour diameter using the surface temperature of the healthy breast as a reference to calculate the half maximum. This was caused by the low value of the half maximum temperature with respect to the minimum temperature at the surface of the breast with a tumour. An alternative solution was to use the minimum temperature reached at the surface of the tumourous breast itself as a reference temperature. This will be referred to as non-referential FWHM. Fig. 4b shows the numerical calculation of the diameters of hot spots caused by different tumour diameters at different depths d. It is clear that the hot spot diameter increases with tumour depth, which is consistent with previous two-dimensional work of Wu et al. [35]. However, the FWHM also increases with the tumour diameter which makes it difficult to attribute a single FWHM to a particular depth.Thus far, it has been shown that retrieving information about tumour depth using a steady state thermal contrast or by measuring the width of the hot spot diameter on the thermal map depends on the magnitude of the maximum temperature reached at the surface of the breasts. In an attempt to enhance the magnitude of steady state thermal contrast, dynamic thermography after cold stress is examined.From an initial state at thermal equilibrium, a cold stress temperature Tcold was applied on the top of both the healthy and the suspicious breast model during a cooling period tcool. The Pennes Eq. (1) was then solved using a constant boundary condition:(12)T=Tcoldfor0<t≤tcoolIn order to study the effect of cold stress temperature Tcold and the cooling period tcool on the surface thermal transients, we have examined cooling the breast at temperatures of 5, 10 and 15°C for cooling periods of 10, 20, 30, 60 and 120s. A time step of 0.25s was used for both cooling and rewarming; these values represented good numerical convergence.In order to estimate the depth affected by heat transfer during cooling, it is helpful to define the thermal penetration depth δp. The temperature at the thermal penetration depth should satisfy [52]:(13)∂T(z,t)∂z=0atz=δp(t)(14)T(z,t)=Tiatz=δp(t)where Tiis the initial temperature. For the numerical solution, the cooling penetration depth has been defined as the maximum distance from the surface for which the drop in temperature is more than 0.1°C. Fig. 5represents the variation of the penetration depth versus the cooling time. An uncertainty of about 0.25mm, corresponding to the numerical mesh size, must be associated with each penetration depth calculation. It seems that a minimum cooling period of 20s is required for cold front to reach the gland region where a tumour is likely to be. When cooling for 2min, the thermal cold front is shown to penetrate to a depth of 14mm, causing the tumours located beyond this depth to remain uncooled.After the cold stress was removed, the transient temperatures at both breasts were recorded during a rewarming period of 60min, consistent with the observation of Pennes [40] that skin temperature at the forearm needs 30–60min to reach steady state after chilling. Both breasts were free to exchange heat with ambient by convection and radiation. To evaluate the efficiency of the cold test on the enhancement of temperature differences between the breasts, we defined the transient maximum thermal contrast:(15)Cmax(t)=max[Ttumour(t)]−Thealthy(t)as being the difference between the maximum temperature reached at the surface of the tumourous breast and a reference temperature at the surface of the healthy breast during rewarming.To enable tracking of the maximum temperature, the steady state thermogram may help in marking the hot spot area on the suspicious breast and the contralateral symmetrical part on the healthy breast can be used as a reference area. The dynamic change in surface temperature of the suspicious breast is then not monitored in space so as to avoid massive data storage of transient temperature maps.Fig. 6shows a typical transient maximum thermal contrast during rewarming for a breast with a 10mm tumour at a depth of 5mm after being cooled for 1min. To assess the use of cold stress as an enhancement, we use the steady state thermal contrast as a reference criterion. To this aim, a dash dotted line representing the steady state thermal contrast was plotted in Fig. 6. The transient on Fig. 6 increases to reach the steady state thermal contrast at a later time τss, referred to as the response time, and continue to increase to a peak value at time τpeak, referred to as the observation time, after which it decreases to reach a final steady state thermal equilibrium by the end of rewarming. The magnitude of the transient peak and its corresponding time, as well as the response time, were extracted from the transient maximum thermal contrasts for tumours of various diameters located at different depth. The effect of cold stress temperature and the cooling period on these characteristic data are examined in the following sections.The early transient is characterised by the time τss at which the maximum contrast reaches steady state. Fig. 7shows the variation of the response time τss versus tumour depth and diameter after cooling the breasts at 5°C for 1min. It appears that the response time increases with tumour depth. Further, the tumour diameter seems to have no significant effect on the response time for shallow tumours. However, as the tumour depth increases, Fig. 7 shows that the smaller the tumour is, the longer is the response time.Fig. 8shows the response time τss for a 10mm tumour located at different depths after being subject to different cold stress temperatures during a cooling period of 1min. The response time τss is slightly shorter for lower cold stress temperature and this effect becomes more noticeable as the tumour depth increases. Nevertheless, a 1°C increase in the cooling temperature would increase τss approximately by a minimum of 3s for a shallow tumour and a maximum of 13s for the deepest one.The effect of the cooling period on the response time has been also examined and is shown in Fig. 9. Although an increase in the cooling duration has been found to increase the penetration depth in Fig. 4, results of Fig. 9 show that there is no significant change in the response time, τss, when the cooling time increases from 0.5 to 2min. Response time values obtained after a cooling period of 0.5min will likely exhibit a decrease of approximately 20s when the cooling period becomes four times longer.Results of Figs. 7–9 also show that the response time τss varies between 2 and 30min which means that a minimum of 2min is necessary to observe any enhancement of the thermal contrast at the surface of the breast after cold stress. Despite the observed small effects of cold stress temperature and the cooling duration on the response time τss, Figs. 7–9 showed that it is still difficult to relate τss unambiguously to a tumour depth regardless of the tumour size. Furthermore, by considering results of Fig. 2 that showed small steady state contrast values for tumours at depths of 2cm and more, the measure of their induced response times relies mainly on the use of a highly sensitive infrared camera.In order to understand the origin of the response time τss and to explain its dependency on tumour depth and diameter, it is important to examine the breast thermal state at the end of cooling. It was shown in Fig. 5 that the extent of cooling was determined by the penetration depth δpbeyond which the initial steady state temperature of the breast has not been affected by cooling. At the end of cooling, the thermal gradient established within the breast due to the presence of a hot thermal front beneath the cold front causes diffusion of heat from the warmer deeper breast tissue towards the cold surface. As the temperature of the hot thermal front depends on the metabolic heat generated by a tumour and its depth d, the response timeτss was found to highly depend on the tumour diameter and depth. It is then reasonable to suppose that τss is the time needed for the cold thermal front located at the penetration depth δpto recover and reach its steady state temperature.Fig. 10shows the effect of tumour diameter and depth on the magnitude of the transient peak Cpeak and its corresponding observation timeτpeak after cooling for 1min at Tcold=5°C. It can be noticed that the trends on Fig. 10a are similar to those obtained in steady state as illustrated in Fig. 2. Although high transient peak values were obtained for tumours at depth less than 15mm after cold stress, Fig. 10a gives no additional information about the tumour depth compared to Fig. 2. On the other hand, the associated observation times do not seem to be affected by the tumour diameter as can be seen in Fig. 10b, and almost identical observation times have been obtained for different tumour diameters.In Fig. 11the effect of cold stress temperature on the transient peak magnitude and the associated observation time are examined. Fig. 11a shows that the application of a low cold temperature slightly increases the magnitude of the transient peak for shallow tumours, but Fig. 11b suggests it does not affect the corresponding observation time. Results of Fig. 11 have significance since they imply that temperatures not greatly below room temperature can be used for cold stress.The effect of the cooling period on the contrast peak and the observation time has also been examined. Fig. 12a shows that long cooling periods slightly increase the magnitude of the transient peak for shallow tumours but do not improve the thermal signature of deep seated tumours. Therefore, the magnitude of the contrast peak does not depend on how deeply the cold front has penetrated within the breast or whether it has reached the tumour during cooling. Furthermore, it can be seen in Fig. 12b that the cooling duration has no major effect on the observation times. For example, a 30s increase in the cooling duration reduced the observation time, τpeak, by approximately 20s for a tumour at depth of 15mm.Observation time results versus tumour depth as shown in Figs. 10b, 11b and 12b were found to be the least dependent on the cold stress temperature, the cooling period and tumour diameter. As the observation time, τpeak, rises after the response time τss, the time needed by the cold thermal front to recover, τpeak, is likely to be the time needed for the hot thermal front at the top of the tumour to affect the breast surface thus inducing a contrast peak during thermal rewarming.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
