@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Using an admittance algorithm for bone drilling procedures

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Description of an admittance algorithm for bone drilling procedures.Layer transitions properly detected before bone breakthrough.Robust performance without collecting experimental data or retuning the control parameters.Only a position sensor is needed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Assisted surgery,Bone drilling,Layer detection,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Bone drilling is a common procedure in many types of surgeries, including orthopedic, neurological and otologic surgeries. Several technologies and control algorithms have been developed to help the surgeon automatically stop the drill before it goes through the boundary of the tissue being drilled. However, most of them rely on thrust force and cutting torque to detect bone layer transitions which has many drawbacks that affect the reliability of the process. This paper describes in detail a bone-drilling algorithm based only on the position control of the drill bit that overcomes such problems and presents additional advantages. The implication of each component of the algorithm in the drilling procedure is analyzed and the efficacy of the algorithm is experimentally validated with two types of bones.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Drilling is a common procedure in bone surgery. It is used in orthopedic surgeries for fractures and bone reconstruction [1]; in neurological surgeries, for example in craniotomy and stereotactic surgery [2]; in ear surgeries, such as a cochleostomy for cochlear implantation [3] and in any otologic surgery [4]. In orthopedic surgeries, drilling is required in about 95% of post-trauma treatments and interventions, where holes are required to mount the screws needed to fix and correct bone fractures or to attach plates or other prosthetics.Surgeons work very carefully, trying to control the penetration of the drill and avoid harming vessels and tissues located in the proximities of the bone. One of the main risks consists of projecting the drill bit beyond the structure being drilled. The safety of the patients relies on the experience of the surgeon, but it has been shown in experimental studies that surgeons drill beyond the far cortex by an average of 6.33mm, depending on their age and experience [5].Several technologies, each with different control algorithms and strategies, have been developed to help the surgeon to automatically stop the drill before it goes through the boundaries of the tissue being drilled. Most of them, implement algorithms and sensors to control the force of penetration and the torque of the drill.In previous work we presented DRIBON [6,7], a new automated-mechatronic drilling system which implemented an algorithm based on the position control of the drill bit. This strategy is completely different from the rest of the technologies found in the literature. The aim of this work is to describe in detail the differences between our approach and related work (Sections 2 and 3), analyze in detail the implemented methodology (Section 4), and show its effectiveness when drilling different types of bones (Section 5). The distinguishing feature of the approach is that it allows drilling in different bone types without changing the control algorithm or building a neural network based on experimental data. Additionally, layer transitions can be properly detected before bone breakthrough.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Automatic bone drilling is an active research field and has the aim of reducing or even removing any undesired displacement of the drill bit along the planned path. The goal is to provide the surgeon with a smart mechatronic device able to drill the desired depth and automatically stop before bone layer transitions occur or surrounding tissue are harmed. Most devices and methodologies to date rely on force and torque sensors to measure the penetration force and torque, and detect bone layer transitions from these data. This strategy has many limitations: 1) measures are usually very noisy which complicates the control actuation, 2) multiple previous bone drills are necessary to build proper neural networks and threshold values, 3) changing bone type requires that the strategy be readjusted and a new neural network be built, and 4) it is very complicated to stop the drill bit just before breakthrough occurs.The current work describes in detail a very different approach where only the drill displacement is measured. A position sensor is only needed for bone layer detection and the methodology is valid even if bone characteristics change, which is largely more inexpensive than force and torque sensors. Moreover, drilling can be stopped safely before breakthrough. This methodology has been thoroughly described throughout the paper. First of all, related work was reviewed and the differences between previous force-based methodologies and current position-based approach were explained by using the impedance–admittance control analogy. Afterwards, the so-called admittance approach followed in this work was described in detail, showing the implications of each part of the algorithm for the drilling process.Finally, the system and the proposed control algorithm were tested by drilling two very different types of bone, namely cow and chicken bone. Results of the experiments show how the system was able to use the same algorithm to stop the drilling process just before breaking through the second bone layer; no prior calibration or drilling experience was needed to ensure adequate performance.The authors declare that the present research development was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.