@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Optimization of novel spectral estimator for fractionated electrogram analysis is helpful to discern atrial fibrillation type

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A novel spectral estimator is used to discern paroxysmal versus persistent atrial fibrillation fractionated electrograms.The estimator is improved by selectively imparting antisymmetry to basis vectors used to construct the power spectrum.This preprocessing step leads to improved differentiation of spectral parameters in paroxysmal versus persistent atrial fibrillation fractionated electrograms.The improvement is potentially useful to better discern regions of atrial fibrillation substrate that should be targeted for catheter ablation.This method has been shown to provide better discernment of atrial fibrillation type as compared with the Fourier transform estimator.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Atrial fibrillation,Dominant frequency,Electrograms,Parameters,Spectral estimation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
IntroductionParoxysmal versus persistent atrial fibrillation (AF) can be distinguished based on differences in the spectral parameters of fractionated atrial electrograms. Maximization of these differences would improve characterization of the arrhythmogenic substrate. A novel spectral estimator (NSE) has been shown previously to provide greater distinction in AF spectral parameters as compared with the Fourier transform estimator. Herein, it is described how the differences in NSE spectral parameters can be further improved.MethodIn 10 persistent and 9 paroxysmal AF patients undergoing electrophysiologic study, fractionated electrograms were acquired from the distal bipolar ablation electrode. A total of 204 electrograms were recorded from the pulmonary vein (PV) antra and from the anterior and posterior left atrial free wall. The following spectral parameters were measured: the dominant frequency (DF), which reflects local activation rate, the DF amplitude (DA), and the mean spectral profile (MP), which represents background electrical activity. To optimize differences in parameters between paroxysmal versus persistent AF patients, the NSE was varied by selectively removing subharmonics, using a threshold. The threshold was altered in steps to determine the optimal subharmonics removal.ResultsAt the optimal threshold level, mean differences in persistent versus paroxysmal AF spectral parameters were: ΔDA=+0.371mV, ΔDF=+0.737Hz, and ΔMP=−0.096mV. When subharmonics were not removed, the differences were substantially less: ΔDA=+0.301mV, ΔDF=+0.699Hz, and ΔMP=−0.063mV.ConclusionsNSE optimization produces greater spectral parameter difference between persistent versus paroxysmal AF data. Quantifying spectral parameter differences can be assistive in characterizing the arrhythmogenic substrate.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Fractionated atrial electrograms are useful to characterize the arrhythmogenic atrial fibrillation (AF) substrate for catheter ablation [1–4]. Since fractionated electrograms are complex, frequency analysis is often used for characterization [4]. It has been shown that there are significant differences in the spectral parameters of paroxysmal versus persistent AF electrograms. It would be desirable to maximize these differences to best characterize the arrhythmogenic substrate, which may lead to improved catheter ablation paradigms. A novel spectral estimator (NSE) has been shown to provide greater distinction in spectral parameters acquired from paroxysmal versus persistent AF patients, as compared with the discrete Fourier transform (DFT) method [3]. The NSE has additional advantages as a spectral estimator over the DFT for certain applications, including robustness to noise and phase jitter [1–3]. It has also been used to successfully discern ventricular tachyarrhythmias at onset in canine postinfarction studies [5]. However, the NSE suffers from the presence of significant cross-terms and subharmonics, which changes the spectral background level and is therefore undesirable during spectral parameter measurement. In prior work, these components were removed by imparting antisymmetry to all basis vectors used to form the NSE power spectrum [2,4]. In so doing, subharmonics were eliminated. This resulted in some improvement in the ability of NSE parameters to discern fractionated electrograms recorded from paroxysmal versus persistent AF patients. Yet, antisymmetry was imparted indiscriminately to all basis vectors used to generate the power spectrum. In the current study, we sought to determine whether selective impartation of antisymmetry could improve the ability of NSE to discern fractionated electrograms acquired from persistent versus paroxysmal AF patients.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
By selectively imparting antisymmetry to the data-driven basis used to form the NSE power spectrum, it is possible to improve the ability of spectral parameters to distinguish fractionated electrograms acquired from paroxysmal versus persistent AF patients. The selection can be based on the ratio shown in Eq. (14). By varying the threshold for selection, efficacy at particular threshold levels can be tested. The best threshold is chosen as that level at which the mean difference in spectral parameters, and the mean significance of the difference, is maximized when comparing paroxysmal versus persistent AF fractionated electrograms (Figs. 2 and 3). With more observations, it may be possible to achieve significance in the differences at more anatomical locations, and therefore to more accurately assess the alterations in spectral parameters that occur at differing anatomical locations in the left atrium of AF patients. This is potentially useful for guiding the radiofrequency ablation catheter in AF patients undergoing electrophysiologic study and treatment.