@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Consistent geometrical modelling of interlock fabrics

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Novel CAD modeling strategy of the geometry of interlock fabrics unit cells.Consistent (perfect description of the contacts between yarns) and automated.High level of realism, meshed with hexahedral elements, ready for meso simulations.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Weaving fabrics,Forming,Unit-cell model,Finite element simulations,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The aim of this study is to simulate the deformations of dry fabrics during the first step of LCM (Liquid Closed Moulding) processes. Among the available numerical approaches, 3D finite elements simulation at the mesoscopic scale seems to lead to a good compromise between realism and complexity. At this scale, the fibrous reinforcement is modeled by an interlacement of yarns assumed to be homogeneous that have to be accurately represented. The paper therefore presents the creation of a, as realistic as possible, 3D geometrical model of the yarns of complex unit cells. It is achieved through the implementation of an iterative strategy based on two main properties. On the one hand, consistency, which ensures a good description of the contact between the yarns, that is to say, the model does not contain spurious spaces or interpenetrations at the contact area. On the other hand, the variation of the yarn section shape along its trajectory is accounted so that it enables to stick as much as possible to the evolutive shape of the yarn inside the reinforcement. Using this tool and a woven architecture freely implementable by the user, a representative model of any type of reinforcement (2D, interlock) can be obtained. The obtained CAD model is fully consistent so that it can be directly used for FE simulations at the meso-scale without any modifications or corrections. An example of equi-biaxial extension of a carbon interlock fabric is proposed.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The use of continuous fibre reinforced composites in various industries and especially in the transportation business is increasing because lighter, complex shaped parts can be manufactured. Among all the processes available for the manufacturing of such parts, the LCM (Liquid Composite Moulding) techniques seem to be the most promising. The first step of these processes consists in draping a dry mono or multi-layer preform before liquid resin is injected [1–3]. This preforming stage is a delicate phase since the physical mechanisms involved are complex and very different from those occurring during the stamping of metallic sheets. The dry fabric is able to undergo various strains (shear, tensile, bending, etc.) and loadings (binders, friction) in order to be draped on complex double curved dies [4–13]. The formability of a fabric is therefore in direct relation with the mechanical behaviour of the textile stack. Understanding, characterizing, identifying the mechanical behaviour of dry fabrics is consequently of primary importance in order to predict the feasibility of a given part with a given fabric, but also in order to optimize fabric choice or process parameters. Different approaches, experimental or numerical, can be used to achieve this crucial task. The experimental determination of the mechanical behaviour of fabrics has been intensively studied. A rich bibliography exists, among which [14–30] can be cited. However, many teams are still working on this topic in order to refine the knowledge of the composite community, since the mechanical behaviour of fibrous material is far from being understood. Although the experimental approach uses direct, accurate methods that have indeed helped understand and characterize the physical mechanisms involved during the deformation of fabrics ([31–32] for instance), many papers underline how difficult it is to get accurate repeatable results [19]. This approach also requires long and expensive experimental campaigns, and it can only deal with existing fabrics. It cannot be added in a loop of fabric creation, for instance. These difficulties contribute to raise the numerical approach as a necessary complement.Numerical strategies are all the more interesting that, due to the weaving process, fabrics exhibit symmetries and periodicity that allow to consider a representative part that is named the unit cell. Among the numerical strategies, analytical methods are simple and efficient [15,33–36]. However, they do not deal well with all the complexity of fibrous reinforcements and especially the multi-scale nature of dry fabrics. This is especially the case for complex architectures, such as interlocks, which will be tackled in this paper. A fibrous composite reinforcement is constituted by the interlacement of yarns, themselves composed of thousands of fibres, the diameter of which is in the range of [37] a few microns. Three different scales can consequently be considered. At what is called the macro scale, the fabric is seen as a continuous membrane. This scale is classically used to simulate the forming step of the whole reinforcement, with a specific mechanical behaviour [38–48]. Nevertheless, it is not adapted to investigate the mechanical behaviour of the unit cell, since the latter does not explicitly appear in this kind of modelling. On the other hand, the micro scale tends to consider each individual fibre that constitutes the yarn. Each fibre is considered as a beam interacting with its neighbours. This scale is the finest one, but needs to account for thousands of contacts between the beams. The number of fibres considered therefore needs to be reduced to the range of a hundred, and even in this case, calculations are complex and require a huge amount of time [49]. At the moment, therefore, the optimal scale for the investigation for the mechanical behaviour of the unit-cell seems to be the intermediate meso-scale. Only the second level of heterogeneity, the meso level, is explicitly considered. As a consequence, the fabric is assumed to be the interlacement of continuous yarns. This scale enables to take into account the complex meso-architecture of fabrics without dealing with thousands of fibres. Coupled with 3D finite element simulations, it leads to reasonable calculation times and complexity. The fibres are modelled through a specific constitutive law, often obtained via simple tests and/or inverse identification, implemented in a finite element code [17,50–59]. Even if the meso modelling seems to be the best compromise between realism and complexity, such finite element simulations present the following difficulties:•The yarn is modelled as a continuous material. Therefore, a specific behaviour law accounting for its fibrous nature has to be implemented. In particular, it requires to follow the fibre orientation during the unit-cell deformation using specific rotation tensors, since those implemented in standard codes such as Abaqus® cannot be used [60–63]. In this paper, the strategy presented in [61] will be used for the applications presented at the end.All the contacts between the yarns have to be taken into account, in the context of finite transformations. This results in complex simulations, all the more difficult that the number of yarns in the unit-cell is high.Above all, a 3D finite element simulation requires an accurate consistent 3D meshed geometry of the unit-cell. “Accurate” has to be understood here as modelling the real yarns geometry (yarn width, thickness, volume fraction, etc.) and all the real contacts between the yarns. “Consistent” means that the contact surfaces are accurately described, that is, no spurious voids or interpenetrations occur at the contact zones. Without both of these conditions, simulations cannot be considered as representative [64].This paper aims at dealing with how to obtain this consistent accurate meshed model.Due to the large increase in the use of composites in structural parts for aeronautic and automotive applications, thicker parts have to be manufactured. This can be done via the stacking of multiple thin plies or using thick reinforcements, such as interlocks or 3D fabrics, in which several layers of weft yarns are linked by warp yarns. Depending on the weaving process capacities, very thick and large unit-cells can be obtained containing between ten and a hundred or so yarns.Fig. 1 presents the architecture of two interlock fabrics that will illustrate the proposed strategy. The first one is a “virtual” fabric (Fig. 1(a)) approximated from a real one used in [65], and has the following characteristics: the pitch distances between the neighbouring warps and wefts are 7mm and 4mm, respectively. The thickness of the unit-cell is 1.5mm. The overall fibre volume fraction was measured to be 0.25, of which 0.07 and 0.18 were lying respectively in the warp and weft directions. Width and thickness of the yarn are assumed to be respectively 2mm and 0.3mm. It is a very simple interlock with a low yarn density, which will be used to validate the basic functionalities of the software.The second one is a woven interlock reinforcement used in aeronautics. It is denoted G1151® and constituted by an interlock weaving of 6K carbon yarns (630g/m², 7.5yarns/cm) (Fig. 1(b)). The G1151® unit cell consists in 6 warp yarns and 15 weft yarns, the weft yarns being distributed on 3 levels. The ply thickness is 1.54mm. The 6K carbon yarn has an original width and thickness of about 0.34mm. The fabric is manufactured by Hexcel Company and its mechanical characteristics (tensile test, picture frame tests, bending tests, etc.) have been studied [16,18,66] his second fabric gathers all the difficulties that can be encountered in this type of modelling, and will therefore help in showing the capability of the proposed strategy.The process to obtain a consistent meshed unit-cell can be broken down into two tasks: the CAD modelling and the meshing of the obtained CAD model. Various tools can be used to obtain the CAD model of a unit-cell. The most popular in the composites community are WiseTex [37] and TexGen [64]. Both are powerful and efficient software able to deal with any architecture of textile reinforcements, from UD to NCF and 3D. Both also feature unit-cell meshing. Many other techniques can be found in the literature based on the same principle: considering the different networks independently, and dealing with internal network contacts a posteriori [68-70]. In addition, the yarn sections are of a simple shape, so that it appears difficult to model the real yarn shape, the complexity of which being due to the numerous contacts between the yarns [70–74]. Nevertheless, for some kinds of unit cells, especially with a low yarn density, even with relatively coarse assumptions, the results obtained may be accurate enough [71,74]. Even in the case of complex fabrics, the CAD model obtained can represent accurately the geometrical parameters of the unit cell [71,75]. However, looking at consistency and accuracy, two main problems are met: on one hand, contacts between yarns are treated as consequences of an idealized yarn trajectory, on the other hand, consistency is not ensured at the contact zones. For complex unit-cells such as interlocks, the originally created cells show many interferences [71]. Some techniques can be used to modify a posteriori the unit-cell, but they require a substantial amount of time and lead to local non-physical deformations of the yarn section. The accuracy of the model is then widely altered. Moreover, one can doubt on the ability of these approaches to deal in a reasonable timeframe with interlock unit cells, in which many contacts may occur. In order to deal with such interferences, Couegnat proposed a specific CAD modelling dedicated to unit-cell simulations of ceramic composites. His methodology consists in imposing a distance between yarns (void) even in the contact zone [76]. The thus created spurious voids enable the start of the finite element calculation, but induce two main drawbacks. Numerous small finite elements are generated in the small area between two yarns supposed to be in contact, and the interface between the yarns is not correctly described. If the latter is problematic for composite simulation, it is definitely worse for dry unit-cell simulation. Indeed, the contact between the yarns is the main phenomenon that drives the mechanical behaviour of dry reinforcements such as the biaxial tensile behaviour, for instance. As all the previous ones, this strategy is therefore not convenient for composite application. It is therefore necessary to develop specific approaches integrating consistency as an intrinsic property.For 2D fabrics, consistent 3D CAD modellers have been developed over the last years [77–78]. They permit to obtain consistent, accurate unit-cells but are restricted to standard 2D fabrics (plain, twill, satin weaves). These modellers contain more or less the principles that can be adapted and extended to deal with more complex architectures. As a matter of conclusion, since no convenient method to achieve our goal can be found in the literature, the aim of this paper is to present a new consistent meshing CAD modeller for interlock fabrics: GEOFAB, which shall provide a consistent hexahedral mesh of the unit cell of any woven architecture of fabrics (2D, interlock, 3D, etc.) within a reasonable amount of time.In interlock fabrics, 4 types of contacts can be differentiated according to their nature (Fig. 2). The first one is intrinsic to the notion of fabric. Indeed, the interlacement of the two yarn networks leads to what will be called “weaving contacts”, since they are expected as results of the weaving process. They only depend on the chosen fabric architecture and are perfectly localised and predetermined. In fabrics with a low yarn density they are often the only ones. The second interlock considered in this paper (Fig. 1) illustrates this family.In addition to the growing complexity of architectures, the objective of increasing the reinforcement fibre volume fraction (even now for 2D fabrics) also leads to increase the yarn density inside the unit-cell. The resulting number of contacts is higher and increases with yarn density. Between two weaving contacts a yarn has to pass through several transverse yarns. When the fabric is dense, the spacing is not sufficient to enable the yarn to travel between its transverse counterparts without contacts. This is the second type of contact, which will be called “intermediate contacts”. Furthermore, the weaving process is supposed to enforce the yarns of a same network to be parallel and separated. This property is verified for fabrics with low yarn density. However, for more and more fabrics, such as the G1151® used here for instance, the yarn spacing is imposed to be lower than the yarn width in the weaving process. The lateral crushing of yarns is consequently accounted to enable weaving. This leads to the third type of contact, which will be called “lateral contacts” (section1.4, Fig. 2). The fourth and last type of contact consists in bottom/up contacts between the yarns of a same network. It will be called “longitudinal contact”. These 4 types of contacts have the following three different consequences, depending on their influence on the yarn trajectory and/or section shape:•A modification of the yarn trajectory and section, which is responsible for the yarn undulation,A modification of the yarn section without any change in the yarn trajectory, which is a kind of “indentation” andnegligible modifications of the yarn trajectory and section.All these types of contacts and consequences will be dealt with, so that a consistent model for any interlock fabric can be obtained.As a conclusion, for interlock fabrics, in addition to the infinity of architectures, the possible high density of yarns in the unit cell leads to the occurrence of many contacts at many locations inside the cell (Fig. 2). Since they are not “weaving contacts”, they are not expected but “sustained” and are difficult to identify and locate “a priori”. Accounting explicitly and accurately for the contacts inside the unit-cell is therefore a crucial issue. Two main challenges have to be addressed for the modelling of such cells: the first one is to properly account for the internal contacts. The second one is to ensure the consistency properties at the contact zones. This paper intends to tackle these two challenges following different steps. First, the specifications required to accurately model interlock fabrics are tackled. Secondly the modelling strategy is developed and applied on Catia V5 in order to achieve accurate automated modelling. Based on the CAD modelling, a meshing and data input procedure can be developed and finite element simulations can be performed. Examples are presented at the end of the paper.As previously explained, the trajectory of the yarns is inspired from what has been done for 2D fabrics [77]. It is assumed to be planar and composed of a succession of straight segments and parabolas. These different parts are linked by tangency conditions (Fig. 3). Parabolas model contacts that lead to the yarn curvature ((a) in Section 1.3) when straight segments model contacts that do not induce any modification of the trajectory (the longitudinal yarn remains straight, (b) and (c) in Section 1.3). Between two contacts (of any type), since there are no loads except residual tensions (coming from the weaving process), the yarn is obviously assumed to be straight. Straight segments therefore model the free parts of the yarns. Two parabolas are never directly linked by a tangency condition, a straight segment always exists between them, but it can be as small as needed.The strategy used in the 2D modeller appeared to be really efficient, as far as the consistency at the contact zone is concerned. The extension of this technique is consequently chosen [77]. The surfaces of each yarn at the contact zone are imposed as identical, i.e. described by the same parabolas. As will be described in details in the followings, the parabolas obtained after the calculation of the yarn trajectories are used to build the section of each yarn at the contact zone [77].In addition to these two parabolas, the complete section shape is closed using additional segments and parabolas. For 2D fabrics, any section shape was efficiently modelled with two parabolas and two segments [77]. For interlock fabrics, since the contact between yarns appears to be more complex, one to three curves linked by tangency conditions are necessary to model the contact side of the yarn, the number being automatically selected by the software (Fig. 4). Any other section shapes could be easily implemented but since we intend to mesh the CAD model with hexahedral elements, flat flanges are well adapted to the need. In addition, depending on the size of the lateral segments, a large range of shapes, from almost lenticular to almost rectangular shapes, can be modelled (Fig. 4). The yarn section at each control point is consequently defined using 4 parameters: section width, thickness, right and left flange (Fig. 4).Interlock fabrics are composed of two yarn networks. Due to the weaving process, warp yarns are classically assumed to be distributed over different columns, each yarn laying one over the other (Fig. 5(a)). This assumption is consistent for many fabrics, especially for those with a low warp yarn density. But since we are interested in accurately modelling fabrics with high yarn density, we have to deal with more complex structures. In this case, lateral contacts occur between neighbouring yarns, which leads to following two main consequences:•The yarns may be completely shifted, and consequently not remain superimposed with the others (Fig. 1), which would result in significant changes in the fabric structure, mechanical behaviour, permeability etc. The real position of the shifted yarns has therefore to be taken into account, considering a higher number of columns than what is theoretically assumed (Fig. 5(b)).Lateral contacts are also responsible for the local displacement of yarns. The trajectory of yarns of a same network consequently doesn’t remain in strictly parallel planes. Since yarns are supposed to be a continuous sweep of sections along a trajectory, the latter is obviously not planar, which is not consistent with the assumption made in Section 2.1. However this problem can be dealt with by keeping a straight trajectory using CAD functionalities. The displacement of the section according to the trajectory indeed reproduces the exact same geometry (Fig. 6). As a matter of conclusion, assuming plane trajectories is not a limitation to the modeling of the out-of-plane undulation of the yarns trajectory due to the occurring lateral contacts.Different unit cells can be considered, any of them can be parameterized with this approach. Nevertheless, only one type will be detailed here: the one that consists in cutting the fabric between two yarns in the weft and warp directions (Fig. 1). As a matter of fact, the other unit cells are easily obtained through the repetition and cut of a part of or the entire “standard” unit cell.The coordinate system affected to the unit-cell is defined as follows: x and y are respectively the weft and warp direction, and z is normal to x and y. z=0 is taken at the lowest point of the unit cell (as if the fabric was laid on a plane z=0).ncαiis the number of contacts of yarn i belonging to network α. Consistently with the standard unit cell chosen in Section 2.4, the first and last elements of the trajectory are straight segments.The trajectory of yarn i belonging to network α is then composed of (Fig. 7(a)):•ncαiparabolas, notedPαik,1≤k≤ncαi, whose equations are defined from their apexSαik(xSαijzSαij)and a parameterpαik,1≤k≤ncαisuch as(1)(z−zSαik)=pαik(x−xSαik)2,1≤k≤ncαiFor contacts that lead to no modification of the trajectory, the straight segments are treated as degenerated parabolas.2ncαi+2control pointsMαij, thus2(2ncαi+2)coordinatesMαij(xαijzαij),1≤j≤2ncαi+2ncαi+1straight segments linking some of the points.The geometrical model is then completely defined with the parabola parameters and point coordinates. The total number of parameters is then(2)ninc=2(2ncαi+2)+ncαi=5ncαi+4The geometrical equations linking the parameters are the following:–2 tangency conditions per parabola (left and right side), thus 2 tangency conditions per contact:2ncαitangency equations2 periodicity conditions (continuity and tangency)Tangency condition on the left side of the parabola(pointMαij(xαijzαij)):(3)2pαik(xαij−xsαik)=zαij−1−zαijxαij−1−xαij,1≤k≤ncαi,j=2kTangency condition on the right side of the parabola(Mαij+1(xαij+1zαij+1)):(4)2pαik(xαij+1−xsαik)=zαij+2−zαij+1xαij+2−xαij+1,1≤k≤ncαi,j=2kPeriodicity condition (continuity and tangency)(5)zαi1=zαijmax,zαi1−zαi2xαi1−xαi2=zαijmax−1−zαijmaxxαijmax−1−xαijmax,jmax=2ncαi+2The total number of equations is then(6)ninc=ncαi+ncαi+2=2ncαi+2In order to obtain a well-conditioned system,5ncαi+4−2ncαi−2=3ncαi+2geometrical parameters have to be given. Any of the unknown could be chosen. Since they are among the easiest to identify on a real fabric, thexαij,1≤j≤2ncαi+2are selected. They can be deduced from the data sheet of the fabric for the weaving contacts for instance. In addition, this will lead to an easier manipulation of the model.Since the crimp of the yarn is a predominant value for the fabric mechanical properties, characterizing the undulation of the yarn is a key point to obtain an accurate geometrical model. For 2D fabrics, crimp is often measured and used. For more complex architectures and yarn shapes, the crimp is not sufficient to describe the yarn undulation. Consequently, for the yarn undulation to be mastered requires that the heightshαikof the contact parabolas be controlled. Two cases will be differentiatedParabolas with a horizontal tangency:hαikis then defined as the z coordinate of the parabola summit. (Fig. 7(b)):(7)zsαik=hαikOther parabolas:hαikis then defined as the height h of the parabola with respect to the segment constituted by the contact point (Fig. 7(c)). The coordinates of one point(xc,zc)belonging to the parabola can then be calculated to get:(8)xc=12(xαij+xαij+1)+hαik−Sgn(xαij+1−xαij)‖MαijMαij+1‖̲(zαij+1−zαij)(9)zc=12(zαij+zαij+1)+hαik|xαij+1−xαij|‖MαijMαij+1‖̲And the following equation can then be written:(10)zCαik−zsαik=pαik(xCαik−xsαik)21≤k≤ncαiObviously, if the user prefers entering a point(xc,zc)belonging to the parabola, the software can deal with this and Eq. (10) is directly written.In any case, one equation can be written for each contact parabola(11)zsαik=hαikorzCαik−zsαik=pαik(xCαik−xsαik)21≤k≤ncαincαinew equations are consequently obtained.As a conclusion, the model exhibits5ncαi+4unknowns. Among them,2ncαi+2have to be implemented by the user as geometrical characteristics of the fabric. Those remaining are related by3ncαi+2independent equations. The model is well conditioned; the trajectory is therefore completely identified by solving this non-linear equation system.The trajectory being calculated, the yarn section has to be computed so that a consistent unit cell is obtained. Let us remember here that the strategy chosen is to impose the surface of each yarn to be identical to that of the others at the contact zone.In order to obtain perfect consistency at the contact zone, two conditions have to be fulfilled: the two yarn surfaces have to be parallel and they should have one common point. According to the definition of the contact surface given in Section 2.2, the contact surface of each yarn consists in a paraboloid supported by the two contact parabolas calculated in the previous section so as to respect yarn undulations (Fig. 8). The first criterion is therefore fulfilled because the two surfaces are supported by the same curves. In order to obtain the investigated common surface, (i.e. choosing the good paraboloid, Fig. 8), a common point Q has to be determined (Fig. 8). The aim of this section is to calculate the coordinates of a point belonging to the contact zone.Several definitions of yarn thickness can be considered when dealing with fabric geometry. In the present modelling, two of them will be considered alternatively, since both are interesting from a numerical point of view (to simplify equations) and the relationship between the both is easily written. The first definition,tαie(M), consists in measuring the distance between two horizontal planes tangent to the yarn section (Fig. 4(e)). It is undoubtedly the most intuitive and widespread definition of thickness and the closest to what is classically measured on fabrics. The second one,tαic(M), consists in measuring the yarn thickness in a longitudinal cutting plane (for instance the medium one, Fig. 4(e)), as it appears for instance on the tomography picture of Fig. 2 for the warp yarn. Yarn trajectory is classically defined as the curve that passes through points Oi, the middle of the yarn thickness when cut in the longitudinal medium plane (that is to say thicknesstαic(M),Fig. 9). Moreover, even if a lateral contact occurs, the lateral undulation occurs outside the contact zone, thus, both yarns remain in orthogonal planes in the contact zone. Therefore, the projection of the contact surface is always rectangular.Piis the contact parabola of network i, associated to the contact under study, its summit isSi(xsi,ysi,zsi).PiMis the parabola parallel toPi, and passing through M (xsiM,ysiM,zsiM,piM=pi).A1andB1, are defined as the extremities of the warp contact parabolaC1andD1are obtained shiftingA1andB1of a half thickness; they consequently belong to the external part of the warp yarn (Fig. 9).Their coordinates are the following:(12)C1:(xC1=xA1yC1=yA1zC1=zA1+O1O2⟶‖O1O2‖⟶t1c2),D1:(xD1=xB1yD1=yB1zD1=zB1+O1O2⟶‖O1O2‖⟶t1c2)For the weft yarn, in the transverse plane,A2,B2,C2,D2can be defined the same way.(13)C2:(xC2=xA2yC2=yA2zC2=zA2−O1O2⟶‖O1O2‖⟶t2c2),D2:(xD2=xB2yD2=yB2zD2=zB2−O1O2⟶‖O1O2‖⟶t2c2)The contact surface between the two yarns is therefore located in the following xy domain:xC2≤x≤xD2yC1≤y≤yD1The extremities of the contact surface are I, J, K, L, the coordinates of which areI:(xC2yC1zI),J:(xD2yC1zJ),K:(xC2yD1zK),L:(xD2yD1zL)The z coordinates of I, J, K, L will have to be calculated using the trajectory parabolas obtained previously. Indeed,Cα,Dα, I, J, K, L belong to the external contact surface of yarnα. In order to ensure consistency, the modelling strategy (see Section 2) imposes that the contact parabola of the yarn section is identical to the trajectory parabola of the transverse yarn. Consequently, and according to the definition given previously:C1I, J belong toP2C1;D1, K, L belong toP2D1;C2I, K: belong toP1C2;D2, J, L belong toP1D2.The coordinates of I, J, K, L can then be calculated from two different expressions. For example,zIcan be calculated from parabolasP1C2andP2C1(14)zI1=zs1C2+p1C2(yI−ys1C2)2(15)zI2=zs2C1+p2C1(xI−xs2C1)2The same kind of expressions can be obtain for the points J, K and L. If the data given by the user are consistent, the two expressions ofzI(resp.zJ,zK,zL) give the same value. If not, this is due to the inconsistency between the implemented yarn thickness with the implemented height of the undulation. On Fig. 9, this means parabolas C1D1and C2D2would not intersect. In this case, the software locally adjusts the yarn thickness, so as to respect scrupulously the consistency property. Indeed, depending on the user choice, weft, warp or both yarn thicknesses are modified: defininggI=zI2−zI1, the gap between the two z coordinates of point I, the adjusted values of the thicknesses are obtained as follows:(16)t1cnew=t1c+2αgI(17)t2cnew=t2c+2(1−α)gIWithα=1if the modification affects only warp yarns,α=0if the modification affects only weft yarns andα=0.5if the modification affects uniformly both warp and weft yarns. The differences for all points are calculated by the software as a matter of verificationObviously, the user is aware of this procedure and knows the needed adjustment value in order to decide if he keeps the suggested values or prefers implementing new data.The most important contact zone being defined so as to ensure perfect consistency, the contact part of the cross section is automatically closed using parabolas and segments (Fig. 4), depending on the input data (thickness, width, flat flanges).This second step enables to determine the cross sections of the yarns at each control point. The yarn geometry is consequently defined, the 3D volume being built thanks to the swept blend interpolation of the sections along the trajectory. This feature is available in any CAD software (Catia V5 in our case). The next section presents the implementation of the previous model in VBA and Scilab routines, in order to automatically generate unit cells on Catia V5.The aim of this section is to show how the previous model can be applied to the automatic consistent modelling of any interlock reinforcement using Catia V5. In this first sub-section, inputs consist in the theoretical weaving and yarn data, assuming that the reinforcement is ideally woven.Consistently with Section 2, implementing the data consists in a sequential 6-step procedure, executed in an Excel Sheet. The input table for step i+1 is automatically deduced and plotted by the software from the filling of step i. In the table of step i, detailed inFig. 10 for step 1 to 4, the user has to implement:1.The number of warp and weft zones (Fig. 10(a)) of the unit cell (a zone is defined as a group of yarns with the same z coordinates of the trajectory)The position of each zone in the fabric plane, and the number of yarns in each zone (Fig. 10(b)).For each warp: the number of contact yarns and the number of weft yarns involved in the contacts. In the example of Fig. 10(c), the warp yarn presents two contacts with the weft one. Contacts for each weft yarn are automatically deduced from the data of the warp ones.For each yarn: the longitudinal coordinate of each control point (Figs. 7 and 10(d)).For each contact of each yarn: the height of the undulation or the coordinates of a contact point (Fig. 7).Section parameters (width, thickness, flanges values) (Fig. 9).Any type of interlock architecture can then be implemented and treated by the software, which is the main difference from 2D tools, with which only the standard 2D patterns could be tackled. This succession of tables is really helpful to ensure the consistency of inputs and to guide the user in the implementation. This is all the more useful that the unit cells targeted by the software can be very complex (in the range of fifty yarns or so). The inputs are automatically interpreted by the software and the equation system developed in Section 2 is solved using a non-linear algorithm in Scilab.At this stage, the consistent geometrical model is obtained; the next step consists in creating the associated CAD model. Since Catia V5 offers this possibility, this task is automated through specific Excel macros that read the results coming from Scilab and create the associated Catia V5 features, that is: points, parabolas, segments and the swept-blend interpolation volumes of all the control sections along the trajectory. One of the numerous advantages of using powerful standard software such as Catia V5 is the presence and stability of complex geometrical features such as swept-blend interpolation.The CAD model obtained with the previously described inputs is presented onFig. 11 for the first interlock. It can be noticed on the transverse cuts that the model is fully consistent: there is neither interpenetration nor spurious void at the yarn crossing. A few minutes are needed to generate the input the data; the calculation is almost immediate on a standard laptop. The most time-consuming step (5min or so in this case) is the Catia V5 features creation, especially because the programme has not been optimized to save creation time but in order to enable an easy access to the user for model modifications if needed. Every geometrical feature and parameter can be modified directly in Catia V5 if the user wants to locally refine the unit-cell. In addition, since this step is fully automated, it does not need any intervention of the user.The CAD model obtained for the G1151® fabric is presented onFig. 12. The fabric architecture is well described and consistency is here again perfectly ensured in the accounted contacts zones, that is, the weaving ones. Nevertheless, the ideal unit-cell resulting from the weaving parameters and the theoretical contacts shows many interference between yarns. This is not surprising, as per section 1: for dense interlock fabrics many contacts exist in addition to the weaving ones: lateral, longitudinal and intermediate (Section 1.3). In addition to the longitudinal undulation and section changes, the yarns can be shifted from their theoretical location (Fig. 5), which leads to a significant modification of the unit-cell architecture and of the contacts zones. The next section is dedicated to the accurate modelling of complex patterns.Three main challenges have to be addressed:•Accounting for yarn shifts.Locating the contact points inside the unit cell.Creating the corresponding yarns resulting from these different contacts.This first challenge is the easiest to address, since the solution consists in slightly changing the input data. Indeed, instead of considering the shifted yarn as belonging to the same zone as the others supposed to be superimposed, a new yarn zone is created containing only this yarn. The yarn position can then be adjusted independently with respect to the others.In order to get a consistent modelling of the unit cell, the longitudinal beginning and ending of all the contacts and the undulation change due to the contacts have to be identified. Fig. 1 shows two transverse sections of a G1151® unit-cell and the contact points identified. In addition to the weaving contacts, the different types of contacts listed in Section 1.3 are encountered: longitudinal contacts, intermediate contacts inducing crimp or not, lateral contacts. Inside the G1151® numerous intermediate contacts occur, which makes this fabric representative of all the difficulties that can be met in fabric CAD modelling. Locating all these contacts a priori seems consequently unrealistic, and the more complex the unit cell, the more difficult it is. An a posteriori manual modification of the CAD model would take a huge amount of time and is therefore also to be avoided. Two different methods can be efficiently used depending on the available data and time:•The first one consists in examining the cross sections of the 3D tomography. This experimental strategy is undoubtedly the most accurate, but it requires the use of a Micro Tomograph (which is an expensive device), specific picture treatments so that the cross sections are parallel to the yarn directions, and an accurate observation of many cross sections. But since µCT is getting more and more used, with more powerful tools, this method is undoubtedly the most promising.Another method consists in using the ideal CAD model. Indeed, Boolean functions of Catia V5 can be used to detect interferences between the yarns. After the unit cell has been modelled, the software performs the Boolean intersection between all the yarns. The measured volume of the Boolean intersection enables to automatically detect the interferences and measure their volume. The footprint left by the Boolean operation (Fig. 13) on the yarn allows measuring the geometrical parameters of the interference, and then deducing the geometrical parameters of the contact zone: abscissa of the beginning and end, undulation height or thickness reduction.The conclusion is that in any case, an efficient method is available to get the desired contact data. The contact zones being detected, the next section is dedicated to the strategy deployed to account for them.Intermediate contacts with and without curvature of the transverse yarn are managed by the equation system (see Section 2) and the ability of the software to deal with degenerated parabolas (p=0, if no curvature exists). The new unit cell accounting with the intermediate contacts is presented onFig. 14. Transverse cuts help showing that there is no interpenetration in these different zones now. The other two types of contacts now need to be managed, in order to get a fully consistent unit cell.Lateral contacts occur in unit cells in which the yarn density leads to a distance between the yarns that is smaller than the yarn width. In this situation, when two neighbouring yarns cross, a lateral contact occurs. This results in both a transverse crushing of the section and a local shift of the yarn. As well as the lateral position, the trajectory and the width of each yarn have been calculated, the lateral interferenceivcan be calculated and these contacts can be automatically detected and managed. Repartition coefficientrlcis defined, which controls the ratio between the width (wαi)reduction and the yarn shift (ys). This ratio depends on the yarn constitution and especially on the fibre organization, which makes the transverse crushing more or less easy. It is implemented by the user and is a way to roughly account for the mechanical behaviour of the yarn, so as to get a realistic yarn shape. The crossing zone between two neighbouring yarns being automatically detected, three control sections are added on each yarn, so that lateral consistency is respected. The width and position of these sections are calculated according to the ratio rclwith Eqs. (18) and (19).(18)wαinew=wαi−rlciv(19)ys=(1−rlc2)ivIn the case of a bilateral contact, no yarn shift is possible, the value 1 is then automatically affected torlc. The interference is consequently totally affected to crushing. In the case of a unilateral contact,rlcand the other parameters of the section (wαi,tαic,hαik) are adapted to avoid the interference and obtain a realistic yarn shape. Once this treatment has been applied, a lateral contact detection iteration is performed, in order to ensure that the lateral consistency is effective. If an interference is detected (but this should not happen), it is managed through a local modification of the yarn width.The same type of strategy can be employed for longitudinal contacts. Ratiorcuis introduced, so that the contribution of crushing and vertical shift can be adjusted. The beginning and end of the contact zone are automatically detected thanks to Boolean operations in Catia V5. Then the extremities of the longitudinal contact zone are tracked and detected. Finally, two sections are added on each yarn at both extremities in order to ensure consistency.The new unit cell generated with these added sections (Fig. 15) enables to see the consistency of the new model.As a matter of conclusion, the final model obtained dealing with all the internal contacts reproduces with a high degree of accuracy the complex unit cell of G1151®. The proposed methodology is able to represent the complexity of any interlock unit cell. Micro CT measurements are an efficient tool to identify all parameters, but the proposed modeller can also be used, so that a consistent unit cell can be obtained through an iterative process from the data of the weaving and the yarn initial geometry. Even though the second method is certainly less accurate as regards the section shapes, it allows to get with little input a consistent unit cell that can be used for finite element simulation. Furthermore, the accuracy of the obtained unit cell is obviously much better than the initial one, or than any model that does not account for the different internal contacts.The second challenge that has to be addressed is the generation of an hexahedral mesh of the CAD model.The 3D finite element simulations that will be performed with this unit cell require a hexahedral mesh of the model. The unit cell obtained through this consistent and accurate model results in an assembly of complex swept blend solids. This often makes it impossible to mesh with the automatic algorithms of standard codes, such as Abaqus®. Moreover, the boundary conditions, contact definitions, etc. that have to be imposed on the unit cell can also take a high amount of time to implement. Finally, if parametric studies have to be performed in order to investigate the impact of the weaving or yarn dimensions, data input has to be as quick and as automated as possible.This second challenge will be described in details in another paper, but as a summary, Python routines using the results of the analytical model presented here enable to get a parameterized hexahedral meshing of the unit cell. Criteria dedicated to control element shapes are computed, so that they are not distorted. In addition, node groups, contact surfaces, element orientations, etc. are managed, so that the time needed for the Abaqus® data input is significantly reduced. This procedure is totally automated. An example of mesh is given inFig. 16 for a unit-cell of an interlock of G1151®.Using the generated mesh and data input procedures, finite element simulations can be performed with one or more unit cells.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
