@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Calibration of initial cable forces in cable-stayed bridge based on Kriging approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The FE model of a cable-stayed bridge needs further calibration after optimization.A Kriging surrogate model for calibrating the initial cable forces is proposed.The method can effectively avoid convergence problems in the traditional method.The method can avoid repeated finite element analyses during iteration.When the number of cables is large, it can be used together with traditional method.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Baseline model,Cable-stayed bridges,Initial cable force adjustment,Kriging model,Surrogate model,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Although optimization methods are useful in the preliminary design of cable-stayed bridges for sizing of components and getting optimal bridge configurations, further fine-tuning is invariably conducted in the detailed design thus affecting various sensitive properties such as the deck profile and cable forces. The zero-displacement method that adjusts the initial cable lengths repeatedly to achieve the design deck profile is both computationally intensive and prone to convergence difficulty. Therefore a calibration method is proposed based on a Kriging surrogate model built using the uniform design approach. Apart from establishing the relationship between the bridge deck geometry and the initial cable forces by statistical method, the Kriging model also obviates the need for a large number of repeated finite element analyses. A simple cable-stayed bridge is used to verify the feasibility and accuracy of the proposed method. In real-life cable-stayed bridges with many cables, a staged calibration is implemented so that the Kriging model is used to identify reasonable initial forces in the critical stay cables so that the zero-displacement method or similar can be used for further adjustments. Verification shows that this staged calibration can address not only the deck level tolerance but also the control of cable forces.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Cable-stayed bridges have become more and more popular over the past 50 years because of their desirable structural and aesthetic characteristics. With the continual development in design methodology and construction technology, cable-stayed bridges have opened up a new era of long-span structures with spans over 1000m, in which suspension bridges have been predominant until recently. Since the 1990s, a few notable long-span cable-stayed bridges have also been built in Hong Kong, including the Kap Shui Mun Bridge, Ting Kau Bridge and Stonecutters Bridge, to meet various transportation needs.The finite element method is extensively employed to analyse the behaviour of sophisticated structures under dynamic excitations such as earthquake, wind and vehicular loading [1,2]. However, in the development of finite element models, various simplifying assumptions are normally made because of the complexity of the actual structures. In the determination of the dynamic and static responses, it is inevitable to have discrepancies between the predictions by the structural model and their corresponding measured values. Therefore the initial finite element model needs to be properly calibrated so that the discrepancies between theoretical predictions and field measurements are brought within certain acceptable tolerances for monitoring and condition assessment purposes. A cable-stayed bridge typically comprises the deck, the towers and the cables. As the cables are effectively the only structural components that allow site control, it is essential to study the distribution of cable forces and their effects on the subsequent bridge behaviour. In view of this, the development of a finite element model by suitably adjusting the initial cable forces is an important milestone to provide a reference for more accurate analyses afterwards. Although adjustments of cable forces affect the geometry of not only the deck but also the towers, the vertical profile of the deck in particular is often accorded more importance in the calibration process while the geometry of the towers is often controlled by the horizontal displacements at the top. In the calibration process, the number of control points is meticulously chosen to avoid having an over-constrained optimization problem that brings along not only tedious computations but also lack of solution in many cases.Deck profile calibration can be carried out iteratively by systematically updating a set of initial cable forces in each cycle until certain criteria are satisfied by the final set of cable forces. Based on the criteria or approach employed, the method of deck profile calibration can be categorized into several groups. In the extensively used zero-displacement method [3], satisfactory deck profile under permanent loading is obtained by adjusting the initial cable forces to give zero-displacements especially at the cable anchorages. In the optimization method [4,5], the initial cable forces are adjusted based on certain objective functions from the perspective of efficiency or economy such as optimizing shapes of post-tensioning functions using the B-spline curves [6], maximum stresses in constraints and minimum stresses in stays [7], and optimizing the cable sections based on the load combinations [8]. The force equilibrium method [9] can easily account for the effect of prestressing and the additional bending moments due to the vertical profile of bridge deck, and therefore it can also address concerns of the long-term time-dependent behaviour. The unit force method [10] takes into account all relevant effects in the design of cable-stayed bridges, including construction sequence, second-order behaviour, large displacements, sag effect as well as time-dependent factors.Although various optimization methods are most useful in the preliminary design stage for sizing of components and getting an optimal bridge configuration, further fine-tuning is invariably carried out during the detailed design stage to make it practical for actual erection. For example, steel plates are manufactured to have certain standard thicknesses, stay cables consist of a number of strands of standard sizes, reinforcing bars have certain standard sizes, and the variations of deck section is often in steps rather than being continuous. The stiffness and mass will be slightly varied. While the final design after adjustments is still reasonably close to the optimum, various sensitive properties such as the deck profile and cable forces are often affected, thus requiring further calibration. Therefore, whether or not the design of a cable-stayed bridge has gone through the optimization process, subsequent calibration is indispensable for accurate structural analysis of service behaviour and long-term monitoring.In view of the complexity of real-life cable-stayed bridges, cable force calibration is often achieved by iteration using various commercial finite element packages with programming facilities [11] that allow optimization to be carried out under various constraints considered appropriate. After specifying a set of initial cable forces by approximate equilibrium conditions or certain assumed initial cable strains or stresses, structural analysis is conducted. The redistributed cable forces under permanent loading are extracted and the criteria for iteration are checked. If the deviations are considered unacceptable, the cable strains are modified, and then the optimization process is repeated until the specified tolerance is satisfied. Continuing in this manner, it is theoretically possible to arrive at a set of admissible cable forces eventually. However modern cable-stayed bridges tend to have many closely spaced small-size cables to facilitate erection rather than just a few large-size cables. As these cable-stayed bridges are invariably structures with high degrees of statical indeterminacy and the interaction among cables is not easily predictable, the determination of suitable initial values of cable forces is often a critical step for the subsequent optimization. Actually, an algorithm may fail to converge if there are too many specified objective functions or if the tolerances are made too stringent. Moreover, finite element analysis is carried out repeatedly in the iterative process, thereby substantially increasing the amount of computation required and reducing its efficiency. It is therefore desirable to develop an efficient and practical method for the calibration process.In many fields of engineering, the surrogate model or meta-model has been promoted as a promising method for finite element model updating [12–16] and damage identification [17]. In essence, the surrogate model examines various design variables and their responses in order to identify the design variables that give the best response. Using this, the original sophisticated finite element model can be replaced by a simplified surrogate model constructed by statistical approximation [16]. The surrogate model, which can be constructed after determining the relationship between the variables and the responses using design points [13], has the advantages of high efficiency, easy implementation and adequate accuracy. In the simplest surrogate model, the unknown function of interest is approximated by a polynomial with the random errors assumed to be normally distributed with zero mean, independent and identically distributed. Many alternative surrogate models are available, including the response surface method, Gaussian process meta-model, Kriging model, etc.To address the drawbacks of various available methods for deck profile calibration, an efficient Kriging surrogate model is proposed to calibrate the initial cable forces. Compared with the conventional response surface method that requires an understanding of the qualitative tendency of the entire design space, the Kriging model [18] provides better flexibility of modelling response data with multiple local extreme values. Having originated from geographical space statistics, the Kriging algorithm is a data interpolation scheme to predict unknown values from data at known locations and it is a virtually unbiased minimum variance estimation model [19]. The local estimation characteristics of the model can predict the function value distribution satisfactorily by means of a correlation function. With the development of the Kriging toolbox based on Matlab-DACE [20], the Kriging model has been extensively applied in several computer response models based on approximate simulation [21–24]. This is particularly useful in the application to “computer experiments” such that the sets of input and response are highly dimensional. For example, in the practical application to the design of an aerospike nozzle, only the constant “global” Kriging model has been shown to be more accurate than the conventional response surface models [25]. As the Kriging model is much better at prediction capability than many other fitting methods and it can greatly reduce the computation time, it is extensively applied in the reliability analysis [26].The complicated relationship between the geometry of the bridge deck and the initial cable forces of a cable-stayed bridge can be obtained by establishing a Kriging model using statistical methodology. Updating can be carried out with the established Kriging model by minimizing the residuals between the displacements of the deck at the control points and the objective values. For those bridges with a large number of cables, the surrogate model can be used efficiently together with the traditional method. In the present study, a cable-stayed bridge with a moderate number of cables is studied first. A reasonable number of design points are identified using uniform design to ensure adequate accuracy of the relationship between the cable forces and deck displacements. The outputs at these design points calculated by the finite element model are taken as the real responses of the bridge for this numerical study. In practice, bridge loading tests can be carried out to measure the displacements and other responses of interest. The quality of the Kriging model constructed is mainly assessed based on the accuracy of predictions. The uncertainties of the identified initial cable forces due to modelling errors and measurement noise can be quantified separately by the analysis of variance [27,28] so that a full factorial design of experiments can be applied to the corresponding factors. In addition, the method is also applied to a long-span cable-stayed bridge in Hong Kong for verification of its applicability to real cases.The construction of the Kriging model for calibration of initial cable forces consists of several steps as elaborated below.When “computer experiments” are used involving complicated numerical models and multiple factors to establish an unknown relationship between the response and inputs, the efficiency and accuracy of the method depends critically on the design of the experiment. Classical experimental designs are mostly based on models of analysis of variance that typically involve the main effects, interactions among factors and random errors [29]. An important objective of an experimental design is to provide a good estimate of all parameters in the resulting regression model with a realistic number of experiments. Unfortunately, with an increasing number of factors, both the number of parameters in the regression model and the required number of experiments increase exponentially. Various methods of experimental design are available including the full factorial design, central composite design, Latin hypercube sampling, etc. Among various experimental designs that spread the design points, the method of uniform design [29,30] is an efficient fractional factorial design, and hence uniform design has often been adopted to seek a reasonable number of design points that are uniformly scattered in the domain in order to achieve the necessary accuracy. The method of uniform design has been applied to various branches of science and technology [21], including civil engineering [31].The essence of Kriging model applied is briefly described here. In a problem with s design sites, each design site is defined by n coordinate components while each response has m components. The design variable matrix X of dimensions s×n can be written in terms of either the ith original n-dimensional column vector xicontaining components to define each design site or the jth s-dimensional column vectorx¯jof X as(1)X=[x1⋯xs]T=[x¯1⋯x¯n]Similarly the response matrix Y of dimensions s×m can be written in terms of either the ith original m-dimensional column vector yicontaining response components at each design site or the jth s-dimensional column vectory¯jof Y as(2)Y=[y1⋯ys]T=[y¯1⋯y¯m]The relationship between the response matrix Y and the design variable matrix X can be written as(3)Y=F(X)β+Z(X)where the product of design matrix F(X) and coefficient matrix β denotes the regression model that approximates the global trend of the design space, and Z(X) is the system deviation considered as a stochastic process that should be independent and identically distributed, e.g. normally distributed. For the deterministic response, polynomials of zero-order (constant), first-order (linear) and second-order (quadratic) are provided for the regression model in the adopted toolbox for Kriging model [20]. Once the order is chosen, the lth response ylcan be further expressed with k known functions as(4)yl=f(x)Tβ¯l+zl(x)where the k-dimensional column vector f(x) contains the regression functions,β¯lis the lth column of the coefficient matrix of regression β of dimensions k×m, which can be estimated based on the sampling points, zl(x) is the system deviation, and the limit k depends on the order of regression model chosen and the number of coordinate components n. For constant polynomials, k is 1; for linear cases, k is (n+1); and for quadratic cases, k is (n+1)(n+2)/2. The system deviation zl(x) is assumed to have zero mean and varianceσl2. The covariance between any two interpolation points xpand xqcan be determined as(5)Cov(zl(xp),zl(xq))=σl2R(θ,xp,xq)whereR(θ,xp,xq)is the correlation function between xpand xq, and θ is a parameter of the correlation function. The correlation matrix R has the typical element Rpqgiven by(6)Rpq=R(θ,xp,xq)The adopted toolbox for Kriging model [20] provides 7 choices of correlation model, namely exponential, general exponential, Gaussian, linear, spherical, cubic and spline. For example, the correlation function of the Gaussian correlation model is given in terms of the coordinate componentsxjpandxjqof points xpand xqrespectively as(7)R(θ,xp,xq)=∏j=1nexp(−θj(xjp−xjq)2)For an arbitrary point x⁎ and based on condition of the best linear unbiased estimation, the predicted lth componenty^lof the response vectory^can be determined using the predictor model in the toolbox as [20](8)y^l=(f(x⁎))Tβ¯l⁎+(r(x⁎))TR−1(y¯l−Fβ¯l⁎)whereβ¯l⁎is the lth column vector of the optimized coefficient matrix of regression β⁎ and r(x⁎) is the correlation function for the Kriging predictor, which are given by(9)β¯l⁎=(FTR−1F)−1(FTR−1y¯l)(10)r(x⁎)=[R(θ,x1,x⁎),R(θ,x2,x⁎),…,R(θ,xm,x⁎)]TBased on the field measurements from loading tests of the bridge, an objective function for optimization can be formulated in terms of the residuals of the displacements at certain control points between the field measurements and estimates from the Kriging model, namely(11)min{O(C1,…,Cg)}=min{∑i=1h(KMi(C1,…,Cg)−DFM,i)2}where O is the objective function constructed from the initial cable forces C1–Cgof the g cables, h is the number of control points chosen on the deck for calibration, KMiis the displacement at the ith control point estimated from the Kriging model using the initial cable forces C1–Cg, and DFM,iis the corresponding displacement measured by loading test. The procedures of calibration of initial cable forces by the Kriging model are explained below and also compared with the traditional method in the form of flowcharts inFig. 1.(a)The sampling points of the initial cable forces are generated using the techniques of experiment design. With these input sampling points, the corresponding selected displacements at control points of the deck can be obtained from the finite element model using any self-developed or commercial programme.The Kriging model is created with the initial cable forces and the displacements at control points of the deck associated with the sampling points of the model.A suitable optimization function is formulated to minimize the residuals of displacements of the deck at the control points between the field measurements and estimates from the Kriging model.Updating procedure is processed in the established Kriging model. With the calibrated initial cable forces, the finite element model can be further used for further analysis of the bridge.The initial cable forces of the simple cable-stayed bridge [32,33] shown inFig. 2 are calibrated by a Kriging model.Table 1 shows the structural parameters of the cable-stayed bridge. Each tower is made up of four segments with different sectional properties. The deck is monolithic with the tower at the intersection. In view of the relatively short lengths, the sag effect of the cables is ignored. The finite element model of the bridge is constructed using the commercial package ANSYS Multiphysics 12.0 [34]. As the cable forces are to be adjusted, the finite element model may comprise just the deck and the towers, with the stay cables replaced by their corresponding forces. Symmetry is assumed in this problem and control points for calibration are taken as the cable anchorages at deck level and the middle of the main span. For simplicity in monitoring the subsequent results, the correct forces of Cables 1–6 are assumed to be [11 11 10 10 9 9] ×103kN respectively. The deck is modelled by 84 beam elements while the towers are modelled by 8 beam elements. Each cable is modelled by a single link element. From finite element analysis, the corresponding vertical displacements at the control points from Nodes 2–8 under permanent loading can be obtained respectively as [−0.034436 −0.0094001 −0.0091918 −0.13097 −0.22358 −0.29343 −0.33057]m where upward displacement is taken as positive.Sensitivity analysis of the initial cable forces is then carried out based on a set of estimated initial cable forces. As long as the estimated initial cable forces are reasonable, the sensitivity results are not affected much. Each group of cable force is varied while keeping all others unchanged for the evaluation of the associated changes in displacement at the control points. With 10% increase and decrease of each group of the initial cable forces, the variations of the displacements at the control points are calculated and shown inTable 2.Fig. 3 shows that the deck profile is sensitive to all cable forces and hence all of them should be considered in deck profile calibration. As the sensitivity to the force in Cable 5 is the highest, if its initial value is closer to the correct value, the results will converge faster and be more accurate.The traditional zero displacement calibration method by the finite element method is first performed by an iterative optimization procedure. To start with, the finite element model is built up with the initial cable lengths as calculated geometrically from the drawings and the permanent loading is then applied. The vertical displacements at the deck cable anchorages are adopted as the criteria for iteration. In each cycle, adjustments to the initial cable strains are worked out based on the non-zero deck displacements obtained from the previous cycle for further analysis until the deck displacements at the cable anchorages come within the tolerance. However, if the tolerance for iterations is set too strict, the cable forces in many cases may stop at the limits of the allowable range and fail to converge. In addition, the method can only cater for control points at cable anchorages, but those elsewhere (e.g. Node 8) have to be adjusted by proper preset of formwork during construction, which cannot be predicted by the method. In the present example, the starting values of initial cable forces are taken arbitrarily as [8 8 8 8 8 8]×103kN. After 100 cycles of iteration with an allowable tolerance of 0.005m, the displacements at the control points are given inTable 3, with a maximum discrepancy of displacement at Node 2 of above 32.95%. Although the tolerance is set to be 0.005m, the displacements at the control points cannot converge satisfactorily. The corresponding initial cable forces obtained together with the discrepancies with the objective values are shown inTable 4 for subsequent comparison.During the experimental design for sampling points, a reasonable range for all the cable forces C1–C6 of Cables 1–6 respectively is chosen to be between 5×103 and 17×103kN as(12)C1,C2,C3,C4,C5,C6∈[5×103,17×103]Uniform design is chosen here because of the efficiency and accuracy. The uniform design tables designated as Un(qs) orUn⁎(qs)[30] are used, where U means uniform design, n is the number of trials, q denotes the number of levels for each factor, and s denotes the number of columns in the table. The tables with an asterisk have better uniformity and are therefore preferred. In this example, the uniform design tableU16⁎(1612)as shown inTable 5 and the associated application table inTable 6 are used here.U16⁎(1612)has 16 levels and can well cope with 6 factors for the 6 groups of cable forces with a small deviation D of 0.2518. Table 6 shows that Columns 1, 3, 5, 8, 10 and 11 of Table 5 should be used to form the design for the 6 factors. As the 16 levels are evenly distributed in the range of [5,17]×103kN, Levels ‘1’, ‘2’ and ‘16’, for example, correspond to cable forces of 5.75×103kN, 6.5×103kN and 17×103kN respectively. Therefore using Columns 1, 3, 5, 8, 10 and 11 of Table 5 and the above interpretation of levels, the cable forces for the 16 cases are worked out as tabulated inTable 7. Finite element analyses of the 16 cases are carried out and displacement results at various control points are shown inTable 8. Some plots of the Kriging model constructed are shown inFig. 4, which illustrate the complicated relationship and the challenge of the problem. Assuming the same starting values of initial cable forces of [8 8 8 8 8 8]×103kN as before, iteration by sequential quadratic programming can be carried out using the Kriging model to calibrate the cable forces efficiently. The calculated displacements at the control points are shown inTable 9, while the corresponding initial cable forces are given inTable 10. The displacements at the control points obtained by the Kriging model and the traditional “zero displacement” method are compared with the objective values inFig. 5. With a finite element model comprising 104 elements, the Kriging model takes 0.6s for calibration, while the traditional calibration method takes 32s. Therefore the Kriging model performs better than the traditional calibration method not only in accuracy but also in efficiency.The deck profile calibration process is affected by various uncertainties, including errors of field measurements, uncertainties of structural properties, construction errors, etc. and the Kriging model provides a convenient tool for evaluating the effects of uncertainties. Systematic errors will definitely affect the reliability of calibration result, but this can only be addressed by improving the measurement methods. In this study, the effects of random errors on the identified results are further investigated in respect of the modelling errors and measurement errors [35]. These random errors are assumed to be normally distributed and independent of one another.Only 7 key structural parameters have been chosen for demonstration as shown inTable 11 because they govern the amount of subsequent computations. For example, the modulus of elasticity of the tower is included as contractors often tend to provide concrete of higher strength in view of the serious consequences associated with substandard concrete. The adoption of slip-forming helps to control the accuracy of the cross sectional dimensions and hence the uncertainties of the cross sectional area and moment of inertia may be less significant. For each of the key parameters, two levels of uncertainty expressed in terms of coefficient of variation (COV) are considered. Then a full factorial design of experiments is used involving 27 combinations of input parameters. All parameters are assumed to be unbiased and hence, for example, the mean modulus of elasticity of the tower should be estimated taking into account the tendency for the contractor to provide stronger concrete. For each level of uncertainty, 20 samples of random error are introduced. Hence there are totally 2560 calibration runs as described in Section 4.3. The statistics of the identified cable forces due to uncertainties of key structural parameters are given inTable 12.The effects of field measurements of deck levels on deck profile calibration are analysed. Two levels of uncertainty of deck level measurement, namely 1% and 5% COV, are assumed for all deck nodes without rigid support. Strictly speaking, all the deck nodes without rigid support are subject to independent random error and should be considered together. However it is observed that interaction between cable forces and deck levels is stronger within either the left or right half, but interaction between the two halves is less strong. To focus on the former effects and to keep the problem for demonstration of reasonable size, symmetry is assumed for simplicity. Considering two levels of uncertainty of deck level measurements D2–D8 at Nodes 2–8 respectively and 20 samples of random error for each level of uncertainty, there are a total of 2560 identification runs for full factorial design of experiments. However the Kriging model can be used efficiently without any need for further finite element analysis. The statistics of the identified cable forces due to uncertainties of deck level measurements are given inTable 13.To evaluate the contribution from various factors to the identified cable forces, one may adopt the F-test [36] that is often used in the analysis of variance for comparison with factors of the system deviation. The significance FAof factor A is distributed approximately as F (fA, fe) given by(13)FA=SA/fASe/fe~F(fA,fe)where SAis the sum of squares of system deviation, Seis the sum of squares of deviation of experiment of factor A, and fAand feare their corresponding degrees of freedom. For the key structural parameters and the deck level measurements, the F-statistics of the mean and standard deviation of the chosen factors are calculated.Fig. 6 shows that the uncertainty of dead load of girder is the most significant among structural parameters, which is reasonable as the cables are direct load-carrying components. Therefore uncertainties of the dead load, e.g. density of concrete, accuracy of surface level of in situ concrete slab, etc., will significantly affect the identification of cable forces. SimilarlyFig. 7 shows the significance of uncertainties in deck level measurements. Measurements at Nodes 7 and 8 are the most significant for the exterior cables, i.e. Cables 1 and 2. For the interior cables, measurements at Nodes 6 and 8 are the most significant. In comparison, measurements at Nodes 3 and 4 are the least significant for the identification of cable forces. If instruments for deck level measurement are limited, one may therefore allocate the more accurate ones to positions of higher significance.Ting Kau Bridge is a cable-stayed bridge in Hong Kong with a total length of 1177m completed in 1998. The four longitudinal girders labelled as ‘1st’, ‘2nd’, ‘3rd’ and ‘4th’ are supported from four inclined cable planes emanated from three towers as shown inFig. 8. At each end of the girders, several back-stay cables are closely spaced as a group to stabilize the towers. They are labelled as shown inFig. 9 from A to D and E to I for those at the Ting Kau End and Tsing Yi End respectively. The finite element model of Ting Kau Bridge is constructed using the commercial package ANSYS Multiphysics 12.0. The deck, towers and struts are modelled by beam elements while the stay cables are modelled by link elements taking into account the sag effect, as shown inFig. 10. The flexibility method is used first to obtain the initial values of the cable forces [37]. It is a mathematical approach that involves developing and solving a system of equations that relate cable forces and displacement of control points using the concept of compatibility. However the sole criterion of compatibility may give rise to unreasonable cable forces. In addition, the common expediency of modelling a group of closely spaced cables as an equivalent cable also requires further calibration.The traditional zero displacement calibration method is first performed such that the vertical deviations from the design deck profile do not exceed 5mm. However, even with 30 cycles of iteration, the vertical displacements at control points still cannot meet the requirement. For example,Fig. 11(a) shows that the displacement of the 1st girder under permanent load has a maximum of around 8mm, where the nodes are numbered sequentially from the Ting Kau End. To comply with the allowable tolerance of 5mm, the cable forces can be further adjusted manually but this will be extremely time-consuming.Before conducting calibration using the Kriging model, it is essential to determine the key factors for the experimental design. With totally 384 cables supporting the bridge deck, it is impractical to consider all cable forces as key factors in view of the huge amount of workload and difficulties associated with highly constrained optimization problems. It is important to choose the key factors and obtain reasonable initial values for further iteration. As the bridge is asymmetric, the end back-stay cables play an important role in sharing the unbalanced cable forces and controlling the displacements of side towers. In addition, if one focuses only on minimizing the deviations of deck profile in the calibration, the stresses of some of the end back-stay cables may be unreasonably high. Considering the actual construction process on site and the practicality of deck profile calibration, the cable forces in each group of end back-stay cables for a longitudinal girder are assumed to be the same. This results in 8 factors for the experiment design. The cable stress should be above 0MPa but not exceeding 796.5MPa, which is 0.45 times of guaranteed ultimate tensile strength of 1770MPa. Totally 30 levels of the 8 factors are implemented with the finite element model and the displacements at 42 control points are worked out for the experimental design. The Kriging model is established accordingly. The control displacements include the 40 vertical displacements at the deck anchorages of the end back-stay cables (Fig. 9) on the 4 longitudinal girders, and the 2 longitudinal displacements at the top of side towers. In solving this highly constrained optimization problem, it may be helpful to adopt relaxed tolerances initially at certain critical points and then tighten them gradually. Therefore the initial tolerances at points E and J in Fig. 9 are set at 20mm, and the initial tolerances at points F and I are set at 10mm; elsewhere the tolerance is taken as 5mm. Iteration by sequential quadratic programming can be carried out using the Kriging model to obtain a set of more reasonable forces in the end back-stay cables that satisfy the relaxed set of tolerances. Then with these updated forces in the end back-stay cables and the other cable forces previously calculated by the flexibility method, the zero displacement method by successive adjustments to the initial cable lengths in each cycle is carried out until the final tolerance of 5mm is met. After this staged calibration process, the displacement of the 1st girder under permanent load is shown in Fig. 11(b) and the cable stresses under permanent loading as shown inFig. 12 are all acceptable. Therefore the Kriging model is instrumental in providing a set of reasonable initial cable forces for subsequent calibration so as to satisfy not only the deck level tolerance but also the allowable cable stresses.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The traditional zero-displacement method to carry out deck profile calibration of cable-stayed bridges suffers from convergence problems, tedious computations and unpredictable cable forces. A calibration method based on a Kriging surrogate model is therefore proposed. The Kriging model can be built efficiently using the uniform design approach with a prescribed number of finite element analyses. As opposed to the traditional zero-displacement method that requires time-consuming repetitions of finite element analyses in iteration, the Kriging model provides an effective interpolation technique for iteration without any further finite element analyses. The Kriging model can be utilized effectively in a staged calibration procedure to provide reasonable estimates of critical cable forces such as those in closely spaced group of cables. With the set of reasonable initial cable forces, further calibration can be carried out by iteration to satisfy not only the deck level tolerance but also the allowable cable stresses.