@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Probabilistic atlas prior for CT image reconstruction

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A powerful statistical image reconstruction algorithm for CT is proposed.Data obtained from earlier scans are used to construct a probabilistic atlas with Laplacian mixture model.Prior information obtained from a probabilistic atlas is modeled for the CT image reconstruction.We consider low-dose CT imaging setups using proposed method and alternative approaches.The proposed method outperforms other alternative methods in terms of image quality.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Computed tomography,Statistical image reconstruction,Probabilistic atlas,Laplacian mixture model,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Background and objectivesIn computed tomography (CT), statistical iterative reconstruction (SIR) approaches can produce images of higher quality compared to the conventional analytical methods such as filtered backprojection (FBP) algorithm. Effective noise modeling and possibilities to incorporate priors in the image reconstruction problem are the main advantages that lead to continuous development of SIR methods. Oriented by low-dose CT requirements, several methods are recently developed to obtain a high-quality image reconstruction from down-sampled or noisy projection data. In this paper, a new prior information obtained from probabilistic atlas is proposed for low-dose CT image reconstruction.MethodsThe proposed approach consists of two main phases. In learning phase, a dataset of images obtained from different patients is used to construct a 3D atlas with Laplacian mixture model. The expectation maximization (EM) algorithm is used to estimate the mixture parameters. In reconstruction phase, prior information obtained from the probabilistic atlas is used to construct the cost function for image reconstruction.ResultsWe investigate the low-dose imaging by considering the reduction of X-ray beam intensity and by acquiring the projection data through a small number of views or limited view angles. Experimental studies using simulated data and chest screening CT data demonstrate that the probabilistic atlas prior is a practically promising approach for the low-dose CT imaging.ConclusionsThe prior information obtained from probabilistic atlas constructed from earlier scans of different patients is useful in low-dose CT imaging.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
X-ray computed tomography (CT) has evolved into an essential imaging modality in clinical routines. It is hard to find a hospital that has no in-duty CT imaging equipments worldwide. Clinical diagnostic applications of CT are known as high-dose imaging techniques compared to the conventional plain-film radiography. The extensive use of CT scanning leads to a notable increase of the average patient dose and, consequently, increases possibilities to produce malignancy. The side effects of the radiation dose generated from CT scans become a concerning topic for further investigations. Although it is not yet strictly proven that regular CT scans may lead to malignancy, it is estimated that a rough of 2% of cancers may eventually be caused by the average radiation dose currently used in clinical CT [1]. Moreover, cancer lesion in radiosensitive organs such as lungs is correlated to relatively low dose of 100mGy [2]. It is estimated that about 75% of the collective dose from radiology is resulted from high-dose procedures such as CT in which organ doses are large enough to confirm a significant evidence on cancer risk increase [3]. The optimization of hardware factors such as scanning geometry, tube current and pitch factor would probably lead to a dose reduction. However, it is always preferable to obtain standard imaging techniques that minimize the patient dose with acceptable image quality. The conventional image reconstruction methods based on analytical inversion formulae are still the fundamental choice in clinical equipment [4]. On the other hand, statistical iterative reconstruction (SIR) methods are known to provide a higher image quality thanks to noise modeling and possibilities to incorporate prior information, which has a potential to be useful for some low-dose imaging protocols [5–8].In this work, we investigate the problem of image reconstruction from low-dose imaging protocols. By low-dose imaging, we consider reducing X-ray beam intensity, which is known to increase statistical noise in the reconstructed image (Fig. 1(b)). Moreover, we consider the problem of image reconstruction from a small number of projection views (Fig. 1(c)) and limited angle problem (Fig. 1(d)). Reducing the data sampling rate corresponds a reduction of patient dose, though it may meet some technical challenges when being implemented in clinical routines. In tomographic imaging, it is important to find the appropriate prior model to fit with the imaging application and data limitation. In this context, several prior models are presented to solve problems generated from limited tomographic data. Prior models can be classified into two categories based on the source of knowledge. First category is image-domain-based prior, where prior information is acquired from the reconstructed image domain such as Gibbs smoothing prior [9], total variation (TV) prior [10], Non-local means (NLM) [11] and Gaussian mixture priors [12]. Second category is auxiliary-domain-based, where prior information is calculated from auxiliary source such as reference image [13], dictionary-based [7] and intensity prior [14]. Anatomical information has been used in several tomographic imaging modalities such as emission tomography [15–21], transmission electron microscopy [22].Using of prior information obtained from earlier CT scans to improve the quality of low-dose CT imaging is become an interesting research topic. Several approaches are developed to address this problem. For example, Ma et al. proposed a post-processing method based on nonlocal means filtering, named ndiNLM algorithm [23]. The ndiNLM algorithm is proved to be powerful approach for noise reduction. However, it does not consider the statistical properties of photons. Chen et al. proposed the PICCS algorithm, which incorporate prior information obtained from reference image into the image reconstruction problem within the framework of compressed sensing [13]. Another interesting approach is the PWLS-PINL algorithm [24], which consider a nonlocal regularization using prior image obtained earlier with normal-dose scan. Major limitation of prior image-based reconstruction is the requirement of an earlier scan of the same patient, which is not always available in several CT applications. A hybrid reconstruction method is proposed by Sadowwsky et al. for cone-beam C-arm CT to solve the problem of data truncation with the limited field-of-view of C-arm scanners [25].The present study proposes a new framework for image generation in medical applications, which exploit a probabilistic atlas constructed by processing archived dataset to generate images with superior quality features in future scans. This framework might have a large potential to contribute to future trends in medical imaging such as modulating the patient dose, reducing data measurements, and improving image quality. Conceptually, the overlap between techniques of medical image creation (i.e. image reconstruction and imaging physics) and techniques of image processing (i.e. computational anatomy and computer-aided-diagnosis) is weak. The main stream between these two tracks is limited to forward medical images generated by imaging equipments into processing for diagnosis and analysis. In the context of image segmentation, the use of probabilistic atlas is a common approach to achieve accurate image segmentation in different imaging modalities. The atlas is essentially generated from a population of co-registered images corresponding to distinct patients and is then used to provide a complete spatial distribution of probability that a pixel belongs to each organ. This may provide a useful information that is used to decide an organ to which each pixel should be classified [26].In this paper, we propose a new SIR method using prior information obtained from probabilistic atlas computed using auxiliary dataset. We used a set of reconstructed volumes obtained from previous scans of several patients to construct a probabilistic atlas using the Laplacian mixture model (LMM). The mixture parameters are estimated using the expectation maximization (EM) algorithm [27]. The atlas and the mixture model parameters are then used to construct the image reconstruction cost function from limited projection data. The developed method can be considered an extension of our earlier work of the intensity-based MAP (iMAP) algorithm [14]. The main contribution of this paper is to demonstrate that the spatial information provided by the atlas leads to a more accurate reconstruction when the projection data is limited.This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the iMAP algorithm is briefly reviewed. The proposed method is detailed in Section 3. The experimental results are presented and discussed in Section 4. The limitations of the proposed method and future extensions are discussed in Section 5, while the paper is concluded in Section 6.Although analytical image reconstruction methods are still the main approach for clinical equipments, it is known that the data limitations lead to significant artifacts in the reconstructed image [28]. An alternative approach is the SIR, where photon statistics and accurate physical imaging models can be incorporated into the image reconstruction. This would lead to suppression of statistical noise and other data limitation artifacts in an effective way. Indeed, this would increase the computation time, but this problem can be mitigated with the use of high-speed computation hardware such as GPUs. The data acquisition in the transmission X-ray CT can be described in a discrete form using the following statistical model.(1)yi≈Poisson(biexp(−〈ai,x〉)),i=1,…,m,where x=(x1, …, xn) is the image vector representing the attenuation coefficients of object, y=(y1, …, ym) is a vector representing the raw detector measurements with the blank scan b=(b1, …, bm), A={aij} is the m×n system matrix that models the imaging system, and〈ai,x〉=∑j=1naijxjis the inner product of ith row of matrix A and image vector x. In SIR, the maximum likelihood (ML) approach is used in many cases. In the case of transmission CT, the solution is found through solving the following optimization problem.(2)x*=argminx≥0l(x)(3)l(x)=−∑i=1myilog(bi)−yi∑j=1naijxj−log(yi!)−biexp−∑j=1naijxj,where l(x) is the (negative) log-likelihood function. However, the ML method is known to amplify the statistical noise in tomographic reconstruction, which is a high-dimensional inverse problem. The typical approach to solve this issue is the introduction of a regularization term into the penalty function. Bayesian approaches such as Maximum a posteriori (MAP) are the common framework in this regard. The solution is found by maximizing the MAP function defined as:(4)P(x|y)=P(y|x)P(x)P(y),and the solution of the image reconstruction problem is found by(5)x*=argminx≥0L(x)+βU(x),where U(x) is the penalty term that represent the prior knowledge of the object in question. The compromise between the data fidelity enforced by the likelihood function and the regularization term is controlled by a hyper-parameter β. The penalty term (also known as the regularization term) can take several forms. The common approach used as a regularizer is the Gibbs smoothing prior [29–31]. Moreover, it is possible to integrate other prior information of the image such as intensity information. In the following section, we briefly introduce a recently developed algorithm by the authors with the name of intensity-based MAP (iMAP) algorithm. The iMAP algorithm is the basis used to derive the image reconstruction method proposed in this paper.Recently, we have developed an iterative image reconstruction algorithm from a small number of projection views named as iMAP algorithm [14]. In this method, a regularization term based on prior information concerning a small number of intensity values contained in the object in question is introduced. The regularization term, named as intensity prior, is computed using average intensity values of uniform regions in the scanned object, and it leads to a considerable improvement in image quality. The framework of iMAP algorithm is based on the fact that, in many CT imaging applications, most of anatomical structures, and corresponding attenuation information can be easily known or estimated in prior to image reconstruction. Moreover, the intensity value within the same region (organ) is almost uniform or is slightly varying.In the iMAP algorithm, the solution of image reconstruction problem is found by solving the following optimization problem.(6)minx≥0f(x)=L(x)+βD(x)(7)L(x)=∑i=1mbiexp(−〈ai,x〉)+yi〈ai,x〉(8)D(x)=∑j=1nminl=1Lωlξl(xj),ξl(t)=|t−zl|zl−1≤t≤zl+1,∞(otherwise),where L(x) is the negative log-likelihood after ignoring the irrelevant terms, D(x) is a distance function corresponding to the intensity prior, z=(z1, …, zL) is a set of a priori known intensity values arranged in ascending order (i.e. z1<z2<…<zL−1<zL) with z0=−∞ and zL+1=∞, and ω1, …, ωLare empirically determined weighting parameters corresponding to the intensity values. The intensity vector z is assumed to be known in prior to reconstruction as it represents attenuation coefficients of uniform regions in the scanned object. The weighting parameter ωlis determined from the frequency of intensity zlappearing in the image, which can be estimated from the intensity histogram. Fig. 2illustrates the penalty function defined in Eq. (8).When the image reconstruction problem is ill-posed due to the limitations of projection data, the regularization term in Eq. (8) is used to find a solution which minimizes the ℓ1 norm distance between each image pixel xjand a closest component of the known intensity vector z.The main challenge in minimizing the cost function in Eq. (6) is that the regularization term D(x) defined by taking the minimum of several ℓ1 norm functions is neither convex nor differentiable. Therefore, it is difficult to employ an ordinary gradient-type iterative method to minimize the cost function. Instead, the majorization-minimization strategy [32,33] is used to replace the minimization problem into a sequence of minimizing a separable surrogate functionf˜(x,xk). At each iteration k, the non-separable part to the cost function is approximated by a separable function around x=xkgiven by(9)f˜(x;xk)=∑j=1nβcj(xj−pj)2+ωh(xj)|xj−zh(xj)|+T(xk),h(xj)={h∈{1,…,L}:ωh|xj−zh|=minl=1Lωl|xj−zl|t},where T(xk) is the term independent of x and (pj, cj) are computed as follows.(10)pj=xjk+xjk∑i=1maij(biexp(−〈ai,xk〉)−yi)∑i=1maij〈ai,xk〉biexp(−〈ai,xk〉)(11)cj=12βxjk∑i=1maij〈ai,xk〉biexp(−〈ai,xk〉).The computational procedure of the iMAP algorithm is summarized as follows.(i)Initialization: Give the intensity prior z, set the initial image x0 as a uniform positive image, and initialize the iteration number as k=0.Majorization: The cost function f(x) is approximately majorized around the current estimate xkby the separable surrogate functionf˜(x;xk)in Eq. (9).Minimization: The separable surrogate functionf˜(x;xk)is minimized over x≥0 to obtain the image estimate for next iterate xk+1.Stopping condition: Set the iteration number as k=k+1 and repeat steps (ii)–(iii) until a stopping criterion is satisfied.During the implementation of the iMAP algorithm, we have found that the major challenge is how to estimate the parameters (zl, ωl) contained in the intensity prior. One possible improvement direction is to develop a robust approach to automatically or semi-automatically estimate the intensity weighting parameter ωlsuch that it matches to the intensity histogram of the image in question. Moreover, the structure of the iMAP algorithm is based on the pixel intensity values without consideration of any spatial information (i.e. spatially dependent nature). In other words, the iMAP algorithm uses prior information of expected intensity values for all image pixels equally. However, it would be useful to utilize additional information provided by the pixel position in the image. In the present work, based on these observations, we extend the iMAP algorithm by incorporating additional pixel-dependent probability obtained from a probabilistic atlas to further improve the reconstruction performance.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
