@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Neurosurgery planning in rodents using a magnetic resonance imaging assisted framework to target experimentally defined networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Framework based on magnetic resonance imaging and digitized 3D brain atlases for brain navigation.It allows the use of individualized information from multiple MRI modalities to assist experimental neurosurgery planning and in vivo tissue processing.Three examples of experimental designs in neuroscience are presented.The results illustrate its feasibility for identifying and selecting connected neuronal population in vivo and directing electrode implantations to targeted nodes in the intricate system of brain networks.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
MRI,Neurosurgery planning,Computerized rat brain atlas,Electric microstimulation,Functional connectivity,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Background and objectiveMeaningful targeting of brain structures is required in a number of experimental designs in neuroscience. Current technological developments as high density electrode arrays for parallel electrophysiological recordings and optogenetic tools that allow fine control of activity in specific cell populations provide powerful tools to investigate brain physio-pathology. However, to extract the maximum yield from these fine developments, increased precision, reproducibility and cost-efficiency in experimental procedures is also required.MethodsWe introduce here a framework based on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and digitized brain atlases to produce customizable 3D-environments for brain navigation. It allows the use of individualized anatomical and/or functional information from multiple MRI modalities to assist experimental neurosurgery planning and in vivo tissue processing.ResultsAs a proof of concept we show three examples of experimental designs facilitated by the presented framework, with extraordinary applicability in neuroscience.ConclusionsThe obtained results illustrate its feasibility for identifying and selecting functionally and/or anatomically connected neuronal population in vivo and directing electrode implantations to targeted nodes in the intricate system of brain networks.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Neurosurgical methods for precise targeting of brain nuclei are necessary to many experimental designs in current neuroscience. For instance, multiple electrophysiological recordings (from tens to hundreds of locations) are now possible with silicon probe technology. Simultaneous recording from multiple brain targets is fundamental to unveil the rules of information coding in such a system which implements a highly distributed and parallel processing. These technologies can be applied both in vivo and in vitro in live tissue. For in vitro recordings, the preparation of brain slices containing interconnected neuronal populations is critically limited by the lack of specific information on fibers trajectory. Thus, cutting brain tissue commonly results in the dissection of most, if not all, long-range axonal connections. Another example of current interest in neuroscience is the electric microstimulation of deep brain structures. This technique is being investigated in preclinical settings to uncover their functional principles and exploit their full clinical possibilities [1–13]. Stereotaxic neurosurgery is particularly relevant to deep brain stimulation since the precise location of the stimulated cell population will determine the functional outcome [14,15].There are two leading procedures for targeting specific brain structures. The first one is an atlas-guided technique based on the combination of an anatomical atlas with a stereotaxic frame. The main drawbacks of this method are the lack of three-dimensional information for the electrode insertion, the inaccuracy due to biological variability in size and shape among subjects, and the lack of specific atlases for all animal species and particular ages (for instance, from development to aging). Although inter-individual variation is reduced in experimental animals [16], especially in those lissencephalic as rats and mice [17], the lack of three-dimensional information and age and species-specific atlases hampers the precision in many experimental designs.The second methodology is based on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) guidance. This approach brings as major advantage the possibility to apply personalized surgical procedures and coordinates in three dimensions [18]. The inherent disadvantage of this approach is the utilization of two different devices, the imaging system and the stereotaxic frame, using consequently, two different reference systems. This problem has been solved in the past by recognizing in the images several tissue landmarks and using their relative position to determine the brain orientation in the stereotaxic frame [19]. Alternatively, recent work has exploited the idea of placing external landmarks, such as bars or cannula filled with paramagnetic material [16,20]. These landmarks are easily detectable in the MR image and are used to obtain the transformation parameters between the two reference systems. Regardless of the strategy, both reference systems need to be registered [21]. The process of obtaining the transformation parameters for the registration can be done manually or automatically by means of cost-function algorithms, and several registration strategies can be found in recently published papers [22–26].In the case of rat brain region-wise studies, most solutions assume as a de facto model the anatomical atlas developed by G. Paxinos and C. Watson in 1982 [27]. For instance, Schwarz et al. [28], Cai et al. [29] or Hjornevik et al. [30] developed their respective rat brain atlases taking as reference the Paxinos and Watson model. In [30] it was possible to combine the developed rat brain atlas with both Positron Emission Tomography (PET) and MRI, but involving manual coregistration. Schwarz and collaborators [28] presented a framework for functional MRI (fMRI) whereby it was possible to register automatically anatomical and functional images to a digital version of the Paxinos and Watson rat brain atlas. Besides the version of Schwarz et al., other digitalizations of Paxinos and Watson atlas attempt to improve the label coregistration accuracy using Principal Components Analysis [29,31].Another interesting approach is presented by the Allen Developing Mouse Brain Atlas [32]. Its tool elegantly provides a characterization of gene expression in the brain beginning with mid-gestation to aging, in conjunction with an online database and annotated reference atlases.Other methods involve spatial normalizations to a common stereotaxic space [33]. The current trend is given by whole brain registrations, as they allow inter-subject studies and extends the research to a higher level by giving the possibility to compare among populations. Such direction is followed in Schweinhardt et al. [34], who used the SPM software package (SPM99, Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, London, United Kingdom) to implement an approach to register functional MR images to a rat brain template based upon anatomical landmarks present in T2-weighted images. Anatomical correspondences in the two image spaces were identified and used in a label-based affine spatial transformation. However, this forces to identify as many anatomical landmarks as possible to achieve a better approximation. This method relies on the biological observation that the skull shape and size of rat brain are essentially the same as long as their weights are within certain range [19].In this work we are presenting a virtual space to assist sophisticated experimental designs and surgery planning in rodents using functional and anatomical information extracted from MRI, in addition to general cartographic information provided by an integrated brain atlas. Importantly, experimental designs can be planned based on both, average group-level imaging results or individualized results for specific subjects. Imaging data used to guide electrode implantations, orientation of brain slicing for in vitro experiments or complex surgeries in general, include functional MRI (fMRI), diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) and manganese enhanced MRI (MEMRI), just to mention some examples. The possibilities opened by the developed framework for the study of rat brain circuits in vivo are illustrated, as a proof of concept, in three examples of functional and anatomical connectivity experiments based on electric stimulation-driven fMRI and MEMRI neuronal tract-tracing.All computational procedures have been written using MATLAB R2009b (The Mathworks, Inc., Natwick, MA, USA). The FSL (FMRIB Centre, Oxford, United Kingdom) and SPM (SPM8, Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, London, United Kingdom) packages have been used for preprocessing and statistical analysis. All experiments were approved by the local authorities (IN-CSIC) and were performed in accordance with Spanish (law 32/2007) and European regulations (EU directive 86/609, EU decree 2001-486).Urethane anesthetized (1.3g/kg) Sprague-Dawley rats (250–300g) were implanted with platinum-iridium electrodes following standard surgical procedures as described before [35]. The microelectrode implantation was targeted to the nucleus accumbens (i.e., desired coordinates: anteroposterior or AP=1.6, mediolateral or ML=0.8, and dorsoventral or DV=6.8mm), and stereotaxic coordinates were facilitated by the virtual electrode placement tool provided by the framework. The stimulating electrode was fixed to the skull with plastic screws and dental cement and after that, the animal was placed in the scanner. Stimulation during BOLD-contrast fMRI acquisition consisted on periods of 4s of stimulation followed by 26s of rest, repeated ten times [35]. The stimulation pulses had a duration of 0.1ms, an intensity of 0.2mA and a frequency of 10Hz. Electric currents applied to brain tissue produce direct depolarization of neuronal elements (including somas and axons) and therefore fMRI maps under electric stimulation unveil the functional outcome of a particular stimulation protocol in a specific location.Isoflurane anesthetized (4% induction, 2% maintenance during surgery) Sprague-Dawley rats or ICR mice were stereotaxically injected with an isotonic solution of MnCl2 0.1M into the primary somatosensory cortex (0.1μL) or intra-vitreally (0.5μL), respectively [36]. Stereotaxic coordinates for the cortex were obtained from the virtual placement tool. After manganese injection animals were recovered from the anesthesia and i.p. administered with analgesics (buprenorphine 5μg/Kd). MEMRI scans were routinely obtained before (baseline) and 24h after manganese injection. Manganese ions reduce the longitudinal relaxation times (T1) of hydrogen protons. Consequently T1-weighted MR images show enhanced signal intensity at those locations where Mn2+ ions accumulate. Since Mn2+ is transported anterogradely by neurons, statistically significant increases in signal intensity will demonstrate the presence of efferent connections.Anesthetized animals (urethane for fMRI or isoflurane for MEMRI studies) were monitored for body temperature, heart rate, CO2 and SpO2 throughout the scanning session. All experiments were carried out in a horizontal 7T MR scanner with a 30cm diameter bore (Biospec 70/30v, Bruker Medical, Ettlingen, Germany). A 1H rat brain receive-only phase array coil with integrated combiner and preamplifier, no tune/no match, in combination with the actively detuned transmit-only resonator (Bruker BioSpin MRI GmbH, Germany) was employed. Data were acquired with a Hewlett-Packard console running Paravision software (Bruker Medical GmbH, Ettlingen, Germany) operating on a Linux platform. Functional MRI was done in 15 coronal slices using a GE-EPI sequence with the following parameters: field of view (FOV)=25mm×25mm, slice thickness=1mm, matrix size=96×96, number of segments=1, flip angle (FA)=60°, echo time (TE)=15ms and repetition time (TR)=2000ms. T2-weighted anatomical images were collected using a rapid acquisition relaxation enhanced sequence (RARE), applying the following parameters: FOV=25mm×25mm, 15 slices, slice thickness=1mm, matrix size=192×192, effective TE=56ms, TR=2s and a RARE factor of 8. For MEMRI experiments a modified driven equilibrium Fourier transform (MDEFT) sequence with MDEFT-preparation was used to obtain T1-weighted anatomical images [37]. The scan parameters were: TR=22.2ms, TE=4ms, FA=20°, ID=1000ms and four segments. The geometric parameters of the 3D scans were: matrix size=192×112×128, FOV=48mm×28mm×32mm, and voxel size=0.25mm×0.25mm×0.25mm. Parameters: FOV=15mm×15mm, matrix 75×75, 28 slices, slice thickness 0.25mm.We registered the experimental images to the standard space provided by Schwarz and collaborators [28]. It has two anatomical T2-weighted images used as templates (each with high and low resolution in the anterior–posterior direction, used here for MEMRI and fMRI respectively), and another image, with all the brain regions of interest (ROI) parcellated according to Paxinos and Watson atlas. The position of bregma is defined in image space from the stereotaxic coordinates [27], and is used as the origin of our virtual space.Experimental data of both fMRI and MEMRI acquisitions were preprocessed using SPM8 and FSL [38] software packages. Images were scaled by a factor of 10 to compensate the difference between human and rat brain size, and skull stripped (FSL BET, Oxford Centre for Functional Magnetic Resonance imaging of the Brain, London, UK) [39] in order to achieve better registration results. To improve brain extraction, data was rescaled by a factor of 0.5 before using BET (and by a factor of 2 afterwards) in the anterior–posterior dimension making the brain more spherical. Electric stimulation fMR images were also realigned with SPM8. Finally, the dataset was smoothed with a Gaussian kernel and registered to the atlas with FSL/FLIRT [40] using 9 parameters.Regarding to the esfMRI analysis, the SPM8-GLM machinery was used for the calculation of statistical parametric maps. The design matrix includes the temporal paradigm and the realigned movement parameters as regressors [41]. We estimated the statistical significance via Monte Carlo simulation as implemented in AlphaSim (AFNI AlphaSim, Biophysics Research Institute, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, USA) and applied it for statistical correction.The MEMRI statistical analysis procedure consists of a repeated measure t-test between pre- and post Mn2+ injection images [36].An approach based on Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was implemented to obtain a brain slice containing a neuronal tract of interest. The desired trajectory is defined by the user based on the result, in the present example, of in vivo tract-tracing with manganese injections and MEMRI. Desired trajectories based on DTI results are also envisioned. For MEMRI, voxels containing manganese were segmented by means of a semi-automatic region-growing algorithm. The user has to click on those voxels that contain manganese (they appear brighter on MRI) and define an intensity range in order to determine the belonging of other voxels in the neighborhood to the region. Afterwards, this 3D segmented volume is binarized and skeletonized. The most important locations (network nodes) according to the user can be selected before applying PCA. The two first principal components define a mathematical plane, which minimizes the mean squared error with respect to the desired trajectory. The optimal virtual slice with a desired thickness containing the trajectory can be determined from this plane. The user can maximize the number of nodes to be conserved modifying this slice thickness. The position of the calculated plane is determined by only two angles, elevation and azimuth, relative to the horizontal plane. The PCA is carried out by means of MATLAB statistical toolbox, which implements singular value decomposition.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In the present work a framework has been developed to perform neurosurgery planning in experimental animals with multiple applications in neuroscience. It allows both individualized and group-level information on functional and anatomical connectivity to guide experimental design and execution. We have first used the framework to extract individualized coordinates to implant a stimulating electrode in the core of the nucleus accumbens or inject the paramagnetic neuronal-tract tracer manganese in the fore-limb region of the rat somatosensory cortex. Then, we have automatically extracted the functional and anatomical connectivity patterns from the respective electric-stimulation fMRI and MEMRI experiments. Furthermore, we have introduced the concept of connectivity fingerprints and shown the possibility to derive the precise stereotaxic coordinates for the nodes constituting these networks. Similar experiments are envisioned based on diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), resting-state fMRI or volume based morphometry, to guide multi-electrode implantations in vivo, as an example. Finally, the possibility to use in vivo tract-tracing to image fiber trajectories between interconnected regions is used by the developed framework to extract the optimal sample orientation for slicing brain tissue while preserving neuronal connections of interest. Therefore the developed framework, combined with state of the art methodologies for non-invasive and longitudinal imaging of neuronal circuits, opens new avenues for understanding brain structure and function in health and disease.The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest.