@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Model based clustering of high-dimensional binary data

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A method for clustering high-dimensional binary data.The model is extended to include random block effects for repeatedly sampled data.A variational EM algorithm is developed for parameter estimation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Binary data,Clustering,Data visualization,High dimension,Latent variables,Mixture models,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A mixture of latent trait models with common slope parameters for model-based clustering of high-dimensional binary data, a data type for which few established methods exist, is proposed. Recent work on clustering of binary data, based on ad-dimensional Gaussian latent variable, is extended by incorporating common factor analyzers. Accordingly, this approach facilitates a low-dimensional visual representation of the clusters. The model is further extended by the incorporation of random block effects. The dependencies in each block are taken into account through block-specific parameters that are considered to be random variables. A variational approximation to the likelihood is exploited to derive a fast algorithm for determining the model parameters. Real and simulated data are used to demonstrate this approach.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Binary manifest variables are extremely common in behavioral and social sciences research, e.g., individuals may be classified according to whether they take holidays abroad or whether they are satisfied with their lives. In such circumstances, they can be recorded as agreeing or disagreeing with some proposition, or as being capable of doing something or not. Such binary variables are often thought to be indicators of one or more underlying latent variables like, for instance, ability or attitude.  Bartholomew and Knott (1999) classify latent variable models into four different classes according to the respective natures of the manifest and latent variables (cf.  Table 1). Note that latent trait analysis is termed item response theory (IRT) in the field of educational testing and psychological measurement.Model-based clustering is a principled statistical approach for clustering, where data are clustered using some assumed mixture modeling structure. A finite mixture model is a convex combination of a finite number of simple component distributions. Historically, the Gaussian mixture model has dominated the model-based clustering literature (e.g.,  Wolfe, 1963; Banfield and Raftery, 1993; Celeux and Govaert, 1995; Fraley and Raftery, 2002; McNicholas and Murphy, 2008; Baek et al., 2010). However, very recent model-based clustering work has focused on mixtures of non-elliptical distributions (e.g.,  Lin, 2010; Lee and McLachlan, 2013; Vrbik and McNicholas, 2012, 2014; Morris and McNicholas, 2013; Franczak et al., 2014; Subedi and McNicholas, 2014; Murray et al., 2014a,b). Mixture model approaches to data where some or all of the variables are discrete have also been considered (e.g.,  Hunt and Jorgensen, 1999; McLachlan and Chang, 2004).Model-based approaches for categorical data have received relatively little attention, and recent work on mixtures of latent trait models is summarized in Table 2.  Browne and McNicholas (2012) introduce a mixture of latent variables models for the model-based clustering of data with mixed type, and a data set comprising only binary variables fits within their modeling framework as a special case. Within their parameter estimation procedure,  Browne and McNicholas (2012) draw on the deterministic annealing approach of  Zhou and Lange (2010). This approach focuses on increasing the chance of finding the global maximum; however, Gauss–Hermite quadrature is required to approximate the likelihood.Gollini and Murphy (2014) propose a mixture of latent trait analyzers (MLTA) for model-based clustering of binary data, wherein a categorical latent variable identifies clusters of observations and a latent trait is used to accommodate within-cluster dependency. They consider a lower bound approximation to the log-likelihood. This approach is easy to implement and converges quickly in comparison with other numerical approximations to the likelihood. However, mixture of latent trait models become highly parameterized when applied to high-dimensional binary data, particularly when the data come from several different components or the continuous latent variable is high-dimensional.A mixture of item response models (Muthen and Asparouhov, 2006; Vermunt, 2007) has very similar structure to the latent trait mixture models; however, it is highly parameterized, uses a probit structure, and numerical integration is required to compute the likelihood. Thus, it can be difficult to apply to large heterogeneous data sets in practice. A similar approach has also been discussed by  Cagnone and Viroli (2012), who use Gauss–Hermite quadrature to approximate the likelihood. In addition, they assume a semi-parametric distributional form for the latent variables by adding extra parameters to the model.Multilevel mixture item response models (Vermunt, 2007) can be used to cluster repeatedly sampled binary data. These models focus on univariate traits because of the number of parameters in the model and the use of quadrature methods for the numerical integration of continuous latent variables. Accordingly, multilevel mixture item response models are not suitable for analyzing large data sets with underlying high-dimensional latent trait structure.For these reasons, we propose two different mixtures of latent traits models with common slope parameters for model-based clustering of binary data: a general model that supposes that the dependence among the response variables within each observation is wholly explained by ad-dimensional continuous latent variable in each component, and a model specifically designed for repeatedly sampled data that supposes the response function in each component is composed of two continuous latent variables by adding a blocking latent variable. The proposed mixture of latent trait models with common slope parameters (MCLT) model is a categorical analogue of a mixture of common factor analyzers (MCFA) model (Yoshida et al., 2004; Baek et al., 2010). The MCLT model enables us to reduce the number of free parameters considerably in estimating the slope. Moreover, it facilitates a low-dimensional visual representation of the clusters with posterior means of the continuous latent variables corresponding to the observed data. The model with a blocking latent variable can potentially reduce known variability of repeatedly sampled data among clusters; accordingly, we can be more accurate about cluster identification.In the mixture of latent traits model, the likelihood function involves an integral that is intractable. In this work, we propose using a variational approximation to the likelihood, as proposed by  Jaakkola and Jordan (2000),  Tipping (1999), and  Attias (2000). For a fixed set of values for the variational parameters, the transformed problem has a closed-form solution, providing a lower bound approximation to the log-likelihood. The variational parameters are optimized in a separate step.The general model is demonstrated on a US Congressional Voting data set (Asuncion and Newman, 2007) and the model for repeatedly sampled data is applied to a data set describing the sensory properties of orange juice (Lee et al., 2013). We compare our approach to the MLTA approach proposed by  Gollini and Murphy (2014). The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section  2, we propose a mixture of latent trait analyzers model with common slope parameters. The data simulations are presented in Section  3. Our approach is then applied to two real data sets (Section  4), and we conclude with a summary and suggestions for future work (Section  5).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
