@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Parameter-dependent behavior of articular cartilage: 3D mechano-electrochemical computational model

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A parameter-dependent analysis of articular cartilage is developed through a specific computational model.The results show how Young's modulus and Poisson coefficient control tissue behavior rather than electrochemical properties.Ion diffusivity and ion activity coefficients appear to be vital in controlling velocity of incoming and outgoing fluxes.This parametric study establishes a basic guide the essential properties to be included into computational modeling of articular cartilage.The model provides a helpful tool in articular cartilage simulations.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Parametric analysis,Articular cartilage,Mechano-electrochemical model,Cartilage Young's modulus,Ion diffusivity,Ion activity coefficient,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Background and objectiveChanges in mechano-electrochemical properties of articular cartilage play an essential role in the majority of cartilage diseases. Despite of this importance, the specific effect of each parameter into tissue behavior remains still obscure. Parametric computational modeling of cartilage can provide some insights into this matter, specifically the study of mechano-electrochemical properties variation and their correlation with tissue swelling, water and ion fluxes. Thus, the aim of this study is to evaluate the influence of the main mechanical and electrochemical parameters on the determination of articular cartilage behavior by a parametric analysis through a 3D finite element model.MethodsFor this purpose, a previous 3D mechano-electrochemical model, developed by the same authors, of articular cartilage behavior has been used. Young's modulus, Poisson coefficient, ion diffusivities and ion activity coefficients variations have been analyzed and quantified through monitoring tissue simulated response.ResultsSimulation results show how Young's modulus and Poisson coefficient control tissue behavior rather than electrochemical properties. Meanwhile, ion diffusivity and ion activity coefficients appear to be vital in controlling velocity of incoming and outgoing fluxes.ConclusionsThis parametric study establishes a basic guide when defining the main properties that are essential to be included into computational modeling of articular cartilage providing a helpful tool in tissue simulations.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Articular cartilage plays a vital role in the function of diarthrodial joints [1]. The initial event that triggers pathological process of cartilage degeneration is still unknown [2]. Hence, to investigate the initiation of cartilage diseases, most important parameters that control its behavior should be determined. So far, the common method to accomplish that, are specific experimental assays [3–5]. However, these techniques require high costs and elevate time consuming. Besides, experimental approaches limit the study of parameters in an individual manner. To solve these problems, in the last decade, it has emerged the use of computational models to simulate cartilage behavior [6,7] as well as materials mimicking cartilage [8,9]. Therein, the finite element method is the most used [10,11]. In the literature many material models for articular cartilage can be found. These models range from relatively simple, including the biphasic nature of the tissue [12,13], to models that include descriptions of all major individual components of the cartilage [14–18]. However, the main parameters to consider in these simulations remain still obscure since the requirements of a material model are highly dependent on the particular question under research. In general, the more features of the composition and structure of articular cartilage are included, the larger the number of material parameters that must be determined, and the more computationally expensive the model becomes. Hence, we should always try to use the simplest model with the lowest number of tissue properties to obtain the required data but without compromising the predictive capacity of the computational model.The present parametric study faces important questions like: (i) is the weakening of collagen matrix enough for tissue to swell or it is required to consider the proteoglycans content decrement? (ii) is Poisson coefficient an essential parameter in articular cartilage modeling? (iii) which phenomena, mechanical, chemical or electrical do manage tissue behavior? (iv) are they combined to control tissue behavior or one of them is more relevant?To solve these questions a previous developed three-dimensional mechano-electrochemical model [16,17] has been used to analyze and quantify the influence of each parameter variation into cartilage behavior. Specifically, Young's modulus (E), Poisson coefficient (ν), cation and anion diffusivities (D+ and D−, respectively), cation and anion activity coefficient (γ+ and γ−, respectively) changes have been addressed. To our knowledge, this is the first parametric study that determines the influence of these properties in an isolate manner in cartilage behavior, resulting in a basic guide to select the main parameters required for articular cartilage simulation. Note that the model includes essential biological phenomena, previously described in literature, that affect cartilage behavior (diffusive-convective events and mechano-electrochemical effects) [14,19,20]. However, it excludes those that experimentally show less influence as the viscosity of the solid matrix. Often, material models of articular cartilage exclude this effect since in short-term type of simulation the viscosity does not play a great role and articular cartilage appears as an elastic solid with lower compressibility [21,22]. Results show that (i) only collagen degradation is required to promote tissue swelling; (ii) minimal variation in ν generates significant differences in tissue swelling and water and anion fluxes; (iii) variation in D+ and D− seems to have less influence in capturing cartilage behavior than the mechanical parameters, however, they control the velocity of ion fluxes and finally, (iv) similar to D+ and D−, γ+ and γ− show lower influence into tissue deformation (one order or magnitude less) than the studied mechanical properties.The presented parametric study is a helpful tool to decipher the effects on cartilage simulated behavior when varying Young's modulus, Poisson coefficient, and ion activity and diffusivity coefficients. Besides, the inclusion of repulsion phenomenon due to negative fixed charges attached to proteoglycans and the 3D nature of the model, present this algorithm as a new and easy method for the analysis and selection of the main parameters to include in cartilage computational models.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this work, a parametric study of the main mechano-electrochemical parameters of articular cartilage has been performed. To this aim, a previous developed three-dimensional mechano-electrochemical model has been used to analyze and quantify the influence of each parameter in cartilage behavior [16,17]. Specifically, E, ν, D+, D−, γ+ and γ− effects have been addressed. To our knowledge, this is the first parametric study that determines the influence of these properties in an individual manner in cartilage behavior, resulting in a fundamental guide to select the main parameters required for articular cartilage simulation. The relevance of this previous validated model and its current application lies on the impossibility of setting up the parametric variation and subsequent analysis experimentally.Under these conditions, the obtained results demonstrate that (i) only the consideration of collagen fibers degradation by reducing the E results in higher values of tissue swelling. Thus, in contrast with other authors that remark the necessity of including proteoglycan associated reduction, only collagen degradation is essential to promote tissue swelling. (ii) Regarding ν, there is a general tendency to include this parameter in computational simulation as a constant and no experimental measurement is usually developed to determine its variation upon age, sex or part of the body where the tissue is found. However, results derived from this work showed that a minimal variation in ν generates significant differences in tissue swelling and water and ion fluxes. Therefore, it is essential to include consistent values of ν as well as its correlation with the rest of mechanical properties in computational simulation to capture the correct articular cartilage behavior. Besides, both, E and ν, have been shown to be the parameters with more influence in tissue behavior, among all studied properties. (iii) Variation in ion diffusivities seems to have less influence in cartilage behavior than the other mechanical parameters. In the other hand, they control the velocity of ion outgoing fluxes toward the external bath and limit the incoming flux of water. Thus, they also control swelling and tissue behavior but less than previously analyzed parameters. Finally, (iv) high values of ion activity coefficients generate higher disbalance between inside and outside the tissue, however, similar to ion diffusivities their influence is lower (one order or magnitude less) than the studied mechanical properties. Additionally, since articular cartilage behavior has been evidenced to be very sensitive to variation of several mechano-electrochemical parameters, the use of additional sophisticated tools for parametric sensitivity analysis is suggested [29,30]. Their use could help in the better understanding of the involved parameters.With all this, we consider that this parametric study represents a valuable tool to predict and quantify the impact of each mechano-electrochemical parameter into tissue deformation capacity.The authors declare that there is no conflict of interests regarding the publication of this paper.