@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The numerical analysis of non-Newtonian blood flow in human patient-specific left ventricle

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Aim: investigate the effect of different rheological models of blood within the LV.Model: the MRI images are used to reconstruct the time-resolved geometry of LV.Finding: the non-Newtonian assumption is significant on the LV flow dynamics.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Left ventricle,Hemodynamics,Non-Newtonian,Shear rates,Computational fluid dynamics,Fluid–structure interaction,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Recently, various non-invasive tools such as the magnetic resonance image (MRI), ultrasound imaging (USI), computed tomography (CT), and the computational fluid dynamics (CFD) have been widely utilized to enhance our current understanding of the physiological parameters that affect the initiation and the progression of the cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) associated with heart failure (HF). In particular, the hemodynamics of left ventricle (LV) has attracted the attention of the researchers due to its significant role in the heart functionality. In this study, CFD owing its capability of predicting detailed flow field was adopted to model the blood flow in images-based patient-specific LV over cardiac cycle. In most published studies, the blood is modeled as Newtonian that is not entirely accurate as the blood viscosity varies with the shear rate in non-linear manner. In this paper, we studied the effect of Newtonian assumption on the degree of accuracy of intraventricular hemodynamics. In doing so, various non-Newtonian models and Newtonian model are used in the analysis of the intraventricular flow and the viscosity of the blood. Initially, we used the cardiac MRI images to reconstruct the time-resolved geometry of the patient-specific LV. After the unstructured mesh generation, the simulations were conducted in the CFD commercial solver FLUENT to analyze the intraventricular hemodynamic parameters. The findings indicate that the Newtonian assumption cannot adequately simulate the flow dynamic within the LV over the cardiac cycle, which can be attributed to the pulsatile and recirculation nature of the flow and the low blood shear rate.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The blood contains some particles and semisolid components such as the cells, proteins, lipoproteins, and ions [1] and as such possess non-Newtonian characteristics. Moreover, published experimental results demonstrated that the blood viscosity has the characteristics of shear thinning, thixotropic, viscoelasticity, and yield stress in some range of the shear rate [2–4] and as such the blood viscosity significantly depends upon the flow shear rate history. It is known that the transition shear rate of blood viscosity from non-Newtonian to Newtonian is around 100s−1 which implying that the apparent viscosity remains constant for the shear rate larger than this amount, and hence the assumption of Newtonian blood could be valid for the shear rate higher than a shear rate of 100s−1[5]. However, it should be noted that the blood shear rate in some parts of the cardiovascular system is less than 100s−1 in transient flow, especially in the region of high pulsatile and recirculating blood flow [6]. Moreover, it is recognized that the non-Newtonian property of the blood is quite significant during the deceleration period of the cardiac cycle where the velocity and velocity gradients approaching zero [7]. Therefore, to model the fluid flow behavior inside LV, it is necessary to take into account the effect of blood non-Newtonian behavior on the accuracy of the numerical prediction under the whole cardiac cycle. The Newtonian assumption of the blood is almost the common approximation in the numerical study of the cardiovascular systems owing to the complexity of solving non-Newtonian constitutive equations and in most published research the effect of the blood non-Newtonian characteristic has been neglected and most researchers have assumed a constant viscosity during the whole cardiac cycle. This assumption could affect the prediction of the hemodynamics of the cardiovascular system in the whole or in a part of the cardiac cycle, especially in a period with low shear rate [8]. Moreover, it has been argued that the blood significantly exhibits the non-Newtonian behavior in disease conditions such as the myocardial infarction, cerebrovascular diseases, and hypertension [9,10]; consequently, the rheological parameter of the blood must be employed in numerical simulation of patient-subject cardiovascular systems. In addition, due to the recent advancement of CFD modeling, it is now much more feasible to implement the complex non-Newtonian constitutive assumptions in Navier–Stokes equations.In recognition of this fact some researchers [7,11–17] have simulated various blood non-Newtonian constitutive equations to analysis different parts of the cardiovascular hemodynamics. Johnston et al. [7,11] investigated the influence of different non-Newtonian models on the hemodynamics of the coronary arteries for both steady and unsteady conditions. After extensive comparison of Newtonian and various non-Newtonian models, they concluded that the generalized power-law (GP) model is the appropriate model to analyze the WSS distribution of the blood flow in low shear rate ranges. However, Freshwater et al. [18] modeled various model of bypass arteries grafts and concluded that for high shear rate the effect of non-Newtonian is not significant. Still, Razavi et al. [13] showed that the power-law model led to more deviation in velocity and the WSS in the stenosis artery in comparison to the other models in the pulsatile conditions. Karimi et al. [12] demonstrated that the blood rheological affects the WSS distribution within the aorta during the diastole, and more specifically, the Cross rheological model significantly has different WSS distributions in comparison with other models. Molla et al. [14] demonstrated that the non-Newtonian parameters have a significant influence on the hemodynamics and post-stenosis recirculation in the eccentric stenosis channel. The authors showed that the pressure drop due to the shear stress at the stenosis wall was higher than the one obtained using the Newtonian model and it also was observed that due to the higher reduction of shear stress, the arterial remodeling of the stenosis was enhanced and the endothelium damage increased. The authors then concluded that the non-Newtonian model could predict better the augmentation of the stenosis rather than the Newtonian model. Valencia et al. [19] showed that the discrepancies between the Newtonian and non-Newtonian property of the blood in the high gradient region is more critical in the carotid artery with an aneurysm. Other results showed that the non-Newtonian assumption was found to be critical in the aneurysm due to the large spatiotemporal variation of the WSS during the transient cardiac cycle. Do [20] investigated the influence of the different non-Newtonian blood property of the arteries. The numerical results demonstrated that the non-Newtonian property of the blood could strongly affect the spatiotemporal distribution of the WSS and other hemodynamics parameters. However, most of the available literature indicates that the non-Newtonian behavior of the blood could be a critical factor and might considerably affect the prediction of cardiovascular hemodynamics. Moreover, the recent published literatures that investigated the hemodynamic of different parts of cardiovascular system using Newtonian and various non-Newtonian models are listed in Table 1.Notwithstanding, there is a recognition that, the blood non-Newtonian property might affect the flow characteristics of the patient-specific LV, as many researchers ignored the effect of the non-Newtonian property of the blood on the numerical simulation of the patient-specific LV [8,21–26] or idealized LV [27–30], and only a few researchers applied it in their simulations. For instance, Schenkel et al. [31] employed the Carreau–Yasuda model, and Krittian et al. [32] used the Carreau model of the non-Newtonian blood in the simulation of the patient-specific LV. However, to the best of our knowledge, this important effect has not been thoroughly investigated to assess the hemodynamics of the LV under the correct physiological blood flow. In this paper due to the lack of the information on the influence of the blood rheological models on the intraventricular hemodynamics, we investigated the effect of various non-Newtonian models within the patient-specific LV over a complete cardiac cycle. In doing so, the Navier–Stokes equations coupled with different non-Newtonian models were analyzed using the commercial ANSYS FLUENT software. Based on the numerical results, in this paper, we will fully discuss and analyze the hemodynamics parameters of the patient-specific LV that could be influenced by the implementation of non-Newtonian assumption.In this research, the 3D LV anatomy model of normal subject is reconstructed by using the MRI images that were acquired by a 1.5T MR scanner (Avanto, Simens Medical Solution, Erlangen) at National Heart Centre Singapore. During the MRI examination, 30 frames of the images were extracted in one cardiac cycle. Subsequently, the extracted images were utilized to reconstruct the anatomical geometry of the LV by using the image processing techniques. The segmentation process and image processing is not within the scope of this paper and to obtain more information regarding this, please refer to our previous work [33–35]. However, due to the insufficient spatiotemporal resolution of the extracted medical images during one cardiac cycle in the numerical simulation, extra intermediate images between main images were produced by using the cubic-spline interpolation method. The numbers of the intermediate images were in a way that the Courant number close to unity due to the convergence criteria of numerical simulation. The total number of the reconstructed geometries/time-steps are 1500 that includes 600 time-steps for the systolic and 900 time-steps for diastolic phase. During the simulation, the geometry of the LV was updated by loading the new positions of the surface nodes and by implanting a UDF in FLUENT. Due to the variation of the geometry, the new mesh was generated by using the combination of the FLUENT robust mesh smoothing and re-meshing feature. The mesh and time independency were checked to produce reasonable time step and mesh size and the result showed that the flow features do not change for the current number of the meshes and time-steps. The total number of the unstructured meshes in the first time steps was 1,483,528 elements.As shown in Fig. 1, due to the low spatiotemporal resolution of the MRI images to capture the movement of the valve leaflets, both mitral and aortic valves are simply modeled as the orifices. The orifice-type modeling of heart valves have been used widely in previous LV simulations [17,22,36–38] and it is verified that this model could mimic the intraventricular hemodynamics. We used the pressure boundary condition in both the mitral and aortic valve openings [31]. The inlet and outlet boundaries were chosen away from the exact position of the mitral and aortic valves by adding a part of the atrium and aorta to the geometry in order to avoid their effect on the intraventricular flow [22]. During the systole, the inlet and outlet boundaries treat like pressure outlet and wall boundary condition, respectively. In addition, during the diastole the aortic and mitral valve treats like wall and pressure inlet boundary condition, respectively. The endocardium motion was prescribed by variation of the geometry during the cardiac cycle. Moreover, the blood flow field was assumed to be at rest in the initial condition; so to avoid the initial condition error and reach the quasi-steady condition of the fluid flow, it is necessary to run the case of several cycles. We had simulated some cases for four cycles and observed that the flow was repeated after the third cycle; therefore, in order to reduce CPU time we simulated three only cycles. Fig. 2demonstrates how the intraventricular flow pattern in one arbitrary plane (the long axis plane, see Fig. 1) was developed among four cycles in one specific rheological model and specific moment of the cycle. A qualitatively comparison of the flow pattern reveals that the flow between third and fourth cycle is roughly identical. Moreover, we computed the standard deviation of the ventricular volume-average viscosity difference between two sequent cycles in all time steps (for case study in the generalized power-law model) to quantitatively evaluate the repeatability of the flow pattern after three cycles. Result represented that this value was 12.56%, 1.952%, and 0.366% between the first and second cycle, second and third cycle, and finally between third and fourth cycle, respectively. Consequently, taken together the qualitative and quantitative comparison of the flow development in four sequent cycles, it can conclude that the flow would be replicated with an expected minor variation of the hemodynamic parameters after the third cycle.Fig. 3shows the variation of the LV volume during the cardiac cycle. The end-diastolic volume (EDV) and end-systolic volume (ESV) of the LV are 105.89ml and 55.46ml, respectively. As a result, the stroke volume (SV) and the ejection fraction (EF) of the LV are 50.43ml and 47.62%. It should be noted that the computational domain contains a small part of the atrium and aorta, so the actual amount of the EDV, ESV, SV and EF are different. Here, we used the dimensionless time for convenience and as it is shown in Fig. 3, only few moments were chosen to demonstrate the credibility of the results: (a) T=0, onset of systole, (b) T=0.227, peak of ejection, (c) T=0.4, onset of diastole, (d) T=0.65, rapid filling, (e) T=0.88, slow filling, and (f) T=1, end of diastole.Arbitrary Lagrangian–Eulerian (ALE) is the most effective way to analysis the FSI problems with the small and large structural deformation. The interface boundaries of the fluid domain deform in a similar manner to the structure deforms [39]. The integral form of the Navier–Stokes and continuity equations as two fluid domain governing equations in the ALE formulation take the following formulation [40]:(1)ρρt∫∀ρd∀+∫Sρ(v−vb).ndS=0(2)ρρt∫∀ρvd∀+∫S(ρv(v−vb)+pI−τ).ndS=0where t is time, ∀ the control volume, S the boundary surface, ρ the density, v the velocity vector of fluid in a Eulerian description, vbthe velocity vector of the boundary, n normal to the surface, p pressure, I unit tensor, and τ the stress tensor. The stress tensor in Navier–Stokes equations equals the following equation:(3)τij=μapp∂ui∂xj+∂uj∂xiwhere the μapp is the local dynamic apparent viscosity of the fluid, and xiand xjindicate the coordination of the fluid. The kinematic and dynamic of both the fluid and structure elements are equal in fluid–structure interface [29]. As results, the boundary conditions at the fluid–structure interface are the following equations:(4)df=ds(5)n.τf=n.τswhere d is the displacement, τ stress, and n the normal to the FSI interface. In the ALE framework, the solver computes the surface mesh velocity by comparing the previous and the new mesh position. However, in the Newtonian fluid, the fluid local apparent dynamic viscosity (μapp) is constant in the entire domain, but in the non-Newtonian fluid the local apparent dynamic viscosity is a function of the shear rate history and some material constants. Some of the most frequently used non-Newtonian models (see Table 2) have been selected to use in the current simulation: [12], in all of the aforementioned non-Newtonian constitutive equations,γ˙represents the scalar quantity of the fluid shear rate that equalsγ˙=2tr(D), where D=1/2(∇v+∇vT) is the deformation rate that demonstrates the variation of the apparent viscosity of all of these non-Newtonian models versus the shear rate. In all the proposed equations, as shown in Fig. 4, the viscosity is higher than the Newtonian viscosity in the range of shear rate less than 102s−1 and it reaches the Newtonian viscosity for the shear rate higher than 103s−1. A user-defined function (UDF) was compiled in the CFD solver in order to supply the non-Newtonian constitutive equations.Fig. 5shows the variation of the blood average viscosity during a complete cardiac cycle. In general, as expected, the figure demonstrates that the average value of viscosity is decreasing during the accelerating period (before the peak of ejection and rapid filling) and decreasing during decelerating period (after peak of ejection and during the slow filling). The peak and minimum value of the average viscosity found to be located in the slow filling and peak of ejection, respectively. However, it is observed that the average viscosity of the Carreau model remained higher than other four models during the whole cycle. Though this quantity for KL model was found to be lower in comparison to the other models, yet the viscosity is still higher than the Newtonian case. However, the average viscosity of Carreau and GP models were found to be somewhat similar and both models have the same pattern during the whole cycle. Still, the average viscosity of the Cross and Casson models were found to be located in the middle of the figure. In addition to the Cross model, the viscosity was found to be lower than the Carreau, GP, and Casson during the systole, but it reached the Carreau and GP value at the late diastole.Johnston et al. [11] introduced the global importance factor (IG) to quantitatively investigate the significance of various non-Newtonian model in coronary arteries. They concluded that IG=0.25 is the cut-off value of importance factor, implying that the model with above the cut-off has a significance in the simulation. Here, we used the same idea to evaluate the influence of the non-Newtonian models on the predictions of the hemodynamics of the LV. The global importance factor is defined as the following equation:(6)IG=1N∑i=1N(μ−μ∞)20.5μ∞×100where N is the total number of the computational grid, i the grid index, μ∞ is the Newtonian viscosity and N is the total node number. Table 3shows the values of IGfor different models in selected times. As it can be seen from this table, this value for the Casson and KL models remains under the cut-off value, but for the other modes except the peak of ejection found to be above the cut-off value. As expected, at the peak of ejection the velocity gradient and consequently the shear rate is high, hence the non-Newtonian effect of the blood is not important in this period. This is illustrated in Table 3 except in the case of the Casson and KL models. However, other models clearly show that the non-Newtonian behavior in the most period of the cardiac cycle. Additionally, Table 3 also shows the other value of the viscosity such as the minimum, maximum, and average viscosity values of the blood for different models. The minimum value of the viscosity in GP, KL, and Cross models are closer to the Newtonian viscosity behavior, but for the Carreau and Casson this value is found to be high. It shows that the apparent local viscosity in Carreau and Casson never reach the Newtonian value during the cycle at the selected moments. Moreover, the maximum values of the viscosity in Carreau models always were also found to be higher than other models. It is observed that the maximum viscosity of KL model is always found to have lower value in comparison to the other models.However, to better evaluation of the viscosity variation inside the LV, we present the viscosity contours using different non-Newtonian models in Fig. 6. As expected, the viscosity found to be higher near the apex and middle-LV due to the low shear rate in this region. Still, the blood flow velocity and velocity gradient near the apex region found to be low, so the apparent viscosity of non-Newtonian models are found to be low in this region. At the upper part of the LV, however, particularly in the mitral and aortic regions, due to the high velocity and velocity gradient there, the shear rate and consequently the viscosity is found to be high.Moreover, due to the complexity of the intraventricular flow pattern and the vortex formation, we decided to represent our results in one 2D plane as illustrated in Fig. 1. In addition, it should be noted that the flow pattern, vortex number or magnitude change (especially small vortices) by varying the angle of the 2D plane. Still Fig. 6 shows the velocity streamlines in selected moments for the Newtonian and other non-Newtonian models for general comparison. The numerical results show a good agreement with the published literature regards the formation and propagation of the vortices inside the LV.Noting that once the systole phase starts the LV initiates to contracting condition and subsequently the flow is redirected toward the aorta. The large vortex is formed in the aortic region to help efficient ejection. Interestingly, the small vortices cannot be observed in the middle of LV for the KL and Cross models respectively. The blood flow is relatively smooth in the KL and Cross in comparison to the other models. At the peak of ejection, the blood flow is smoothly straightened toward the aortic valve orifice. Note that all models have the same flow pattern at this moment, so the non-Newtonian parameters cannot have a significant effect on the flow pattern at the peak of ejection. A strong outward jet was formed at the aortic orifice and the velocity reached the maximum value (around 1.2m/s) in comparison to the other moments.Once the diastole starts and LV wall initiates to expanding stage, the blood flows into the LV through the mitral orifice. Small vortices are starting to form at the LV apex and in the entrance (mitral valve region) by progressing the blood into the LV. It should be noted that the number and strength of the vortices are known to be different for various models. Moreover, the small vortices in the entrance region cannot be observed in the Carreau model. Still in the apex region, the shape of the vortices is different due to the high variability of the viscosity in this region.The flow pattern starts to be more complex once the LV wall initiates dilation. As shown in Fig. 7the flow is found to be more complex during the rapid filling. The flow was redirected to the aorta and vortices were in clockwise directions. Some small vortices were formed to be in the middle and upper parts of the LV. Still vortices shape and strength are known to be different for various models. The flow pattern in the apex region was completely different for all models considered here. During the slow filling, the flow was found to be smoother than other moments of diastole. A small vortex was observed to form in the Casson model. Finally, at the end of diastole, the flow was recirculating, and a strong vortex was formed underneath the aortic valve orifice. In addition, some small vortices could be observed in the middle of LV. The flow was redirected to the aorta in all models to assist in the efficient ejection of the next systole. The number of the small vortices that were formed in the middle of the LV was different in all the models considered here. These small vortices were formed in Carreau, Casson, and GP models respectively, but they cannot be seen in other models. However, the flow pattern in the middle and lower part of the LV were, in general, similar in Newtonian and KL, and Cross models respectively.Fig. 8demonstrates the variation of the velocity magnitudes in different lines (L1, L2, and L3) at selected times. As it can be observed, mostly the velocity magnitudes of the different models have the same pattern. In most cases, the velocity profiles approximately coincident with each other when the velocity magnitude is high. Usually the KL models have the lower magnitudes of the velocity in comparison with other models.Moreover, we extract the maximum value of the WSS to evaluate the influence of the non-Newtonian and as well as the Newtonian model on the LV WSS. It is to be noted that in cardiovascular hemodynamics generation of the high WSS is not desirable due to damage the red blood cells [18,41]. Analyzing the LV WSS distribution can assist in manufacturing of cardiac assist devices and prosthetic heart valves [17,42].Table 4represents the maximum values of WSS in different models. The maximum WSS in the Newtonian fluid found to be approximately less than the non-Newtonian model. The Casson model has the highest amount of WSS during the complete cardiac cycle. The maximum WSS of the Casson model found to be 60.89% which is higher than the Newtonian model once diastole phase starts. The maximum WSS of KL and Cross models were found to be less than the Newtonian models in some moments of the cycle (onset of systole, peak of ejection, and slow filling phase). During the slow filling, the maximum WSS of the Cross model was found to be 14.03% less than the Newtonian model. However, in general, the results show that the non-Newtonian blood flow assumption in LV, significantly change the variation of the maximum WSS.The distribution of the WSS along arbitrary line L4 (line position was represented in Fig. 1) is plotted in Fig. 9for different rheological models and selected moments to highlight the variation of the WSS on myocardium wall. In general, the WSS distribution pattern along L4 is similar in all models but with different magnitude. Overall, these results indicate that the magnitude of the WSS, as it was shown before in Table 4, is higher at the peak of systole in comparison to the other phases due to the formation of the high outflow jet toward the aortic valve tract. To quantitatively comparison of the different rheological models on the WSS, we calculated the root-mean-square error (RMSE) of the WSS over all nodes at the myocardium wall by using the following equation:(7)RMSE=1M∑i=1M(WSSNewtonian,i−WSSnon-Newtonian,i)2where M is total nodes of the wall, WSSNewtonian,iis the WSS of the Newtonian model, and finally WSSnon-Newtonian,iis the non-Newtonian WSS at the node number i. RMSE can provide significant insight into addressing the importance of the rheological models to predict the overall WSS distribution. Because the RMSE calculates the average of the errors’ square between the Newtonian and other rheological models, the rheological model with low RMSE value can predict the similar level of WSS distribution obtained from Newtonian model. Fig. 10provides the magnitude of RMSE in different non-Newtonian models. The Casson and Cross models were found to have respectively the highest and smallest magnitude of the RMSE during the whole cardiac cycle. At the peak of ejection, RMSE of all rheological models is significantly higher in comparison to the other phases due to the presence of the high WSS at this moment. The difference of the RMSE between the peak of ejection and onset of diastole for all models was found to be high. Also, there was not found significant difference between the RMSE predicted by KL and Cross models in different stages of the cycle.In order to evaluate the three-dimensional vortex structure formation during the systolic phase, the main vortex structure at the end of systole in all rheological models is compared in Figs. 11 and 12. We used the Lambda-2 vortex criterion method to plot the ISO-surface of the main ventricular vortex with the same level of the vortex number in all figures. The intraventricular vortex configuration in this study is consistent with result obtained in the previous study [43] which they utilized the similar approach. It is interesting to note that the vortex structure configurations of all rheological models are not identical as shown in Figs. 11 and 12, but the discrepancies are not remarkable. The main reason for the similarity of the vortex structure in all models, especially the vortex penetration depth, is that all models have a similar vortex time formation due to utilizing the same geometry and boundary conditions. It is shown [44] that the vortex position is approximately proportional to the vortex formation time [45]. The ventricular dimensionless vortex time formation can be defined usingT=4/πD3¯(SV−VolA)proposed by [45], whereD¯is the orifice name diameter (or2times of the mitral orifice equivalent mean diameter), SV the stroke volume, and VolAthe blood volume during the atrial contraction. By assuming that the atrial contraction pumps about 30% of the stroke volume, the vortex formation time in our model is 0.953. However, as it can be observed from vortex structure, it is not rolled up deeply toward the apex in all models; therefore, the main intraventricular vortex is not able to wash out the apical stagnant flow. Consequently, the lack of large vortex may lead to enhancement of the blood coagulation risk in the apical region [46]. Moreover, the large intraventricular vortex is desirable due to the fact that the large vortex ring enhances of the flow redirection toward the aorta by preserving the incoming blood flow momentum [47]. However, some discrepancies in the vortex configuration are found in different rheological models due to the variation of the flow field. The vortex structure of all rheological models found to consist of two connected parts. As shown in Figs. 11 and 12, the upper vortex ring in all models is approximately identical, but the lower ring found to be different in each rheological models. It can be found that the vortex size in GP, Carreau, and Casson models is larger than the vortex size in Newtonian and the other two models. Therefore, GP, Carreau, and Casson models can reproduce desirable strong vortex inside the LV. In the previous study by Elbaz et al. [48], the vortex ring orientation angle (α) is defined as the angle between the vortex ring and LV long axis. Figs. 11 and 12 represent that the orientation angle of the lower vortex ring is different between all models. Table 5shows that the lower plane of the vortex in Newtonian, KL and Cross approximately is perpendicular to the LV long axis, but in other models the vortex ring plane is turned more than 10° around the long axis toward the inflow jet.It has been suggested in other studies [16,28,49–51] that the important function of LV dynamic flow is the blood transport and mixing. The effects of non-Newtonian flow models on the blood transport and mixing in the LV would be next prospective study. Furthermore, the flow pattern from these non-Newtonian flow models will be compared with other reference data like pcMRI (phase contrast MRI) or echo PIV in patient-specific model.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
