@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A cross-hospital cost and quality assessment system by extracting frequent physician order set from a nationwide Health Insurance Research Database

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A system that provides a convenient way for physicians to retrieve and compare clinical pathways among health care providers about herniorrhaphy.The frequent physician order sets were derived from the National Health Database.A higher consistency index leads to lower recurrence rates.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Clinical pathways,Physician order,Quality of health care,Database,Hernia,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
PurposeClinical pathways fall under the process perspective of health care quality. For care providers, clinical pathways can be compared to improve health care quality. The objective of this study was to design a convenient physician order set comparison system based on claim records from the National Health Insurance Research Database (NHIRD) of Taiwan.MethodsData were retrieved from the NHIRD for the period of 2003–2007 for frequent physician order sets found in hospital surgical hernia repair inpatient claim records. The derived frequent physician order sets were divided into five frequency thresholds: 80%, 85%, 90%, 95% and 100%. A consistency index was defined and calculated to understand each care providers’ adherence to clinical pathways. In addition, the average count of physician orders, average amount of cost, Charlson comorbidity index, and recurrence rate were calculated; these variables were considered in frequent physician order sets comparison.ResultsRecords for 3262 patients from 257 hospitals were retrieved. The frequent physician order sets of various frequency thresholds, Charlson comorbidities, and recurrence rates were extracted and computed for comparison among hospitals. A recurrence rate threshold of 2% was established to separate low and high quality of herniorrhaphy at each hospital. Univariable analysis showed that low recurrence rate was associated with high consistency index (70.99±23.88 vs. 52.60±20.30; P<.001), few surgeons at each hospital (3.50±4.41 vs. 7.09±6.57; P<.001), and non-medical center facility type (P=.042). A multivariable Cox regression analysis indicated an association of low recurrence rates with consistency index only (one percentage increased: OR=0.973; CI: 0.957–0.990; P=.002).ConclusionsThe proposed system leveraged the claim records to generate frequent physician order sets at hospitals, thus solving the difficulty in obtaining clinical pathway data. This allows medical professionals and management to conveniently and effectively compare and query similarities and differences in clinical pathways among hospitals.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Health service quality is critical for both health care providers and receivers. In the 1980s, Donabedian proposed a conceptual model for studying and evaluating health care service quality [1]. This model classified the quality of care into three perspectives: structure, process, and outcome. The structure perspective focused on “the material, facilities, equipment, human resources, and organization of the health care providers”. The process perspective focused on “what is actually done in giving and receiving care”, including the activities involved in making a diagnosis and recommending or implementing treatment. The outcome perspective focused on the “effects of care based on the patients’ health conditions”. There are many issues associated with the three health service delivery perspectives noted above. There are many concerns associated with implementing these three health service delivery perspectives, such as providing allocation of resources, providing evidence-based care, and reducing variability in outcomes [2]. Clinical pathways provide one approach to addressing these; they comprise “structured, multidisciplinary care plans (identify patient group; set pathway parameters; agree goals; map multidisciplinary care; track variances; feedback and review; upgrade pathway) that detail essential steps in the care of patients with a specific clinical problem [3,4]. They fall under the process perspective and are important components of health service quality.One of the main issues in clinical practice is the variability in care delivery among health care providers. That is, patients with similar clinical conditions may receive different care, particularly regarding surgical procedures. This situation can result in differences in elements such as hospital stays, laboratory tests, the use of medication and blood products, outpatient treatment, complications, readmissions, total cost, outcomes, and patient satisfaction. All of these issues are of concern to patients, health professionals, and health care management [5]. The application of clinical pathways is one way to address the quality-of-care challenge, as they provide guidance for common diagnostic and therapeutic procedures in clinical practice [6]. The application of clinical pathways can reduce re-admission [7] and medical cost [8] for hernia surgery, pulmonary complications and hospital stays for head and neck reconstruction [9] or minimize hospital costs and hospital stays for both hepatectomy [10] and kidney surgery [11]. Thus, clinical pathways have been developed and applied in many hospitals.Clinical pathways have taken many forms. A typical clinical pathway contains a set of physician order activities to be executed during a defined time period for a specific clinical care objective (e.g., exam, anesthesia, drug prescription). The pathway can be used to coordinate the clinical care team, standardize practices, and reduce the variance in health care delivery. The benefits of clinical pathways include achieving expected outcomes, promoting effectiveness and efficiency of clinical care, and optimizing resource utilization. Taken together, these benefits lead to a higher quality of care [12].Best practice clinical pathways come from two sources: creation of clinical pathways and adherence to clinical pathways. The creation of clinical pathways is usually based on existing evidence and medical rules discussed in a professional committee. This process can ensure that the clinical pathways are as objective as possible. However, a group of professionals under the same health care institution may still overlook or exclude an important factor or activity. Day-to-day usage of the clinical pathways may also identify areas of improvement. In addition, hospitals could possibly find ways to improve their own clinical pathways by reviewing those of other hospitals.Though comparing clinical pathways in use at other institutions could be helpful, it can be difficult to obtain this information. Even when details of the clinical pathways of another hospital are obtained, the resulting outcome of these clinical pathways can be difficult to determine. Moreover, it is never known whether the other hospital precisely follows the clinical pathways. Thus, it is difficult to make a comparison with another hospital. In summary, we need a practical and convenient method for overcoming the above issues and realizing an effective comparison of clinical pathways.Among the diverse components of the clinical pathway, sets of physician orders are a main component, which can be extracted and validated by reimbursement database. The National Health Insurance Research Database (NHIRD) of Taiwan can be utilized to achieve this purpose. In 1995, Taiwan launched a single-payer National Health Insurance program. More than 99% of the population, about 2.3 million people, were enrolled [13]. A portion of the data from this database was systematically sampled and de-identified to form a database suitable for research purposes. From this database, it is possible to extract frequent physician order sets by examining physician orders that applied to patients from different hospitals. In addition, herniorrhaphy is an outpatient operation, which includes simple clinical pathway. Thus, one part of the clinical pathways for herniorrhaphy can be effectively realized through the comparison of physician order sets. This proposed system can provide the decision-making information needed by health care management to improve the quality of their services. The objective of this study was to design a system that will provide an easy process for health care providers to compare sets of physician orders across all hospitals.In the remaining sections of this paper, we present the methods, data source, computation algorithm, and overall system architecture of our study. A sample hernia surgical operation procedure and its results are shown in Section 3. In Section 4, we discuss the results of the sample comparison and address the contribution and potential of our approach.The data used in our analysis were drawn from the NHIRD. The dataset used a representative sample (N=1,000,000) selected from the entire database of beneficiary information [14]. Data extracted included registration files and original data for reimbursement claims. The registration files included information on patients, physicians, and care providers. The identification data for each file was scrambled to ensure confidentiality. Based on the hospital registration file, we categorized the hospitals into three types: medical center, regional hospital, and district hospital. The inpatient expenditures file contained patient admission claim data, including admission date, discharge date, and up to five ICD9 operation procedure codes for this hospitalization as well as the patient's gender, date of birth, hospital ID, and physician ID. The inpatient orders file contained the physician orders related to the above inpatient expenditures admission record. The physician orders were divided into different categories including medication description and amount, special materials, anesthesia, surgery, treatment of disposal, injection, radiation treatment, inspection, case payment (Diagnosis Related Group, DRG), and others. From the inpatient orders file, we obtained the actual physician orders that applied to the patients.To demonstrate the usability of the system, we selected and compared results from a hernia repair operation. “Hernias are associated with reduced quality of life and high socioeconomic cost” [15,16]. Hernia repair is classified as a digestive system procedure. The claim records of inpatients over 18 years of age who underwent a unilateral inguinal hernia repair for the first time between 2003 and 2007 were retrieved from the NHIRD, and included ICD9 procedure codes 53.00, 53.01, 53.02, 53.03, 53.04 and 53.05. The selection process is depicted in Fig. 1.The original NHIRD data comprise detailed records, but our study required us to aggregate information. Therefore, we prepared the data in order to meet the aggregate query requirements. This operation was similar to the transition from a transaction database to a data warehouse. Transaction databases are used for daily operations, and data warehouses for business decision making. First, ETL (extract, transform, and load) must be performed on the transaction database to construct the warehouse database. Then, the normalized transaction database must usually be de-normalized to accelerate and fulfill the aggregate query requirements of the data warehouse. The tasks to be performed in advance are as follows: extract the target detailed medical records that meet the desired procedure codes, apply exclusion criteria, calculate the number of cases grouped by hospital ID and then sort them by the number of cases, calculate the average number of physician orders per hospital, and calculate the average amount of cost per hospital. Once complete, this process yields a population and number overview regarding the target surgical operation. Subsequently, we can decide whether to drill down to the individual data records.The clinical pathway for a surgical operation at a specific hospital can be derived from the physician orders claimed in the insurance records. Our approach was to compute the frequency of physician orders that applied to patients. We established five frequency thresholds (80%, 85%, 90%, 95% and 100%) and determined the physician orders that reached the respective thresholds. For example, a physician order that reaches 80% frequency indicate that this physician order occurred in more than 80% of the claim cases. Similarly, if a physician order reaches 100% frequency, it means that it occurred in all claim cases. In theory, higher frequency of physician order sets will result in fewer physician orders that qualify. Physician order sets that reached one of the thresholds were considered frequent physician order sets. For example, the frequent physician order sets for some surgical procedure of a care provider could look like Table 1. The meaning of most of the order codes is found in Table 6. The concept of the extraction and comparison process is shown in Fig. 2.Table 1 demonstrates that orders 1–18 occurred in more than 80% of the hospital's total cases. If the hospital's average number of physician orders applied per case is 20, then we can say that 18/20 (90%) of physician orders per case reach the 80% frequency threshold. On the other hand, if the hospital's average number of physician orders per case is 40, we can say that only 18/40 (45%) of physician orders per case reach the 80% frequency threshold; the former situation is more consistent than the latter. To understand the consistency of each hospital, we defined a consistency index as follows:Consistencyindex=∑k=15FrequencyOrderCountk×FrequencyPercentagekAverageOrderCount×FrequencyPercentagekwhere FrequencyPercentagek=80%, 85%, 90%, 95%, 100% for k=1, 2, 3, 4, 5, FrequencyOrderCountkis the number of physician orders reaching FrequencyPercentagek, Average Order Count is an average count of physician orders per case.Let us use Table 1 as an example. For a surgical procedure, if the hospital's average number of physician orders per case is 20, the consistency index of this hospital can be calculated as follows:Consistencyindex=18×80%+17×85%+16×90%+12×95%+3×100%20×80%+20×85%+20×90%+20×95%+20×100%=64.11%In an extreme condition, if all of the FrequencyOrderCountk=20, then the consistency index would be 100%. The concept of various frequency thresholds of physician order sets is shown in Fig. 3.In order to assess the relationship between a patient's past health status and the current health outcome, we computed the comorbidity index of every patient and the average comorbidity index of every hospital. We used Charlson's model [17] to compute patient comorbidity, and examined the correlation between morbidity and ICD9 disease and procedure codes, as adapted by Deyo et al. [18]. We designed a software module to compute the Charlson score for each patient by using patient ID and index date. After computing each patient's Charlson score, we computed the average Charlson score for each hospital. We approximated each hospital's comorbidity status with the Charlson scores.One indicator of health care quality is patient recurrence rate. The system retrieved patients’ recurrence records by identifying the ICD9 code 550.91 (hernia recurrence) from the index date until the end of 2008. As this database is nationwide, we also determined whether the patient returned to the same or a different hospital. The system displayed all recurrence records after the index date. The system also showed the physician ID associated with each surgical procedure. We then determined if different physicians had varying favorite physician orders, assessing if they differed from the frequent physician orders derived from the hospital's frequent physician order sets.The ultimate objective of the proposed system is to provide a method of comparison among hospitals. Users can select any number of hospitals among which to compare their frequent physician order sets as well as the Charlson score, recurrence rate, and categorized amount of cost. The system then shows the similarity and difference of the selected hospitals, item by item. In the frequent physician order set comparison procedure, the system retrieves the frequent order sets of the selected hospitals and calculates the union of these order sets to form a list data structure. Then, the system traverses each retrieved order set to make a mark in the union order set list if the current visited order matches between the union order set list and the retrieved order set. Then, the system displays the marked union order set list to the user. The pseudo code of the comparison procedure is listed as follows:Algorithm ComparisonInput: FrequentOrderSetA, FrequentOrderSetBOutput: UnionOrderSetSet UnionOrderSet=Union of FrequentOrderSetA and FrequentOrderSetBFor each PhysicianOrder t in FrequentOrderSetABeginIf t exists in UnionOrderSetSet a mark in the A field of matched PhysicianOrder of UnionOrderSetEndFor each PhysicianOrder t in FrequentOrderSetBBeginIf t exists in UnionOrderSetSet a mark in the B field of matched PhysicianOrder of UnionOrderSetEndReturn UnionOrderSetTo increase the system's accessibility, it was developed in C# to operate as a web application based on SQL Server 2008 and running on Microsoft Internet Information Services. Fig. 4depicts the system architecture, and Fig. 5the hierarchy of functionalities.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In conclusion, we developed a system that provides a convenient way for physicians to retrieve and compare one part of the clinical pathways among health care providers. The sets of physician orders were derived from the NHIRD, an evidence-based database. Thus, the data can provide a means for actual practice other than just a document description or workflow. The claim records of the NHIRD, the related Charlson score, days of hospitalization, and recurrence rate were also calculated and displayed for comparison to evaluate the related potential quality. Results suggest that a higher consistency index leads to lower recurrence rates. Care-provider administrators can use a consistency index of 70% as a reference benchmark when taking steps to continuously adjust and adhere to their clinical pathways.None declared.