@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
ISRUC-Sleep: A comprehensive public dataset for sleep researchers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A publicly-available sleep dataset, called ISRUC-Sleep, is introduced.It contains data of healthy and patient subjects with different characteristics.Two recording sessions per subject are included in subgroup-II of the dataset.ISRUC-Sleep were evaluated using the ASSC method SSM4S.Effects of sleep disorders, diseases and medications are presented.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Sleep dataset,Automatic sleep stage classification,Polysomnographic signals,Effects of sleep disorder,Medication effects,Feature selection,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
To facilitate the performance comparison of new methods for sleep patterns analysis, datasets with quality content, publicly-available, are very important and useful.We introduce an open-access comprehensive sleep dataset, called ISRUC-Sleep. The data were obtained from human adults, including healthy subjects, subjects with sleep disorders, and subjects under the effect of sleep medication. Each recording was randomly selected between PSG recordings that were acquired by the Sleep Medicine Centre of the Hospital of Coimbra University (CHUC). The dataset comprises three groups of data: (1) data concerning 100 subjects, with one recording session per subject; (2) data gathered from 8 subjects; two recording sessions were performed per subject, and (3) data collected from one recording session related to 10 healthy subjects. The polysomnography (PSG) recordings, associated with each subject, were visually scored by two human experts.Comparing the existing sleep-related public datasets, ISRUC-Sleep provides data of a reasonable number of subjects with different characteristics such as: data useful for studies involving changes in the PSG signals over time; and data of healthy subjects useful for studies involving comparison of healthy subjects with the patients, suffering from sleep disorders.This dataset was created aiming to complement existing datasets by providing easy-to-apply data collection with some characteristics not covered yet. ISRUC-Sleep can be useful for analysis of new contributions: (i) in biomedical signal processing; (ii) in development of ASSC methods; and (iii) on sleep physiology studies. To evaluate and compare new contributions, which use this dataset as a benchmark, results of applying a subject-independent automatic sleep stage classification (ASSC) method on ISRUC-Sleep dataset are presented.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Sleep is an active and regulated process with an essential restorative function for physical and mental health [1]. Quality of sleep and sleep disorders have an important effect on the health and quality of life. The study of individual behaviors during sleep through all-night PSG recordings has consistently been an important research topic.Numerous methods have been developed for automatic detection of arousals, apnea, and sleep stages [2–5]. These methods often use PSG recordings, including electrophysiological signals (electrocardiographic activity, brain-wave patterns, eye movements, and activation signal of muscles), pneumological signals (airflow, blood oxygen level, and movement of respiratory muscles), and other contextual information (body position, lights, snore recording, etc.) [6]. These signals have been collected from human individuals using noninvasive surface electrodes. To evaluate the efficiency of automatic sleep pattern analysis methods, non-public and few existing public datasets have been used. Rigorous comparisons between the developed methods cannot be done since the used datasets differ in recording conditions, physiological conditions of subjects and number of assessed subjects. Datasets with quality content, publicly available, are an important vehicle for accelerating research, since they facilitate the performance comparison of new approaches and methods. This paper presents three main contributions:•We introduce a publicly-available comprehensive sleep dataset, called ISRUC-Sleep, which comprises three subgroups as illustrated in Fig. 1. The subgroups of the dataset contain PSG signals of different adult individuals, including healthy subjects, subjects with sleep disorders, and subjects under the effect of sleep medication. Sleep stages were labeled by two sleep experts. Furthermore, for 8 subjects (subgroup-II), two sets of PSG data, which have been recorded at different time dates, are provided.Aiming to help sleep researchers in their analysis and inferences using this dataset, for each subject, useful and complementary information related to sleep disorders, used medications, and their effect on sleep patterns, are presented.Aiming to evaluate and compare of new contributions, which will use this dataset as a benchmark, results of applying a subject-independent ASSC method on ISRUC-Sleep dataset are presented. This supervised-learning based method, detailed in Khalighi et al. [7], is henceforth named SSM4S.11Sirvan Supervised Method for Sleep Staging.Background material, terms definition (Table 1), and effects of sleep disorders and medications on sleep patterns are summarized in the next subsections.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
