@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A markerless system based on smartphones and webcam for the measure of step length, width and duration on treadmill

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A markerless low cost system for the estimation of some spatial-temporal parameters of human gait.A system usable on not-instrumented treadmill.A system characterized by a very high level of automation.A system can be used to analyze up to one hundred steps.A system with precision comparable with the gold standard.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Triaxial accelerometer,Markerless system,Stride length,Stride width,Homographic transformation,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Background and objectiveA markerless low cost prototype has been developed for the determination of some spatio-temporal parameters of human gait: step-length, step-width and cadence have been considered. Only a smartphone and a high-definition webcam have been used.MethodsThe signals obtained by the accelerometer embedded in the smartphone are used to recognize the heel strike events, while the feet positions are calculated through image processing of the webcam stream. Step length and width are computed during gait trials on a treadmill at various speeds (3, 4 and 5km/h).ResultsSix subjects have been tested for a total of 504 steps. Results were compared with those obtained by a stereo-photogrammetric system (Elite, BTS Engineering). The maximum average errors were 3.7cm (5.36%) for the right step length and 1.63cm (15.16%) for the right step width at 5km/h. The maximum average error for step duration was 0.02s (1.69%) at 5km/h for the right steps.ConclusionThe system is characterized by a very high level of automation that allows its use by non-expert users in non-structured environments. A low cost system able to automatically provide a reliable and repeatable evaluation of some gait events and parameters during treadmill walking, is relevant also from a clinical point of view because it allows the analysis of hundreds of steps and consequently an analysis of their variability.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The use of treadmill to measure spatio-temporal gait parameters allows the collection of a large number of walking steps that may result very useful in rehabilitation context for evaluation purposes. Several papers showed results obtained by different systems (opto-electronic system, instrumented walkway) related to spatial and temporal gait parameters on treadmill for healthy [1–5], and pathological subjects [6–8].In papers [9–11] stereo-photogrammetric systems are adopted to calculate spatial parameters on treadmill gait, using different foot landmarks. Generally, the results reported in literature show the variability of such parameters with respect to age, walking speed, pathological or experimental (over ground versus treadmill) conditions. In Owing's papers [1,2] the focus was on the variability of step width and length with respect to age of subjects and walking speed. The results obtained in both these studies, at normal speed, showed that step width variability of older adults was significantly larger than that of young adults. They found that step length and related variability were not age-dependent. In Stolze and co-workers [4] study, the influence of treadmill on gait parameters with respect to the overground walking condition was examined between children and adults at their preferred speed. They found that step length significantly reduced in treadmill condition while step width significantly increased both for adults and children group. Temporal-spatial gait parameters were estimated in 39 healthy adults while walking over an instrumented walkway (GAITRite) and an instrumented treadmill system at matched speed in Wearing et al. paper [3]. For treadmill condition, parameters were not comparable with those obtained by the instrumented walkway because of different spatial resolution of both systems: step length was significantly lower in treadmill trials for both legs. Zeni and Higginson [5] examined familiarization time required to reach a steady-state gait on treadmill. They found a significant difference among trials with respect to step width with a decreasing trend over the first five trials. In the last years, the use of smart technologies such as accelerometers and webcams to evaluate gait and related parameters is growing, helped also by the rapid development of these technologies and their use embedded in devices commonly used such as smartphones. 3-D accelerometers and webcams are assuming an increasing interest for the ambulatory assessment of human motion, particularly for the extraction of spatio-temporal parameters of gait, but also for a simplified analysis of motor tasks deemed clinically significant for the functional evaluation of motor disabilities [12–16]. Literature reports many attempts to use accelerometers for gait analysis, often embedded in more complex measurement systems [12–14,17,18]. They provides estimates of stride or step duration and walking cadence even if their estimation is often affected by a rather high incertitude [12]. The problem can be solved using expensive commercial systems based on inertial measurement units. Other video systems based on webcams are characterized by a limited accuracy in the estimation of temporal gait parameters due to their low frame rate but can give satisfactory accuracy in the determination of spatial gait parameters. The use of passive markers placed on anatomical landmarks, has the advantage of simplifying the image data elaboration but requires specialized operator for their determination [19].The approach followed in this paper relies on the integration of accelerometer and image data in a unique system, very cheap, completely automatic and suitable to be used in non-structured environments like ambulatory settings by non-expert users. In this study, the use of markers is avoided: in order to recognize feet position while the subject is walking on a treadmill, he/she has to wear just white socks. This system represents the evolution of previous works [20,21] that, on the contrary, were marker-based.The system uses the accelerometer embedded in a smartphone and a high definition (HD) webcam. The accelerometer data are used mainly for timing measurement and for properly selecting the specific webcam frames that have to be processed, thus minimizing the overall computation time [20]. The HD-webcam allows the estimation of feet positions on a plane: in the present paper the plane is the rolling plane of a treadmill. The prototype described in this paper uses only one smartphone, placed on the fixed lateral part of the treadmill structure, and a webcam placed laterally. The system can record and automatically analyze hundreds of steps. Results obtained with this system were compared with those obtained by a 3D optoelectronic stereo-photogrammetric system. This latter is the gold-standard for gait analysis but is very expensive and requires structured environments and expert users. Nonetheless the errors in the spatio-temporal parameters measured by this prototype system with respect to those obtained by the gold-standard system, resulted quite small.Aim of this study is to develop a reliable system that can be used in ambulatory, non-structured environments, for the analysis of human gait on treadmill. It is based on the use of a webcam and of a 3D accelerometer embedded in a smartphone placed on the treadmill. Tough in the present application its use is limited only to the estimation of step length, width and step duration, possible future development can take into account the estimation of further significant gait parameters and events exploiting a method based on photogrammetric recordings [22].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
