@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Different medical data mining approaches based prediction of ischemic stroke

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We assessed different medical data mining approaches to predict ischemic stroke.Grid search were used for improving classification performance of the models.The accuracy and AUC values were higher than 0.8947 and 0.8953, respectively.SVM and SGB models yielded remarkable performance for classifying ischemic stroke.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Ischemic stroke,Medical data mining,Penalized logistic regression,Stochastic gradient boosting,Support vector machine,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
AimMedical data mining (also called knowledge discovery process in medicine) processes for extracting patterns from large datasets. In the current study, we intend to assess different medical data mining approaches to predict ischemic stroke.Materials and methodsThe collected dataset from Turgut Ozal Medical Centre, Inonu University, Malatya, Turkey, comprised the medical records of 80 patients and 112 healthy individuals with 17 predictors and a target variable. As data mining approaches, support vector machine (SVM), stochastic gradient boosting (SGB) and penalized logistic regression (PLR) were employed. 10-fold cross validation resampling method was utilized, and model performance evaluation metrics were accuracy, area under ROC curve (AUC), sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value and negative predictive value. The grid search method was used for optimizing tuning parameters of the models.ResultsThe accuracy values with 95% CI were 0.9789 (0.9470–0.9942) for SVM, 0.9737 (0.9397–0.9914) for SGB and 0.8947 (0.8421–0.9345) for PLR. The AUC values with 95% CI were 0.9783 (0.9569–0.9997) for SVM, 0.9757 (0.9543–0.9970) for SGB and 0.8953 (0.8510–0.9396) for PLR.ConclusionsThe results of the current study demonstrated that the SVM produced the best predictive performance compared to the other models according to the majority of evaluation metrics. SVM and SGB models explained in the current study could yield remarkable predictive performance in the classification of ischemic stroke.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Ischemic stroke (IS) is associated with high mortality worldwide and is considered among the most important public health problems [1]. IS influences the management, diagnosis, and outcome. Treatments for acute IS should be made according to subtype of IS. Classification of subtypes for IS was arranged utilizing medical/clinical characteristics and the finding of supplementary clinical studies. The classification of Trial of Org in Acute Stroke Treatment (TOAST) defines five subtypes of IS: (1) big-artery atherosclerosis, (2) cardioembolism, (3) little-vein occlusion, (4) stroke of other identified etiology/causes, and (5) stroke of unidentified etiology/causes. The proposed rating system can determine etiologic diagnosis of IS in high proportions [2]. The important inference demonstrates the determination and prediction of causes and markers for the diagnosis and prevention of IS [1,2].Data mining (also called knowledge discovery process) is a methodology for discovering hidden patterns from enormous datasets by using statistical approaches [3]. This methodology has many advantages compared to classical methods. For instance, in contrast to traditional statistical methods, data mining approaches require less presumptions in the classification and regression applications [4].Alexopoulos et al. [5] applied inductive machine learning (ML) approaches in the diagnosis of stroke disease and used C4.5 algorithm by building a decision tree. These authors reported that inductive ML is a promising approach for computer-aided diagnosis of stroke. Linder et al. [6] used logistic regression (LR) and artificial neural networks (ANNs) for classifying acute ischemic stroke from the Database of German Stroke, and suggested that LR was the gold standard for the classification of acute ischemic stroke in comparison with ANNs, which may be employed as an alternative multivariate analysis. Khosla et al. [7] presented the comparison of the Cox proportional hazards model with a ML method for the prediction of stroke on the dataset of the Cardiovascular Health Study, and determined that combined with their suggested feature selection algorithm combined with support vector machine (SVM) achieved a higher area under the ROC curve when compared to the Cox proportional hazards model. In our previous study, ANNs and SVM were utilized to predict stroke disease using knowledge discovery process (KDP) approaches, and the results of the study determined that ANNs yielded more predictive performance as compared with SVM for the prediction of stroke and that the suggested ANNs might be beneficial for predictive purposes concerning stroke illness [3]. Additionally, there are some studies on ischemic stroke lesion segmentation using data mining or ML procedures [8–10].The use of data mining approaches in many disciplines, especially in medicine, is increasing day by day. The medical application of data mining is called as medical data mining (MDM). Thence, MDM (also called knowledge discovery process in medicine) processes for extracting patterns from large datasets. In the current study, we intend to assess medical data mining approaches to predict ischemic stroke.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
MDM is one of the main application areas where performance metrics are very important to evaluate the predictions of the models [27]. In the current study, different data mining approaches were constructed and proposed for the prediction of ischemic stroke. For this purpose, SVM, SGB and PLR models were explained and were compared based on several predictive performance metrics: accuracy, AUC, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value and negative predictive value. When the values of accuracy and AUC were considered, SVM had the highest predictions as compared to GBM and PLR. While the values of accuracy, AUC, sensitivity and negative predictive value of SVM were slightly higher than GBM, all of the performance metric values for SVM and GBM were considerably higher than PLR. The values of all the performance metrics concerning the models were quite high and may be acceptable for the classification of ischemic stroke. The results achieved from the current study indicated that the constructed SVM showed a remarkable predictive performance in the majority of the performance metrics. For obtaining much more accurate and robust comparison results, comprehensive simulation study is necessary.Finally, the current study and our previous study [3] revealed that, computer-aided approaches such as medical data mining or medical knowledge discovery are an effective instrument in the prediction of ischemic stroke and explore the hidden relationships and associations in the datasets.