@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Verifier-based three-party authentication schemes using extended chaotic maps for data exchange in telecare medicine information systems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We develop an efficient and secure verifier-based three-party authentication scheme.Our scheme is based on extended chaotic maps and suitable for data exchange in TMIS.Our scheme proven secure in the random oracle model.Our scheme avoids time-consuming modular exponents and scalar multiplications on ECC.Our scheme has lower computational cost, fewer transmissions and higher security.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Telecare medicine information systems,Chaotic maps,Authentication,Data exchange,Verifier-based,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Telecare medicine information systems provide a communicating platform for accessing remote medical resources through public networks, and help health care workers and medical personnel to rapidly making correct clinical decisions and treatments. An authentication scheme for data exchange in telecare medicine information systems enables legal users in hospitals and medical institutes to establish a secure channel and exchange electronic medical records or electronic health records securely and efficiently. This investigation develops an efficient and secure verified-based three-party authentication scheme by using extended chaotic maps for data exchange in telecare medicine information systems. The proposed scheme does not require server's public keys and avoids time-consuming modular exponential computations and scalar multiplications on elliptic curve used in previous related approaches. Additionally, the proposed scheme is proven secure in the random oracle model, and realizes the lower bounds of messages and rounds in communications. Compared to related verified-based approaches, the proposed scheme not only possesses higher security, but also has lower computational cost and fewer transmissions.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Telecare medicine information systems (TMIS) provide health care workers and medical personnel with accessing remote medical resources including electronic medical records (EMR) or electronic health records (EHR) through public networks, and help them to rapidly making correct clinical decisions and treatments [1,2]. To have efficient transmissions and to ensure information security and privacy protection are essential for TMIS. Thus, many related approaches in these research fields were recently developed to realize the requirements in security and efficiency. For example, the authentication schemes for HIPAA privacy and security regulations were proposed to provide authorization, authentication and key management. The software solution for sharing and querying of HL7 version 3 clinical documents was presented to provide security to data providers and protecting the patients’ privacy [3–9].A verified-based three-party authentication scheme for data exchange in TMIS does not store actual password and only keeps a verifier computed from the actual password in an authentication server's database. The authentication server uses another method to verify the user's possession of actual password in order to oppose to a stolen verifier from the password file. Next, two legal users in hospitals and medical institutes agree a common session key via the help of an authentication server. Then these users can establish a secure channel and exchange EMRs or EHRs securely and efficiently. That is, verified-based three-party authentication schemes for data exchange in TMIS could provide patients at home, doctors at clinical centers, and home health-care agency with communicating platforms for accessing EMRs and EHRs securely, conveniently and efficiently [10].Lee et al. [11] in 2005 developed an efficient verified-based three-party authentication scheme. The scheme of Lee et al. did not require server's public keys and can oppose to a stolen verifier from the password file. However, Wang and Mo [12] in 2006 showed that the scheme of Lee et al. [11] fails to withstand stolen verifier attacks and also presented a modified verified-based three-party authentication scheme as an alternative. In 2007, Kwon et al. [13] also proposed a secure verifier-based three-party authentication scheme which did not require server's public keys and had fewer rounds than other related schemes in transmissions. Chien [14] in 2011 proposed a verifier-based three-party key exchange protocol, which is proven secure in the random oracle model. Pu et al. [15] in 2013 demonstrated that the protocol of Chien is still vulnerable to a partition attack, and proposed an enhanced protocol that can defeat the possible attacks. In order to provide key confirmation and enhance computational efficiency, Lin and Lee [10] in 2014 proposed a proven secure verifier-based three-party authentication scheme and a round-efficient version for data exchange in TMIS. However, these verifier-based three-party authentication schemes [10–15] require many time-consuming modular exponential computations and thus cannot execute efficiently.Cryptography based on chaotic map recently had been shown that it has better performance than traditional cryptography [16–18]. In order to have higher efficiency, many various approaches based on chaos theory were developed. For example, Tseng et al. [19] in 2009 proposed the authentication scheme based on chaotic map. Later, Niu et al. [20] and Xue et al. [21] proposed improved schemes based on Tseng et al.’s scheme in order to overcome the weaknesses in security. Guo et al. [22] in 2013 proposed a new authentication scheme based on chaotic map for providing anonymity and withstand various attacks. Hao et al. [23] in 2013 proposed a chaotic map-based authentication scheme for telecare medicine information systems. Besides, Xiao et al. [24] in 2007 presented a key agreement protocol based on chaotic maps. Then the related protocols based on Chebyshev chaotic maps were continuously presented [25–29].This investigation develops an efficient verified-based three-party authentication scheme by using extended chaotic maps for data exchange in TMIS. The proposed scheme does not require server's public keys, is implemented by rearranging and sending the messages in parallel, and also includes the key confirmation without extra numbers of messages and rounds. Compared to related verified-based three-party authentication schemes, the proposed three-party authentication scheme not only retains the same security properties with the previous schemes, but also is more efficient in computations and in communications. Moreover, the proposed scheme is proven secure in the random oracle model [30–32] and realizes the lower bounds of messages and rounds in communications.The remainder of this investigation is organized as follows. Section 2 lists the used notations and definitions. Section 3 presents the proposed efficient verifier-based three-party authentication scheme using extended chaotic maps. Section 4 provides the security and performance analyses. Finally, Section 5 draws conclusions.This section first lists the used notations, defines Chebyshev chaotic maps, and then describes the used properties of chaotic maps. In this work, A and B are two communication parties, and S is a trusted authentication server. Table 1lists the notations used throughout this work.(1)Chebyshev chaotic maps [16–18]. The Chebyshev polynomial Tn(x) is a polynomial in x of degree n, defined by the following relation:Tn(x)=cosnθ,wherex=cosθ.The recurrence relation of Tn(x) is defined as:Tn(x)=2xTn−1(x)−Tn−2(x),for any n≥2, with T0(x)=1 and T1(x)=x.The Chebyshev polynomial satisfies the semi-group property and thus satisfies:Tr(Ts(x))=cos(rcos−1(cos(scos−1(x))))=cos(rscos−1(x))=Tsr(x)=Ts(Tr(x)),for s, r∈Z+.The Chebyshev polynomial also provides chaotic property: when n>1, Chebyshev polynomial map Tn:[−1, 1]→[−1, 1] of degree n is a chaotic map with its invariant densityf∗(x)=1(π1−x2),for Lyaounov exponent lnn>0.Zhang [33] in 2008 enhanced Chebyshev polynomials and proved that the semi-group property and the commutative under composition still holds on interval (−∞,+∞). That is,Tn(x)≡(2xTn−1(x)−Tn−2(x))modp,where n≥2, x∈(−∞, +∞) and p is a large prime number. Then,Tr(Ts(x))≡Trs(x)≡Ts(Tr(x))modpholds.The enhanced Chebyshev polynomials exhibit two hard problems, which include the extended chaotic maps-based discrete logarithm and Diffie–Hellman problems [28,29,33], and are described as follows.Extended chaotic maps-based discrete logarithm (DL) problem: given x, y and p, finding the integer r satisfying y=Tr(x)modp is computationally infeasible.Extended chaotic maps-based decisional Diffie–Hellman (DDH) problem: given Tr(x), Ts(x), Tz(x), T(·) and x, deciding whether Trs(x)≡Tz(x)modp holds or not is computationally infeasible.This section presents an efficient and secure verifier-based three-party authentication scheme for TMIS. The proposed scheme promotes the mutual authentication and realizes the session key security by employing the extended chaotic maps-based Diffie–Hellman key exchange, and thus does not require time-consumer modular exponential computations and scalar multiplications on elliptic curves. Additionally, our scheme is implemented by rearranging and sending the messages in parallel, and includes the key confirmation without extra numbers of messages and rounds.The proposed scheme is constructed from two two-party authenticated key exchange (2PAKE) schemes involving A and S and involving B and S, and then combines an extended chaotic maps-based Diffie–Hellman key exchange involving A and B and uses the hash function to realize key confirmation in final. Fig. 1illustrates the proposed scheme, which is explained in details as follows.Initially, A and S share the verifiersvA=TtA(x)modpfor password πA, where tA=H(A, S, πA). Similarly, B and S share the verifiersvB=TtB(x)modpfor password πB, where tB=H(A, S, πB).1.A→S: A, B, XAA computes XA=Ta(x)modp and sends (A, B, XA) to S, where a is a random number.S→B: XA, XSA, XSBAfter receiving the request message from A, S retrieves vAand vB, and computesXSA=(Tc(x)modp)⊕vAandXSB=(Td(x)modp)⊕vB, where c, d are random numbers. Then S sends (XA, XSA, XSB) to B.B→A: XB, XSA, μBS, μBAAfter receiving messages form S, B computes XB≡Tb(x)modp,Td(x)=XSB⊕vB,KBS≡(Tb(Td(x))⊕TtB(Td(x)))modp, μBS=h(B, S, XB, XA, KBS), KBA≡Tb(XA)≡Tb·a(x)modp, and μBA=h(B, A, XB, XA, KBA), where b is a random number and tB=h(B, S, πB), and sends (XB, XSA, μBS, μBA) to A.A→S: μAS, μBS, XB, μABAfter receiving messages form B, A computesTc(x)=XSA⊕vA,KAS≡(Ta(Tc(x))⊕TtA(Tc(x)))modp, μAS=h(A, S, XA, XB, KAS) and KAB≡Ta(XB)≡Ta·b(x)modp, where tA=h(A, S, πA). If A successfully verifies μBA, then A computes μAB=h(A, B, XA, XB, KAB) sends (μAS, μBS, XB, μAB) to S.S→B: μSA, μSB, μABS computesKSA≡(Tc(vA)⊕Tc(XA))modpandKSB≡(Td(vB)⊕Td(XB))modp. If S successfully verifies μASand μBS, then computes μSA=h(S, A, XA, XB, KSA) and μSB=h(S, B, XB, XA, KSB), and sends (μSA, μSB, μAB) to A.B→A: μSAAfter that, if B successfully verifies μABand μSB, then B forwards μSAto A. Finally, A verifies μSA. Thus, A and B negotiate a common session key SK=h(A, B, S, XA, XB, KAB)=h(A, B, S, XA, XB, KBA).The steps in the proposed verifier-based three-party authentication scheme can also be reordered in a round-efficient manner. The proposed scheme can be executed in four rounds as follows (Fig. 2).1.(1) A→S: A, B; (2) A→B: A, XAA sends a request message (A, B) to S. At the same time, A computes XA≡Ta(x)modp and sends (A, XA) to.(1) S→A: XSA; (2) S→B: XSB; (3) B→S: A, B, XB; (4) B→A: B, XBS retrieves vAand vB, and computesXSA=(Tc(x)modp)⊕vAandXSB=(Td(x)modp)⊕vB. Then S sends XSAto A and sends XSBto B in parallel. At the same time, B computes XB≡Tb(x)modp, sends (A, B, XB) to S and sends (B, XB) to A in parallel.(1) A→S: μAS; (2) A→B: μAB; (3) B→S: μBS; (4) B→A: μBAA computesTc(x)=XSA⊕vA, KAS≡(Ta(Tc(x))⊕Ta(Tc(x)))modp, μAS=h(A, S, XA, XB, KAS) and KAB≡Ta(XB)modp. Then A verifies μBA, computes μAB=h(A, B, XA, XB, KAB) and sends (μAS) to S and sends (μAB) to B in parallel. At the same time, B computesTd(x)=XSB⊕vB,KBS≡(Tb(Td(x))⊕TtB(Td(x)))modp, μBS=h(B, S, XB, XA, KBS), KBA≡Tb(XA)modp, and μBA=h(B, A, XB, XA, KBA). Then B sends (μBS) to S and sends (μBA) to A in parallel.(1) S→A: μSA; (2) S→B: μSBS computesKSA≡(Tc(vA)⊕Tc(XA))modpandKSB≡(Td(vB)⊕Td(XB))modpand verifies μASand μBS. Then S computes μSA=h(S, A, XA, XB, KSA) and μSB=h(S, B, XB, XA, KSB), sends (μSA) to A and sends (μSB) to B. Finally, A verifies μBAand μSA. B verifies μABand μSB. Additionally, A and B negotiate a common session key SK=h(A, B, S, XA, XB, KAB)=h(A, B, S, XA, XB, KBA).This section provides the security proofs of the proposed verifier-based three-party authentication scheme and compares its performance with that of other related verifier-based three-party authentication schemes.Communicating participants: The participants include two clients A and B, and a trusted third party S. A and B authenticate each other and establish a common authentication key SK via S in the scheme P. A participant may be involved in numerous instances, called oracles, of distinct concurrent executions of the scheme P. The instance i of participant U is denoted asΠUi.Long-lived keys: A's password πAand B's password πBare probably chosen by some human and might be weak. Then πAand πBare called as long-lived keys. The verifiers vA=h(A, S, πA) and vB=h(A, S, πB) are stored in S, where h is a cryptographic one-way function. A verified-based scheme only stores a verifier in server's database and uses another method to verify the user's possession of actual password in order to oppose to a stolen verifier from the password file [11,34,35].Oracle queries: Oracle queries model the capabilities of the adversary A and are described below.–Send(ΠUi,M): This query models that an adversaryAcontrols all communications in P.Asends a message M to oracleΠUi; thenΠUicomputes what P tells it to, and sends back the response message.Acan initiate the execution of P by sending a query (ΠUi, “start”) to a user oracleΠUi.Corrupt(U): This query models the property of perfect forward secrecy. Namely, compromising long-lived keys does not endanger previous session keys. The adversaryAsends this query to a participant U, and returns U's long-lived key.Hash(M): This query models that adversaryAreceives hash results by sending queries to a random oracle Ω. On receiving this query, checks whether a record (M, r) has been queried and recorded in the H-table. If successful, Ω replies r toA; otherwise replies a random r′, and records (M, r′) in the H-table.Reveal(ΠUi): This query models known key attacks. Specifically, compromising authentication keys does not reveal other authentication keys. TheRevealquery is only available to adversaryAif oracleΠUihas accepted.Test(ΠUi): This query measures the authenticated key security (or the session key security), which specifies the indistinguishability of the real session key from a random string. During executing the scheme P, adversaryAcan send queries to the oracle, as described above.Acan ask a singleTestquery at sometime. ThenΠUiflips an unbiased coin c and returns the real session key SK toAif c=1; otherwise, it returns a random string toA.Partnering: Two user oraclesΠAiandΠBjare partnered if–oraclesΠAiandΠBjdirectly exchange message flows andonly oraclesΠAiandΠBjhave the same session key SK.Freshness: An oracleΠUiis Fresh in P if the following conditions are satisfied.–ΠUihas accepted a session key SK, andΠUiand its partner have not been sent a Reveal query.Session key security (AKE security): This security definition defines that an adversary is allowed to ask manyTestqueries as it wants. If aTestquery is asked to a client instance that has not accepted, then return the invalid symbol ⊥. If aTestquery is asked to an instance of an honest participant whose intended partner is dishonest or to an instance of a dishonest participant, then returns the real session key. Otherwise, theTestquery decides to return either the real session key or a random string via an unbiased coin c. The adversary aims to correctly guess the value of the hidden bit c used by the Test oracle. The ake-advantage of the event that an adversary violates the indistinguishability of the scheme P is denoted asAdvPake(A). The scheme P is AKE-secure ifAdvPake(A)is negligible [30–32].The Difference Lemma [36] is made used within our sequence of games and is described as follows:Lemma 1(Difference Lemma)Let A, B and F be events defined in some probability distribution, and suppose that A∧¬F⇔B∧¬F. Then|Pr[A]−Pr[B]|≤Pr[F].AKE security for the proposed schemeFor proving the proposed scheme, we construct it from two 2PAKE schemes involving A and S, and involving B and S. The following theorem shows that the proposed 2PAKE scheme involving A and S has AKE security if the used hash function is secure and the extended chaotic maps-based decisional Diffie–Hellman assumption holds.Theorem 1LetAdvddhbe the advantage that a DDH attacker solves the extended chaotic maps DDH problem within time t1. Then, the probability that an adversary breaks the AKE security of the 2PAKE scheme involving A and S:Adv2pakeake(t,qexe,qtest,qseA,qhA,qake)≤(qhA)22l−1+2⋅qseAN+2⋅Advddh(t1,qexe,qake),where t≤t1+4(qexe+qake)τ; qexedenotes the number of queries to the Execute oracle; qtestdenotes the number of queries to the Test oracle;qseAdenotes the numbers of the Send queries involving A and S;qhAdenotes the numbers of the Hash queries involving A and S; qakedenotes the number of queries to the final AKE scheme; password is a dictionary of size N; l is a security parameter; τ is the time to perform an exponential computation.Each game Gidefines the probability of the event Eithat the adversary wins this game. The first game G0 is the real attack against the 2PAKE scheme and the terminal game G4 concludes that the adversary has a negligible advantage to break the AKE security of the 2PAKE scheme.Game G0: This game corresponds to the real attack. By definition, we have(1)Adv2pakeake(A)=|2Pr[E0]−1|.Game G1: This game considers password guessing attacks. Each(Tc(x)modp)⊕vAis different, wherevA=TtA(x), tA=h(A, S, πA) and c is a random number, since the password πAis protected by a cryptographic one-way function. Thus, the adversary has no information for verifying his/her password guesses. This implies that the security against password attacks is measured by the probability that exists messages of the form(Tc(x)modp)⊕vAin a Send query such thatπA∗is correct. Then, we have(2)|Pr[E0]−Pr[E1]|≤qseAN.Game G2: This game simulates all oracles as in previous game except for using a table list H to simulateHashqueries involving A and S. Then, games G1 and G2 are undistinguishable except collisions of H-table in G3. Thus, according to the birthday paradox and Lemma 1, we have(3)|Pr[E1]−Pr[E2]|≤(qhA)22l,whereAmakesqhAHashqueries involving A and S.Game G3: This game simulates all oracles as in previous game except for modifying the simulation ofSendqueries refereeing the flows containing Ta(x) and Tc(x) of the 2PAKE scheme, and the simulation of the Test(Ui) oracle to avoid relying on the knowledge of x, y and z used to compute the answer to these queries. Assume that (X, Y, Z)=(Ta(x), Tc(x), Ta·c(x)) is a random extended chaotic maps DDH triple. A simulator S simulates the oracles for all sessions involving all honest participants by using this triple (X, Y, Z) and the classical random self-reducibility of the extended chaotic maps DDH problem. Then S sets up the long-lived key of user A, and picks a random numberi∈[1,qseA]and answers the oracle queries according to the 2PAKE scheme. Thus, S can correctly answer theTestqueries. Additionally, the random variables in G2 is replaced by another random variables in G3. So, G2 is equivalent to G3, and we have(4)Pr[E2]=Pr[E3].Game G4: This game simulates all oracles as in previous game except that all rules are computed using a triple (X, Y, Z) sample from a random distribution(Tu(x),Tv(x),Tw(x)), instead of an extended chaotic maps DDH triple.Assume thatAddhis a challenger and tries to violate the indistinguishability of the extended chaotic maps DDH problem; andAakeis an adversary and is constructed to break the session key security.Addhflips an unbiased coin α∈{0, 1} and decides to return the real session key KAS(if α=1) or a random string (if α=0) toAake. ThenAakeoutputs its guess bit α′ and wins if α′=α.Addhasked aSend,CorruptorTestqueries,Addhreturns the output exactly as executing the previous experiment except for (X, Y, Z) that it had received as input. IfAakeoutputs α, thenAddhoutputs 1; otherwise, outputs 0. If (X, Y, Z) is a real extended chaotic maps Diffie-Hellman triple,AddhrunsAakein G3 and thusPr[Addhoutputs1]=Pr[E3]. If (X, Y, Z) is a random triple,AddhrunsAakein G4 and thusPr[Addhoutputs1]=Pr[E4]. Therefore, we have(5)|Pr[E3]−Pr[E4]|≤Advddh(Addh).Since all sessions keys are random and independent, and no information on α is leaked, we have(6)Pr[E4]=12.By combining Eqs. (1)–(6) and using Lemma 1, we haveAdv2pakeake(Aake)≤(qhA)22l−1+2⋅qseAN+2⋅Advddh(Addh).Then the proof is concluded.□The following theorem shows that the proposed 2PAKE scheme involving B and S has AKE security if the used hash function is secure and the extended chaotic maps DDH assumptions holds.Theorem 2LetAdvddhbe the advantage that a DDH attacker solves the extended chaotic maps DDH problem within time t1. Then, the probability that an adversary breaks the AKE security of the 2PAKE scheme involving B and S:Adv2pakeake(t,qexe,qtest,qseB,qhB,qake)≤(qhB)22l−1+2⋅qseBN+2⋅Advddh(t1,qexe,qake),where t≤t1+4(qexe+qake)τ;qseBdenotes the numbers of the Send queries involving B and S;qhBdenotes the numbers of the Hash queries involving B and S; the used parameters qexe, qtest, qake, N, l and τ are defined as inTheorem 1.The proof of Theorem 2 can be concluded by using the same arguments of Theorem 1, and thus is not presented here.The following theorem shows that if the used hash function is secure and the extended chaotic maps-based Decisional Decisional Diffie–Hellman assumption holds, then the proposed scheme has AKE security.Theorem 3LetAdv2pakeakedenote the advantage that an adversary breaks the AKE security of the 2PAKE scheme and are defined inTheorems 1 and 2. LetAdvddhbe the advantage that a DDH attacker solves the extended chaotic maps DDH problem. Then, the probability that an adversary breaks the AKE security of the proposed three-party authentication scheme:AdvPake(t,qexe,qtest,qse,qh,qake)≤5⋅(qh)22l−1+8⋅qseN+10⋅Advddh(t1,qexe,qake),where t≤t1+12(qexe+qake)τ; qexedenotes the number of queries to the Execute oracle; qtestdenotes the number of queries to the Test oracle; qsedenotes the numbers of the Send queries; qhdenotes the numbers of the Hash queries; qakedenotes the number of queries to the final AKE scheme; and the used parameters N, l and τ are defined as inTheorems 1 and 2.Each game Gidefines the probability of the event Eithat the adversary wins this game. The first game G0 is the real attack against the proposed scheme and the terminal game G4 concludes that the adversary has a negligible advantage to break the AKE security of the proposed scheme.Game G0: This game corresponds to the real attack. By definition, we have(7)AdvPake(A)=|2Pr[E0]−1|.Game G1: This game modifies the simulation of the oracles as follows. The session key KASin 2PAKE involving A and S is replaced as a random session keyK′AS. Then the successful probability of the adversaryA2pake-1between G0 and G1 is equal to the probability of breaking the security of the underlying 2PAKE involving A and S. Therefore, we have(8)|Pr[E1]−Pr[E0]|≤Adv2pakeake(A2pake−1).Game G2: Similarly, this game modifies the previous game by replacing the session key KBSin 2PAKE involving B and S with a random session keyK′BS. Then, the successful probability of the adversaryA2pake-2between G1 and G2 is equal to the probability of breaking the security of the underlying 2PAKE involving B and S. Thus, we have(9)|Pr[E2]−Pr[E1]|≤Adv2pakeake(A2pake−2).Game G3: This game simulates all oracles as in previous game except for using a table list H to simulateHashqueries. Then, games G2 and G3 are undistinguishable except collisions of H-table in G3. Thus, according to the birthday paradox and Lemma 1, we have(10)|Pr[E2]−Pr[E3]|≤qh22l,whereAmakes qhHashqueries.Game G4: This game simulates all oracles as in previous game except for modifying the simulation ofSendqueries refereeing the flows containing Ta(x) and Tb(x) of the proposed scheme, and the simulation of the Test(Ui) oracle to avoid relying on u, v and w used to compute the answer to these queries. By using similar arguments in Theorem 1, we have(11)|Pr[E3]−Pr[E4]|≤Advddh(Addh)and(12)Pr[E4]=12.By combining Eqs. (7)–(12) and using Lemma 1, we haveAdvPake(Aake)≤2⋅Adv2pakeake(A2pake-1)+2⋅Adv2pakeake(A2pake-2)+2⋅(qh)22l+2⋅Advddh(Addh)≤2⋅(qhA)22l−1+4⋅qseAN+2⋅(qhB)22l−1+4⋅qseBN+(qh)22l−1+10⋅Advddh(Addh)≤5⋅(qh)22l−1+8⋅qseN+10⋅Advddh(Addh),whereqseA,qseB,qhAandqhBare defined as in Theorems 1 and 2, and satisfyqseA≤qse,qseB≤qse,qhA≤qhandqhB≤qh.Then the proof is concluded.□Resisting stolen verifier attacksTheorem 4The proposed verifier-based three-party authentication scheme using extended chaotic maps for TMIS resists stolen verifier attacks.In the proposed scheme, an adversaryAsteals a copy of the verifier vAfor the user A in S's database, wherevA=TtA(x)modp, πAis A's password and tA=H(A, S, πA).Afails to derive tAfrom vAbecause of the Extended Chaotic Maps-Based DLP. Then, he/she will fail to computeKAS≡(Ta(Tc(x))⊕TtA(Tc(x)))modp, μAS=h(A, S, XA, XB, KAS), and send out the validate messages (μAS, μBS, μAB) in Step 4. Similarly, if an adversaryAsteals a copy of the verifier vBfor the user B, then he/she still fails to compute tB, KBS, μBS, and send out (XB, XSA, μBS, μBA) in Step 3, whereKBS≡(Tb(Td(x))⊕TtB(Td(x)))modpand μBS=h(B, S, XB, XA, KBS). Then the adversaryAwill fail to masquerade as a legitimate user, and thus the proposed scheme resists the stolen verifier attacks.□Table 2lists the performance comparisons of the related verifier-based three-party authentication schemes and the proposed scheme, where TEdenotes the time of executing a modular exponentiation; TMdenotes the time of executing a modular multiplication; TCdenotes the time of executing a Chebyshev polynomial computing; THdenotes the time of executing a hash operation; and TRdenotes the time of generating a random number, respectively.The first comparison item is used computational cost. All the Lee et al.’s schemes [11], the Wang and Mo’ scheme [12], the Kwon et al.’s scheme [13], the Chien's scheme [14], the Pu et al.’s scheme [15], and the Lin and Lee's scheme [10] required many time-consuming modular exponential computations. But, the proposed scheme is developed by using extended chaotic maps, and thus is more efficient than the other schemes.The second comparison item is required messages and rounds in transmission. The Kwon et al.’s scheme requires four rounds. Both the Lin and Lee's scheme and the proposed scheme require six messages and four rounds. The Kwon et al.’s scheme, the Pu et al.’s scheme, the Lin and Lee's scheme and the proposed scheme are more efficient than the Lee et al.’s scheme and the Wang and Mo's scheme in communication. Moreover, in a nonce-based 2PAKE scheme [37] without using public keys, two communicating participants (A-S or B-S) authenticate each other and execute a challenge/response [38]. Then three messages and three rounds are required. Thus, to implement a nonce-based three-party authenticated key agreement scheme without using public keys requires at least six messages. Additionally, the originator (A) is the only one who initiates a message. The others (B and S) can issue messages only at the moment they receive one. Then B and S must authenticate each other and execute a challenge/response after A initiates a message in the first round. Hence, to implement a nonce-based three-party authenticated key agreement scheme without using public keys requires at least four rounds. The Kwon et al.’s scheme can be executed in four rounds. The Pu et al.’s scheme, the Lin and Lee's scheme and the proposed scheme can be executed in six messages and four rounds. Thus these schemes and the proposed scheme realize optimal in communications.The subsequent comparison items are security properties including providing mutual authentication and session key security, resisting password guessing, password guessing and stolen verifier attacks, and providing key confirmation. The Pu et al.’s scheme, the Lin and Lee's scheme and the proposed scheme provide more security properties than other schemes. Therefore, the proposed scheme retains higher security and is more efficient in computation and in transmission than other related verified-based schemes.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper develops an efficient and secure verified-based three-party authentication scheme by using the extended chaotic maps. The proposed scheme adopts rearranging and sending the messages in parallel, includes the key confirmation without extra numbers of messages and rounds, and thus can be executed in fewer messages and rounds. The proposed extended chaotic maps-based scheme possesses more security properties and is more efficient in computation and in transmission than other related verified-based schemes. Furthermore, the proposed scheme is proven secure, realizes optimal in communications, is superior to the related verified-based schemes, and thus is more suitable for data exchange in TMIS.