@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
On the improvement of wireless mesh sensor network performance under hidden terminal problems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
WMSN approaches offer new perspectives to conventional WSN-based applications.Among WMSN proposals, the ASES mode guarantees the most relevant mesh capabilities.ASES has no mechanisms to mitigate the negative effects of hidden terminals (HT).Under ASES rules, we propose an optimization model and a multi-channel time-slotted algorithm to alleviate the HT problem.An intensive performance evaluation study is discussed to validate our proposals.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Wireless Mesh Sensor Networks,Hidden terminal,Analytical characterization,Goal programming,Multi-channel time-slotted algorithm,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Wireless Mesh Sensor Networks (WMSNs) have recently received a great deal of attention in the scientific and developers communities due to the significant advances of this technology in the wireless communication field. The main reason was that competing WMSN approaches that emerged in the last few years provide mesh capabilities (e.g., robustness, scalability, multi-hop mesh routing, or energy efficiency, among others) to conventional WSN-based applications, encouraging researchers and end users to adopt new perspectives and solutions. Unfortunately, each one of these approaches lacks some (or many) of the aforementioned mesh capabilities, not assuring, a priori, the feasibility and, especially, the long-term stability of WMSN applications. The IEEE 802.15.5 standard and, in particular, its Asynchronous Energy Saving (ASES) mode was conceived to fill this gap since it integrates, in a single solution, most of these capabilities, guaranteeing, among other benefits, a long network lifetime. However, the ASES mode has no built-in mechanisms to mitigate the negative effects of hidden terminals, which sharply degrades the network performance. This fact leads us to conclude that any current WMSN approach is non-exempt of some problem, which prevents the definitive boost of this technology in the consumer market. Under these circumstances, our contribution to the WMSN field in this paper is a twofold proposal addressed to alleviating the hidden terminal problems in a scenario running under the most relevant design premises of ASES mode. Therefore, we first formulate a multi-objective optimization and then solve it by using Goal Programming. Both mathematical techniques are applied to obtain the best solution that simultaneously minimizes the aggregate message collision time due to hidden terminals and maximizes the network lifetime. Secondly, we propose the design of a MULti-channel TIme-scheduled algorithm for the HIdden Terminal problem avoidance (MULTI-HIT) which appropriately exploits the available bandwidth and accomplishes a straightforward coordination between any sender–receiver pair. Finally, the analysis and simulation experiments are presented and their results carefully discussed, demonstrating the effectiveness of both proposals in the WMSN arena.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Wireless Mesh Sensor Networks (WMSNs) comprise a technological field that has arisen as the natural evolution from the conventional Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs), composed of only a few nodes, to large-scale networks in which sources and destinations are interconnected through different paths of intermediate nodes forming a mesh layout  [1]. To this end, new mesh capabilities such as multi-hop mesh routing, scalability, robustness, reliability, self-organization or energy efficiency must be satisfied  [2]. In this sense, advances in WMSNs over the next few years will be addressed to the design, development and integration of all these capabilities into a single standard mesh solution which, in turn, will ensure a strong boost of this technology in a wide range of areas, such as automation and control (home and industrial), environmental surveillance, precision agriculture, traffic monitoring, or health services  [1].Concerning the mesh capabilities mentioned above, we pay special attention to energy efficiency since it is considered as one of the major issues in WMSN nodes usually fed by conventional (chemical) batteries. This is because many of the network nodes must accomplish a twofold functionality: (i) acquire and dispatch physical information of the surrounding area and (ii) relay appropriately the data from other different source nodes. Under these circumstances, the Asynchronous Energy Saving (ASES) mechanism defined by the IEEE 802.15.5 standard is an operational mode conceived to reduce the power consumption of the WMSN nodes. To achieve this purpose, ASES integrates, in a single solution, an efficient duty-cycle strategy for saving energy along with most of the above mesh capabilities. This fact makes IEEE 802.15.5 standard and its ASES mechanism advantageous with respect to other WMSN approaches  [2], such as Zigbee Pro  [3], the International Engineering Task Force (IETF) with its solution IPv6 over Low power Wireless Personal Area Networks (6LoWPAN)  [4], WirelessHART  [5] or ISA SP100.11a  [6].However, ASES mode is not free from problems, one of the main ones being, in our opinion, that it prevents the definitive penetration of this solution in the consumer market: the hidden terminal (HT) effect. The HT phenomena occur when two (or more) sender nodes which are unable to sense each other transmit simultaneously, provoking message collisions at one or several common receiver nodes. This event leads to retransmitting the message/-s that suffered a collision, which greatly increases the energy devoted to transmitting/receiving a message successfully. Furthermore, if further collisions by HT also affect the retransmissions, it may occur that messages are finally discarded; therefore not reaching the receiver. This situation, extended to the overall WMSN, results in a dramatic increase in the number of messages lost, which may entail a strong deterioration of the network operation. Thereby, the inability of plain ASES to mitigate the HT effects together with the fact that the remaining WMSN solutions only satisfy an incomplete set of mesh capabilities is the reason that has motivated this work. In this paper, we propose a novel analytical model and a multi-channel time-slotted algorithm. Both proposals are aimed at alleviating the HT problems in a WMSN running under the most relevant premises of ASES mode, which assures, among other issues, a longer lifetime operation.Therefore, as a first contribution of this research work, we introduce a multi-objective (MO) optimization problem  [7], which allows us to formulate multiple objectives in a single problem definition, in order to later apply the mathematical tool denoted as Goal Programming (GP)  [8,9] to simultaneously satisfy the objectives pursued. Prior to the definition of the MO problem objectives, we have to decide the most appropriate constraints that approximate the work here proposed to the real network operation. To this end, we derive the mathematical equations of the achieved throughput per link (total bitrate between a pair of nodes) and the energy consumption associated to each node. Furthermore, the hidden terminals effect along with some design premises of the ASES mode is also modeled in the formulation of the constraints. As objectives of the MO problem, we select: (i) the aggregate message collision time, denoted as the total ineffective time lost by collisions produced by HT problems, and (ii) the network lifetime, defined as the minimum node lifetime for any node belonging to the network. Interestingly, the simultaneous optimization of both objectives ensures a suitable throughput per link due to the decrease in the number of messages lost by collisions and, in turn, extends the network lifetime.Among all the existing MO optimization techniques, we decided on Goal Programming to solve the problem formulated. Unlike more conventional optimization approaches (i.e., single-objective, sequential-objectives or other MO techniques)  [7], GP offers an adjustable model to real network operation conditions, combining, on the one hand, simplicity of formulation expressing constrains usually as linear/non-linear programming, and, on the other hand, flexibility to compute the optimal solution thanks to simultaneously optimizing the deviations (underachieve/overachieve) of estimations (called goals) about real (domain-driven applications) conditions. These deviations become the objectives of the optimization problem. In order to obtain the best performance of the WMSN, we numerically estimated the goals for the aggregate message collision time and network lifetime metrics which are consistent with the operation of some real scenarios related to agriculture applications where our group has wide experience  [10,11]. The numerical results obtained by GP clearly satisfy the deviations of these goals, thus setting an optimal design in order to reach an efficient and complete sensing monitoring during, at least, the period specified by the end users for the WMSN applications under consideration. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, this is the first work in the scientific literature that provides a solution based on Goal Programming in order to improve the WMSNs performance under hidden terminal interference.As a second contribution of this paper, we present the design of a MULti-channel TIme-scheduled algorithm for the HIdden Terminal problem avoidance, which we call MULTI-HIT. This new algorithm, based on the design principles of the ASES mode operation, is conceived to mitigate the HT problems in a WMSN. To this end, we first take into consideration the studies in  [12–14], which allow us to learn about the strong points and limitations of the different techniques that cope with the HT effects in WSNs and WMSNs. These techniques are classified into four main categories, namely, time-slot scheduling mechanisms, channel multiplexing protocols, directional antenna techniques and, CDMA-based proposals. Among them, we propose a solution which follows some of the rules related to channel multiplexing  [15] and time-slot scheduling  [16,17] techniques, and does not require additional and costly hardware, as it is the case of proposals that employ CDMA-based or directional antenna methodologies. On the contrary, MULTI-HIT implements a straightforward schedule for the nodes transmission/reception tasks while making an efficient use of the multiple frequency channels available in the 2.4 GHz ISM band. The final result is a clear reduction in the energy and computing/memory resources required in comparison with solutions based on CDMA or directional antennas.The MULTI-HIT scheme is also evaluated by means of computer simulation, comparing its performance results with the ones obtained by (i) the optimization study and (ii) a recent approach denoted as Quorum-based energy-efficient Medium Access Control protocol (Queen-MAC)  [12]. This scheme has already been validated by the scientific community and also combines channel multiplexing and time scheduling techniques, thus sharing common features with our MULTI-HIT proposal. Therefore, it seems appropriate to judge Queen-MAC against MULTI-HIT, though, as will be discussed, its performance is shown to be worse. In contrast, the multi-objective study and MULTI-HIT proposal exhibit similar network performance in terms of throughput and network lifetime, which demonstrates the effectiveness of both works when dealing with the HT problem in the WMSN arena.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section  2 we review the related work, paying special attention to the studies in which the HT phenomena are modeled analytically. An overview of the ASES mode is provided in Section  3. In Section  4, the optimization problem is formulated and solved by means of the goal programming multi-objective technique, and the results obtained are thoroughly examined. MULTI-HIT is described in detail in Section  5. Section  6 presents an intensive performance evaluation study in which the optimization model and simulation frameworks are comparatively discussed. Finally, Section  7 concludes the paper.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In the Wireless Mesh Sensor Network arena, we presented two contributions aimed at facing the hidden terminal problem, a crucial concern that is closely related to the non-definitive penetration of this technology in the consumer market. On the one hand, we have designed a novel analytical model which shows a notable reduction in the number of collisions caused by hidden terminals without jeopardizing one of the main requirements of the WMSNs: energy efficiency. To achieve this purpose, firstly, we model our problem by means of multi-objective (MO) formulation, defining the minimization of the aggregate message collision time and the maximization of the network lifetime as objectives. Furthermore, our MO problem establishes important features of the IEEE 802.15.5 standard as constraints, in particular, its Asynchronous Energy Saving mode (ASES), and the hidden terminal phenomena, which allow us to approximate our mathematical formulation to the real operation of a WMSN. Secondly, the MO formulation is solved by the Goal Programming (GP) technique, which gives the best result for the set of objectives proposed. To this aim, we have preliminarly estimated the expected result for each objective (goal) from our experience in fields such as precision agriculture. These expected goals along with the problem constraints are extremely important because they allow GP to attain a real-world solution to our case of study. As our second contribution, we propose a MULti-channel TIme-scheduled algorithm for the HIdden Terminal problem avoidance (MULTI-HIT). In a WMSN scenario operating with ASES premises, MULTI-HIT is aimed at mitigating the hidden terminal phenomena thanks to the exploitation of the different frequency channels available in the 2.4 GHz ISM band and a straightforward coordination between any arbitrary sender–receiver pair.To evaluate the appropriate behavior of our MULTI-HIT proposal, we developed a complete simulation framework, in order to fairly compare its results with our optimization study and a recent multi-channel time-slotted protocol called Queen-MAC which is also addressed to reducing the hidden terminal effects. Simulation experiments reveal that MULTI-HIT provides better results than the Queen-MAC approach, while a similar network performance is attained in comparison with our numerical solution, thus demonstrating the effectiveness of both approaches and their applicability to realistic scenarios.As upcoming research, our analytical approach and MULTI-HIT proposal can be extended in order to include additional application-specific requirements typically encountered in real-world scenarios (e.g., environmental surveillance, automation and control (home and industrial), traffic monitoring, health service, among others). Following this line, to further improve the analytical model proposed, the inclusion of new constraints and/or objectives related to, for instance, the maximization of the network throughput in order to increase the data delivered at the sink node, will be addressed. Furthermore, we plan to extend our analytical model and MULTI-HIT to address the following issues. First, a channel interference model would be incorporated, which would help to measure more accurately the real interference experienced by nodes on a given frequency channel. Second, our twofold solution would be assessed for other network layouts (e.g., random topologies) and node densities. This would allow us to tackle the problem of messages collisions caused by other network issues, such as collisions due to CSMA-CA and intensive contention for the wireless medium. Finally, concerning MULTI-HIT proposal, we could also improve its performance as follows. On the one hand, nodes would periodically collect information referred to, for instance, the Receiver Signal Strength Indicator (RSSI) and/or the Link Quality Indicator (LQI), and using strategies such as machine-learning techniques  [55], each node would be able to determine whether a given channel is reliable enough to conduct the communications. On the other hand, additional information about the state of the nodes’ batteries and throughput per link would be added within WN messages, allowing sender nodes to balance their traffic load. This way, senders would avoid the transmission of messages to overloaded nodes, or whose available battery level is close to exhaust.