@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A new approach for automatic sleep scoring: Combining Taguchi based complex-valued neural network and complex wavelet transform

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
In this study, a new complex classifier-based approach is presented for automatic sleep scoring using EEG signals.The effect of complex-valued classifiers shown to have a positive impact on classification accuracy of EEG signal data.One of the interesting parts of the study is the parameter optimization that significantly affects system performance.Proposed method can be used to design a computer support system for rapid and accurate sleep stage scoring.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
EEG signals,Dual-tree complex wavelet transform,Taguchi method,Sleep stage scoring,Complex-valued neural networks,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Automatic classification of sleep stages is one of the most important methods used for diagnostic procedures in psychiatry and neurology. This method, which has been developed by sleep specialists, is a time-consuming and difficult process. Generally, electroencephalogram (EEG) signals are used in sleep scoring. In this study, a new complex classifier-based approach is presented for automatic sleep scoring using EEG signals. In this context, complex-valued methods were utilized in the feature selection and classification stages. In the feature selection stage, features of EEG data were extracted with the help of a dual tree complex wavelet transform (DTCWT). In the next phase, five statistical features were obtained. These features are classified using complex-valued neural network (CVANN) algorithm. The Taguchi method was used in order to determine the effective parameter values in this CVANN. The aim was to develop a stable model involving parameter optimization. Different statistical parameters were utilized in the evaluation phase. Also, results were obtained in terms of two different sleep standards. In the study in which a 2nd level DTCWT and CVANN hybrid model was used, 93.84% accuracy rate was obtained according to the Rechtschaffen & Kales (R&K) standard, while a 95.42% accuracy rate was obtained according to the American Academy of Sleep Medicine (AASM) standard. Complex-valued classifiers were found to be promising in terms of the automatic sleep scoring and EEG data.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
One of the important factors that affect our daily lives is healthy sleep. Examples of situations in which sleep affects our lives are with regard to work performance, mood, morale and relationships with other individuals [1]. Sleep research is of great importance for the detection and treatment of sleep-related problems. In addition, sleep analysis also provides significant benefits for various psycho-physiological analyses. For example, it has been reported that a healthy deep sleep stage accelerates physical healing. Furthermore, a healthy rapid eye movement (REM) stage increases learning ability and strengthens the memory.The most important source referenced in sleep analysis is the sleep scoring process. Polysomnographic recordings (PSG) are used for sleep scoring. These PSG are comprised of data including the EEG, electromyogram (EMG) and electrooculogram (EOG) data of the patient [1]. These records are evaluated by experts using the R&K standards. According to these standards, each 30-second epoch is classified as awake, REM and non-rapid eye movement (NREM stages 1–4). Recently, NREM stages 3 and 4 have been combined and referred to as the slow wave sleep stage (SWS).EEG signals are the most commonly used physiological signals in sleep studies. The reason for this is these signals give information about brain activity [2]. EEG signals are typically composed of four wave types. They are respectively delta (0–3.99Hz); theta (4–7.99Hz); alpha (8–12.99Hz) and beta (13–30Hz). In the different sleep stages, these waves have different properties. Low amplitude and combined EEG frequency can be seen in awake stage. In the NREM stage 1, a 2–7Hz frequency range and the presence of alpha waves in less than half of the cycle are observed in EEG signals. In the NREM Stage 2, there are sleep spindles (12–14Hz) and k-complexes. With low frequency waves of less than 2Hz, sleep spindles and k-complexes can be seen in NREM Stage 3 and NREM Stage 4 which are the deep sleep stages [3,4]. Low voltage and mixed EEG frequency can be seen in the REM stage. Also in this stage, there are low amplitude EMG, high level EOG signal from both eyes and sawtooth wave-like pattern [5].EEG signals have a great deal of formal complexity. The amplitudes and the frequencies of these signals are constantly changing. Furthermore, these signals are not periodic. Therefore, measurements must be done with caution over a long period, in order to obtain meaningful information from these signals. Specialists analyze EEG data (recorded for hours) in 5–10s frames and it is shown on a computer screen [2]. This process is a rather tedious and difficult process, and there is also the possibility of making mistakes. As can be seen, visual analysis with regard to sleep staging and the interpretation of complex EEG signals is a difficult problem. For all these reasons, EEG signals must be analyzed using a suitable, highly accurate method with regard to an effective sleep staging system. Recently, many models for the automatic sleep scoring have been proposed. Sinha [6] proposed a method which classifies three sleep stages (sleep spindles, REM and awake). A 95.35% classification accuracy was achieved in the study in which artificial neural networks (ANNs) and wavelet transform were used. Susmakova and Krakovska [7] used 73 characteristic measures in the sleep scoring with discriminant analysis involving Fisher's quadratic classifier. Subasi et al. [8] used a wavelet-based ANN model to classify drowsy, alert and sleep states. The classification results of this study were 96.2% drowsy, 93.6% alert and 92.3% sleep. Zoubek et al. [9] used Fourier transform coefficients, Kurtosis values, entropy values and standard deviation values for sleep scoring. They achieved 80% accuracy rate in the study in which neural networks were preferred as the classifier. In a study in which they benefited from EEG signals, Doroshenkov et al. [10] proposed a hidden Markov model-based classification algorithm. The authors obtained the best results in terms of the classification of the REM stage. Ebrahimi et al. [11] proposed a method based on ANN and wavelet transform in their study. They achieved a 93% accuracy rate in the study in which five sleep stages were classified. Jo et al. [12] achieved an 84.6% accuracy rate using a genetic fuzzy classifier. Tagluk et al. [13] classified the sleep stages using a feed-forward neural network. A 74.7% success rate was obtained in the study and 5 sleep stages were classified. Fraiwan et al. [14] used time-frequency entropy values as a feature. They used these features, obtained in different frequency bands, as input data to a linear discriminant analysis algorithm. 84% success rate was obtained in the study in which 6 sleep stages were classified. Ozsen [15] obtained time-frequency based features in her study in which she used EEG, EMG and EOG signals. A class-dependent sequential feature selection algorithm was used for the detection of effective features among the obtained data. The features obtained after the feature selection step were presented as input data to the ANN and a 90.93% success rate was obtained in the study in which 5 sleep stages were classified. Hsu et al. [16] used energy-based features. Five sleep stages were classified in the study in which a recurrent neural network was used as the classification algorithm. The researchers obtained a success rate of 87.2%.In this study, an effective system is proposed which can automatically perform the staging process with complex-valued classifiers. DTCWT is used in the feature extraction stage. In the next step, 5 statistical feature values are obtained from obtained features. The obtained complex valued features are classified using CVANN algorithm. Effective parameter values of the algorithm are obtained using the Taguchi method in order to improve the performance of CVANN algorithm.The organization of the paper is as follows. In Section 2, information about the methods used in this study is presented. In Section 3, the details of the proposed method are given. In Section 4, the experimental design is described in detail. In Section 5, the experimental results are summarized and the comparative analyses of these results are presented. In Section 6, experimental results of this work are discussed. In Section 7, the results obtained in this study and information about future planned targets are provided.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
