@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Integrating biological knowledge based on functional annotations for biclustering of gene expression data

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Biclustering of gene expression data.Integration of biological knowledge.Scatter search.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Biclustering of gene expression data,Integration of biological knowledge,Scatter search,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Gene expression data analysis is based on the assumption that co-expressed genes imply co-regulated genes. This assumption is being reformulated because the co-expression of a group of genes may be the result of an independent activation with respect to the same experimental condition and not due to the same regulatory regime. For this reason, traditional techniques are recently being improved with the use of prior biological knowledge from open-access repositories together with gene expression data.Biclustering is an unsupervised machine learning technique that searches patterns in gene expression data matrices. A scatter search-based biclustering algorithm that integrates biological information is proposed in this paper. In addition to the gene expression data matrix, the input of the algorithm is only a direct annotation file that relates each gene to a set of terms from a biological repository where genes are annotated. Two different biological measures, FracGO and SimNTO, are proposed to integrate this information by means of its addition to-be-optimized fitness function in the scatter search scheme. The measure FracGO is based on the biological enrichment and SimNTO is based on the overlapping among GO annotations of pairs of genes. Experimental results evaluate the proposed algorithm for two datasets and show the algorithm performs better when biological knowledge is integrated. Moreover, the analysis and comparison between the two different biological measures is presented and it is concluded that the differences depend on both the data source and how the annotation file has been built in the case GO is used. It is also shown that the proposed algorithm obtains a greater number of enriched biclusters than other classical biclustering algorithms typically used as benchmark and an analysis of the overlapping among biclusters reveals that the biclusters obtained present a low overlapping. The proposed methodology is a general-purpose algorithm which allows the integration of biological information from several sources and can be extended to other biclustering algorithms based on the optimization of a merit function.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Gene expression data matrices show the expression profile of thousands of genes along dozens of samples, which are studied in different microarray experiments. Each value in these matrices is a numerical value that represents the expression value of a gene in a specific sample. It is assumed that groups of genes that share a similar expression profile also share the same regulatory regime and hence the same functionalities. This assumption is called the guilt-by-association heuristic [1]. It is lately being reformulated because of the co-expression of a group of genes may be the result of an independent activation with respect to the same experimental condition and not due to the same regulatory regime is captured. Biclustering of gene expression data is an unsupervised machine learning technique that searches groups of genes with a similar expression profile under a subset of conditions. Recently, integration methods based on the combination of multiple sources from open-access data have been proposed in other fields as clustering or classification. These approaches can outperform the traditional algorithms and increase the possibilities of correcting the spurious information existing in high-throughput technology data as gene expression data or other “omic” data. The most important difference of biclustering with respect to traditional clustering is that biclustering aims to cluster simultaneously genes as well as conditions, rather than focusing solely on either one. Clustering techniques split the data matrix into groups of co-expressed genes along all samples in the matrix such that the union of all the clusters constitutes the complete matrix and all of them are disjoint. However, biclustering finds co-expressed genes only under a subset of samples. Therefore, the overlapping among results is considered and the motivation is to discover hidden patterns more than to describe the gene expression matrix. Note that some recently published traditional clustering algorithms allow the overlapping between clusters [2,3]. The goal of biclustering is to search groups of locally co-expressed genes more than to describe the gene expression matrix. The motivation is to find hidden patterns to discover potential biomarkers or formulate new hypothesis. Although biclustering was studied firstly in the 1960s [4] when it was proved to be a NP-hard problem, in the context of gene expression data it was firstly introduced by Cheng and Church [5].In the context of biclustering, public databases and repositories such as the Gene Ontology project (GO) or Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) have been commonly used to validate the quality of biclusters from a biological point of view. Concretely, the enrichment analysis of a set of genes in the context of GO is usually used as a standard framework of comparison among biclustering algorithms [6]. The results are compared according to a ranking based on the characterization of each group of genes belonging to a bicluster with respect the information stored in GO. GO is an ontology with a hierarchical structure with three roots or domains: molecular function, biological process and cellular component. Each gene is related to a set of GO annotations with different levels of specificity. These annotations are terms in the ontology which are linked with groups of genes. These genes are annotated in the term. Low-level terms in the tree structure report more detailed information than high-level terms which are more general. Functional annotation files are built such that each gene is associated with the set of terms where it is annotated.These open-access biological data are commonly used in biclustering literature to validate results and their use is a common factor in most of the papers. Many biclustering algorithms have been proposed using different heuristic strategies or search criteria to find biclusters [7–9]. Several algorithms such as Cheng and Church's algorithm (CC) [5], Iterative Signature Algorithm (ISA) [10], Order-preserving Submatrix Algorithm (OPSM) [11] or xMotifs [12] are usually used as benchmark algorithms in order to establish a comparison among biclustering algorithms. CC was the foundational algorithm and it is based on a deterministic greedy iterative search method. This method finds biclusters with a residue less or equal than a threshold that is given as an input parameter. Although the residue is a measure usually used in biclustering [5], it cannot capture coherent evolution patterns [13]. The ISA algorithm uses a nondeterministic greedy algorithm that finds up- and down-regulated patterns. The input matrix is reordered to find blocks of coherent values with respect to rows and columns that are reported as biclusters. The OPSM algorithm searches for biclusters according to a model based on linear ordering among rows. This algorithm sequentially finds each bicluster and although coherent evolution patterns are captured, it cannot find inverse coherent evolution patterns. The xMotifs algorithm iteratively searches the largest bicluster according to some constraints by removing samples. Direct and inverse coherent evolution patterns are captured by this algorithm and a huge number of biclusters are usually reported. Moreover, it is important to highlight the family of biclustering algorithms based on evolutionary computation and metaheuristics that optimize a certain quality measure [14–17]. Likewise, algorithms of this family that use measures based on correlations among genes as a mechanism to find co-expressed genes have been recently published in literatures [18–26].All the above-mentioned algorithms search biclusters composed of co-expressed genes and the biological knowledge is only used as a posteriori criterion to determine the relevance of the biclusters found. However, the author in [27] considered that the studies based on gene expression data had some limitations. In particular, the co-expression of a group of genes may be the result of a parallel and independent activation with respect to the same experimental condition and not due to capture the same biological functionality. Therefore, the assumption that co-expression means co-regulation should be reinterpreted. For this reason, the biological knowledge has been incorporated during the search process to avoid groups of co-expressed genes that do not show biologically representative connections. For example in the field of clustering, the algorithm presented in [28] uses the K-means algorithm and integrates gene annotation files extracted from GO with a concept of distance based on the co-expression and functional similarity. A GO-based measure has been also applied as part of the workflow of a predictive algorithm to classify genes in [29]. Namely, the average of the Pearson correlation, which evaluates similarities among gene expression profiles, and a GO-based measure are used to define a distance. This distance is used to cluster genes and to elaborate a ranking of candidate genes. A gene feature selection method is presented in [30] which integrates information from KEGG instead of from GO. This algorithm is a KEGG-improved evolutionary strategy that shows a better performance for selecting genes than classical algorithms.Functional similarity measures based on GO involve a concept of distance between two genes. There are several semantic similarity measures to compare GO terms to which genes are annotated [31]. They can be basically classified in two groups: edge-based measures and information content (IC)-based measures. The first group of measures assumes that the specificity of a term can be directly inferred from its depth in the GO graph and the second group is based on the frequency of a term in the GO graph. However, a gene is usually annotated in several terms and not in only one, and hence, it is better to use similarity measures that compare sets of terms rather than single terms. A comparison among this kind of measures is presented in [31] where the simGIC measure shows the best performance. This measure computes the similarity between two genes using the IC associated to each term in the genes. Note that the GO graph structure is needed to compute the IC in addition to the gene annotation file. Also there are other measures based on a preprocessed binary matrix instead of the tree structure of GO. This matrix is composed of genes as rows and GO terms as columns and the elements are 1 or 0 depending on if the gene is or is not annotated in the GO term, respectively. These measures are based on the Vector Space Model (VSM) originally developed in the context of information retrieval. The measure presented in [32] can be also classified as a semantic similarity measure but neither a preprocessed matrix nor the GO graph structure are necessary. This measure is based on the overlapping among gene annotations from flat GO annotation files where the tree structure of GO is captured. In particular, the annotations for each gene are propagated to upper levels in the ontology and all the associated parent terms are considered.It can be stayed that the integration of biological information from different sources is actually one of the challenges and research directions in Bioinformatics [33]. There are many works that use other data sources, not only information from GO or KEGG. For example, several data sources can be merged to integrate biological knowledge as protein–protein interaction networks, genome-wide binding data and information from the literature and not only information from GO [34]. The COALESCE algorithm [35] uses the gene expression data together with DNA sequence data as input data and other supporting data as additional information during the process in order to discover regulatory modules. This algorithm finds biclusters that are used as a guide to discover these modules. The proposed algorithm in [36] uses protein–protein interaction networks and gene expression data to discover cancer biomarkers, which are found through the discovering of groups of genes in biclusters that are also highly connected in the network. Recently, a biclustering algorithm [37], which works with microRNA and target genes data, uses GO information to do a ranking of the results.From the best of our knowledge, the biological information integration in biclustering of gene expression data has not been still investigated. The aim of this paper is to introduce this idea in the biclustering field by means of functional annotation files. These files are flat files where each gene is linked with its corresponding terms in the biological repository. The proposed algorithm is a scatter search-based metaheuristic that optimizes a fitness function which defines a criterion to evaluate the quality of the biclusters. This algorithm is based on the algorithm presented in [25] and although several procedures differ, the most relevant contribution is the fitness function definition to integrate the biological information. This function consists of three parts: the first one is a term to control the size of the biclusters; the second one is the correlation among genes to capture co-expressed genes; finally, the third term is an additional term to integrate the biological information. The goal is to establish an equilibrium in the fitness function to find biclusters composed of co-expressed genes that capture similar biological functionalities. Additionally, two different biological integration possibilities are experimentally studied: firstly, the biological information is included with a measure proposed here based on an enrichment study of a set of genes, and secondly, with a GO-based measure that computes the overlapping among the annotated terms of a group of genes. Both measures only use as input data to integrate the functional information an annotation file that relates genes and biological terms. Therefore, the input data of the algorithm are only the gene expression matrix and a functional annotation file. The proposed methodology is a general-purpose algorithm which allows the integration of biological information from several sources such as GO, pathways KEGG or any biological information provided by flat annotation files and can be extended to other biclustering algorithms based on the optimization of a merit function.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the algorithm where firstly the fitness function is defined and secondly the search procedure is described. In the fitness function section, two different biological integration measures are also defined. Experiments are described and discussed in Section 3. Namely, the experimental results are analyzed from three points of view: the integration of biological information improves the algorithm performance; the performance of our approach is better than that obtained by several benchmark algorithms; and the results from the two different biological integration measures are discussed. Finally, Section 4 is devoted to conclusions and future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A scatter search-based biclustering algorithm that integrates biological information has been proposed in this paper. The data input of the proposed algorithm are the gene expression matrix and a direct annotation file linking genes with sets of biological terms extracted from a biological repository or database. The Gene Ontology, KEGG pathways and InterPro databases have been used as source for generating these files in this work. Two different biological measures, FracGO and SimNTO, have been proposed to integrate this information by means of its addition to the fitness function to be optimized to evaluate the quality of the biclusters in the scatter search. The measure FracGO is based on the biological enrichment and SimNTO is based on the overlapping among GO annotations of pairs of genes. Experimental results from the application of the proposed algorithm for two datasets have been reported and discussed showing a better performance when biological knowledge is integrated and better biclusters than that of the classical biclustering algorithms.The main motivation has been to use a standard biological validation criterion in biclustering [6,44] as mechanism to integrate biological knowledge. This criterion is based on the percentage of enriched biclusters that is calculated using direct annotation files. If these files are GO files which have been generated by propagating annotations to upper levels in the GO hierarchy, the experimental results show that FracGO-based biclusters only share general GO terms and they do not capture relevant biological information. In this case, the SimNTO measure, which is based on the term overlap defined in [32] and uses annotation files as input, is faster and simpler than other GO semantic measures and solves this problem. Several experiments show that SimNTO-based biclusters capture relevant biological information that present pathways mapping in Reactome, for example. It is important to note that SimNTO captures the GO hierarchical structure if the annotation files contain all parent terms for each term. As a summary, the differences between the FracGO and SimNTO measures depend on the data source and how the annotation file has been built in the case GO is used.Future work will be focused on the study of other biological measures to handle microRNA/mRNA data and how to integrate information from different biological sources. Some improvements in the search procedure of the proposed algorithm will be also analyzed such as the setting configuration of inner parameters.We declare that we have not any actual or potential competing financial interests.