@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Identification of temporal variations in mental workload using locally-linear-embedding-based EEG feature reduction and support-vector-machine-based clustering and classification techniques

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Recognition of mental workload is crucial to improve the safety of human–machine system.A simulated process control task was used to elicit different levels of mental workload.Mental workload was assessed by using multichannel EEG signals.Locally linear embedding was used to reduce the dimensionality of EEG power features.Support vector clustering and support vector data description methods were combined to classify EEG data.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Mental workload,Locally linear embedding,Support vector data description,Support vector clustering,Operator functional state,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Identifying the abnormal changes of mental workload (MWL) over time is quite crucial for preventing the accidents due to cognitive overload and inattention of human operators in safety-critical human–machine systems. It is known that various neuroimaging technologies can be used to identify the MWL variations. In order to classify MWL into a few discrete levels using representative MWL indicators and small-sized training samples, a novel EEG-based approach by combining locally linear embedding (LLE), support vector clustering (SVC) and support vector data description (SVDD) techniques is proposed and evaluated by using the experimentally measured data. The MWL indicators from different cortical regions are first elicited by using the LLE technique. Then, the SVC approach is used to find the clusters of these MWL indicators and thereby to detect MWL variations. It is shown that the clusters can be interpreted as the binary class MWL. Furthermore, a trained binary SVDD classifier is shown to be capable of detecting slight variations of those indicators. By combining the two schemes, a SVC–SVDD framework is proposed, where the clear-cut (smaller) cluster is detected by SVC first and then a subsequent SVDD model is utilized to divide the overlapped (larger) cluster into two classes. Finally, three-class MWL levels (low, normal and high) can be identified automatically. The experimental data analysis results are compared with those of several existing methods. It has been demonstrated that the proposed framework can lead to acceptable computational accuracy and has the advantages of both unsupervised and supervised training strategies.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
With the development of sophisticated automatic control/automation techniques, human operators become the supervisors and the decision makers in human–machine systems [1–4]. However, the abnormal psychophysiological states of the operator may lead to the operator performance degradation [1]. On one hand, in order to cope with the large-scale and/or time-varying information flows, operators may ignore critical clues due to the limited cognitive capacity, which adversely impacts the regular functioning of the system [5]. On the other hand, engaged with the human–machine system with high level of automation for a long duration, operators may become inattentive [3] and it could prevent them from manually coping with unforeseen emergent events in time. It is thus quite necessary to address how to maintain the optimal operator functional state (OFS) in the context of human–machine systems, where the risk of the accident is closely related to humanistic component/agent, e.g., in the fields of public transportations (driving, railway and shipping) [6–9], chemical and nuclear industry [10,11] and aeronautics and aerospace [2].Mental workload (MWL), which fluctuates in response to the transient cognitive demand, is considered to be a crucial factor of OFS. Some researchers even use these two concepts/terms interchangeably [12]. According to the existing studies [13–16], a reasonable definition of MWL can be summarized as “the portion of the operator information processing capacity or resources that is required to meet system demands and the mental effort that the operator devotes to control or supervision”. For the purpose of adapting operators to be attentive, concentrated, engaged to the primary task requirements and of avoiding MWL overload, adaptive automation strategy was proposed to allocate proper type and amount of tasks between the operator and the computer dynamically in human–machine systems [1,17–20].The neuroimaging technologies, such as electroencephalogram (EEG) and functional magnetic resonance imaging, have been used widely and effectively to examine human brain functions related to MWL variations. In particular, EEG has the advantages of high temporal resolution and readiness of implementation. It was successfully applied in many fields combined with pattern classification techniques, such as brain computer interface [21], depression diagnoses [22], and sleep-wake classification [23]. Regarding the MWL level detection/classification issue, EEG has been extensively utilized together with other psychophysiological measurements, e.g., electrocardiogram (ECG), electrodermal measurement, and electrooculography signals [24–26]. The early work has verified that the level of MWL under different levels of task complexity and/or difficulty could be categorized into a few different classes based on temporal change of the EEG power spectral density (PSD) or the time–frequency features of the EEG time-series data [27]. These studies showed that the suppression of the parietal and occipital α (8–13Hz) power as well as the enhancement of the frontal θ (4–7Hz) power of EEG would occur with increased task difficulty. Moreover, when operators perform long-duration and low-cognitive-demand tasks, the inattentive state caused by monotonous task operations can be also detected by making use of measured EEG data. This issue is termed as alertness detection [6–9,28–30], where the significant change of EEG–PSD features is often used to determine the level of alertness and/or drowsiness of the operator.On the other hand, EEG can be combined with other different psychophysiological measures to overcome the insensitivity of the single psychophysiological marker of particular individual operators [31–33], for example the EEG, ECG and ocular features were jointly utilized. In recent years, the multimodal approach also received much attention, where EEG was integrated with other neuroimaging techniques [34–36]. For instance, the combination of steady-state visual evoked potentials with EEG has been explored for establishing the reliable human–machine interaction [34]. The gaze information was embedded in the EEG-based brain–computer system [35]. In particular, the functional near infrared spectroscopy measurement for recognizing the MWL variation was also examined [36]. Using the mixed information from the multimodal approach can be beneficial for comprehensively exploring the salient features of human brain functions.To interpret the MWL changes using the measured psychophysiological data, some statistical methods and linear classification techniques were developed, e.g., the hybrid approach by combining principle component analysis (PCA) and stepwise discriminant analysis [37]. The nonlinear classifiers, particularly artificial neural networks and support vector machines (SVM), were shown to achieve superior pattern classification performance [38–40]. More recent work was focused on extracting the most representative features to reveal the relationship between task difficulty/performance and the neurophysiological responses under virtual reality environment [7,8,41,42], where the independent component analysis technique has been widely applied for EEG data preprocessing and analysis. In addition, to achieve high classification accuracy of nonlinear classification or modeling techniques, the improved optimization methods [43] and the hybrid learning approaches [33] were also examined.In this paper, a novel MWL detection framework based on a combination of unsupervised and supervised learning strategies are proposed to cope with several crucial issues that received less attention in the literature: (1), as multi-channel EEG recording is applied in our data acquisition experiments, the dimensionality of the candidate EEG feature vectors can be very high. Therefore, the performance of various data-driven methods may be limited due to the curse of the dimensionality, i.e., the available data in high-dimensional space is sparse and the amount of data required for eliciting the reliable results would grow exponentially with the dimensionality [44,45]. Moreover, if the number of training samples is even smaller than the number of features, the peaking phenomenon occurs and the accuracy of prediction/classification methods would be also degraded [46]. To this end, a viable solution is to automatically derive MWL features by using certain feature reduction techniques while the change of MWL can be interpreted/visualized by using a few EEG markers; (2) the intrinsic clusters of EEG features related to MWL variations are rarely explored and it could be beneficial to understand the transition of the operator's brain process involved in complex human–machine system; (3) considering the supervised learning based classification methods, the training targets of each psychophysiological sample must be known. Here, the continuously measured task performance data [47] as well as the type of control conditions is used to determine the target class labels.To address the above three issues, a EEG-data-based MWL detection framework using integratively locally linear embedding (LLE) [48], support vector clustering (SVC) [49] and support vector data description (SVDD) [50] is proposed and validated. In this work, LLE technique is utilized to find the low-dimensional manifold in the high-dimensional EEG feature space in order to extract the representative EEG markers from different cortical regions. This implementation is motivated by that the consistent brain process reflected by EEG–PSD time courses could form a manifold with the limited dimensionality which can be used to represent the low-dimensional MWL indicators. Moreover, EEG data is typically nonlinear and the classical linear dimension reduction method may not be adequate. It is also worth noting that LLE has been successfully used in many real world applications, e.g., feature fusion [51], image classification [52], and face recognition [53], where the representative features with the relatively low dimensionality can be elicited. Then, the SVC approach, which is used to find the data clusters in EEG data space with no need to know the number of clusters, is adopted to detect the drastic change of the EEG features. In this way, a SVC–SVDD hybrid framework is established, where the crisp cluster is first found by SVC and a subsequent SVDD model is utilized to discriminate/distinguish the somewhat blurred and overlapped cluster into two classes. The hybrid framework is shown to yield acceptable accuracy of three-class (low, normal and high) MWL temporal data classification.This paper is organized as follows. The next section describes the principle of the experimental paradigm, EEG data preprocessing scheme and MWL detection framework. The corresponding results are shown in Section 3. In Section 4, the detailed discussions are given. Section 5 includes conclusion and future works.In the experiment, a simulated safety-critical human–machine system with the complex tasks is considered. The aim of the study is to evaluate the MWL level of the human operator on earth when coping with tasks for remotely monitoring/repairing the air quality manager systems of the spacecraft in the low earth orbit. It was provided by automation-enhanced cabin air management system (ACAMS). The original idea of ACAMS came from [2,20,54,55] and it was redeveloped by FGAIO of Technical University of Berlin. ACAMS was designed as a life support system of a micro-world with a representative process control environment. A group of control tasks require the operator to interact with the dynamic information that reflects the system status and also highly demand the operator's cognitive resources. The main task of ACAMS for the operator is to monitor the current states of the system and collaborate with the automatic controllers to maintain the quality of the breathable air in the closed cabin. Hence, the operator's performance breakdown would lead to the serious human–machine system failure and harm the safety of the human in the spacecraft. To this end, evaluating operator's MWL is crucial for preventing the high-risk operational states since the high level of MWL indicates the operator suffers the tasks that are too difficult to automate.The dynamic visual display of ACAMS consists of four subsystems, i.e., oxygen concentration (O2), pressure (P), carbon dioxide concentration (CO2) and temperature (T), while each subsystem with automatic and manual control mode is highly dependent with others. Only the system control task is considered in this study, i.e., subjects were instructed to manually compensate for the drift of several subsystems and try to maintain them within the target ranges when corresponding automatic controllers were defined to be the failure. In this case, there were preprogrammed technical failures/faults of subsystems and the corresponding variables related to the air quality of the cabin cannot be automatically controlled. In order to maintain the safe functioning of the human–machine system as a whole, those subsystems have to be switched from automatic mode to manual mode, which allows human operator take over some control tasks requiring manual control due to the unavailability or failure of automatic control functionality. The operator must continue the manual control operations until the failures were detected and fixed. On one hand, the number of manually controlled subsystems (NOS) was adopted to indicate the task difficulty [47], i.e., the larger NOS represents more difficult task. Moreover, standard (SL) and high (HL) actuator sensitivity levels were defined for each subsystem, i.e., the task under the HL condition is much more difficult. Hence, there are two factors that can influence the complexity of subjects’ tasks, i.e., NOS and the actuator sensitivity. On one hand, larger NOS indicates the subject has to accomplish more tasks at one time. Moreover, under HL condition, the corresponding subsystem can be compensated to the target ranges representing the safety system state very quickly. However, it demands more subjects’ attention and mental resource with the dynamic display of ACAMS since the subsystems can easily run out of the target range. The reason for using both two factors is to provide enough task load difficulty to simulate the possible performance breakdown or dysfunctional situation of the human–machine system.Six volunteers participated in the experiment and had given informed consent. All subjects with the engineering background are male, healthy, right-handed and well trained for tasks. None of subjects had a history of neurological or psychiatric disorders and all of them are the postgraduates of East China University of Science and Technology, Shanghai, China. The psychophysiological data collected on five of them (subjects A–E, 22–24 years, mean age 23) were adopted in this work. The data set of one subject has been removed from the study because one part of the data has been mistakenly rewritten by another subject's data. In this case the dataset was contaminated and not correct for the subsequent analysis.Each subject operated ACAMS for two trials which were performed at the same time on different days. These ten trials (5 subjects×2 trials) are denoted as A1, A2, B1, B2,…, E1, E2, respectively. Each trial contains ten phases and lasts 50min (i.e., each phase lasts 5min, see Fig. 1).The control conditions across 10 phases for one trial are defined as follows. In phase 1, 4, 7 and 10 of baseline conditions, all subsystems were automatically controlled. During the phase 2 and 3, two subsystems were defined as the failure and the subject was required to manually control them under the SL and HL actuator sensitivity, respectively. Similarly, three and four subsystems were defined as the failure for the phase 5–6 and 8–9, respectively, and the subjects need to accomplish the same tasks under SL (for phase 5 and 8) and HL conditions (for phase 6 and 9). The details are listed in Table 1. It is noted that during the baseline conditions the subjects also have to monitor the trajectories of all subsystem to maintain the situation awareness of the task environment despite the manual process-control operations are not required. In this case, the subjects with opened eyes were required to concentrate themselves on the dynamic display of ACAMS because the subjects may become unfamiliar with the task operations if they were fully rested for a certain time period. Moreover, compared to our previous study [47], the length of each control condition was reduced from 15min to 5min and the more difficult tasks are involved with HL condition. The shorter duration of the conditions impose instantaneous demand of the cognitive resource of the operator, which is more related to MWL variations. In this case, the factor of fatigue accumulation is not a main factor that influences EEG data. On the other hand, more difficult tasks can help us examine the limit of the cognitive capacity of the operator. As a result, more reliable definition of discrete MWL levels can be made.When subjects operated with ACAMS, the psychophysiological data (EEG, ECG and ocular signal) were measured via EEG acquisition equipment (Nihon Kohden® EEG system). In this study, only EEG signals are used as clues to identify MWL variations, which were recorded by using fifteen channels on the scalp with the sampling frequency of 500Hz, i.e., AFz, F3, F4, Fz, C3, C4, Cz, CPz, P3, P4, Pz, POz, O1, O2 and Oz, based on 10–20 international electrode system [56]. The reference is the average potential of two earlobes. This EEG acquisition paradigm is expected to cover the cortical regions highly related with the MWL variations [8,12,20,37,47]. When the experiment began, the subject sat in front of the computer where ACAMS runs and was not allowed making head or body movements. The task of ACAMS was accomplished only by using the mouse of the computer. Furthermore, the collected EEG was simultaneously visualized by the other computer. When the significant EMG artifacts were observed for a long time in the visualized EEG signals, the data collection experiment would be terminated and the data of this trial were removed. The subject was asked to rest for 20min and begin another trial. It is noted that only in the second control condition of trial E1 we found this problem and the data of this trial were recollected.Raw EEG data were pre-processed by a Butterworth IIR filter with the low-pass frequency of 40Hz. The coherence method [57] was used to remove the blink artifact in the frontal EEG. Then, EEG–PSD was computed by using fast Fourier transformation with frequency resolution of 1Hz from each 1-s clean EEG epoch. For each channel, forty frequency-domain EEG features corresponding to 1–40Hz were extracted. After correcting outliers, the mean of each EEG feature in 5-s were calculated. Hence, The size of EEG feature set for one trial is 580×600, where 580 is the number of EEG feature vectors with the last 10-s data of each phase were omitted and 600 is the number of frequency domain features. Finally, the time courses of each feature set were standardized by subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation to ensure that all features have equal significance for the subsequent analysis.To objectively quantify the task performance of the subjects, time in range (TIR) is defined as the time ratio of the ACAMS system in the safe state during a certain time period [20,47]. TIR is computed based on the historical trajectories that were recorded by ACAMS:TIR=rO2(k)+rP(k)+rCO2(k)+rT(k)4.When the subsystem (O2, P, CO2 or T) was falling in the target range at time k, r(k)=1 would be set (otherwise r(k)=0). Hence, the range of TIR computed in each second is from zero to one. Since the goal of tasks for the subjects is to control all subsystem within the target ranges. The large TIR can represent the safety performance of ACAMS and the small TIR indicates the performance breakdown. The mean TIR of all manual condition phases are summarized in Table 2. It is shown that the order of the task difficulty of the manual condition phases from low to high is 2, 5, 8, 3, 6 and 9. In particular, TIR of phase 9 indicates the extremely poor performance, where the mean value is 0.542 and significantly lower than other phases, e.g., compared with phase 2 (F(1, 8)=71.52, p<0.001 with ANOVA and W=15, p<0.05 with directional Wilcoxon signed-rank test) and even phase 6 (F(1, 8)=10.4, p<0.05 with ANOVA and W=15, p<0.05 with directional Wilcoxon signed-rank test). On the other hand, the mean of TIR for phase 2 is close to 1. Hence, the MWL levels of one trial can be inferred as at least three classes, i.e., low (phase 1, 4, 7, 10, baseline states), normal (phase 2, good performance) and high (phase 9, poor performance).The architecture of EEG-based MWL variation identification framework is illustrated in Fig. 2. As data preprocessing scheme is given in the previous section, the following subsections explain each of the remaining stages: EEG-based MWL feature extraction by using LLE, MWL clustering by using SVC, and binary MWL classification by using SVDD in more detail. It is noted that, SVC and SVDD can be separately used to deal with a binary MWL detection problem and can also form a hybrid approach to identifying three-class MWL.Feature selection or dimensionality reduction is quite necessary for extracting the most representative indicators to improve the reliability and interpretability of the framework since 600 EEG features are considered. This procedure could be achieved by using the expert knowledge [17], coefficient analysis with task performance [8] and principle component analysis (PCA) [8,12,37]. However, the behavior of EEG features is significantly nonlinear [8,33] while the linear projection achieved by using PCA may lose potentially important information. Meanwhile, the operator performance data is hardly available for highly automated control conditions, e.g., flight task [19] or baseline conditions in this study. To this end, LLE is applied to extract MWL indicators for several reasons. Firstly, consistent brain process related to MWL variations is reflected by EEG–PSD series with sufficient time–frequency resolution and it is assumed to form a manifold with limited dimensionality in data space. The MWL indicators can be considered as low-dimensional embeddings which best fit the high-dimensional EEG features based on locally linear approximation. Secondly, it is naturally suitable for dimensionality reduction of nonlinear EEG feature set since LLE could achieve globally nonlinear transformation of PSD vectors and the optimal information preservation is expected. At last, LLE is an unsupervised method and could fuse EEG features automatically.For successfully implementing LLE, the smoothness of the manifold [48] is a crucial prerequisite. Meanwhile, the variation of EEG features behaves differently on multiple cortical regions. It would be thus suitable to build multiple LLE processes to deal with a group of EEG features that has similar behaviors. To find the best way, three schemes for using EEG futures from different combinations of channels as LLE inputs are considered. Fig. 3illustrates the three grouping schemes and they are defined as follows.Grouping Scheme 1: each channel is separately used to build one LLE process while fifteen processes are derived in total. Grouping Scheme 2: all channels are used to build a single LLE process. Grouping strategy 3: four LLE processes are built based on four different channel groups, e.g., group 1 contains AFz, F3, F4 and Fz on the frontal region, group 2 contains C3, C4 and Cz on the central region, group 3 contains P3, P4, Pz, and CPz on the parietal region, and group 4 contains O1, O2, Oz and POz on the occipital region. It is noted that strategy 3 is inspired by the results of [8] that indicates three dipole locations of EEG sources related to mental task performance are centered in frontal, parietal and occipital regions, respectively.In addition, two parameters for each LLE process should be selected carefully, i.e., the number of nearest neighbors K and the output dimensionality d. The nonlinear characteristic of EEG–PSD can be reflected by K while d reveals the intrinsic dimensionality of the manifold. Here, K and d are independently determined based on the smallest reconstruction error and the residual variance[58], respectively. On one hand, minimizing the reconstruction error results from the approximation of each EEG–PSD vector xiand its optimal linear combination of K nearest neighbors. It is defined as:minwijE=∑i=1Nxi−∑j=1Nwijxj2,s.t.∑j=1Nwij=1,∀xj∉KNN(xi),wij=0,where wijdenotes the normalized linear combination weights, KNN(xi) represents the set of K nearest neighbors of xiand N is the total number of EEG–PSD vectors. Optimal K corresponds the smallest min E. On the other hand, residual variance is defined asσR2(DA,DB)=1−ρDADB2, where DAand DBare the similarity matrices (i.e., the elements are the distances between each two samples) of LLE inputs and outputs respectively andρDXDYdenotes the Bravais–Pearson correlation coefficient taken over all entries of DAand DB. The smallest residual variance implies that the relative distances of samples are best preserved. For the grouping scheme 1, the average d summed from all groups across all subjects and trials is 38.8 with the standard deviation of 7.96. For the grouping scheme 2 and 3, the averages of summed d are 2.3 and 12.0 with the standard deviations of 0.48 and 2.79, respectively. It can be found that for all schemes the dimensionality of the LLE outputs were highly reduced compared to the original dimensionality of EEG features and the different schemes also influence the distribution of summed d. After the optimal K and d are determined, the low dimensional embeddings of EEG–PSD, defined as MWL indicators, are computed and ranked by using Shannon entropy while the ones with smooth behaviors (correspond to larger Shannon entropy) are selected for subsequent analysis [59].Firstly, a single SVC process is applied on MWL variations detection between baseline conditions (phase 1, 4, 7 and 10) and manual conditions (phase 2, 3, 5, 6, 8 and 9). This type of binary MWL variations (denoted as case 1) would occur six times at six switch points between baseline and manual condition phases in one trial, i.e., across phase 1–2, phase 3–4, phase 4–5, phase 6–7, phase 7–8 and phase 9–10. Clustering analysis is then applied on two phases of MWL indicators surrounded the switch point for binary MWL clustering. All manual conditions are defined as normal-high MWL level while the baseline condition is low MWL level, i.e., the labels of clusters are assigned according to control conditions.In this study, SVC is employed based on two reasons. Firstly, using SVC is unnecessary to predetermine the number of clusters. The results of SVC vary flexibly and can be controlled by several parameters. Moreover, SVC has the capacity to deal with the overlapping of clusters by using soft clustering boundaries and thus clear clusters are expected to be recognized.For achieving nonlinear clustering boundary, Gaussian radial basis function (RBF) kernel is adopted and it is defined asK(mi,mj)=exp(−mi−mj2/σ2), where miis the MWL indicator vector. The shape of the SVC clustering boundary is then governed by regularization parameter C and RBF width σ. In order to derive clear-cut clusters, C∈[0.1, 0.3] [47] andσ∈0.2,0.4are used between different trials.To interpret the different clusters of MWL indicators as the MWL variations, the clustering results are summarized as a clustering matrix. Each element of the matrix is computed via: cij=pij/qi, i=1, 2, …, n, j=1, 2, where n is the number of clusters, i denotes the cluster label, j represents the phase index, pijdenotes the number of samples of each cluster within each phase and qiis the number of samples of each cluster. Hence, the clustering matrix represents whether or not the samples of one cluster are concentrated in a single phase. If any clusters are evenly distributed in all phases, it implies the MWL variation can not be detected and vice versa. Moreover, the detection threshold was defined to control the overlapping of the clusters. The values of the detection threshold within a finite set {0.1, 0.2, …, 0.5} are examined separately. Each value in the set represents the upper bound of the percentage of samples that are wrongly clustered, e.g., the samples in phase 1 are clustered into cluster 2. Namely, the detection threshold is required to be determined not too small or too large for controlling the sensitivity of recognizing MWL variations [59]. In subsequent analysis, detection threshold is empirically set to 0.3 by exploring all possible values in the parameter set. In this case, MWL variation would be detected only if 70% samples of each cluster are concentrated in a single phase. In particular, only clusters that contain more than 10% samples are considered. It is because that the samples located near the switch point of the two successive phases are considered as the transient state between two MWL levels. In this case, the SVC approach may recognize them as a new cluster with few samples (4–8% of two-phase data) and it is difficult to accurately interpret the corresponding MWL level of these samples.SVDD is utilized to design auxiliary binary classifiers for identifying MWL variation when MWL indicators slightly vary. SVDD is a typical “one-class” classifier. The fundamental concept of SVDD is to use a smallest enclosed hypersphere to cover all the target-class samples while the non-target classes can be refused. This mechanism could be quite beneficial when low or normal MWL level is considered as the target class. In this case, MWL indicator vectors of high MWL level that represent more serious consequences can be identified with higher accuracy.The reliability of SVDD classifier is firstly assessed by a binary MWL classification problem (denoted as case 2). In this case, MWL indicators of phase 2 or phase 2 and 5 are defined as class 1 (normal MWL) and phase 9 is defined as class 2 (high MWL). The performance of SVDD classifier is evaluated based on the training and testing paradigm, i.e., evenly separating the EEG feature set into two subsets and class 1 of one subset is used for training and the other subset is used for testing. In this case, MWL indicators should be estimated by using a nonlinear model since LLE could not generate an explicit mapping (least square support vector regression is adopted [60]). It is noted that samples in the training sets that lead to the non-smooth detection boundary are eliminated by removing the boundary support vectors. Finally, false rejection rate (FRR, type I error, misclassifying class 1 as class 2) and false acceptance rate (FAR, type II error, misclassifying class 2 as class 1) are used to evaluate the classification performance.When MWL indicators slightly vary, clear clusters cannot be yielded because of the high degree of overlapping. To this end, adopting an auxiliary classifier for further recognizing the blurred cluster is reasonable. For the purpose of increasing the identification accuracy on high MWL class, SVDD is used to build a hybrid SVC–SVDD approach. Considering both of case 1 and 2, a three-class MWL recognition problem can be inferred (denoted as case 3), i.e., low, normal, and high. In this case, SVC is first applied to identify the drastic changes of MWL indicators and the clear-cut cluster is derived. Then, SVDD is utilized to classify the additional two MWL levels that within the overlapped cluster. It is noted that there are three possibilities of the cascade mode between SVC and SVDD (Fig. 4). The type of cascade mode is determined by the class label of the clear-cut cluster identified by SVC, where the training class of SVDD is low or normal MWL to ensure the classification accuracy on high MWL class. And this label is assigned by a typical MWL indicator that has positive correlation with task difficulty. When one of samples in the identified cluster has the highest (or lowest) value of the typical MWL indicator compared with other samples, it is a high (or low) MWL cluster otherwise it is a normal MWL cluster. The overall identification accuracy is then evaluated based on the subset of each trial that contains one baseline phase (low MWL, class 1), phase 2 (normal MWL, class 2) and phase 9 (high MWL, class 3).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, an EEG-data-based high-risk MWL detection framework by combining unsupervised and supervised learning has been proposed and validated based on the most typical EEG markers (MWL indicators) extracted by use of LLE algorithm. It is shown that the high-dimensional frequency-domain EEG features can be well represented by their low-dimensional embeddings. The LLE–SVC–SVDD hybrid framework was successfully applied to MWL monitoring based solely on the measured psychophysiological data. Despite some limitations, the presented study shows a promising way to find EEG markers related to the MWL variation which can be effectively recognized by the proper classifiers. In our future plan, we would develop reliable real-time MWL assessment method with an aim to avoid/mitigate the occurrence of risky operator functional states which may result in unacceptable decrement even breakdown of human performance.Zhong Yin and Jianhua Zhang declare no conflict of interest.