@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Transformed perturbation stochastic finite element method for static response analysis of stochastic structures

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
TPSFEM for static response analysis of stochastic structures is proposed.Probability density function of static response is calculated.Cumulative distribution function of static response is calculated.The effectiveness of TPSFEM is investigated.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Perturbation stochastic finite element method,Change-of-variable technique,Probability density function,Cumulative distribution function,Static response analysis,Stochastic structure,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
To obtain the probability density functions and the cumulative distribution functions of static responses of stochastic structures, a hybrid stochastic method named as the transformed perturbation stochastic finite element method (TPSFEM) is proposed. In TPSFEM, the static responses of stochastic structures are approximated as the linear functions of random variables by using the first order perturbation technique. According to the approximated linear relationships between static responses and random variables, the probability density functions of static responses are obtained by the change-of-variable technique. The cumulative distribution functions of static responses are calculated by the numerical integration method. The numerical examples on a thin plate, a six-bar truss structure, a Mindlin plate and a shell structure verify the effectiveness and accuracy of the proposed method. Hence, the proposed method can be considered as an alternative engineering method for the static response analysis of stochastic structures.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Due to the effects of model inaccuracies, physical imperfections and system complexities, uncertainties widely exist in engineering structures including bridges, buildings, offshore structures, vehicles, ships, aerospaces and so on. In most cases, the uncertainties existing in engineering structures can be treated as random variables whose probability density functions are defined unambiguously based on the statistical analysis of sample data. The uncertain structures with random variables can be described as stochastic problems. Probability approaches can be considered as the most feasible techniques for stochastic problems. In engineering practices, the use of the random theory in the finite element method (FEM) has initiated the development of the stochastic finite element method (SFEM) [1–3]. SFEM has received considerable attention in the last several decades. The ability of SFEM to treat with the non-deterministic properties is of great value for a design engineer realizing the reliability assessment and the robustness analysis of uncertain structures.Monte Carlo method is the most versatile probabilistic method for stochastic problems. According to the probabilistic convergence, the accuracy of Monte Carlo method strongly depends on the number of samples generated by a random number generator. With the increase in the number of samples, the accuracy of Monte Carlo method is improved gradually. However, the improvement in the accuracy of Monte Carlo method is always at the cost of computational burden. Thus, Monte Carlo method cannot be directly applied to large-scale engineering problems. In order to reduce the computational cost of Monte Carlo method without deteriorating its accuracy, numerous variants (the importance sampling method [4], the subset simulation method [5], the line sampling method [6] and the other extended methods [7]) have been developed in the last decade. Each variant has its merits and demerits [8]. Monte Carlo method and its variants are random sampling method. Recently, some non-random sampling method, such as Metropolis sampling method [9,10] and interval sampling method [11,12], have been developed. The main advantage of these non-random sampling methods is that the total number of samples can be reduced greatly. However, the computational accuracy of these non-random sampling methods is depended on the sampling rule which is formulated on the basis of sample model. If the sampling rule is inappropriate, results yielded by the non-random sampling methods may be deviated from the real ones seriously. Therefore, up to now, Monte Carlo method is still considered as the most robust probabilistic method and is usually used as a reference method to investigate the accuracy of other probability approaches [13–15].Spectral stochastic method, in which the random input parameters are modeled by Karhunen–Loève formulation and the random response quantities are approximated by the polynomial chaos expansion, is an alternative approach for stochastic problems [16]. The application of the spectral stochastic method within the finite element framework has initiated the development of the spectral stochastic finite element method (SSFEM) [17–21]. The main advantage of SSFEM is that the complete probability distributions of random variables can be provided. According to the researches on the convergence and accuracy of SSFEM [22,23], we can obtain that the results estimated by SSFEM converge to the “exact” solutions when the number of terms in the polynomial chaos expansion increases towards infinity. Unfortunately, with the increase in the number of terms, the computational burden of SSFEM increases sharply. This is why the application of SSFEM has been limited to the stochastic systems with a small number of degrees of freedom in the past time. Furthermore, the application range of SSFEM is strongly depended on the approaches adopted to calculate the coefficients of expansion.Perturbation stochastic finite element method (PSFEM) is another important branch of stochastic methods [24–33]. In this approach, the random system matrices and the random loading vectors are expanded by the Taylor series. As the improvement in precise obtained by using the higher order approximations is rather small when compared to the disproportional increase of the computational complexity, the first order approximation is the most feasible strategy [34]. Based on the first order perturbation analysis, the responses of stochastic structures are transformed into the linear functions of random variables. By linearizing the relationships between the responses of stochastic structures and random variables, the computational complexity of PSFEM is simplified and the mathematical formulae of PSFEM can be easily implemented in the standard finite element codes. In most cases, the results obtained by PSFEM are expressed as the expectations and standard deviations of response vectors [25,27–33]. The expectations and standard deviations are the important mathematical characteristics of random variables. In the probability theory, if the types of the probability distributions of random variables are not defined unambiguously, the probability density functions of random variables cannot be determined even though the precise values of expectations and standard deviations are obtained. Consequently, the classical PSFEM cannot be applicable to determine the probability density functions of random responses of stochastic structures, unless the random responses can be approximated as Gaussian random fields [25,26]. As a matter of fact, the uncertain parameters in many cases cannot be modeled as Gaussian variables. If some uncertain parameters are modeled as non-Gaussian variables, the random responses are usually strongly non-Gaussian. Therefore, how to effectively apply the classical PSFEM to the stochastic structures whose responses cannot be approximated as Gaussian random fields is still a challenge needing to be dealt with.In probability theory, the change-of-variable technique is used to derive the probability density functions of dependent variables according to the probability density functions of independent variables and the mapping relationships between dependent variables and independent variables [35]. In application of the change-of-variable technique, the mapping relationships between dependent variables and independent variables should be invertible. Unfortunately, in the practical engineering, the responses of stochastic structures are not likely to be the invertible functions of random variables. Even if the responses of stochastic structures are the invertible functions of some random variables, the mapping relationships between responses and random variables may be too complicated to obtain the corresponding inverse functions.As is mentioned above, the mapping relationships between responses and random variables of stochastic structures can be linearized by the classical PSFEM based on the first order perturbation analysis. However, the classical PSFEM cannot be used to calculate the probability density functions of responses unless the responses can be approximated as Gaussian random fields. The change-of-variable technique can be used to calculate the probability density functions of dependent variables, if the probability density functions of independent variables are defined ambiguously and the mapping relationships between dependent variables and independent variables are invertible. Thus, a hybrid stochastic method which integrates the classical PSFEM and the change-of-variable technique within a unified framework may be developed to calculate the probability density functions of responses of stochastic structures.In this paper, a unified framework integrating the classical PSFEM and the change-of-variable technique together is constructed. Based on the constructed unified framework, a hybrid stochastic method named as TPSFEM is proposed for the static response analysis of stochastic structures. In the proposed method, the responses of stochastic structures are simplified to the linear functions of random variables based on the first order perturbation analysis. The invertible function of a linear function can be easily obtained by some simple mathematical operations. Thus, the change-of-variable technique can be effectively applied to calculate the probability density functions of responses of stochastic structures. TPSFEM for the static response analysis of stochastic structures requires the following steps: (1) expanding the random stiffness matrices and the random loading vectors by using the first order Taylor series; (2) calculating the static responses of stochastic structures based on the first order perturbation analysis; (3) determining the coefficient vectors of the corresponding random variables; and (4) approximating the probability density functions of the static responses of stochastic structure based on the change-of-variable technique and calculating the cumulative distribution functions of the static responses of stochastic structures based on the numerical integration method.The organization of this paper is listed as follows. The mathematical backgrounds about the numerical methods based on the change-of-variable technique to calculate the probability densities of the function with a random variable and the function with two random variables are discussed in Section 2. TPSFEM for the static response analysis of stochastic structures is deduced in Section 3. In Section 4, four numerical examples including a thin plate, a six-bar truss structure, a Mindlin plate and a shell structure are provided to verify the effectiveness and accuracy of the proposed method. In Section 5, some conclusions are given.Suppose g(x) is a function of the random variable x, defined as(1)y=g(x)where the probability density function of x can be expressed as fx(x).By using the change-of-variable technique, the probability density function of y can be determined in the term of fx(x)(2)fy(y)=1|dy/dx|fx(x)=1|dy/dx|fx(g−1(y))where fy(y) is the probability density function of y; x=g−1(y) is the inverse function of y=g(x). Unfortunately, it may be difficult or even impossible to obtain the inverse function x=g−1(y), as not all functions have the corresponding inverse functions. If the inverse function x=g−1(y) cannot be obtained, Eq. (2) has little meaning. To overcome this disadvantage, a numerical method based on the Taylor expansion will be proposed in this section.By introducing the Taylor expansion, the function y=g(x) can be expressed(3)y=g(xe)+dg(x)dx|x=xe(x−xe)+12!d2g(x)dx2|x=xe(x−xe)2+⋯where xe is the expectation of the random variable x. Neglecting the higher order terms, Eq. (3) can be rewritten as(4)y≈g(xe)+dg(x)dx|x=xe(x−xe)=A+Bxwhere(5)A=g(xe)−dg(x)dx|x=xexe,B=dg(x)dx|x=xeEq. (4) is the first order Taylor expansion of y=g(x). Based on Eq. (4), the inverse function x=g−1(y) can be expressed as(6)x=g−1(y)=y−ABSubstituting Eq. (6) into Eq. (2), we can obtain(7)fy(y)=1|B|fx(y−AB)Employing the change-of-variable technique and the first order Taylor expansion, the probability density of a function with a random variable can be obtained through the simple arithmetic operations defined in Eqs. (4)–(7).Consider a function with two random variables(8)y=g(x1,x2)where x1 and x2 are independent random variables whose probability density functions can be expressed asfx1(x1)andfx2(x2).As x1 and x2 are independent random variables, we can obtain(9)fx1x2(x1,x2)=fx1(x1)fx2(x2)Employing the change-of-variable technique, the probability density function of y can be determined in the terms offx1(x1)andfx2(x2)(10a)fy(y)=1|dy/dx2|∫x1=a̲1a¯1fx1x2(x1,x2)dx1=1|dy/dx2|∫x1=a̲1a¯1fx1(x1)fx2(x2)dx1(10b)fy(y)=1|dy/dx1|∫x2=a̲2a¯2fx1x2(x1,x2)dx2=1|dy/dx1|∫x2=a̲2a¯2fx1(x1)fx2(x2)dx2wherea̲1anda¯1are the lower and upper bounds of the integration domain of the random variable x1;a̲2anda¯2are the lower and upper bounds of the integration domain of the random variable x2.If x1 is considered as a constant, the inverse function of y=g(x1, x2) can be expressed as x2=g−1(x1, y). Similarly, if x2 is considered as a constant, the inverse function of y=g(x1, x2) can be expressed as x1=g–1(x2, y). By substituting x2=g−1(x1, y) and x1=g−1(x2, y) into Eqs. (10a) and (10b), we can obtain(11a)fy(y)=1|dy/dx2|∫x1=a̲1a¯1fx1(x1)fx2(g−1(x1,y))dx1(11b)fy(y)=1|dy/dx1|∫x2=a̲2a¯2fx1(g−1(x2,y))fx2(x2)dx2Based on Eqs. (11a) and (11b), the probability density function of y, namely fy(y), can be obtained. However, it may be difficult or even impossible to obtain the inverse function x2=g−1(x1, y) and x1=g−1(x2, y). Thus, the numerical method based on the Taylor expansion will be presented in this section.By using the first-order Taylor expansion, the function y=g(x1, x2) can be expressed as(12)y≈g(x1e,x2e)+∂g(x1,x2)∂x1|x1=x1ex2=x2e(x1−x1e)+∂g(x1,x2)∂x2|x1=x1ex2=x2e(x2−x2e)=A+Bx1+Cx2where(13)A=g(x1e,x2e)−∂g(x1,x2)∂x1|x1=x1ex2=x2ex1e−∂g(x1,x2)∂x2|x1=x1ex2=x2ex2e,B=∂g(x1,x2)∂x1|x1=x1ex2=x2e,C=∂g(x1,x2)∂x2|x1=x1ex2=x2ewherex1eandx2eare the expectations of the random variables x1 and x2.According to Eq. (12), the inverse functions of x1 and x2 can be expressed as(14a)x1=y−A−Cx2B(14b)x2=y−A−Bx1CSubstituting Eqs. (14a) and (14b) in to Eqs. (11a) and (11b), we can obtain(15a)fy(y)=1|C|∫x1=a̲1a¯1fx1(x1)fx2(y−A−Bx1C)dx1(15b)fy(y)=1|B|∫x2=a̲2a¯2fx1(y−A−Cx2B)fx2(x2)dx2From Eqs. (15a) and (15b), we can see that the probability density of a function with two independent random variables can be expressed as the convolution of the individual probability density functions of both random variables. If the analytical solutions of Eqs. (15a) and (15b) cannot be obtained, the fast convolution algorithms, such as the fast Fourier transform (FFT) algorithm, can be considered as the alternative methods to calculate their numerical solutions. In the numerical examples in this paper, FFT is chosen to calculate the convolution.For a function with more than two random variables, the method to calculate its probability density is not different from the method to compute the probability density of the function with two random variables in essence. Thus, the process to calculate the probability density of the function with more than two random variables is not discussed in this section detailedly but can be seen in Section 3.2. It should be noted that the method which integrates the change-of-variable technique and the first order Taylor expansion in a unified form for calculating the probability density of the function with random variables is named as the transformed perturbation stochastic method (abbreviated as TPSM) in this paper.Consider the finite element equation of the static structure(16)Ku=Fwhere K is the stiffness matrix of the structure; F is the loading vector; u is the unknown static response vector.Due to the effects of manufacturing/construction tolerances, aggressive environmental factors and unpredictable external loads, the parameters of structures are likely to be imprecise. In most cases, the probability distributions of these parameters may be obtained based on the statistical analysis of sample data. Let x={x1, x2, …, xn}T be a random vector consisted of random variables{xi}i=1n. The stiffness matrix K with random variables is called as the random stiffness matrix and is denoted as K(x); the loading vector F with random variables is called as the random loading vector and is denoted as F(x). Naturally, the unknown static response vector u is also a random vector. The finite element equations of structures with random variables can be expressed as(17)K(x)u=F(x)Based on the perturbation stochastic method, the first order Taylor expansion of the random stiffness matrix K(x) and the random loading vector F(x) can be expressed as(18)K(x)=K(xe)+∑i=1n∂K(x)∂xi|x=xe(xi−xie)=Ke+ΔKF(x)=F(xe)+∑i=1n∂F(x)∂xi|x=xe(xi−xie)=Fe+ΔFwherexe={x1e,x2e,…,xne}is the expectation of the random vector x;xieis the expectation of the random variable xi; Ke and ΔK are the expectation and the deviation value of K(x); Fe and ΔF are the expectation and the deviation value of F(x). Ke, ΔK, Fe and ΔF can be expressed as(19)Ke=K(xe),ΔK=∑i=1n∂K(x)∂xi|x=xe(xi−xie)Fe=F(xe),ΔF=∑i=1n∂F(x)∂xi|x=xe(xi−xie)Substituting Eq. (18) into Eq. (17), Eq. (17) can be translated into(20)u=(Ke+ΔK)−1(Fe+ΔF)If the spectral radius of (Ke)–1ΔK is less than 1, ((Ke)+ΔK)–1 can be approximated by the Neumann expansion(21)(Ke+ΔK)−1=Ke+∑k=1∞(Ke)−1(−ΔK(Ke)−1)kSubstituting Eq. (21) into Eq. (20), one gets(22)u=(Ke)−1Fe+(Ke)−1ΔF+∑k=1∞(Ke)−1(−ΔK(Ke)−1)kFe+∑k=1∞(Ke)−1(−ΔK(Ke)−1)kΔFNeglecting the higher order terms, Eq. (22) can be rewritten as(23)u≈(Ke)−1Fe+(Ke)−1ΔF−(Ke)−1ΔK(Ke)−1FeSubstituting Eq. (19) into Eq. (23), we can obtain(24)u≈(K(xe))−1F(xe)+(K(xe))−1(∑i=1n∂F(x)∂xi|x=xe(xi−xie))−(K(xe))−1(∑i=1n∂K(x)∂xi|x=xe(xi−xie))(K(xe))−1F(xe)In the classical PSFEM, the stochastic characteristics of the random static response vector are express as expectation and standard deviation. The expectation and standard deviation of the random static response vector u shown in Eq. (24) can be expressed as(25)E(u)≈(K(xe))−1F(xe)(26)SD(u)≈∑i=1n((K(xe))−1(∂F(x)∂xi|x=xe−∂K(x)∂xi|x=xe(K(xe))−1F(xe)))2var(xi)where E(u) and SD(u) are the expectation and standard deviation of the static response vector u; var(xi) is the variance of the random variable x.The expectation of the random static response vector indicates its mean value. The standard deviation of the random static response vector shows its variability. Unfortunately, although the expectation and standard deviation of the random static response vector are obtained, the probability density of the random static response vector cannot be determined unless the random static response vector can be approximated by a Gaussian random field. In many cases, the uncertain parameters cannot be modeled as Gaussian variables. If parts of uncertain parameters are modeled as non-Gaussian random variables, the random static response vector is usually strongly non-Gaussian. In the following section, a hybrid stochastic method to calculate the probability density function of the non-Gaussian random static response vector will be proposed.In the probability theory, the change-of-variable technique can be used to define the relationships between the probability density functions of random variables [35]. In this section, the change-of-variable technique will be introduced to calculate the probability density function of the random static response vector u.Eq. (24) can be rewritten as(27)u=A0+∑i=1nAixiwhere(28)A0=(K(xe))−1F(xe)−∑i=1n(K(xe))−1×(∂F(x)∂xi|x=xe−∂K(x)∂xi|x=xe(K(xe))−1F(xe))xieAi=(K(xe))−1(∂F(x)∂xi|x=xe−∂K(x)∂xi|x=xe(K(xe))−1F(xe)),i=1,…,nThe random static response vector u is consisted of elements uj(j=1,…,m) and can be expressed as u={u1,…,uj,…,um}T, in which m is the degree of freedom of the stochastic structure. The coefficient vectors A0 is consisted of elements A0,j(j=1,…,m) and can be expressed as A0={A0,1,…,A0,j,…,A0,m}T. The coefficient vectors Ai(i=1,…,n) is consisted of elements Ai,j(j=1,…,m) and can be expressed as Ai={Ai,1,…,Ai,j,…,Ai,m}T. Eq. (27) can be rewritten as(29){u1⋮uj⋮um}={A0,1⋮A0,j⋮A0,m}+∑i=1n{Ai,1⋮Ai,j⋮Ai,m}xiAccording to the algorithm of the linear equation, the jth element ujin the vector u can be calculated by(30)uj=A0,j+∑i=1nAi,jxi,j=1,…,mAs is shown in Eq. (30), the random static response ujis a function of random variables{xi}i=1n. According to the numerical method shown in Section 2, the algorithm to calculate the probability density function of the random static response ujwill be described in the following:Step 1: We rewrite Eq. (30) as(31)uj=A0,j+∑i=1nyi,jwhere yi,j=Ai,jxi(i=1,…,n). The probability density function of the random variable xiis well-defined and is denoted as fi(xi). According to the change-of-variable technique, the probability density function of yi,jcan be expressed as(32)fyi,j(yi,j)=1|Ai,j|fxi(yi,jAi,j),i=1,2,…,nStep 2: Assume that Y1,j=y1,j+y2,j, Eq. (31) can be rewritten as(33)uj=A0,j+Y1,j+∑i=3nyi,jwhere the probability density function of the random variable Y1,jis unknown. According to Eqs. (15a) or (15b), the probability density function of the random variable Y1,jcan be expressed as(34)fY1,j(Y1,j)=∫y1,j=b̲1b¯1fy1,j(Y1,j)fy2,j(Y2,j)dy1,j=1|A2,j|∫x1=a̲1a¯1fx1(x1)fx2(Y1,j−A1,jx1A2,j)dx1whereb̲1andb¯1are the lower and upper bounds of the integration domain of the random variable y1,j;a̲1anda¯1are the lower and upper bounds of the integration domain of the random variable x1.Step 3: Assume that Y2,j=Y1,j+y3,j, Eq. (31) can be rewritten as(35)uj=A0,j+Y2,j+∑i=4nyi,jwhere the unknown probability density function of the random variable Y2,jcan be expressed as(36)fY2,j(Y2,j)=∫y3,j=b̲3b¯3fy3,j(y3,j)fY1,j(Y1,j)dy3,j=∫x3=a̲3a¯3fx3(x3)fY1,j(Y2,j−A3,jx3)dx3whereb̲3andb¯3are the lower and upper bounds of the integration domain of the random variable y3,j;a̲3anda¯3are the lower and upper bounds of the integration domain of the random variable x3.Step 4: Similar to step 3, the probability density function of the random variable Yr,j(r=2,…,n−2) can be expressed as(37)fYr,j(Yr,j)=∫xr+1=a̲r+1a¯r+1fxr+1(xr+1)fYr−1,j(Yr,j−Ar+1,jxr+1)dxr+1whereYr,j=Yr−1,j+yr+1;a̲r+1anda¯r+1are the lower and upper bounds of the integration domain of the random variable xr+1.Step 5: When the probability density function of the random variable Yn-2,jis obtained, the Eq. (31) can be rewritten asAs the probability density function of Yn−2,jand yn,jhas been obtained, the unknown probability density function of ujcan be expressed as(39)fuj(uj)=∫xn=a̲na¯nfxn(xn)fYn−2,j(uj−A0,j−An,jxn)dxnwherea̲nanda¯nare the lower and upper bounds of the integration domain of the random variable xn.Based on the probability density function of uj, the corresponding cumulative distribution functionFuj(ui)can be expressed as(40)Fuj(ui)=∫−∞uifuj(t)dtIn practical engineering, the analytical solution of Eq. (40) may be not obtained. Thus, the numerical integration methods, such as the Newton numerical integration method, the Simpson numerical integration method, the Gaussian numerical integration method and so on, can be considered as the potential methods to solve Eq. (40). In numerical examples of this paper, the Newton numerical integration method is chosen.From the algorithm mentioned above, we can see that TPSFEM integrates the classical PSFEM and the change-of-variable technique in a unified framework successfully. Firstly, the static responses of stochastic structures are expressed as the linear functions of random variables based on the first order perturbation analysis. And then the change-of-variable technique is introduced to calculate the probability density functions of random static responses. The main advantage of the classical PSFEM is that the relationships between static responses and random variables are linearized by the classical PSFEM which can be easily implemented in standard finite element codes. The main advantage of the change-of-variable technique is that it can be applied to calculate the probability density functions of the invertible random functions which are Gaussian or non-Gaussian random fields. Therefore, TPSFEM can be considered as a potential method for the static response analysis of stochastic structures. According to the probability density functions and the cumulative distribution functions of static responses, the failure probabilities (or reliabilities) of stochastic structures can be obtained directly. In engineering practice, the failure probabilities (or reliabilities) of stochastic structures can be of guidance for design.The proposed TPSFEM is based on the first-order perturbation analysis, so its accuracy suffers from the effects of uncertainties of random variables. With the increase in the uncertainties of random variables, the accuracy of TPSFEM decreases gradually. The accuracy of TPSFEM can be improved by introducing the higher order perturbation technique. However, compared with the disproportional increase of the computational burden and the computational complexity, the improvement in accuracy by using the higher order perturbation technique is rather small. Furthermore, the accuracy of TPSFEM based on the first-order perturbation analysis is good when the uncertainties of random variables are small. For these reasons, the first-order perturbation technique is selected in the derivation of TPSFEM.A thin plate (shown inFig. 1) whose analytical solution of static response can be obtained will be proposed to investigate the accuracy of TPSM described in Section 2. The edges of OA and OC of the thin are simply supported. The edges of BA and BC are free. A horizontal point force F is applied at node B. The analytical solution of the deflection of node B can be expressed as(41)w=6Fab(1+ν)Et3where w is the deflection of node B; E is Young's modulus; a is the length of edge OC; b is the length of edge OA; t is the thickness of the thin plate; and ν is Poisson's ratio.Young's modulus E, the thickness t, the lengths a and b of this thin plate are assumed as random variables. The applied force F is also assumed as random variable. The distributions of these random variables are listed inTable 1.To investigate the accuracy of the classical perturbation stochastic method (abbreviated as PSM) based on the first order perturbation analysis [1], the expectations and standard deviations of the deflection of node B calculated by Monte Carlo method (abbreviated as MCM) with 100,000 samples and PSM are listed inTable 2. Table 2 shows the expectation and standard deviation approximated by PSM are very close to those yielded by MCM. It verifies that the accuracy of PSM based on the first-order perturbation analysis is good when it is used to predict the expectation and standard deviation of the static response of the stochastic structure whose analytical solution can be obtained.In probability theory, the probability density function describes the relative likelihood of a random variable at a given value. Thus, if the probability density function of the static response of this thin plate is yielded, the relative likelihood of the interested response at any considered value can be obtained directly. The cumulative distribution function which can be calculated according to Eq. (40) describes the probability of a random variable taking a value which is less than or equal to a given value. Both the probability density function and the cumulative distribution function can be used for estimating the failure probabilities (or reliabilities) which can be used to optimize stochastic structures. The probability density functions and the cumulative distribution functions of the deflection of node B calculated by MCM with 100,000 samples and TPSM are plotted inFig. 2. It can be seen from Fig. 2 that the probability density function of the deflection of node B is non-Gaussian remarkably. This indicates the static response of the stochastic structure is non-Gaussian when some random variables are non-Gaussian variables. Therefore, it is unreliable or even wrong to approximate the responses of stochastic structures as Gaussian fields if some random variables are non-Gaussian variables. Moreover, it can be found from Fig. 2 that the probability density function and the cumulative distribution function of the deflection of node B yielded by TPSM match the reference results obtained by MCM well. Thus, the accuracy of TPSM is good when used for predicting the probability density function and the cumulative distribution function of the static response of the stochastic structure whose analytical solution can be obtained.To investigate the computational accuracy of TPSM quantitatively, the relative errors of the probability density function and the cumulative probability function are calculated. Expectation, which can be interpreted as the long-run average of the results of many independent repetitions of an experiment, is one of the most basic mathematical characteristics of a random variable. The expectations of the deflection of node B obtained by MCM (listed in Table 2) is marked inFig. 3. When the deflection of node B takes on this expected value, the corresponding probability densities obtained by MCM and TPSM are listed inTable 3. The corresponding relative error of the probability density yielded by TPSM is also shown in Table 3. The cumulative distribution function is the probability of the response taking on a value that is less than or equal to the interested value. When the interested value of the deflection of node B is 0.3m, the cumulative probabilities obtained by MCM and TPSM are listed in Table 3. The corresponding relative error of the cumulative probability yielded by TPSM is also shown in Table 3. When calculating the relative error of TPSM, the result yielded by MCM is used as reference result. From Table 3, we can obtain that the relative error of the probability density and cumulative probability are about 5.51% and 0.21%, respectively. This indicates that the accuracy of the probability density function and the cumulative distribution function obtained by TPSM is good.A six-bar truss structure is shown in Fig. 3. Each bar is a truss element. The total number of elements is six. The total number of nodes is four. The exact static response of the six-bar space truss structure can be obtained by employing a finite element analysis. The applied force vector and the global stiffness matrix of the truss are shown as follows:(42)f=(P,2P,2.5P,−1.5P)T(43)K=EAL(K10.6+K20.6+K30.8+K40.8+K5+K6)where E is Young's modulus; A is the cross-sectional area; L is the length; P is the applied load; Kiis the ith element stiffness matrix and can be expressed as(44)K1=[10−100000−10100000],K2=[0000000000000000],K3=[0000010000000000],K4=[0000000000000001],K5=[0.36−0.4800−0.480.640000000000],K6=[00000000000.360.48000.480.64]In this numerical example, Young's modulus E, the cross-sectional area A, the length L and the applied load P are treated as random variables. The distributions of random variables are listed inTable 4.To investigate the accuracy of the classical PSFEM based on the first order perturbation analysis [1], the expectations and standard deviations of the x-displacements and y-displacements of nodes 2 and 3 calculated by MCM with 100, 000 samples and the classical PSFEM are listed inTable 5. Table 5 shows the expectations and standard deviations approximated by the classical PSFEM are very close to those yielded by MCM. It verifies that the accuracy of the classical PSFEM based on the first order perturbation analysis is good, when they are applied to predict the expectation and standard deviation of the static response of the truss with random variables.To investigate the accuracy of TPSFEM, the probability density functions and the cumulative distribution functions of the x-displacements and y-displacements of nodes 2 and 3 calculated by TPSFEM are plotted in Figs. 4 and 7. The probability density functions and the cumulative distribution functions of the x-displacements and y-displacements of nodes 2 and 3 calculated by MCM with 100,000 samples are also plotted inFigs. 4–7.From Figs. 4–7, we can see that probability density functions of the x-displacements and y-displacements of nodes 2 and 3 are non-Gaussian remarkably. It indicates that the static responses of the truss structure are the non-Gaussian random fields when some random variables are the non-Gaussian variables. Furthermore, it can be seen from Figs. 4–7 that the probability density functions and the cumulative distribution functions of the x-displacements and y-displacements of nodes 2 and 3 yielded by TPSFEM match the reference results obtained by MCM well. Thus, the accuracy of TPSFEM is good when used for predicting the probability density function and the cumulative distribution function of the static response of the truss with random variables.To investigate the computational accuracy of TPSFEM quantitatively, the relative errors of the probability density functions and the cumulative probability functions are calculated. The expectations of the x-displacement and y-displacement of nodes 2 and 3 obtained by MCM (listed in Table 5) are marked in Figs. 4–7, respectively. When the x-displacements and y-displacements of nodes 2 and 3 take on these expected values, the corresponding probability densities obtained by MCM and TPSFEM are listed inTable 6. The corresponding relative errors of the probability densities yielded by TPSFEM are also shown in Table 6. When calculating the relative errors of TPSFEM, the results yielded by MCM are used as reference results. It can be seen from Table 6 that the relative errors are less than 3%, which indicates that the accuracy of the probability density function obtained by TPSFEM is good.As we mentioned before, the cumulative distribution function is the probability of the response taking on a value that is less than or equal to the interested value. When the interested values of the x-displacement and y-displacement of node 2 are 0.013m and 0.005m, the corresponding cumulative probabilities obtained by MCM and TPSFEM are listed inTable 7. When the considered values of the x-displacement and y-displacement of node 3 are 0.013m and −0.002m, the corresponding cumulative probabilities obtained by MCM and TPSFEM at these values are also listed in Table 7. The corresponding relative errors of the cumulative probabilities yielded by TPSFEM are shown in Table 7. When calculating the relative errors of TPSFEM, the results yielded by MCM are used as reference results. It can be seen from Table 7 that the relative errors are about 1%, which indicates that the accuracy of the cumulative probability function obtained by TPSFEM is good.Mindlin plate is the most commonly used plate model in engineering practice. The main assumption for the Mindlin plate is that the normal to the mid-plane of the plate remain straight during the deformation but they are not necessarily normal to the deformed middle surface. Based on this assumption, the plate structural stiffness matrix K can be written as(45)K=∫ΩBbTDbBbdΩ+∫ΩBsTDsBsdΩwhere Bb and Bs are the bending stress shape function and the shear stress shape function of the shell element; Db and Ds stand for the bending stiffness constitutive coefficient matrix and the transverse shear stiffness constitutive coefficient matrix. The discrete shear gap is adopted to avoid the shear-locking. The more detailed formulae about the Mindlin plate can be referred to Ref. [36]. Based on the criteria of ensuring the computational accuracy and controlling the model scale, this Mindlin plate is discretized into the finite element model consisting of 256 isoparametric elements and 289 nodes.As is shown inFig. 8, the size of the considered Mindlin plate is 400mm×400mm×1mm. Four edges of the plate are simply supported. Young's modulus E, Poisson's ratio ν, the shear correction factor κ and the thickness t of this Mindlin plate are assumed as random variables. The load P applied at node 1 (the middle point of the Mindlin plate) is also assumed as random variable. The distributions of these random variables are listed inTable 8.In this numerical example, the z-displacement of node 1 and the rotation of node 2 (the middle point on line CD) in the x–z plane are investigated. The expectations and standard deviations of the z-displacement of node 1 and the rotation of node 2 in x–z plane calculated by MCM with 100, 000 samples and the classical PSFEM based on the first order perturbation analysis are listed inTable 9. Table 9 shows that the expectations and standard deviations approximated by the classical PSFEM are close to those yielded by MCM. It once again verifies that the accuracy of the classical PSFEM based on the first order perturbation analysis is good when it is used for predicting the expectation and standard deviation of the static response of the Mindlin plate with random variables.The probability density functions and the cumulative distribution functions of the z-displacement of node 1 calculated by MCM with 100,000 samples and TPSFEM are plotted inFig. 9. The probability density functions and the cumulative distribution functions of the rotation of node 2 in the x–z plane calculated by MCM with 100,000 samples and TPSFEM are plotted inFig. 10. It can be seen from Figs. 9 and 10 that the probability density functions of the z-displacement of node 1 and the rotation of node 2 in x–z plane are non-Gaussian remarkably. This once again indicates the static responses of the structure are non-Gaussian when some random variables are non-Gaussian variables. Moreover, Figs. 9 and 10 show that the probability density functions and the cumulative distribution functions of the z-displacement of node 1 and the rotation of node 2 in x–z plane yielded by TPSFEM match the reference results obtained by MCM well. Thus, the accuracy of TPSFEM is good when used for the predicting the probability density function and the cumulative distribution function of the static response of the Mindlin plate with random variables.The expectations of the z-displacement of node 1 and the rotation of node 2 in x–z plane obtained by MCM with 100,000 samples (listed in Table 9) are marked in Figs. 9 and 10, respectively. When the z-displacement of node 1 and the rotation of node 2 in x–z plane take on these expected values, the corresponding probability densities obtained by MCM and TPSFEM are listed inTable 10. The corresponding relative errors of the probability densities yielded by TPSFEM are also shown in Table 10. When calculating the relative errors of TPSFEM, the results yielded by MCM are used as reference results. It can be seen from Table 10 that the relative errors are less than 5%, which indicates that the accuracy of the probability density functions obtained by TPSFEM is good.When the interested values of the z-displacement of node 1 and the rotation of node 2 in x–z plane are 0.003m and 0.02rad, the corresponding cumulative probabilities obtained by MCM and TPSFEM at these values are listed inTable 11. The corresponding relative errors of the cumulative probabilities yielded by TPSFEM are also shown in Table 11. When calculating the relative errors of TPSFEM, the results yielded by MCM are used as reference results. It can be seen from Table 11 that the relative errors are about 1.5%, which indicates that the accuracy of the cumulative probability functions obtained by TPSFEM is good.The shell structure is another important structure and is widely used in vehicle body, aircraft, submarine and other engineering structure. Based on the first shear deformation theory, the shell structural stiffness matrix Ks can be written as(46)Ks=∫ΩsBmTDmBmdΩ+∫ΩsBbTDbBbdΩ+∫ΩsBsTDsBsdΩwhere Bm, Bb and Bs are the membrane stress shape function, the bending stress shape function and the shear stress shape function of the shell element; Dm, Db and Ds stand for the membrane stiffness constitutive coefficient matrix, the bending stiffness constitutive coefficient matrix and the transverse shear stiffness constitutive coefficient matrix. The more detailed formulae about the shell structure can refer to Ref. [36]. Based on the criteria of ensuring the computational accuracy and controlling the model scale, this shell structure is discretized into the finite element model consisting of 128 isoparametric elements and 153 nodes.The considered shell structure is shown inFig. 11. Four edges of the shell are clamped. Young's modulus E, Poisson's ratio ν, the shear correction factor κ and the thickness t of the considered shell structure are assumed as random variables. The load P applied at the middle node of the shell structure is also assumed as random variable. The distributions of these random variables are listed inTable 12.The expectations and standard deviations of the z-displacement of the middle node and the rotation of the middle node in the y–z plane calculated by MCM with 100,000 samples and the classical PSFEM based on the first order perturbation analysis are listed inTable 13. Table 13 shows the expectations and standard deviations approximated by the classical PSFEM are very close to those yielded by MCM. It verifies that the accuracy of the classical PSFEM based on the first order perturbation analysis is good, when they are applied to predicting the expectation and standard deviation of the static response of the shell structure with random variables.The probability density functions and the cumulative distribution functions of the z-displacement of the middle node calculated by MCM with 100,000 samples and TPSFEM are plotted inFig. 12. The probability density functions and the cumulative distribution functions of the rotation of the middle node in the y–z plane calculated by MCM with 100,000 samples and TPSFEM are plotted inFig. 13. It can be seen from Figs. 12 and 13 that probability density functions of the z-displacement of the middle node and the rotation of the middle node in y–z plane are non-Gaussian remarkably. Moreover, Figs. 12 and 13 show that the probability density functions and the cumulative distribution functions of the z-displacement of the middle node and the rotation of the middle node in y–z plane yielded by TPSFEM match the reference results obtained by MCM well. Thus, TPSFEM shows a good accuracy when used for predicting the probability density function and the cumulative distribution function of the static response of the shell structure with random variables.The expectations of the z-displacement of the middle node and the rotation of the middle node in y–z plane obtained by MCM with 100,000 samples (listed in Table 13) are marked in Figs. 12 and 13, respectively. When the z-displacement of the middle node and the rotation of the middle node in y–z plane take on these expected values, the corresponding probability densities obtained by MCM and TPSFEM are listed inTable 14. The corresponding relative errors of the probability densities yielded by TPSFEM are also shown in Table 14. When calculating the relative errors of TPSFEM, the results yielded by MCM are used as reference results. It can be seen from Table 14 that the relative errors are less than 1%, which indicates that the accuracy of the probability density functions obtained by TPSFEM is good.When the considered values of the z-displacement of the middle node and the rotation of the middle node in y–z plane are 1.14×10−4m and 1.5×10−5rad, the corresponding cumulative probabilities obtained by MCM and TPSFEM are listed inTable 15. The corresponding relative errors of the cumulative probabilities yielded by TPSFEM are also shown in Table 15. When calculating the relative errors of TPSFEM, the results yielded by MCM are used as reference results. It can be seen from Table 15 that the relative errors are about 0.5%, which indicates that the accuracy of the cumulative probability functions obtained by TPSFEM is good.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
