@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Computer aided detection system for micro calcifications in digital mammograms

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Noise and background removed using histogram equalization and morphological filtering.Local thresholding and Otsu's technique were used to segment masses from the background.Feature extraction of mammograms images was proposed using Gray Level co-occurrence matrix (GLCM).Three classifications techniques of mammogram images were applied.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Micro calcifications (MCCs),Histogram equalization (HE),K-nearest neighbor classifier (K-NN),Support vector machine (SVM),Artificial neural network (ANN),Otsu's threshold,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Breast cancer continues to be a significant public health problem in the world. Early detection is the key for improving breast cancer prognosis. Mammogram breast X-ray is considered the most reliable method in early detection of breast cancer. However, it is difficult for radiologists to provide both accurate and uniform evaluation for the enormous mammograms generated in widespread screening. Micro calcification clusters (MCCs) and masses are the two most important signs for the breast cancer, and their automated detection is very valuable for early breast cancer diagnosis. The main objective is to discuss the computer-aided detection system that has been proposed to assist the radiologists in detecting the specific abnormalities and improving the diagnostic accuracy in making the diagnostic decisions by applying techniques splits into three-steps procedure beginning with enhancement by using Histogram equalization (HE) and Morphological Enhancement, followed by segmentation based on Otsu's threshold the region of interest for the identification of micro calcifications and mass lesions, and at last classification stage, which classify between normal and micro calcifications ‘patterns and then classify between benign and malignant micro calcifications. In classification stage; three methods were used, the voting K-Nearest Neighbor classifier (K-NN) with prediction accuracy of 73%, Support Vector Machine classifier (SVM) with prediction accuracy of 83%, and Artificial Neural Network classifier (ANN) with prediction accuracy of 77%.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Breast cancer is the most common cancer and continues to be a significant public health problem among women around the world [1], and is the second leading cause of female cancer mortality after lung cancer [2]. Statistics have shown that 1 out of 10 women are affected by breast cancer in their lifetime. According to the American Cancer Society in 2009, approximately 269,800 cancer deaths in women and the breast cancer reaches to 15% from it. The diagnosed cancer cases were 713,220 and the breast cancer occupied 27% of these cases, and estimates that in 2011 [3] approximately 230,480 women in the US diagnosed with tumor breast cancer, and about 39,520 women died from breast cancer. Cancer statistics claim that breast cancer got the third position of appearance in diagnosed new cases following genital organs and digestive systems cancer comparing to other forms of cancer [4]. Over the past decades it has become alarming that breast cancer incidence rates are increasing steadily. Changes in risk factors seem to contribute to the rising incidence. However, the mortality rates for breast cancer have remained relatively constant due to more effective treatment and earlier diagnosis Primary prevention seems impossible since the cause of this disease still remains unknown. It is believed that the most promising way to decrease the number of patient suffering from the disease is by early detection. Early detection [5,6] and diagnosis of breast cancer plays a very important role in cancer treatment and allows a faster recovery for most of the patients, and considered the most effective methods of reducing mortality. There are several ways in which breast cancer can be diagnosed, including breast self-examination (BSE), clinical breast exam (CBE), imaging or mammography, and surgery. A mammogram is the most effective technique for breast cancer screening and early detection of masses or abnormalities; it can detect 85–90% of all breast cancers. Micro calcifications (MCs) are among the earliest signs of a breast carcinoma [7]. Depending on its shape, a mass screened on a mammogram can be either benign or malignant. Usually benign tumors have round or oval shapes, while malignant tumors have a partially rounded shape with a spiked or irregular outline. Noncancerous or benign tumors include cysts, fibro adenomas, and breast hematomas. A cancerous or malignant tumor in the breast is a mass of breast tissue that grows in an abnormal and uncontrolled way. The malignant mass will appear whiter than any tissue surrounding it. Calcifications (both macro-calcification and micro calcification), the second abnormality that can be seen on mammogram images, are most of the time not malignant and not a sign of cancer. Successful diagnosis in mammography is dependent on detecting cancer in its earliest and most treatable stage. Reading mammograms is a very demanding job for radiologists. Their judgments depend on training, experience, and subjective criteria. Even well-trained experts may have an interobserver variation rate of 65–75%. Computer aided diagnosis (CAD) systems may help radiologists in interpreting mammograms for mass detection and classification [8]. Since 65–90% of the biopsies of suspected cancer turned out to be benign, it is very important to develop CADs that can distinguish benign and malignant lesions. The combination of CAD scheme and experts’ knowledge would greatly improve the detection accuracy. The detection sensitivity without CAD is 80% and with CAD up to 90% [9]. The main objective of this study is to discuss the computer-aided detection system that has been proposed, designed and developed in order to overcome the drawbacks of mammograms in detecting the MCCs, and classify those MCCs into two classes (Abnormal–Normal) and (Malignant–Benign).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
