@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Transfer of vertical nanowire arrays on polycaprolactone substrates for biological applications

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Vertical nanowires were transferred to polycaprolactone substrates.The hybrid nanowire-polymer substrate has a homogeneous topography over millimeters.PC12 cells were successfully cultured on the hybrid substrates.The results are promising for bioimplant applications.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Nanowires,Polycaprolactone,Biocompatibility,Polymer,Gallium phosphide,Cells,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We used two methods, namely stamping and printing, to transfer arrays of epitaxial gallium phosphide (GaP) nanowires from their growth substrate to a soft, biodegradable layer of polycaprolactone (PCL). Using the stamping method resulted in a very inhomogeneous surface topography with a wide distribution of transferred nanowire lengths, whereas using the printing method resulted in an homogeneous substrate topography over several mm2. PC12 cells were cultured on the hybrid nanowire-PCL substrates realized using the printing method and exhibited an increased attachment on these substrates, compared to the original nanowire-semiconductor substrate. Transferring nanowires on PCL substrates is promising for implanting nanowires in-vivo with a possible reduced inflammation compared to when hard semi-conductor substrates are implanted together with the nanowires. The nanowire-PCL hybrid substrates could also be used as biocompatible cell culture substrates. Finally, using nanowires on PCL substrates would enable to recycle the expensive GaP substrate and repeatedly grow nanowires on the same substrate.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Semiconductor nanowire arrays are used in a growing number of bio-applications ranging from biosensing [1–13], tuning cellular growth and adhesion [14–21], to transfecting cells [22,23]. A particularly promising application would consist of using nanowires to improve current neural implants, which are limited by the formation of a scar around the implant electrodes [24]. This scar is composed of glial cells, which isolate the electrodes from the intended recorded (or stimulated) neurons, resulting in implant loss of function. Many studies, both in-vitro and in-vivo, have demonstrated that nanowires are a promising tool for neural implant applications. In-vitro, nanowire arrays have been shown to promote neuronal adhesion and neurite outgrowth to an exceptional extend, while glial cell proliferation has been shown to be limited on these substrates [14,16,19,25]. Nanowire arrays have also been shown to enable simultaneous, multiple cellular signal measurements with great sensitivity in cultures [8,26–28]. In vivo, nanowire-based electrodes were able to measure neuronal activity in the rat cortex in acute experiments, and gallium phosphide nanowires injected in the rat brain were shown to be non-toxic [3,29]. The main obstacle to transposing the nanowire array platform from in-vitro studies to in-vivo applications is their stiff and thick substrate (Young’s modulus of 150GPa [1]), which would elicit a strong inflammatory reaction, resulting in a glial scar if used on a chronic basis [3]. When using nanowire photodetectors, for retinal prosthesis applications for instance, the substrate is not needed, except for providing mechanical stability during its insertion. Therefore, there is a need for resorbable substrates, which can provide mechanical support during nanowire implantation in neural tissues. Polycaprolactone, is a biodegradable polymer with a Young’s modulus of 300MPa [30], which is softer than GaP but still significantly harder than neural tissue (1kPa [31]) and is therefore of interests since it is expected to maintain the implant integrity during insertion before being degraded in vivo. Here, we tested two different methods for transferring nanowires from their original substrate to a thin PCL substrate. The morphology of the substrate after transfer and the lengths of nanowire segments protruding from the polymer were investigated using scanning electron microscopy (SEM). PC12 cells were cultured on nanowire-PCL substrates and immunocytochemistry was used to assess cell adhesion and differentiation, which were compared to the ones of PC12 cells cultured on control PCL substrates and on the original nanowire semiconductor substrates.Gallium phosphide (GaP) nanowires were grown using Metal Organic Vapor Phase Epitaxy (MOVPE) as described earlier [2]. Briefly, 80nm gold nanoparticles were deposited randomly, at an average density of 1/μm2 on GaP (111)B substrates (Girmet, Russia) using an aerosol setup. The substrates were placed in a MOVPE reactor (Aixtron 200/4, Germany) where the nanowire growth was conducted at 10kPa, 470°C using trimethylgallium and phosphine as gas precursors. The precursor gas molar fraction were 4.3×10−6 and 8.5×10−2 for Ga(CH3)3 and PH3, respectively, in a hydrogen carrier gas flow of 6L/min. The resulting nanowire diameter was 80±5nm and the nanowire length was adjusted using the growth duration to 3.6μm and 5.5μm (referred to as short and long nanowires, respectively), depending on the samples (see Fig. 1).Pellets of PCL (Sigma) were dissolved in dichloromethane to a final concentration of 4% (weight/volume). Two mL of the PCL solution were poured in a container (lid of a 1” fluoroware box) and heated up to 70°C for 10min to let the solvent evaporate. The resulting film of PCL (approximatively 200μm thick) was cooled down to room temperature and cut in approximately 5 by 5mm pieces.The PCL substrate was heated up to 110°C in an oven for 2min. The GaP nanowire substrate was then placed upside down on top of the PCL. Both substrates were placed in the oven at 110°C for 2–5min and then allowed to cool down at room temperature. When the PCL substrate became opaque, the GaP substrate was peeled-off, leaving the nanowires in the PCL substrate (see Fig. 2)This method was adapted from a study published recently [32]. Briefly, the GaP nanowires were heated up to 110°C in an oven for 30min. The PCL substrate was put in an oven at 110°C until the PCL became transparent. Both the GaP nanowire and the PCL substrates were then taken out of the oven to cool down. While cooling down, the transparent PCL substrate was placed on top of the nanowire substrate. After cooling down completely the PCL was peeled off, ripping all nanowires off the GaP substrate (Fig. 3).Frozen PC12 cells (ATCC) were thawed and transferred into 9mL growth medium consisting of Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) (Invitrogen Life Technologies) with 10% heat-inactivated horse serum (Invitrogen Life Technologies), 5% fetal bovine serum (Invitrogen Life Technologies) and 1% l-glutamine–penicillin–streptomycin solution (Sigma–Aldrich). The cell suspension was centrifuged for 12min at 200 g at room temperature. After one wash step in growth medium, the cells were resuspended in 10mL growth medium and seeded onto a 75cm2 culture flask (VWR). The growth medium was exchanged every second day. After four to six days, the PC12 cells were subcultured. After changing the complete growth medium the cells were detached from the flask surface by pipetting up and down ten times. The resulting cell suspension was split into four parts of 2.5mL each to which 7.5mL of medium were added before seeding the cells on new culture flasks. The cells were differentiated two days after subculturing them by replacing the medium by DMEM containing 100ng/mL neural growth factor (NGF) and 1% l-glutamine–penicillin–streptomycin solution. The cells were then detached from the culture flask by pipetting up and down ten times and then 2mL of the cell suspension were seeded onto 35mm polystyrene petri dishes (SARSTEDT) in which the test substrates were placed and coated with poly-d-lysine (PDL) and laminin beforehand (see section below for detailed experimental procedure). The differentiation medium was changed every second day. After seven days of differentiation, the cells were fixed for 30min in 4% paraformaldehyde in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and then rinsed three times for 5min in PBS.The test substrates were placed at the bottom a petri dish and were coated with PDL and laminin before differentiating PC12 cells on the substrate. PDL (Sigma–Aldrich) was dissolved in sterile water at a concentration of 50μg/mL. The dishes were incubated with 2mL of this solution for 2h at room temperature and then rinsed in sterile water to remove the excess PDL. The petri dishes were subsequently incubated with 2mL of a 10μg/mL laminin (Sigma Aldrich) in PBS solution for 3h at room temperature.After fixation, the cell F-actin was labeled by incubating the cells with Alexa Fluor 488-Phalloidin (Invitrogen, Life Technologies) 1/200 in PBS containing 0.25% Triton X-100 and 0.25% bovine serum albumin (BSA) for 1h at room temperature.The cells were then rinsed three times in PBS and incubated with 1μg/mL bisBenzimide Hoechst 33342 trihydrochloride (Sigma–Aldrich) in PBS for 1min at room temperature to label the cell nuclei. The cells were then washed three times in PBS before visualization using a confocal microscope (Zeiss LSM 510).After fixation, the cells were dehydrated in ethanol series and air-dried. A thin layer of Au/Pd (6nm) was sputtered on the samples (Polaron E5100 DC, AXIMA, Sweden) in order to obtain a conducting layer on the substrates. Scanning electron microscopy was performed using a SU8010 SEM (Hitachi).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Nanowires can be transferred from their hard, semiconductor substrate to a soft, biodegradable PCL substrate. Using the printing method, the substrate topography is similar to the one of the nanowire substrates before transfer, except for shorter nanowire lengths. The cell adhesion is increased on the hydrid PCL-nanowire substrates, compared to pure semi-conductor nanowire substrates, while the cell differentiation does not significantly vary on any type of substrate tested in this study. Cell processes are attaching and interacting with nanowires transferred on PCL, in a similar manner to what has been reported for cell–nanowires interactions in the literature. Using PCL substrates instead of semi-conductor substrates will be beneficial when implanting nanowires in-vivo, since PCL is softer than GaP and also slowly biodegradable. Finally, using PCL substrates and transferred nanowire arrays will enable to recycle the expensive substrate and to grow nanowires repeatedly on the same substrate.