@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Two-dimensional finite element modeling of glass forming and tempering processes, including radiative effects

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We model the entire forming process (forming and tempering) of a 2D glass plate.We propose a thermomechanical model including internal radiative effects.A model with P1-approximation on a deforming domain is proposed.Results are compared with a model with Rosseland approximation.We compare the results for the deformed shapes and residual stresses.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Glass,Forming,Tempering,Radiation,Modeling,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The entire glass sheet forming process consists of heating and forming a glass sheet and cooling and tempering it afterwards. For the first step, the glass sheet is heated using a local radiative source and deforms by sagging. In the thermo-mechanical calculations, temperature dependent glass viscosity, heat exchange with the ambient air and radiative source effects should be considered. A two-dimensional finite element model with plane deformation assumptions is developed. Using the P1-Approximation, the formulation and numerical resolution of the Radiative Transfer Equation (RTE) are performed on the glass domain as it changes over time to estimate the flux of the radiative body at each position in the glass. In the next step, the sheet is cooled. Narayanaswamy׳s model is used to describe the temperature dependent stress relaxation and the structural relaxation. The RTE is again solved using the P1-Approximation to consider the internal radiative effects during the cooling. There is a discussion using the P1-Approximation and comparing the results to other existing methods for the temperature changes of the glass throughout the forming process, for the deformed shape at the end of the forming step and for the residual stresses after tempering.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Glass is a semi-transparent material with highly temperature dependent mechanical and thermal behaviors. In reality as well as in modeling, deforming glass to achieve the final desired geometry requires mastering the coupled changes of the temperature inside the glass and the product shape. Modeling a glass forming process, where large deformations occur, means computing the solution of one complex and non-linear thermo-mechanical problem. On one hand, it is necessary to determine the heat conduction of the glass taking the conditions of the boundaries between the glass and the ambient air and the glass and the forming tools into account. On the other hand, the model would also need to solve the mechanical problem with the temperature dependent viscosity of the glass and the changing contact conditions imposed by the forming tools. In the last two decades, the modeling of glass forming has been widely developed [1,2] using commercial software packages or homemade codes. For specific applications, glass must be tempered to make it more resistant and safer. During the tempering phase, the deformations are limited but there is a coupling between temperature and stress relaxation.Besides heat conduction and heat convection, radiation plays an important role and for high temperatures, thermal radiation is the dominant heat transfer process. Very complete assessments of radiative heat transfer can be found in [3,4], and [5] and its application to the glass industry can be found in [6] and [7].Since the geometry of glass changes during forming, different glass forming modeling solutions were proposed to account for radiation effects. The first and simplest one involves totally ignoring the radiation effects [8]. Another solution consists of using the Stefan-Boltzmann׳s law and considering only surface radiation [9]. This law is normally applied to opaque bodies, which is not the case for glass. Only a certain part of the radiant energy corresponding to the opaque spectrum of the glass is directly absorbed at the surface [10]. From a numerical point of view, the surface radiation is often approximated and taken into account by modifying the convection coefficient. This provides a linear relation instead of the T4 non-linearity in temperature [9].Glass is a semi-transparent material, and internal radiative effects also occur inside the glass. A widely used solution involves using equivalent conductivity (such as the active thermal conductivity method [11,12]), which is temperature dependent, or the Rosseland׳s approximation [13]. The Rosseland׳s approximation treats thermal radiation as a correction of heat conductivity, which is computed before the FEM computation using absorption coefficients. This is why it is so quick and easy to integrate into commercial software packages. It is used not only in glass forming modeling, where the domain changes overtime, but also extensively used for fixed domains with negligible deformations, such as glass tempering modeling. Originally, the method was derived in 1924 by S. Rosseland [14] to investigate stellar radiation. This is why the method is valid only for optically thick glass. Furthermore, it was shown in [15] that, for glass tempering, using the Rosseland׳s approximation produces vast errors in transient stress calculations.The exact method for taking radiation in glass into account is to solve the radiative transfer equation. From a numerical point of view, this is a challenge because of the high-dimensionality and the non-linearity of RTE. A detailed discussion about different numerical methods for solving the radiative transfer equation and many more references can be found in [3] and [7]. Due to that fact that, during glass forming, one must deal with changes in the geometry of the glass plate being formed, the P1-Approximation for numerically solving the radiative transfer equation is used for the research presented here. Using the method of moments [7], one can obtain a system of two-dimensional diffusion equations instead of the high-dimensional radiative transfer equation.In the present glass sagging modeling case, a laser is used to create local heating of the glass, as examined for the thermal computations of the cutting [16], drilling [17] or scribing [18] processes. In these studies, radiative heating was usually performed in a simple way. A first method for taking the radiative source into account is to consider it as a surface flux [16,19,20] whose intensity is directly related to the power of the radiative source. This approximation is good if the source wavelength is in the opaque zone of the glass under consideration. If this is not the case, a more precise method must be used. Another method consists of applying Beer׳s law, which involves nothing more than solving the one-dimensional radiative transfer equation [17,20]. In [21], Li et al. compare these two methods. The comparison reveals that both methods are very similar for optically thick glass. However, for optically thin glass, the Beer׳s law model provides much better results with respect to experimental data.The research discussed here focuses on the two-dimensional (2-D) modeling of the extent of gravity sagging in a glass sheet being heated with a laser and of the tempering after sagging. This thermo-mechanical problem, for which both deformations and temperatures of the glass sheet must be computed, is a complex incremental and iterative problem that can be solved using commercial software. In the case of a deformable body discussed here, the P1-Approximation is used, for the forming and the tempering steps, to solve the RTE instead of using more simplified solutions found in the literature. An initial discussion on the temperature changes in the glass sheet during forming and on the deformed shape of the glass at the end of the forming step is proposed to compare the solution obtained by the P1-Approximation for radiation to other simplified ones. The discussion continues with the temperatures during the cooling phase and the residual stresses after tempering.In this paper, the glass was first exposed to a local heat using a laser source, and subsequently deformed through gravity sagging. In a second step, the deformed shape was tempered. The glass sheet was clamped on the left side (y=0) and exposed to uniform convection with ambient air on all its surfaces. Considering uniform thermal conditions in the x-direction and assuming that the dimension of the sheet in the x-direction was much larger than in the (y,z)-directions, the problem can be reduced to two dimensions with generalized plane strain conditions. Under this assumption, there is no heat transfer in the (x,z) plane but dilatation effects are allowed in the x-direction. Finally, the problem was solved on the following domain:x¯=(y,z),andD={0≤y≤l,0≤z≤w,},Dt=D×{0≤t≤tmax}.w denotes the sheet thickness, l the length (Fig. 1) and tmaxthe heating duration.During the heating phase, the glass plate was surrounded by hot air and a laser was applied at point (d,w) with constant power. The glass is only formed due to the gravity. For the tempering step, the laser was switched off and cool air was blown all over the glass sheet.The static equilibrium of the deformable glass sheet in the presence of gravitational effects without inertial effects is described using:(1)∇x¯⋅σ+ρg¯=0,x¯∈Dwhere σ is the Cauchy stress tensor in the deformed glass sheet, ρ the density of the glass andg¯the gravitational constant. Note that the derivative is taken with respect to positionx¯in the actual deformed glass sheet. The boundary conditions of the glass surface∂Dare affected by a non-displacement condition imposed by clamped side∂Luof the glass sheet and the fact that there was no external force acting on the other glass sheet boundary∂D\∂Lu. They are described using:(2)u¯⋅n¯=0,x¯∈∂Luandσn¯⋅n¯=0,x¯∈∂D\∂Lu,whereu¯is the displacement vector at positionx¯andn¯is the normal unit vector for the glass surface.With a very low strain rate during sagging, the glass behavior was assumed to be viscoelastic around transition temperature Tg. The elastic part is characterized by the instantaneous Young’s modulus E and Poisson׳s ratio ν. At a given temperature, the glass is viscoelastic. The stress and strain tensors were split into a deviatoric tensor and a hydrostatic part using following relationships:(3)σ(r¯,t)=s(r¯,t)+trace(σ(r¯,t))3I=s(r¯,t)+σh(r¯,t)3I,(4)ε(r¯,t)=e(r¯,t)+trace(ε(r¯,t))3I=e(r¯,t)+εh(r¯,t)3I,wheree(r¯,t)is the deviatoric strain tensor,s(r¯,t)the deviatoric stress tensor,Ithe unit tensor,εh(r¯,t)the first strain tensor invariant andσh(r¯,t)the first stress tensor invariant. In the following, a generalized Maxwell model was considered for the shear part. This leads to:(5)s(r¯,t)=∫0ξG(ξ−ξ׳)∂e∂ξ′(ξ′)dξ,with shear modulusG(t)=Σi=1nGie−(t/τi). Giis the weight at relaxation time τiand n the number of relaxation times used to describe the behavior of the glass (n=6 is enough to fit experimental data [22]). Bulk modulus K was used as a constant. Variable ξ was the so-called “reduced time”, which was used to take temperature dependence into account through the thermo-rheological simplicity assumption. It is defined by:(6)ξ(r¯,t)=∫0tϕ[T(r¯,t′)]dt′where ϕ is the “shift function” defined by (8). The behavior of glass during a cooling process is very complex since structural relaxation must be taken into account. This is usually done by using the concept of fictive temperature. Roughly speaking, fictive temperature Tfrepresents the deviation of the structure of the glass from its equilibrium state. The fictive temperature is determined as follows:(7)Tf(r¯,t)=T(r¯,t)−∫0tM(ξ−ξ′)dTdξ′dξ′.M(t) is the relaxation modulus of the fictive temperature, which depends only on the material. Shift function [25] is defined by:(8)ϕ(r¯,t)=exp(−HRg[xT(r¯,t)+1−xTf(r¯,t)−1Tr]).H is an activation energy,Rg=8.314Jmol−1K−1the universal gas constant, x a material parameter and Tra reference temperature at which G(t) is measured.Moreover, the fictive temperature Tfalso contributes to thermal strain:(9)εth(r¯,t)=βl(Tf(r¯,t)−T0(r¯,t))+βg(T(r¯,t)−Tf(r¯,t)).βland βgare the dilatation coefficients in the liquid and solid states respectively.Since gravity sagging will create large deformations of the glass sheet, the highly nonlinear system (1,2) must be solved to get the displacements. The high temperature dependency of the behavior of the glass (8) means that, in the modeling, we must consider the heat transfer in the glass during gravity sagging. The heat transfer in the 2-D glass sheet is described by the well-known heat transfer equation:(10)cpρ∂T∂t(x¯,t)=∇⋅(kh(x¯,t)∇T(x¯,t))−∇⋅q¯(x¯,T),(x¯,t)∈Dt,(11)T(x¯,0)=T0(x¯),x¯∈D.T denotes the temperature depending on positionx¯and time t, cpis the specific heat capacity, and khthe heat conductivity.T0(x¯)denotes the initial temperature of the glass. On the right hand side of (10),q¯(x¯,T)denotes the radiative flux vector, which is defined as the first moment of radiative intensityI(x¯,Ω¯,λ)with respect to direction vectorΩ¯by:(12)q¯(x¯,T)=∫λminλmax∫S2I(x¯,Ω¯,λ)Ω¯dΩdλ.S2 denotes the unit sphere. At the boundary, it is proposed to describe heat flux using:(13)kh∇T(x¯,t)⋅n=α(T(x¯,t)−T∞(t))+π∈∫opaque(B(T(x¯,t),λ)−B(T∞,λ))dλ,(x¯,t)∈∂Dt.This means that heat flux is composed of two terms. The first one represents convection with the surrounding air at a temperature T∞. α is the convection coefficient. The second represents the difference between the radiation of the glass and the irradiation of the surroundings in the opaque wavelength region. ε denotes hemispherical emissivity and λ the wavelength in the glass, λmin≤λ≤λmax.B(T(x¯,t),λ)denotes Planck׳s function given as(14)B(T(x¯,t),λ)=2hc02ng2λ5[ehc0/ngλT(x¯,t)−1].k is Boltzmann׳s constant, h Planck׳s constant, c0 the speed of light in a vacuum, and ngthe refractive index of the glass. Due to the glass sheet forming, the heat transfer problem (10–14) must be solved on a deformable body. There is coupling between the equilibrium Eqs. (1–9) and the heat Eqs. (10–14).The glass sheet is locally heated(x¯∈∂Lq)using a laser with a power denoted by qlaser(t) acting on a surface area denoted by Alaser. The radiation of the hot glass in the semi-transparent wavelength region is described by the Radiative Transfer Equation (RTE) [23]. If a band model for the absorption coefficient κ(λ) is considered:(15)κ(λ)=κk=const.,forλk−1≤λ≤λk,k=1,2,…,Mk.then the radiative intensityI(x¯,Ω¯,λ)must satisfy the following equation in each band k[24]:(16)Ω¯⋅∇Ik(x¯,Ω¯)+κkIk(x¯,Ω¯)=κkBk(T(x¯,t)),(x¯,t)∈Dt,whereBk(T)=∫λk−1λkB(T,λ)dλandIk(x¯,Ω¯)=∫λk−1λkI(x¯,Ω¯,λ)dλis the unknown in the band k which is independent from λ.The boundary condition forIk(x¯,Ω¯)on domain∂Lqtaffected by the laser heating is(17)Ik(x¯,Ω¯)=Bk(T∞)+qlaserk(t)4πAlaser,(x¯,t)∈∂Lqt,withqlaserk=∫λk−1λkqlaserk(λ)dλ.The boundary condition elsewhere is(18)Ik(x¯,Ω¯)=Bk(T∞),(x¯,t)∈∂Dt\∂Lqt.Due to the RTE (16–18), the whole system (10–18) used to compute the temperatures in the glass sheet during glass forming is high-dimensional, non-linear, and therefore, challenging to solve numerically. This is why we use the P1-Approximation for the radiative part (16–18). Instead of (16) with boundary conditions (17) and (18), this approximation leads to consider now the incident energyGk(x¯)of the band k satisfying(19)−∇⋅(13κk∇Gk(x¯))+κkGk(x¯)=4πκkBk(T(x¯,t)),(x¯,t)∈Dt,with the boundary conditions(20)13κk∇Gk(x¯)⋅n=12(Gak(x¯)−Gk(x¯)),where(21)Gak(x¯)=4πBk(T∞),(x¯,t)∈∂Dt\∂Lqt,(22)Gak(x¯)=4πBk(T∞)+2qlaserk(t)Alaser,(x¯,t)∈∂Lqt.The divergence of the radiative flux in (19) is directly related toGk(x¯)using(23)∇⋅q¯(x¯,t)=∑kκk(4πBk(T(x¯,t))−Gk(x¯))The derivation of the fundamental equations and the P1-Approximation can be found in [7]. For the mathematical analysis of the coupled system (10,11,16), (19,20), (21,22), refer to [24].To solve the RTE using P1-Approximation, one can note that (19) is very close in form to the steady-state heat transfer equation obtained by deleting the left-hand side in (10). Not only does the equation have a similar form, but the boundary conditions do as well (comparing (19) to (13)). Only termκkGk(x¯), present in the P1-Approximation (19) has no equivalent in the steady-state heat transfer Eq. (10). Consequently, the decision was made to solve the P1-Approximation using ABAQUS® finite element software because of its ability to solve the steady-state heat equation. For this reason, using a DC2D8 thermal finite element, which is an 8-node quadrangle element with biquadratic interpolation in ABAQUS®, the RTE can be solved using the P1-Approximation (19) if, at each finite element level:−Gk(x¯)is considered as a temperature to be computed for each of the nodes of the finite element,1/3κkrepresents material conductivity,the film boundary condition present in ABAQUS® is used to take (20) into account with the film coefficient equal to ½ and the film temperature equal toGak(x¯),the right-hand side of (20) is considered to be body flux.By acting at each finite element level according to the aforementioned considerations to solve the RTE using P1-Approximation, the UEL (User ELement) user-subroutine in ABAQUS® was employed to add extra termκkGk(x¯)present in (19) and not present in the steady-state heat transfer Eq. (10) to the thermal stiffness matrix. With the DFLUX user-subroutine, the temperature dependent right-hand side in (19) was introduced.The P1-Approximation (19) must be solved for each band using the aforementioned procedure in ABAQUS®. Afterwards, the divergence of the radiative flux∇⋅q¯(x¯,t)(23) is computed to determine the heat transfer in the glass sheet (10–13).To summarize, for a given temperature map in the glass sheet (meaning for a given time t and for given temperature values at the nodes of the 2-D finite element mesh of the glass sheet), the body caused by radiation is computed as follows:−From the temperature field and for given time t, the Planck function integralsBk(T(x¯,t))(14) to be used in (13) are computed. The surface radiation effects appearing in the second term of the boundary conditions (13) used for the heat Eq. (10) can be directly computed (a first FORTRAN program was developed for this purpose).The incident radiationGk(x¯)(21,22) for the Mkbands is computed using functionsBk(T(x¯,t))(this is done using ABAQUS®according to the aforementioned procedure)Body flux∇⋅q¯(x¯,t)is computed using resultsGk(x¯)of the Mkbands (23) (a second FORTRAN program was developed for this purpose).The method to solve the RTE with the P1-Approximation (19–22) using the ABAQUS® finite element software as described above was validated with a one-dimensional (1-D) problem by using just one band κk=10.m−1 to get an analytical solution. The 1-D problem was solved using 2-D rectangular geometry with insulation on the two horizontal boundaries and boundary conditions on the vertical edges described by (20). The analytical solution for G(x) and the ABAQUS® solution were consistent with each other (difference of less than 0.01% at each node) using a mesh of 50 uniform elements in the 1-D solution. Several κkvalues were tested. The conclusion was that the mesh must be refined near the boundaries as κkincreases (i.e., for the more opaque bands). This is due to the appearance of boundary layers when κkbecomes large. The coupling of the RTE with the heat transfer Eqs. (10–13) was also validated using a 1-D thermal problem (10–13) considering a 2-band model for radiation. The value of the surface temperature was successfully compared with the solution of a 1-D finite difference program developed by Siedow et al. [15]. In this program, the P1-Approximation was also implemented (difference less than 0.25% for the surface temperature at each time step).In this section, different methods to take radiation into account are compared and their influences on the temperature changes during the process, on the deformed shape of the glass sheet and on the residual stresses.The geometry described in Fig. 1 was considered with thickness w equal to6.⋅10−3mand length l to150.⋅10−3m. The glass was uniformly preheated at the temperatureT0(x¯)=873.15Kin order to decrease the viscosity. All the material properties used in the sequel are given in Appendix: mechanical data are given in Tables 1–3 whereas thermal and radiative data are given respectively in Tables 4, and 5 and 6. The modeling is divided into two parts. During the first 25s of forming, the laser heating occurred at a distance d (Fig. 1) of5.⋅10−3m. The characteristics of the laser were: widthδ=3.⋅10−3m, surface fluxqlaser/Alaser=250.kW×m−2, and wavelength2.75μm≤λlaser≤4.50μm. Note that the laser wavelength was chosen in the k=2 band of the band model for the glass absorption ((15) and Table 5) so that it heats the glass not only at the surface but also directly inside. This amount of heat enabled the sheet to deform quickly in this area whereas the rest of the glass sheet deforms much less.Natural convection around the sheet was considered with the temperature of the surrounding air T∞ equal to873.15Kand convection coefficient α equal to20.Wm−2K−1. For the next 250s of tempering, the laser was switched off and the glass sheet was cooled down by forced convection described byT∞=273.15Kandα=300.Wm−2K−1.Three different approaches were considered in the modeling. They differ in the way the laser source, internal radiation and surface radiation are taken into account.Case 1, denoted “Surface”: the laser heating was modeled using a surface flux q″ applied on a zone of boundary∂Lqtdefined by(d−(δ/2)<y<d+(δ/2), w) and centered on the laser entry point located at (d,w). Term q″ was added to the right-hand side of (13) only on the area concerned by the laser flux. The surface radiation was taken into account with Stefan-Boltzmann׳s law [9]. The radiation effects inside the glass were modeled with the Rosseland׳s approximation [14] using an equivalent conductivity kecomputed from the band model used and the corresponding absorption coefficients (Table 7 in Appendix). In Case 1, body flux∇⋅q¯(x¯,t)in Eq. (10) was not computed and taken as equal to zero.Case 2, denoted “Beer”: the laser was modeled with Beer׳s law [20] considering body fluxQ(z)=κ2(qlaser/Alaser)e−κ2(w−z)obtained by solving the 1-D RTE [20]. In the present 2−D modeling, it was assumed that the glass region concerned by the heat flux was defined as 0<z<w and−(δ/2)<y<d+(δ/2);Alaser=δ⋅1(1 is the dimension in the x-direction). Constant κ2 is the absorption coefficient of the glass at laser wavelength λlaser; κ2 is equal to330.m−1considering Table 5 in Appendix. The body flux Q(z) is added to the right-hand side of (10). In case 2, the surface radiation was also taken into account with the Stefan-Boltzmann׳s law and, the radiation effects were taken into consideration using the Rosseland׳s approximation. As in Case 1, body flux∇⋅q¯(x¯,t)in Eq. (10) was not computed and taken as equal to zero.Case 3, denoted “P1”: the laser and the radiation effects inside glass are modeled with the P1-Approximation using a three-band-model for the absorption coefficient (Table 5 in Appendix). The resolution of the thermal problem and RTE were performed using the Eqs. (15–23). Surface radiation was only considered in the opaque region of the spectrum using the second expression in the right-side in (13). Since the laser wavelength belonged to[2.75μm;4.50μm], the laser heat was also considered in Eq. (16) when k=2. Consequently, for k=1 and k=3, the termqlaserkvanished in (16).The thermo-mechanical problem of the entire glass sheet forming process was incrementally and iteratively solved, using ABAQUS® finite element software. Both mechanical and thermal equations were solved using the mesh inFig. 2. The mesh is composed of 8987 nodes and 2920 CPEG8T elements with generalized plane strain conditions, biquadratic interpolation for displacements and bilinear interpolation for temperatures. Before each time step, the RTE equation was solved for each band using the P1-Approximation (18–23) and the same mesh as in Fig. 2, but with DC2D8 thermal elements to solve the RTE with the modifications described in the procedure above.Forty elements were used in the thickness with refinement near the upper and lower glass surfaces, under the laser location and on the glass edges. The mesh was refined to get a correct estimation of the temperature gradients during the heating (forming) and cooling (tempering) steps. These gradients correspond respectively to the laser heating and to the air convection cooling. Moreover, the refinement provides to get an accurate computation of the radiative energy (19–22), of the bending effects during the forming and of the residual stresses after tempering.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
