@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Influence of p-method finite element parameters on predictions of crack front geometry

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
K is calculated more accurately at free surfaces using smaller extraction radii.Corner crack results are dependent on the number of elements along the crack front.Predicted crack front geometry depends on the shape of the K profile along the crack front.High p-levels do not necessarily compensate for a coarse mesh.The energy norm should not be used as the sole indicator of solution convergence.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Finite element,p-method,Stress intensity factor,Crack front,Mesh,Corner crack,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The effect of various p-method finite element model parameters on the prediction of planar crack front geometry in three dimensional structures is evaluated. An automatic crack growth method was developed using the commercial software StressCheck coupled with Microsoft Excel. The geometry of the evolving crack front was predicted using iterations of three dimensional finite element models to determine the stress intensity values at discrete points along the crack front and incrementing the crack length locally using the Paris growth law. Modeling parameters such as the global mesh size, p-level, crack tip mesh size, and the extraction radius used for determining the stress intensity factors were all considered. The effect of these parameters on the predicted shape of a growing elliptical crack front was evaluated through a series of simulations of a corner crack emanating from a centered hole in a plate. A single model of a through crack with a straight crack front was also used to compare the effects of the model parameters on a different geometric configuration. This study has shown that the corner crack geometry and the growth series are more sensitive to the number of elements along the crack front and the extraction radius than the through thickness crack. In addition, convergence of the predicted crack front geometry does not guarantee convergence of the distribution of stress intensity factors along the crack front. It was also determined that for the models considered, using a smaller overall mesh size is a more effective way of decreasing discretization error than increasing the p-level.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Finite element modeling has become a tool that is widely used to predict stress intensity factors for crack configurations for which handbook solutions do not exist. For the aircraft industry, predictions of fatigue life at fastener holes, corrosion sites, and within complex solid geometries require detailed models that are able to predict the distribution of stress intensity factors (K) along three dimensional (3D) crack fronts of arbitrary geometry. In most cases, the shape of the crack front is not known and a simplified geometry is often assumed. For instance, the crack front for corner cracks at holes is often assumed to be a quarter circle, but in reality it grows into more of an elliptical shape.One method often employed for predicting the evolving shape of a crack front uses a series of finite element models to determine the K distribution along the crack front, from which the crack growth increment at individual points are predicted using the Paris growth law [1–4]. Many of these methods use commercial h-method finite element software and employ mapped meshes and manual K extraction techniques. The present study uses the commercial software StressCheck, which is a p-method finite element code. StressCheck is well suited for modeling crack problems as the higher order elements are more capable of capturing the singularity at the crack tip than the standard h-method, eliminating the need for specific crack tip elements. This software also has automatic mesh tools developed specifically for cracks as well as an embedded process for extracting K values. The p-method also allows for estimation of the discretization error of crack models through outputs of the energy norm as the p-level is increased as shown by Prost-Domasky et al. [5]. The methodology used for creating crack models using a p-version finite element code is quite different from the typical h-version, however, studies looking at predicting the shape of an evolving crack front using the p-method are few.The advanced automesher available in StressCheck, enables a free mesh of geometrically mapped tetrahedrons to be created around a specified crack front with elements concentrated in an orderly pattern around the crack tip. The p-method also allows elements with very large aspect ratios (up to 200:1) to be used, which results in fewer overall elements, particularly in crack models. When an h-method mapped mesh is used for crack simulation, a high number of elements are produced along the crack front because of the requirement of maintaining an aspect ratio close to 1. With the high aspect ratios allowed in the p-method, the number of elements along crack front is independent of radial size around the crack tip and allows for a more optimized mesh to be created. The extraction of K within StressCheck uses the contour integral method, and unlike manual post-processing methods, allows the extractions to occur anywhere along the crack front, at locations independent of the nodal location. Since K can be extracted at an unlimited number of points, local variations in the geometry of a growing crack front can be captured.In 2D h-method crack models, mesh parameters such as the size of the crack tip region, the number of elements surrounding the crack tip and the number of layers of elements have been shown to influence the predicted K values [6]. For 3D p-method finite element simulations, less is known about the effect of modeling parameters such as the global mesh size, p-level, crack tip ratio, and the extraction radius for K on the prediction of the crack front geometry and stress intensity values. Understanding the effects of these model parameters is imperative in producing simulations that have a balance between accuracy and solution time. This study uses two types of crack configurations to evaluate the influence of these p-method model parameters on predicting K distributions in planar cracks and on evolving crack front geometry in 3D structures; a single model of a through crack with a straight crack front as well as a series of iterative models of a corner crack growing from a centered hole. The growth series is modeled from an initial corner crack until it reaches through thickness, and assumes that the geometry of the crack front is a centered ellipse with an evolving aspect ratio.The growth model used in this work is based on the method presented by Lin and Smith [1], and aspects of the model procedure such as the crack growth increment, the fitting method used for the crack front and the underlying crack growth method are not examined in this study. While including plasticity induced crack closure and using more complex fitting techniques have been shown to produce more realistic predictions of the crack front geometry [7,8], they are also not considered in this present work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study, the influence of p-method model parameters on the prediction of crack front geometry and on the distribution of stress intensity factors along crack fronts were examined. The following conclusions were drawn from this work:−When predicting stress intensity values, high p-levels producing more degrees of freedom may not necessarily compensate for an overall mesh that is too coarse.All predicted results for the corner crack were highly dependent on the number of elements along the crack front. Crack fronts with complex geometry such as curvature may require convergence studies to determine the optimal number of elements needed.As the extraction radius within the second layer of elements surrounding the crack tip is decreased, the overall distribution of K along the crack front, and the surface effects are captured more accurately. The recommended value of α=0.2 provided the most reasonable predictions.The energy norm should not be used as the sole indicator of solution convergence. Studies on the convergence of the results of interest, such as the crack front geometry, should be performed as well.For the crack growth method used in this study, the shape of the crack front can be predicted as long as the distribution of K along the crack front is captured correctly. However, fatigue life can only be predicted if the magnitude of the K values is accurate.For through thickness cracks, convergence of the average K value also indicates converge of the overall K distribution. For the growth series, convergence of the crack front geometry does not guarantee convergence of the magnitude of the stress intensity values, however, the overall distribution of K may still be captured.