@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multivariate zero-inflated modeling with latent predictors: Modeling feedback behavior

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We propose a multivariate zero-inflated Poisson–Gamma model for counts and times.We studied feedback behavior in a computer-based assessment.High ability students were more likely to consult feedback.The number of feedback pages consulted was negatively related to achievement.Fast working students were not likely to consult feedback.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Feedback behavior,Latent predictors,Multivariate zero-inflated count data,Item response times,Poisson-log normal model,Poisson–Gamma model,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In educational studies, the use of computer-based assessments leads to the collection of multiple outcomes to assess student performance. The student-specific outcomes are correlated and often measured in different scales, such as continuous and count outcomes. A multivariate zero-inflated model with random effects is proposed and adapted for the challenging situation where the multiple outcomes are zero-inflated and possibly right truncated. The joint model consists of a Bernoulli component to deal with the problem of extra zeros, and a multivariate truncated component to model correlated mixed response outcomes from the same subject. In a Bayesian modeling approach, MCMC methods are used for parameter estimation. Using a simulation study, it is shown that the within-individual correlation between counts can be accurately estimated together with the other model parameters. The multivariate zero-inflated model is applied to a computer-based feedback study about computer literacy, where first-year bachelor students were given the opportunity to receive additional feedback. The total number of feedback pages visited and the total feedback processing time are modeled using a Poisson and a Gamma distribution, respectively. The joint modeling framework is extended to incorporate explanatory latent variables (student performance and speed of working), to explore individual heterogeneity in feedback behavior in a computer-based assessment.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Computer-based assessment (a.k.a. computer-administered testing), where students are requested to answer items in a computer environment, is receiving increasing attention. Various advantages of computer-based assessment have been exploited such as improved reliability, improved question styles using interactive multimedia technology, and testing on demand, among other things (e.g.,  van der Linden and Glas, 2010). Recently, the opportunity to provide instant feedback to students has been further developed to improve learning. In different computer-based assessment studies, feedback information was integrated to inform students immediately about their deficiencies given the test results. The main object was to investigate the effects of feedback on students’ learning outcomes (e.g.,  Hattie and Timperly, 2007; van der Kleij et al., 2012).The present study concerns a computer-based formative assessment (CBFA), where first-year bachelor students were given the opportunity to consult feedback after completing an information literacy test. Interest was focused on student-specific propensity to consult feedback and student-specific characteristics of feedback behavior such as the expected number of pages visited and the expected total time to process the feedback information, also referred to as the total reading time. The assessment data provide information about student achievement and working speed.From a statistical point of view, several important features of the feedback data need to be considered. First, the data are potentially zero-inflated, where a substantial group of students, around 42%, did not consult feedback for different reasons (e.g., time limitations, motivation, not familiar with computer-based assessment). Second, the restricted number of test items leads to right truncated feedback-use counts. Third, the probability of feedback use is most likely correlated with the expected number of consulted feedback pages and the expected time reading feedback. This correlation should be taken into account to avoid biased parameter estimates. Fourth, within-subject correlation needs to be addressed, since the number of pages visited and the total time reading are clustered by subject. Fifth, the total number of feedback pages consulted (count data) and the total feedback reading time (positive continuous data) are measured on different scales. Finally, individual latent predictors, achievement and speed of working, are measured using a response time item response model (RTIRT;  Klein Entink et al., 2009; van der Linden, 2007), which requires a proper treatment of the statistical error in the measurements when using them as explanatory variables.Here, a multivariate zero-inflated model with subject-specific random effects is presented that addresses the specific features of the data. The real-data study about feedback use will be used throughout the paper to illustrate the various modeling issues. The model consists of two components, where one component addresses the excess zeros and the other multivariate component describes the variability of the counts (total visited pages) and the continuous times (total feedback reading time). A truncated Poisson distribution is used to model the counts and a Gamma distribution is used to model the times, where subject-specific random effects are used to model the unobserved between-subject variation. The log of the mean parameters, representing the expected total feedback use and expected total processing time, are considered to be random effects and assumed to be multivariate normally distributed to capture the within-subject correlation. This joint model is referred to as a multivariate zero-inflated Poisson–Gamma model, where the random effect mean parameters are referred to as subject-specific rates.Several motivations can be given for the joint modeling framework. Inferences can be made for the original mixed outcomes, the joint model implies separate univariate models, marginal inferences can be directly made, and the random effect structure avoids heavy computational problems since it reduces the issue of dimensionality.In the field of health research, where it is more common to measure mixed outcomes, the joint modeling of mixed outcomes received considerable attention. Many applications consider the modeling of multivariate longitudinal outcomes and a time-to-event outcome (e.g.,  McCulloch, 2008; Rizopoulos et al., 2010; Yang et al., 2007). Furthermore, in practice, observations might be zero-inflated or censored such that values below or above a limit are not observed (Mihaylova et al., 2011; Rose et al., 2006). For example, in HIV/AIDS studies viral loads below a certain limit cannot be measured and are subject to left censoring (Hu et al., 2011). In the present modeling framework, of typical interest would be, in the case of informative dropouts, the joint modeling of the censored viral load measurements and time-to-event data. When considering healthcare cost data (as the aggregated total cost of different sources) and the number of interventions (i.e. number of times a medical intervention was required during a time period) a joint modeling approach will account for within-subject correlated observations. A zero-inflated multivariate modeling approach was required when interventions were sparse for subjects in the population. In other research fields, zero-inflated multivariate (count) data also arise naturally in different applications. For example, in economics, purchases over time of different households and products are likely to be correlated within households. And purchase observations of products that are rarely used are zero-inflated.The present approach builds on work on zero-inflated (count) models. This includes the zero-inflated Poisson model, Lambert (1992) and Loeys et al. (2012) for a more general introduction, where recently Bayesian alternatives have been proposed (see  Congdon, 2005; Gelman et al., 2004). Wang (2010) also proposed a model to handle zero-inflated count data. Zero-inflated Poisson models with random effects were also considered by Min and Agresti (2005) and Rabe-Hesketh and Skrondal (2007). The excess zeros will be explicitly modeled through a Bernoulli model, where the success probability is defined as feedback use. This will make it possible to investigate the heterogeneity in the feedback use and student characteristics can be used to explain individual differences in the propensity to use feedback.The multivariate zero-inflated model is further extended by introducing latent student predictors (achievement and speed of working) as covariates. Latent student characteristics are measured using a response time item response model (RTIRT;  Klein Entink et al., 2009; van der Linden, 2007) and used as explanatory variables (e.g.,  Fox and Glas, 2003; Skrondal and Rabe-Hesketh, 2004). A Bayesian estimation approach is adopted, which supports joint estimation of all model parameters using MCMC simulation techniques.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In the next section, the proposed multivariate zero-inflated mixture model is described using the real-data study as an example throughout the paper. Then, the measurement model for the latent predictors is described. An MCMC algorithm is proposed, which represents the sampling steps related to the different model components. Then, the model is applied to the Dutch feedback data. Finally, the last section provides a discussion and outlines directions for further research.A formal description of the modeling framework is given on the basis of the feedback study. A total ofnstudents are considered that have an opportunity to consult feedback for each itemk=1,…,K. LetYifdenote the total number of feedback pages visited(k=0,1,2,…,K)by studenti(i=1,…,n). The observed number of feedback pages of studentiwill be assumed to be Poisson distributed with feedback rateλi(f).The observed discrete count data may contain excess zeros relative to what can be expected according to the Poisson distribution. This may occur when a significant group of students do not open any of the feedback pages. This group is not interested in feedback and will represent a zero state. Other students may ignore the feedback this time, but they might consult feedback on another test occasion. Following Lambert (1992), the relevant distribution is a mixture of the Poisson distribution and a degenerate distribution at zero. The zero-inflated Poisson model for the total number of feedback pages opened of subjectiis represented by(1)Yif∼{0,with probability1−ϕiPoisson(λi(f)),with probabilityϕi,where1−ϕiis the probability of an excess zero of studenti. It follows that the probability of a zero response and a non-zero response is given by, respectively,(2)P(Yif=0∣λi=λi(f),Yif≤K)=(1−ϕi)+ϕie−λi/Ci(K),(3)P(Yif=j∣λi=λi(f),Yif≤K)=ϕie−λiλijj!/Ci(K),wherej=1,2,…,K. Here,Ci(K)=P(Yif≤K∣λi=λi(f))=∑j=0Ke−λiλijj!is the truncation probability to account for the upper bound ofKitems.LetTifdenote studenti’s total time (in seconds) reading or processing the feedback information. This feedback time equals zero when studentidoes not open any feedback page. Subjects not opening feedback pages generate a substantial proportion of zeros. Therefore, feedback time data are modeled as a mixture of a degenerate distribution at zero (with success probability1−ϕi) and a distribution for the non-zero observations.The zero-inflated time observations are assumed to be zero-inflated Gamma distributed, which is represented by(4)P(Tif=0∣λi=λi(t))=(1−ϕi),(5)P(Tif=ti∣λi=λi(t),ν)=ϕi(2λiνi)ν2Γ(ν2)ti(ν−2)/2exp(−tiν2λi),where0<ti<∞andΓ(⋅)denotes the Gamma function. Note that in this parametrization of the Gamma distribution the shape parameter isν/2and the scale parameter2λi(t)/ν. Then, the expected feedback time is equal toλi(t)and the variance to2λi2(t)/ν.When a test is administered with a time limit, the total time is restricted to be lower than the time limit. In that case, the total time is truncated Gamma distributed, where the truncation probability accounts for the time limit.In some cases, the times are coarsely observed, when, for example, discrete times are recorded as proxies of the continuous observations. In the present study, relatively small total feedback times were stored in whole seconds. These discrete time observations can also be modeled by a Poisson distribution, where a Poisson rate parameterλi(t)can represent the expected total time (in seconds) of subjecti’s feedback time. In the same way as Eq. (1), the zero-inflated Poisson model for the feedback (reading) time is given by(6)P(Tif=0∣λi=λi(t))=(1−ϕi)+ϕie−λi,(7)P(Tif=j∣λi=λi(t))=ϕie−λiλijj!,j=1,2,…In the Gamma distribution and in the Poisson distribution, (5) and (7), the parameterλi(t)represents the expected total reading time of subjecti. The subject parameterλi(f)represents the expected number of feedback pages that are visited. Both subject parametersλi(f)andλi(t)are restricted to be positive and assumed to be independently distributed over subjects, but it is to be expected that they are nested within the subject. For example, the total amount of feedback time increases when opening more feedback pages.The subject parameters are referred to as subject’s rate parameters and the within-subject correlation between the rates are modeled with a multivariate log-normal distribution. That is, the logarithm of the subject’s rates are multivariate normally distributed,(8)(log(λi(f)),log(λi(t)))t∣μ,Σ∼N2(μ,Σ).The student-specific probability of not opening any feedback page equals1−ϕi, which can be explicitly modeled to explore and explain differences between subjects in their use of feedback information. LetGidenote the class-membership variable, whereGi=0when an excess zero is given andGi=1otherwise. The probabilityϕirepresents the probability of a non-zero observation using a logistic probability model,(9)ϕi=P(Gi=1∣α)=exp(xitα)1+exp(xitα),where the vectorxicontains the relevant predictors of subjectifor the probability of giving a non-zero response.A multivariate zero-inflated Poisson–Gamma model is represented by Eqs. (1), (4), (5), (8) and (9). For discrete time observations, a multivariate zero-inflated Poisson model is represented by Eqs. (1) and (6)–(9). In the fully Bayesian model, priors are required for the parametersμ,Σ, andα. The recommended normal priors will be used forμandα(Gelman et al., 2004).The usual prior for the covariance matrixΣis the inverse-Wishart distribution, but the variances of the rates are not identified due to the mixture probabilitiesϕi. This follows from the expression of the marginal mean,(10)E(Yif)=E(E(Yif∣λi(f)))=ϕi(exp(μ1+Σ11/2)),=exp(log(ϕi)μ1+log(ϕi)Σ11/2),whereΣ11is the first diagonal element ofΣ. Note that the conditional expected rate equals the expected value of a log-normally distributed variable (Aitchison and Ho, 1989). For the multivariate zero-inflated Poisson model, it can be seen that, besides the variance termΣ11, the mixture probabilityϕiinfluences the marginal mean and simply serves as a scaling factor. The indeterminacy outlined can be solved by fixingΣ11to an arbitrary constant. In the same way, the variance termΣ22is restricted to identify the scale of the Poisson rate,λi(t), which represents the expected feedback time. For the Gamma distribution, it can be shown in a similar way that there is an indeterminacy between the variance termΣ22and the mixture probabilityϕi.Due to this identification issue, variance termsΣ11andΣ22, representing the between-subject prior variance in the rates, will be restricted to one. The prior for the covariance parameterΣ12to model the correlation between subject’s rates will be conditionally specified. Following Klein Entink et al. (2009), this parameter will have a normal prior in the regression oflogλi(f)onlogλi(t). Obviously, observed data will be used to assess the between-individual posterior variation.Note that the model could also be identified by restricting the mean parameterμ1. However, in that case the mean structure is constructed by the variance components, which can complicate the estimation procedure and the interpretation of the variance components.When ignoring the zero-inflated component and treating the times as count data, the joint Poisson model resembles the multivariate Poisson-log normal model of Aitchison and Ho (1989). This multivariate Poisson-log normal model can describe the correlation between multivariate discrete count data, where the assumption of independence among the counts can be tested since it is a constrained version of the model. In this field, Böckenholt et al. (2003) proposed a factor-analytic Poisson model, where multiple factors are used to model the dependency structure. Wang (2010) defined a linear model for the Poisson rates using a log link function and latent person variable. The multiple counts are considered to be responses to items, which are indicators of an underlying latent variable.The multivariate zero-inflated Poisson model allows for overdispersion, since the marginal variance of each count variable,YifandTif, is greater than the marginal mean relative to an inflated Poisson distribution. The multivariate log-normally distributed Poisson rates induce this overdispersion for the marginal distributions (Aitchison and Ho, 1989). Furthermore, the Poisson rates can be positively and negatively correlated in contrast to other multivariate discrete distributions such as multinomial or negative multinomial (Tunaru, 2002).Individual differences in the use of feedback and the time spent reading the feedback can be explored through individual explanatory information. In the present computer-based formative assessment the feedback pages can be consulted as an additional source of information after the test has been completed. The results from the assessment are used to collect information about students’ abilities and speed of working. Therefore, obvious explanatory variables for student feedback behavior are the skills measured by the test and the working speed. The individual item responses and response times are indicators of the underlying latent variables ability and speed, respectively. The subject-specific latent variables will be used as predictors of the expected feedback use and expected feedback time, and they will constitute the matrixxof explanatory variables in Eq. (9).The response time item response model (RTIRT) will be used to measure the latent variables speed and ability given continuous item response times and discrete item responses (van der Linden, 2007; Fox et al., 2007; Klein Entink et al., 2009). LetYikaandTikadenote the dichotomous response and continuous response time of subjectito itemk, respectively. At the level of observations, the two-parameter response model is specified as(11)P(Yika=1∣θi,ak,bk)=Φ(akθi−bk),and the log-normal response time model as(12)logTika∣ζi,ck,dk∼N(dk−ckζi,ωk2).At the level of subjects, the subject-specific latent variables are multivariate normally distributed:(13)(θi,ζi)t∣μP,ΣP∼N2(μP,ΣP).In the fully Bayesian framework, priors need to be specified for the item parameters. Following Klein Entink et al. (2009), a multivariate normal prior is defined for the difficulties,b, intensities,d, the log of discriminations,loga, and the log of time-discriminations,logc. Subsequently, a non-informative normal prior and an inverse-Wishart prior will be used for the mean and covariance matrix, respectively. A different prior model is given by Meyer (2010), who specifies the model with completely independent priors.The joint distribution of the multivariate outcome data given the latent explanatory variables is given by(14)p(yf,tf∣ϕ,θ,ζ,Σ)=∏i[(1−ϕi)+ϕi∫R+2p(yif,tif∣λi(f),λi(t))p(logλi(f),logλi(t)∣θi,ζi,Σ)dλ],whereR+2denotes the positive orthant of two-dimensional real spaceR2. Note that in this case, interest is focused at the level of subjects, and relationships between feedback (seeking) behavior and latent student characteristics are explored. The latent explanatory student characteristics are related to observable indicators at a lower hierarchical level. This corresponds with the modeling framework of Fox and Glas (2003), where several IRT models were used to measure latent explanatory variables at different levels in a structural multilevel analysis. Skrondal and Rabe-Hesketh (2004, pp. 440–443) describe an application of a hazard model with a latent covariate. Croon and van Veldhoven (2007) and Lüdtke et al. (2008) showed that explanatory variables measured as aggregate scores at the lower level lead to biased regression effects when the associated uncertainty is ignored. Through a latent variable approach, the uncertainty of the higher-level constructs is taken into account.The parameters of both joint models, the multivariate zero-inflated Poisson–Gamma model, Eqs. (1) and (5), and the multivariate zero-inflated Poisson model, Eqs. (1) and (7), will be estimated simultaneously using MCMC. For both models, subject’s rates are assumed to be log-normally distributed according to Eq. (8). Furthermore, both models contain a logistic component for the mixture probabilities, Eq. (9), and the RTIRT component for measuring the latent explanatory variables, Eqs. (11) and (12). A sketch is given of the MCMC scheme that represents the full conditional posterior distributions from which samples are to be drawn consecutively. References are given to well-known sampling steps.The MCMC algorithm consists of several steps to simulate values for the latent explanatory variables and for the parameters of the multivariate zero-inflated model. In iterationm, the first step is defined as the sampling of the latent explanatory values of ability and speed, denoted asθi(m)andζi(m), respectively. These sampling steps, and the steps for simulating the other RTIRT parameters, are completely described in van der Linden (2007), Klein Entink et al. (2009), and Fox (2010).Mixture model partThe logistic model parametersαare sampled with a Metropolis–Hastings step. Therefore, consider the random variableZiwhich equals one when feedback is consulted and zero otherwise. For the multivariate Poisson model,Ziis Bernoulli distributed with a success probability of using feedback(15)P(Zi=1∣λi,α)=P(Gi=1∣α)P(Yif>0,Tif>0∣λi(f),λi(t),Yif≤K)=exp(xitα)1+exp(xitα)(1−exp(−λi(f)−λi(t))/Ci(K)),whereCi(K)is the truncation probability defined in Eq. (3). For the multivariate Poisson–Gamma model, the success probability is described by the logistic model with parameterα.Using a multivariate normal proposal distribution forα, the candidateα(m)can be evaluated using the acceptance ratio(16)p(z∣x(m),λ(f),α(m))p(α(m)∣μα,Σα)p(z∣x(m−1),λ(f),α(m−1))p(α(m−1)∣μα,Σα),where in iterationm, the vectorxi(m)contains also latent explanatory variables ability and speed values,θi(m)andζi(m), respectively.Multivariate zero-inflated (Poisson–Gamma) log-normal partThe rate parameters are also sampled using Metropolis–Hastings. Using the prior defined in Eq. (8), the conditional prior forλi(f)can be specified as(17)logλi(f)∣λi(t),μ,Σ12∼N(μ1+Σ12(logλi(t)−μ2),1−Σ122),whereΣ12is the covariance between the two subject rates, and the variance of each rate is fixed to one. The log posterior distribution of the Poisson rate can be expressed as(18)logp(λi(f)∣yif,zi)∝(log(1−ϕi)+ϕiexp(−λi(f))/Ci(K))I(zi=0)+(log(ϕi)−λi(f)+yilogλi(f)−logyi!−log(Ci(K)))I(zi=1)+logp(logλi(f)∣λi(t),μ,Σ12).Proposals are sampled from a normal distribution, and the acceptance ratio can be defined using the posterior density ofλi(f)in Eq. (18). When modeling the times with a Poisson distribution, a Metropolis–Hastings step for the Poisson rateλi(t)can be defined in a similar way. When using the Gamma distribution, the log posterior distribution of the rateλi(t)can be expressed as(19)logp(λi(t)∣tif,zi)∝(log(1−ϕi))I(zi=0)+(log(ϕi)+ν−22log(ti)−tiν2λi(t)−(ν/2)log(2λi(t)/ν)−Γ(ν/2))I(zi=1)+logp(logλi(t)∣λi(f),μ,Σ12),and a Metropolis–Hastings can be defined using the specified posterior density. The degrees of freedomνcan be sampled fromp(ν∣λ(t)), sinceνdoes not enter the likelihood. The posterior can be derived from the posteriorp(λt∣ν,ϕ,t,z=1)and a Gamma prior for parameterν. The posterior density is a non-standard one and Metropolis–Hastings is used to draw samples.The mean part of the multivariate model can be explicitly modeled such thatμi=xitβ, which can include latent covariates. Subsequently, regression parametersβin the multivariate lognormal model can be directly sampled given the subject rates and a conjugate multivariate normal prior.The diagonal elements ofΣare restricted to one. Following the approach of McCulloch et al. (2000), the covariance parameterΣ12is a regression parameter in Eq. (17), where the diagonal elements ofΣare restricted to one. Let the residual variance parameter be denoted asσρ2=1−Σ122. The residual variance is restricted to be positive, which restricts the parameter space ofΣ12to the interval (−1,1). Assume a normal prior restricted to this interval with mean zero and varianceΣ0. Then, the posterior distribution is given by(20)Σ12∣λ,μ,σρ2∼N(∑iλ̃i(t)λ̃i(f)/σρ2∑iλ̃i2(t)/σρ2+Σ0−1,1∑iλ̃i2(t)/σρ2+Σ0−1)I(−1,1),whereλ̃i(f)=λi(f)−μi1andλ̃i(t)=λi(t)−μi2, and(21)σρ−2∣λ,μ,Σ12∼Ga(∑i(λi(f)−Σ12(λi(t)−μ2))2/2+g1,n2+g2)whereGa()denotes the gamma density, and using an inverse gamma prior with scale and shape parametersg1andg2, respectively.In this simulation study, the parameter recovery of the developed MCMC algorithm is evaluated for different within-subject correlations and for multivariate count outcomes. The parameters of the zero-inflated multivariate log-normal Poisson model, denoted as modelM1, will be compared with the true values to assess the accuracy of the developed estimation method. Furthermore, the estimates will be compared with the estimates of zero-inflated univariate Poisson models that ignore the within-subject correlation. In the zero-inflated univariate Poisson model, a linear term is defined for the Poisson rate and the probability to be in the Poisson process using the log and the logit link function, respectively.To emulate the real-data study below, for 500 subjects, 100 data sets were simulated for within-subject correlations of 0,0.25,0.50. For the three different correlations, two log Poisson rates were assumed to be multivariate normally distributed with means of five and variances of one. Next, bivariate count data were generated according to the zero-inflated multivariate log-normal Poisson model, where the probability of feedback use was common across subjects withϕ=0.80such that 20% of the counts were excess zeros.The simulations were conducted in R using the developed MCMC scheme. For each data set, 20,000 iterations were made, and a burn-in period of 5000 was sufficient according to Geweke, and the Gelman–Rubin statistic. The interceptsα0,μ1, andμ2were assigned weakly informative normal priors centered at zero. The covariance parameterΣ12is assumed to be normally distributed in the interval (−1,1) with mean zero and variance one. The parameters of a zero-inflated univariate Poisson model, with a log-linear model for the Poisson rate, were estimated given the first vector of counts and given the second vector of counts, denoted as modelM2andM3, respectively.The results are given in Table 1. The estimates of modelM1,M2, andM3are given in the second, fourth, and sixth column across the 100 simulations, respectively. Furthermore, the average 95% HPD intervals were computed over the 100 simulations. The first column represents the true parameter values. The estimates of the modelM1are close to the true value for the different correlation values. Although the prior means were set to zero, the parameter estimates do not show shrinkage toward the prior means. The different correlations between the log Poisson rates were also accurately estimated.For both univariate models the mean parameter estimates showed a bias. The bias is more or less the same across the different correlation values. This follows from the fact that the expected value of the first and of the second vector of outcomes equalsexp(μ1+Σ11/2)=exp(5.5)andexp(μ2+Σ22/2)=exp(5.5)given non-excess zeros (see Eq. (10)), respectively, which explains the bias. In this situation of overdispersion the variance in the observed data is also much higher relative to the Poisson distribution. It follows that the univariate Poisson model fails to describe the correlation between the multivariate counts, since it assumes independent Poisson counts. Furthermore, the expected counts are overestimated and the variability in the counts underestimated.Posterior predictive checks will be used to assess the fit of the multivariate zero-inflated models to the data. The posterior predictive data under the model are compared to the observed data using a discrepancy measure. The discrepancy measure takes an extreme value if the model is in conflict with the observed data. For the zero-inflated Poisson model, three different discrepancy measures are often considered to evaluate the fit of the Bernoulli and the Poisson components (e.g.,  Neelon et al., 2010; Wang et al., 2007).Hjort et al. (2006) showed that the posterior predictivep-value may not be uniformly distributed under the hypothesized model, which complicates the interpretation of the posterior predictivep-value. They suggested a calibration procedure to correctly interpret thep-values, which requires an additional simulation procedure. Here, the posterior predictive checks are used as a diagnostic tool to identify possible model misfits. This avoids an additional simulation procedure but it is advisable to verify and investigate model misfits suggested by thep-values. That is, a careful investigation of the possible misfit between the observed data and the posited model is needed for situations considered extreme by thep-values.First, the number of observations equal to zero will be compared to the predicted number of zeros under the model,P(∑iyi(rep)=0>∑iyi=0∣y),whereyi(rep)are the replicated data under the model. A posterior probability close to one indicates an overestimation, while a posterior probability close to zero indicates an underestimation of the observed amount of zeros.Second, the index of overdispersion will be used to check whether the model predicts more or less variability in the data relative to the variance of the Poisson model. The posterior predictive check of the overdispersion index is given byP(Var(y(rep))/E(y(rep))>Var(y)/E(y)∣y).In the case of overdispersion, when the posterior probability is close to one, the model will describe more variability in the data than the Poisson model. The random effect Poisson model component is likely to predict more variance than expected under the Poisson model. Typically, the random effect approach is introduced to accommodate relatively low and high feedback-use observations, and subsequently to account for any overdispersion.Third, the predictions of the non-zero counts are compared to the observed values. Therefore, the marginal posterior predictive counts are compared with the observed counts, where the posterior predictive check is given byP(∑iyi(rep)=c>∑iyi=c∣y),forc=1,2,…For each category, a posterior probability is computed to check whether the predictions are more extreme than the observed value.The deviance information criterion (DIC) is used to compare different models. The deviance of the zero-inflated model cannot be directly computed. Therefore, twice the negative log likelihood is used to define the deviance function. LetΩdenote the set of relevant model parameters given the observed datayandt. The deviance is defined asD(Ω)={−2∑i[log((1−ϕi)+ϕip(yi=0∣λi(f),ϕi))+log(1−ϕi)],foryi=0,ti=0−2∑i[log(ϕip(yi∣λi(f),ϕi))+log(ϕip(ti∣λi(t),ν,ϕi))],foryi>0,ti>0.The DIC is computed as the sum of the posterior mean difference,D(Ω)¯, and the effective number of parameters,pD. The effective number of parameters is the difference betweenD(Ω)¯and the estimated deviance given the posterior mean estimateΩ̂.In a computer-based formative assessment (CBFA) at a Dutch university of applied sciences, the opportunity to consult feedback was provided to first-year bachelor students of Law, Health, and Business Administration. After completing the test, the CBFA presented an automatically generated knowledge of results page (summary of correct and incorrect responses) with for each item a link to an additional feedback page. For each item, the additional feedback contains the correct answer and summarized information related to the item content. A student is said to use feedback when he/she visited an additional feedback page. The feedback time was measured as the time between opening and closing the pop-up page showing the additional feedback for that item. For each student and each item, the CBFA registered the response and the response time. Furthermore, the observation whether feedback was consulted and the time taken to process the feedback was also administered.A CBFA of eleven items on information literacy was used to obtain observational (item) response data on feedback seeking behavior. The eleven items were selected in correspondence with lecturers involved. A total of 610 students completed the test. A brief instruction about the test was given at the start of the assessment, and a written instruction was also handed out. Most of the students completed the test within 45 min, and after this time students were allowed to leave the examination room. The objects are to examine student-specific feedback seeking behavior, including the propensity of using feedback, and the relationship with student-level latent predictors as ability and speed of working.The total number of feedback pages opened and the total time (in seconds) to process the feedback are the multivariate outcome data. The complexity of the data, with multivariate data and a large number of zeros, requires a multivariate advanced zero-inflated modeling approach. Two multivariate modeling approaches will be considered. In one approach, the total processing times (stored in seconds) are treated as counts using the Poisson distribution, and in the other approach, as positive continuous observations using the Gamma distribution. A Gamma hyperprior was specified for the shape parameter, with shape hyperparameter one and scale hyperparameter five.The MCMC algorithm was implemented in R (R Development Core Team, 2010). The MCMC algorithm was ran for 100,000 iterations with the first 20,000 iterations as a burn-in. The common convergence diagnostics such as Geweke’s and Gelman and Rubin’s did not show any indication of nonconvergence for any of the MCMC chains. The trace plots and convergence diagnostics were evaluated in R.Estimates of different empty zero-inflated models are given in Table 2. In modelM1, the total number of feedback pages and feedback times were jointly modeled, where the component for the feedback times consisted of a zero-inflated Gamma distribution, according to Eqs. (4) and (5). Additional estimates are reported referred to as full Poisson, where one component models the feedback times using a zero-inflated Poisson distribution, according to Eqs. (6) and (7). Under the labelM2andM3, estimates are given of a univariate zero-inflated Poisson (number of feedback pages as outcomes) and a univariate zero-inflated Gamma model (the number of feedback times as outcomes), respectively. Finally, the feedback times were also modeled using a zero-inflated Poisson model, where the estimates are given in the last row of Table 2 under modelM3.Given the estimates of modelM1, it follows that around 43% of the students did not open any of the feedback pages, and completely ignored this option in the CBFA. The estimated population average equals 57%, which reflects the probability of using feedback. This reflects the high percentage of extra zeros and the requirement of using a zero-inflated Poisson model for the multivariate data. From the estimated log rates follow that on average the expected number of feedback pages visited equalsexp(1,13)≈3.09, and the expected total feedback reading time (in seconds)exp(1,92)≈6.82. These estimates are slightly smaller than the average observed values of feedback pages visited and total feedback time, when ignoring the zero observations, which are 4.11 and 9.35, respectively. The within-subject correlation between the log rates is high and around 0.93, which means that the expected total reading time is highly related to the expected number of pages visited. When treating the feedback times as counts, and fitting a multivariate zero-inflated Poisson model, denoted as full Poisson, slightly smaller estimates are obtained.In Table 2, under modelM2andM3, the results are shown of a univariate zero-inflated Poisson model for the total number of feedback pages opened, and a univariate zero-inflated Gamma model for the total feedback reading time. It can be seen that the percentage of extra zeros in both outcomes are comparable with the estimates of 42% and 43%, respectively. The independently estimated Poisson and Gamma mean are slightly higher than the jointly estimated means. It follows that the multivariate normal prior induces more shrinkage toward the general prior mean of zero than the non-informative independent normal prior for the Poisson and Gamma rate in modelM2andM3, respectively. When modeling the total times as count data using the zero-inflated Poisson model, estimates comparable to the zero-inflated Gamma model were obtained.The model fit was investigated of the different zero-inflated models. Given the posterior predictivep-values, all zero-inflated models were capable of predicting adequately the number of extra zeros. The multivariate zero-inflated models slightly underestimated the feedback-use counts of four and five and slightly overestimated the higher counts nine and ten. This is not very surprising, since just two and four students evaluated nine and ten feedback pages, respectively. The posterior predictive check based on the index of overdispersion showed that the Poisson–Gamma model predicts more variability in the observed feedback-use data relative to the variance of the Poisson model (p-value equals 0.97). This shows that the variability of the feedback-use data is much higher than predicted by a Poisson model, which justifies the use of the random effect Poisson component (see,  Albert, 1992).Attention will be paid to the multivariate zero-inflated Poisson–Gamma model to analyze the mixed data about the use of feedback, the total number of visited feedback pages, and the total time processing the feedback. However, as part of the joint model, the RTIRT model component (Eqs. (11) and (12)) is used to describe the response data as a function of student’s ability and speed of working given the eleven item scores on information literacy. Within the proposed MCMC algorithm for the joint model, posterior draws are made for the latent predictors, which are used to sample the other model parameters. Subsequently, in the full conditional joint model, the latent explanatory variables working speed and ability are used as predictors.The predictors are used to explore differences in the use of feedback through a logistic model. That is, the mixture probabilities are conditionally modeled asϕi=P(Gi=1∣α,θi,ζi)=exp(zi)1+exp(zi),zi=α0+α1θi+α2ζi,such that student-specific ability and speed are related to the probability of using feedback. Subsequently, student response rates of feedback (i.e. expected number of feedback pages visited and expected total feedback reading time) are multivariate log-normally distributed,logλi(f)=β00+β01θi+β02ζi+η0i,logλi(t)=β10+β11θi+β12ζi+η1iwhereηiis multivariate normally distributed with variances restricted to one and correlation parameterΣ12. Normal independent priors for the parametersαandβare specified with zero means and large variances.In Table 3, the estimated parameters are given of the full joint model, denoted as modelM4. A univariate zero-inflated Poisson and a univariate zero-inflated Gamma model with explanatory variables are considered to model the total number of visited feedback pages and the total feedback time, denoted as modelM5andM6, respectively.From modelM4follows that the average percentage of students not visiting any feedback page is around 42%, which was also found with the empty joint models (see Table 2). The student-specific predictors ability and speed of working have a significant relationship with the probability of using feedback. It follows that students who performed well on the test have a significantly higher probability of using feedback (i.e. visiting at least one page) than those who performed poorly. For an average working speed, an increase in ability of 0.50 leads to an increase of around 8% in the probability of using feedback. High ability students were specifically interested in feedback to incorrectly answered questions, whereas low ability students were probably less motivated to check out the feedback. The working speed is negatively related with the probability of using feedback. This means that students who work fast have a lower probability of using feedback than students who work more slowly. For an average ability, an increase of 0.50 in working speed leads to an average decrease of 11% in the probability of using feedback.In Fig. 1, the estimated student-specific probabilities of using feedback are plotted against the student ability and speed of working. It follows that variations in ability and speed of working lead to differences in the probability of using feedback, where high ability students who worked slowly on the test have a high chance of using feedback. Students who worked very fast and those who performed poorly on the test have a low chance of using the feedback. Here, it seems that test motivation is an important factor, since students who took the test seriously, who performed well and took their time, also visited feedback pages.The estimates of the multivariate Poisson–Gamma part show negative effects for both predictors. There is a negative relation between ability and speed of working and the expected total number of visited feedback pages. Although high ability students are more likely to visit a feedback page than low ability students, they are expected to visit less feedback pages in total. For a student with an average working speed, high ability students(θ=1)visit on average two feedback pages (i.e., approximatelyexp(1.15−0.39)), low ability students(θ=−1)on average four to five feedback pages and students of average ability(θ=0)on average three feedback pages. This corresponds to the finding that high ability students consult feedback of the few items that were made incorrectly. The working speed has a negative effect on the total number of pages visited but this effect is not significant.In Fig. 2, the posterior expected total number of feedback pages is plotted against ability and speed of working using the estimates from modelM4. It can be seen that high ability students visited one to two feedback pages, whereas low ability students visited four to five pages. On average slightly more than three pages were visited. It follows that the total number of visited pages varies a lot for students with the same working speed.Finally, the total time processing the feedback is negatively related to ability and working speed. The estimated effects are such that the average feedback processing time is around 6.8, where low ability students spend more time reading feedback and high ability students less time. The same pattern is found for fast and slow working students. In Fig. 3, the posterior expected total time is given for each student. The negative trend between student ability and total time shows that high ability students read a few specific feedback pages, whereas others consult more pages and use more reading time. The negative trend between the total time and speed of working suggests that fast working students also work more quickly through the feedback pages. However, the fast working students were also known to be less motivated to use feedback (see Fig. 1), which may also lead to less processing time for those who consulted feedback. They could have opened a feedback page and closed it quickly without paying much attention to the content.The log rates are highly positively correlated, around 0.93. From the results of modelM5andM6follows that the effects of the predictors are quite similar. However, as in the empty joint model, the intercepts of the independently estimated rates are slightly higher compared to the jointly estimated intercepts. The correlation between the log rates leads to slightly smaller expected values. That is, the total number of consulted feedback pages is expected to be smaller given the total feedback time in comparison to the unconditional expected value. In the same way, the total feedback time is expected to be smaller given the total number of consulted pages than the unconditional expected value. For the Gamma component, the estimated degrees of freedomνequals 38.78 and 40.16 for the empty and the conditional model, respectively.Finally, results of a small model comparison study are given in Table 4. The empty multivariate zero-inflated Poisson–Gamma model fits the data better than the full Poisson model, where the feedback times are considered proxies and treated as counts. It follows that the random effect Gamma component has more free parameters, which leads to a substantially better fit. The fit of the model is further improved by incorporating the explanatory variables, according to the DICs of modelM4. However, from the DICs follow that the empty Poisson–Gamma model fits the data better than the full Poisson model with explanatory variables. This shows that the simplifying case of modeling multivariate counts instead of modeling outcomes in different scales leads to less optimal results with respect to model fit.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
