@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Numerical analysis and optimal design for new automotive door sealing with variable cross-section

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Five variables for featuring sealing cross-section geometry.Combination of BP and GA for cross-section design optimization.3D numerical analysis for the curved corner parts closing process.Door sealing with variable cross-section based on complex profile.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Variable cross-section,Geometrical optimization,Door seal closing effort,Finite element analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Automotive door sealing system isolates passenger compartment from water, dust and wind noise. It has the most direct influences on door-closing performance, which is determined by cross-section design in terms of its appropriate Compression Load Deflection (CLD) property. Traditional sealing structure has uniform geometrical cross-section. It has the shortcomings of bad fitting in corner parts with large curvatures, causing inaccurate door-closing effort design. Regarding the door panel׳s complex 3D profile, numerical analysis and optimal design for new sealing with variable cross-section are developed in this paper. Firstly, the whole sealing is partitioned into several parts. For four nearly straight segments, conventional 2D numerical analysis can still be used to obtain desired geometrical configuration. For other four curved corner parts with large curvatures, 3D numerical analysis of door closing is applied. Secondly, 2D geometrical cross-section optimization is proposed. Instead of three variables in previous research, five variables are selected for featuring cross-section geometry and used for next CAD reconstruction with more precision. After comparison between Back Propagation (BP) neural network and the Kriging surrogate model, BP neural network which performs better and efficient in this automotive design optimization field is applied for extracting nonlinear mapping between five cross-section parameters and compression load, which were parallely optimized by Genetic Algorithm (GA) and its efficiency and accuracy are compared with another evolutionary algorithm of Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO). Thirdly, 3D numerical modeling of four curved corner parts׳ closing process is realized, of which twisting and bending effects during seal assembly are taken into account, thus minimizing theoretical error and producing more realistic solution. Consequently, the desired geometrical configurations for both straight parts and corner parts satisfying designated CLD property can be obtained and the whole sealing can be achieved with variable cross-section, resulting in an ideal door closing effort. Finally, a Matlab-based platform has been developed to assist the design and optimization process. Experiment and case study indicates that it provides an effective method for new door sealing design with variable cross-section.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Automotive door seals are installed in narrow gaps between door and body frame along the perimeters of the opening panels, as shown inFig. 1. They prevent water and dust from entering passenger compartment and accommodate metal manufacturing variations [1]. Door-closing effort is determined by six factors of seal rubber׳s compression load, cabin volume, door weight, latch, etc. It was revealed that door sealing consumes 35–50% energy during the door closing process [2], thus making it become the dominant role for door closing effort design [3–5].As a component intimately associated with human sensibility, automotive door sealing design includes suitable cross-section׳s geometrical parameters, as well as appropriate rubber material property, which result in the desired Compression Load Deflection (CLD) and the final door-closing efforts. Better sealing performance requires both higher reaction force and a wider contact area. However, better door-closing performance requires the opposite conditions [6]. A good door sealing design needs to satisfy both the sealing quality and the door-closing performance. Consequently, door seal design is defined as the compromise between these two reciprocal design targets, which have several features of nonlinearity, such as hyper-elastic rubber material, rubber׳s large deformation and rubber–metal contact behavior.Conventionally, door-closing effort design and measurement have mostly relied on experimental methods. Ordieres-Meré tested quasi-static driven door forces [7]. Egashira et al. measured door-seal reaction force and calculated the changes in the inner cabin׳s atmospheric pressure by air flow [8]. However, the narrow and limited closed space between door seal and door panel makes it difficult to monitor the deformation process and hard to obtain the necessary data of compression load by the traditional measurement methods. Experimental methods have disadvantages in determining the many factors related to door closing effort design and are not particularly feasible for new development of optimized seal design regarding to cost and time.Nowadays, computational efforts have been implemented for door seal design. For instance, 2D cross-section of the door seal is modeled and analyzed, making extraction of the reaction force and contact area conveniently [9]. Kim et al. developed a numerical process to predict minimum door-closing velocity and virtual reaction force versus closing time data [10]. 3D door-closing analysis, using explicit code, was introduced to produce a more realistic solution. Nonlinear finite element analysis is applied to investigate seal performance, permitting numerous design iterations to be evaluated quickly prior to manufacturing and testing the first prototype parts.Although numerical analysis makes great contributions to the door seal design, there still exists some problems for this high non-linear behavior. Door seal is generally in the form of dual extrusion bulbs of metalloid sponge and dense rubber. Its mechanical properties vary with the amount of deformation, previous load history, temperature, frequency and amplitude of the motion [11–13]. In order to predict the accurate door closing performance, seal material properties must be investigated carefully, which is a challenging task in computational mechanics due to large deformations and the nearly incompressible nature of rubber [14–17].Moreover, traditional sealing system has uniform geometrical cross-section. Very few parameters of height and wall thickness are selected for geometrical description. It is simple for design, but would cause inaccurate reconstruction of geometrical configuration. Because the cross-section remains unchangeable, it is easy for manufacturing, but has the shortcoming of bad fitting in large curvature corners and cannot satisfy the varied CLD requirements from different locations of door like the roof part, A-pillar part, B-pillar part and sill part.Recently, variable cross-section extrusion technologies have been invented. With the computer control of extrusion die, rubber can be manufactured with changed cross-section. With regard to automotive door׳s complex 3D profile, new sealing with variable cross-section is desired and can be achieved with the help of new extrusion technology. Consequently, more cross-section geometrical parameters are required. Optimal design of new sealing system could benefit greatly from numerical analysis in term of efficiency and research cost. Regarding to material nonlinear, contact nonlinear and geometrical nonlinear of door sealing, this paper provides a practical numerical approach for new automotive door sealing with variable cross-section.It firstly presented the door sealing partition process based on closing efforts design. A typical door sealing is geometrically divided into eight segments, considering the curvature change of true profile. Secondly, combination of experiment and numerical analysis is used to identify the hyper-elastic material model of door seal rubber. Thirdly, it solved the problem of cross-section׳s geometrical configuration and optimal variable selection. By using BP neural network, the nonlinear mapping mechanism between five cross-section parameters and the desired CLD is established. Based on Genetic Algorithm, cross-section parameters are parallely optimized. Fourthly, numerical modeling of 3D door closing is constructed for corner parts, taking into account the influence of twisting and bending during door seal assembly. By using 2D cross-section optimization for nearly straight segments of door seal and 3D numerical analysis for the rest of the corner parts, the whole sealing can be designed with variable cross section. Finally, a Matlab-based re-exploration platform has been developed, assisting this new sealing system design and demonstration.Door sealing accounts for a substantial portion of door closing effort. Geometrical and topological parameters of seal cross-section, as well as the appropriate rubber material property, would result in a desired Compression Load Deflection (CLD) and door-closing performance in the end. Traditional sealing structure has uniform geometrical cross-section. However, because of door metal panel manufacturing deviation on which seal rubber was mounted and the 3D true corners parts with large curvature, this type of structure has the shortcoming of bad fitting, causing inaccurate door-closing effort design. New door sealing needs variable cross-section so that it can bring about change in the CLD curve at different locations, thus satisfying the desired different compression loads and seal qualities.Considering the non-planar profile of practical sealing in engineering, a typical door sealing is partitioned into eight segments, of which four are nearly straight segments and four are corner parts with large curvatures, as shown inFig. 2. The whole sealing compression load required by good door seal performance is then distributed into each part. Since different compression loads could be raised from different cross-sectional designs of sealing structure, each of the eight segments׳ cross-section parameters needs to be optimally designed based on the distributed compression load, so that sum of them could fulfill the desired total door closing effort.For four nearly straightly segments, conventional 2D numerical analysis of compression process can still be used because of the unchanged compression direction of the door sheet metal. However, the 2D cross-section׳s geometrical configuration of different segments need to be re-designed in order to obtain the assigned different compression loads. For four corner parts with large curvatures, 3D numerical analysis of door closing is applied, considering the bending and twisting effect caused by large curvatures and the pre-load effect of door sealing assembly process. The whole partition is shown inFig. 3.Door seals use Ethylene Propylene Diene Monomer (EPDM) sponge rubber. It exhibits nonlinear force versus displacement response characterized by hyper-elastic models. Different strain energy functions are used to describe the behavior of rubber material, such as the Mooney–Rivlin, Ogden, etc. Experimental and numerical analysis are applied for selection of the appropriate hyper-elastic material model.Firstly, uniaxial tension experiments take place, and the data achieved is fitted to the mechanical coefficients of the various material models which are applied to the finite element analysis. Then the finite element results are compared with the experimental ones to obtain the most suitable material model.Test process is performed based on the standard GB/T 528-2009. The dimensions of test specimen are shown inFig. 4, which also illustrates the plane strain finite element analysis of test specimen. It is obvious that the middle part of the test specimen with uniform distributed stress is the effective coverage for testing data collection.Three test specimens are stretched at the speed of 500±50mm/min until fracture. The cracked position must be within the effective coverage. The testing process is shown inFig. 5 and results are shown inFig. 6.Table 1 displays the coefficient fitting results of hyper-elastic constitutive equations in MSC.Marc, which can be applied in the numerical analysis for the material model verification.In order to predict sealing performance and door-closing force, the chemical, mechanical properties and the constitutive model of rubber material must be considered; moreover, the different orders of the same material constitutive model also influence the reliability of the simulation results.In this study, we utilize the method in Ref. [1] to select suitable material model for the experimental results. Finally, the Foam model is selected in the simulation, as shown inFig. 7, and its strain energy function is shown in the following equation:(1)W=∑n=1Nμnαn(λ1αn+λ2αn+λ3αn−3)+∑n=1Nμnβn(1−Jβn)Among them,μn,αnandβnare the material constants.λiare the principal stretch ratios.In terms of appropriate CLD property according to the distributed sealing compression load, geometrical parameters of four straight segments׳ cross section need to be designed and optimized. In order to establish the implicit relationship between the section parameters and the CLD property, BP neural network is adopted to extract the highly nonlinear mapping mechanism with the help of Design Of Experiments (DOE) to provide sufficient training samples. Then, genetic algorithm is applied to parallely search cross section parameters.Conventional method uses three simple variables of cross section height, rubber thickness and annulus diameter to describe seal cross-section. It ignores rubber׳s non-uniform and irregular shape. Furthermore, it has not taken into account the influence of special convex structure called rib, as shown inFig. 8. In fact, rib segment is very sensitive to compression load according to study in this paper, and a penalty function technique is used to handle the contact constraints in the finite element contact simulation.Fig. 9 shows the poor sealing performance caused by rib and the comparison of compression response with and without rib structure. It can clearly be seen that rib segment would cause an excessive door-closing force, meaning that the traditional simple three variables cannot describe cross-section geometry without considering the rib structure. Considering the non-uniform shape and protruding structure, 2D seal section geometry must be reasonably divided into five parts, as shown inFig. 10.After cross-section partition, appropriate variables need to be selected for featuring cross-section geometry. Five variables of angle α, angle β, distance d, associated with other two thickness variables, are proposed in this paper, as shown in Fig. 10. It covers the possible changes in term of the thickness, shape and height of the sponge tube. The five variables can not only ensure the portions I, II and III of the sponge tube to be reconstructed with minimum deviation, but also make the cross-section׳s geometrical design more convenient and accurate.The result of seal cross section design is its CLD property which can meet the engineering practical requirement, as shown inFig. 11. The measured CLD for certain 2D cross-section must be located in the upper and low limit zones as shown in the shadow. To evaluate the performance of a seal product under actual conditions, the seal deformation is checked in three critical configurations depending on the relative position of the door and frames, denoted by D−2, D, D+2 in Fig. 11. D represents the complete closing condition, while D−2 and D+2 are slightly less and more deformed conditions, respectively.According to the industrial application, the objective function for cross-section optimization can be obtained and, shown in the following equation:(2)f(α,β,d,t1,t2)=∑i=13λi(Fi−fi)2Among them,Fiis the compression load of the three key compression displacements;fiis the center values of the deviation range of the seal design requirement;λiis the weight, in this paper whose f1=2.5N, f2=3.5N, and f3=4.5N. According to the seal energy consumption calculation formula, the relationship of weight between F1, F2, and F3 is F1<F2<F3, therefore, λ1=0.28, λ2=0.33, and λ3=0.39.Because of the irregular shape and hyper-elastic rubber material of door sealing, there exists strong nonlinear mapping mechanism between its input geometrical variables and output compression load, which are difficult to be expressed by the traditional explicit way. BP neural network can realize complicated implicit mapping as long as it has enough hidden layers and points. It was adopted in this paper for extracting mapping between five variables of cross-section and the desired CLD response with the closest approximation algorithm.BP neural network needs sufficient training and learning samples. With the Design Of Experiments methods, the input of cross-section parameters is grouped as five variables and five levels, as shown inTable 2; orthogonal table is used to arrange the experiment samples and 25 groups of samples are numerically analyzed to obtain the output values of F1, F2, and F3.Seal compression in a narrow gap between door metal panel during door-closing is characterized as large deformation of hyper-elastic material, showing strong geometrical and material nonlinearity. Finite element analysis aiming at obtaining the training data collection for neural network must do more work in the aspects of element types, material model and boundary conditions. The results are shown inFig. 12.To verify the numerical analysis of cross-section compression, experiment of real door seal compression is performed, as shown inFig. 13. Since the CLD property is defined by normal compression to cross-section, special fixture with upper part and lower part is designed and made. The upper fixture simulated the door sheet metal, while lower fixture as body frame metal. By adjusting the position of upper fixture and lower fixture, it can ensure that not only the compression load׳s direction is vertical to cross-section, but also the real spatial assembly position in relation to door seal, door panel and frame panel. The results are listed inTable 3. The least error for compression load at D+2 between experimental and numerical analysis is 2.32%, which shows a quite good agreement, indicating that numerical results can be used for BP mapping modeling.A three layers BP neural network is established to model the implicit mapping mechanism using large quantity of training samples learning. The neuron numbers of the input and output layer are 5 and 3 respectively. After taking the training function as “trainlm”, the transfer functions as “tansig” and “purelin”, the highest training number is 7000 and the training goal is 1e−7; then each neural network with different hidden layer neurons is made to learn the training samples, whose results are shown inTable 4 (due to the random training process of the neural network, the data in the table is derived from the comparison of 10 training results).The number of the neurons of the hidden layer is chosen as 18, and other parameters are listed as the above content.Fig. 14 shows the convergence curve of the training mean square error of the neural network, and the comparison of the network output and the sample target is also shown inFig. 15.The software package Design and Analysis of Computer Experiments [18] (DACE) is applied to establish a Kriging model, which is a Matlab toolbox for working with Kriging approximations to computer models. There are two important functions in the toolbox, namely dacefit and predictor, as shown in the following equations:(3)[dmodel,perf]=dacefit(S,Y,regr,corr,theta0,lob,upb)(4)y=predictor(x,dmodel)The parameter theta0 in dacefit is the key to build a fine surrogate model, and there is a principle that when theta is small, the model is relatively smooth while too simple, on the other hand, if theta is too large; the model will change fiercely in local scope and over fit. After lots of trials, we choose the poly0 regression function and the gauss correlation function; with the assumption of anisotropy we choose the following starting point and bounds for theta0, as shown inTable 5.Because of limited samples, in this paper BP neural network is compared with Kriging method by predicting the original section. Table 9 shows the five variables of the original section and the comparison of BP neural network results and Kriging ones is shown inTable 6.It can be seen that the Kriging results match the simulated values a little better; however it is time consuming to choose a proper value for theta0, lob and upb, which means less efficient than BP neural network.Genetic algorithm (GA for short), simulating the natural biological evolution process and nature genetic mechanism, is a classical optimization method. Particle swarm optimization (PSO for short), rooting from simulation of swarm of bird, also solves optimization problems [19].In this paper, GA is compared with PSO through the same surrogate model established by BP neural network. The optimization efficiency is evaluated by the average fitness concluded from 50 calculations, and the comparative results indicate that GA can obtain a better average fitness as shown inTable 7, which means that GA performs a little better than PSO.Genetic algorithm is applied for optimization of five selected cross-section parameters. The variables classification and range are shown in Table 2; the fitness function is shown in Eq. (2). After many trials, its best operating parameters can be obtained and are listed inTable 8.Fig. 16 shows the curve of fitness changing during evolution. The comparison of an optimal result and the original section size is shown inTable 9 and its corresponding compression load values are seen inTable 10.Using the GA-based optimal parameters, a new cross-section׳s geometrical shape is reconstructed precisely and it was again analyzed numerically to obtain corresponding new CLD curve. New cross-section geometry and new CLD were compared to the corresponding old ones and the results are shown inFig. 17(a). Fig. 17(b) shows the finite element analytical process and its result is listed in Table 10.It can be seen that the rib structure matches the profile of upper panel perfectly. The contact and seal area are uniformly distributed along the perimeter of upper panel, which greatly increases the seal performance. Three specific key measurement points of CLD curve, such as D−2, D and D+2, before and after are both listed. The errors of the fittest solution optimized by the genetic algorithm are all within 8%, which reaches the requirement of the engineering application. It indicates that the precision of the non-linear global mapping relationship between the section parameters and the CLD curve, established by BP neural network, is comparatively high.Door panel׳s profile is 3D non-planar curve, causing the related door seal to have complex shape and layout. Previous research regarded the whole seal as a single segment. When calculating the total compression load, it just multiplies the CLD results of compression load per unit length with the total length. This simplification ignored the complicated interaction of twisting and bending for corner parts with large curvatures. 3D numerical analysis was modeled for calculating four corners׳ door sealing compression load.Fig. 18 shows door corner parts, of which the curvature was analyzed. It indicates that corner of B pillar has the biggest curvature change. When corner parts were compressed during door closing, the compression load would be generated from both the normal force as well as the tangent force and twisting force, causing inaccurate calculation of compression force if only using the CLD property obtained from 2D cross-section analysis.The B-pillar with the biggest curvature is adopted to examine the compression efforts by 3D simulation of door-closing process. In order to exhibit the distinct nonlinearity of rubber materials and the complex deform behavior caused by contact, Hypermesh is used for meshing and MSC.Marc is applied for nonlinear analysis.Fig. 19 is the finite element model of B-pillar assembly on door metal panel. It is established with the tetrahedron mesh controlled by the size of 0.6mm. The door sheet metal and body frame metal are defined as rigid body and the seal is regarded as the deformable body characterized by the constitutive model of Foam after verification of sealing rubber material as mentioned.Simulation steps can be described as fixing the pedestal part of the seal, then rotating the body frame metal for 9° around the axis until the door closing position is reached, as shown in Fig. 19. The large curvature of corner profile and changing compression direction caused by rotation of door sheet metal are both taken into account, so that large deformation and compression efforts can be simulated accurately.Fig. 20 illustrates the simulated results of the B-pillar seal with length of 82.24mm. From the results, it can be learned that the direction of seal deformation is gradually changing from one end plane to the other along the installed profile. Meanwhile, the dynamic compression load versus the door closing angle is extracted, as shown inFig. 21, from which we can learn that the starting angle of contact between the seal and body frame metal is 8.45°.By using the many steps of compression load distribution, door sealing portion, 2D cross-section optimization for straight parts and 3D numerical analysis for corner parts, the new automotive door sealing with variable cross-section could finally be achieved.Fig. 22 andTable 11 show the final design results.Combined with other 5 factors, like door weights, cabin air pressure, as mentioned above, an advanced integrated Matlab-based platform is developed to perform the final design and optimization of total door closing effort design.Figs. 23 and 24 show its application for an engineering case study.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
