@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Finding the optimal cut-point for Gaussian and Gamma distributed biomarkers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Categorization is needed when dealing with biomarkers and a binary outcome.We compare by simulation four widely used methods for cut-point finding.Cut-point estimation is better done with the point-closest-to-(0, 1) corner method.Scientists should also focus on the meaning of different cut-point finding methods.Application examples are discussed through the paper.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Biomarkers,Optimal cut-point,Minimum,P,-value approach,Youden index,Concordance probability,Point closest-to-(0, 1) corner in the ROC plane,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Categorization is often needed for clinical decision making when dealing with diagnostic (prognostic) biomarkers and a binary outcome (true disease status). Four common methods used to dichotomize a continuous biomarkerXare compared: the minimumP-value, the Youden index, the concordance probability and the point closest-to-(0, 1) corner in the ROC plane. These methods are compared from a theoretical point of view under Normal or Gamma biomarker distributions, showing whether or not they lead to the identification of the same true cut-point. The performance of the corresponding non-parametric estimators is then compared by simulation. Two motivating examples are presented. In all simulation scenarios, the point closest-to-(0, 1) corner in the ROC plane and concordance probability approaches outperformed the other methods. Both these methods showed good performance in the estimation of the optimal cut-point of a biomarker. However, when methods do not lead to the same optimal cut-point, scientists should focus on which one is truly what they want to estimate, and use it in practice. In addition, to improve communicability, the Youden index or the concordance probability associated to the estimated cut-point could be reported to summarize the associated classification accuracy. The use of the minimumP-value approach for cut-point finding is strongly not recommended because its objective function is computed under the null hypothesis of absence of association between the true disease status andX. This is in contrast with the presence of some discrimination potential ofXthat leads to the dichotomization issue.In the presence of a continuous response test or a biomarkerX, it is often necessary to identify a cut-point value to classify subjects as testing positive, considered at high risk of being diseased, from those testing negative, considered at low risk of being diseased.In this setting, the receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC) is often the starting point for determining the optimal cut-point. The ROC curve is a plot of the true positive fraction (TPF)–or sensitivity (probability of correctly classifying diseased subjects)–and the false positive fraction (FPF)–or 1-specificity (probability of incorrectly classifying non-disease subjects)–for all possible cut-point values ofX(Pepe, 2003).Two methods based on the ROC curve are commonly used to determine the optimal cut-point forX: the Youden index (Youden, 1950) and the point closest-to-(0, 1) corner in the ROC plane approach (Perkins and Schisterman, 2006). The Youden index method selects the optimal cut-point that maximizes the Youden function, defined as the difference between TPF and FPF over all possible cut-point values ofX(Youden, 1950). The point closest-to-(0, 1) corner in the ROC plane approach selects the optimal cut-point forXas the one minimizing the Euclidean distance between the ROC curve and the (0, 1) point. The (0, 1) corner in the ROC curve represents the ideal situation with maximum sensitivity (TPF=1) and specificity(1−FPF=0). Perkins and Schisterman (2006) showed that these ROC-based methods may not lead to the same optimal cut-point, and they advocated for the use of the Youden index method. In fact, this latter is a commonly used measure of overall classification accuracy, while the point closest-to-(0, 1) corner in the ROC plane approach involves the minimization of a quadratic term that does not own a clinical meaning.A third approach to determine the optimal cut-point forXrelies on the maximization of the diagnostic odds ratio (DOR) function (Glas et al., 2003), defined as the ratio between the odds of TPF and FPF over all possible cut-point values ofX. Böhning et al. (2011) have recently showed that the DOR strategy is no longer recommended since it might easily lead to the choice of cut-point values on the boundary of the parameter range ofX. In fact, when considered within a parametric homoscedastic normal distribution scenario, the log-DOR is a convex function. Conversely, this deficient behavior is not present for the Youden index method, that should be preferred to the DOR approach (Böhning et al., 2011).A more recent simulation study (Liu, 2012) compared the performance of the Youden index method and the point closest-to-(0, 1) corner in the ROC plane approach with a new concordance probability criterion based on the choice of the optimal cut-point that achieves the maximum of the product of sensitivity (TPF) and specificity(1−FPF). This latter method performed well within the proposed Normal and Gamma distributions scenarios (Liu, 2012).Indeed, within the class of ROC-based methods, the Youden index seems the most commonly used and sound intuitive criterion for cut-point finding (Perkins and Schisterman, 2006; Böhning et al., 2011). The recently proposed concordance probability (Liu, 2012) has a meaningful interpretation as well. It corresponds to the probability of being below or beyond the cut-point for any random pair of non-diseased and diseased subjects, respectively. However, none have so far compared the Youden index, the concordance probability and the point closest-to-(0, 1) corner in the ROC plane methods with the minimumP-value approach (Miller and Siegmund, 1982). This latter is based on the exploration of all observed values ofXto identify the optimal cut-point that best separates the two risk groups (i.e., diseased and diseased-free) according to the maximum achievable value of the Chi-square statistic on the association betweenXand the binary outcome variable (true disease status).Thus, the aim of this paper is to compare theoretically the minimumP-value approach, the Youden index method, the concordance probability criterion and the point closest-to-(0, 1) corner in the ROC plane approach in order to investigate whether they lead or not to the identification of the same optimal cut-point, and further investigating their performance through simulations. However, it has to be considered that when methods do not lead to the same optimal cut-point, scientists should focus on which one is truly what they want to estimate, and use it in practice.We first outline the context by discussing the background methodology of each method in order to investigate any mathematical similarities and get insights into the meaning of the corresponding cut-points. Then, we generate data from either Normal and Gamma distributions in order to evaluate and compare the behavior and the performance of the investigated methods in cut-point finding. In practice, the cut-point for each of the four methods is non-parametrically estimated by empirical maximization of objective functions.Two application examples are discussed through the paper. The first one deals with the cut-point finding task for the continuous remodeling index (CRI), defined in electrocardiology as a function of signal-averagedP-wave duration and left atrial anteroposterior diameter at end-diastole (Vincenti et al., 2012). Moreover, we use a subset of data from a nested case-control study on prostate cancer (Etzioni et al., 1999) aimed to find a cut-point value for the serum prostate specific antigen velocity (Smith and Catalona, 1994).Some final statistical considerations are given in discussion to guide researchers to the choice of the appropriate statistical approach when dealing with cut-point finding for a continuous test or biomarker.LetXdenote a continuous biomarker which is supposed to be related to the binary outcome (true disease status), whereDstands for the presence of disease andD¯for the absence of disease.The true positive fraction TPF(c)and the false positive fraction FPF(c)are respectively defined, at any given possible cut-pointcofX, as(1)TPF(c)=P(X>c|D)=SD(c)and(2)FPF(c)=P(X>c|D¯)=SD¯(c).Let us consider a sample ofnDdiseased subjects andnD¯non-diseased subjects, whereN=nD+nD¯. For anycofX, we can define the following classification matrix:(3)The sample estimates of the classification probabilities (1) and (2) can be obtained from matrix (3) at a givencofXasSˆD(c)=n22/nDandSˆD¯(c)=n12/nD¯.MinimumP-value approachThe minimumP-value approach (Miller and Siegmund, 1982) is based on a systematic search of the optimal cut-point that achieves the minimum of theP-value of the Chi-square test statistic on the absence of association between the resulting dichotomized biomarker and the binary outcome, or, in other words, the maximum of the associated Chi-square statistic on matrix (3) over all possible cut-point valuescofX. Thus, according to this method, the optimal cut-pointcˆχ2is thecofXmaximizing the 1 degree of freedom Chi-square statistic computed from matrix (3) as(4)χ12(c)=N(n11n22−n12n21)2nD¯nD(n11+n21)(n12+n22).In practice, the search of the optimal cut-pointcˆχ2excludes the boundary ofXwhere eithern11+n21=0orn12+n22=0, in order to avoid an undefined Chi-square statistic (4).Yet the Chi-square statistic can be expressed as a population quantity by writing the observed classification matrix (3) in terms of classification probabilities (1) and (2) (Appendix A). The resulting population Chi-square objective functionCHI12(c)(see also Miller and Siegmund (1982)) is(5)CHI12(c)=(SD(c)−SD¯(c))2(nDSD(c)+nD¯SD¯(c)nD+nD¯)(1−nDSD(c)+nD¯SD¯(c)nD+nD¯)(1nD+1nD¯).Youden index methodThe Youden index(J)(Youden, 1950) is the maximum achievable value of the Youden functionJ(c), defined as the difference between the population quantities TPF(c)(1) and FPF(c)(2),(6)J(c)=SD(c)−SD¯(c).J(c)ranges between 0 ifSD(c)=SD¯(c), and 1 in the ideal case whereSD(c)=1andSD¯(c)=0.Jcould be seen as the maximum vertical distance between the ROC curve and the diagonal chance line (Fig. 1, length of the thick segment line). Moreover,Jcould also be interpreted as the net gain of the true positive fraction with respect to the false positive fraction (Linn and Grunau, 2006).Following this approach, the optimal cutpointcˆJis the c that achieves the maximum of the Youden functionJˆ(c)=SˆD(c)−SˆD¯(c)over all possible cut-point valuescofX.Concordance probability methodThe concordance probability (Liu, 2012) objective function could be defined as the product of the population quantities TPF(c) (1) and the complement to one of FPF(c) (2),(7)CZ(c)=SD(c)⋅(1−SD¯(c)).CZ(c)ranges between 0 ifSD(c)=0or1−SD¯(c)=0, and 1 in the ideal case whereSD(c)=1and1−SD¯(c)=1, i.e.SD¯(c)=0. CZ(c)could be also expressed as the area of a rectangle on the ROC curve of width1−SD¯(c)and heightSD(c)varyingc(Fig. 1, area of the dotted rectangle) and interpreted as the probability of being below or beyond the cut-point for any random pair of non-diseased and diseased subjects.Following this approach, the optimal cut-pointcˆCZis the c that achieves the maximum of the concordance probability functionCˆZ(c)=SˆD(c)⋅(1−SˆD¯(c))over all possible cut-point valuescofX.Point closest-to-(0, 1) corner in the ROC plane approachThe objective function of this ROC-based method (Perkins and Schisterman, 2006) could be easily defined by applying the Euclidean distance formula between the point on the ROC plane defined by the population quantities (1) and (2) and the point (0, 1),(8)ER(c)=SD¯(c)2+(SD(c)−1)2.According to this method, the optimal cut-pointcˆERis thecthat achieves the minimum of the objective functionEˆR(c)=SˆD¯(c)2+(SˆD(c)−1)2over all possible cut-point valuescofX(Fig. 1, length of the thin line segment).The minimumP-value approach and the Youden index method are mathematically related. In fact, from the population quantities (5) and (6), we can writeCHI12(c)=J(c)2/[(nDSD(c)+nD¯SD¯(c)nD+nD¯)(1−nDSD(c)+nD¯SD¯(c)nD+nD¯)(1nD+1nD¯)].Thus, in other words, the Youden function (6) is the square root of the numerator of the Chi-square function (5).However, despite this mathematical similarity, it can be shown that the associated cut-point finding methods do not necessarily identify the same true cut-point. This is discussed in Appendix B, where it is described the special normal homoscedastic case where the ROC-based methods (6)–(8) identify the same true cut-pointcROC. Moreover, if the design is balanced (nD=nD¯), this equality also holds for the minimumP-value approach (5), leading to a common cut-pointcopt. WhennD<nD¯, the true cut-pointcχ2underlying the minimumP-value approach (5) is greater than the one associated to the ROC-based methods, beingcχ2>cROC.Let us assume thatXis normally distributed in the diseased and non-diseased populations, respectively asXD∼N(μD,σD=1)andXD¯∼N(μD¯=0,σD¯=1). This means thatSD(c)=1−Φ(c−μD)andSD¯(c)=1−Φ(c), whereΦdenotes the standard normal distribution function. IfμDis set equal to {0.51, 1.05, 1.68, 2.56}, the corresponding maximum values of the Youden function (6) areJ(cJ)={0.2,0.4,0.6,0.8}, the corresponding maximum values of the concordance probability (7) areCZ(cCZ)={0.36,0.49,0.64,0.81}while the minimum values of the objective function (8) of the point closest-to-(0,1)corner in the ROC plane approach areER(cER)={0.57,0.42,0.28,0.14}. This set of values ofμDensures a wide variety of classification accuracies, ranging from a poor one (J=0.2andCZ=0.36) to a high one (J=0.8andCZ=0.81) (Schisterman et al., 2005). Conversely, the maximum values of the Chi-square function (5) of the minimumP-value approach depend on the size of the sample. For example, by consideringnD=nD¯=100, we obtainCHI12(cχ2)={8,32,72,128}, and consideringnD=50,nD¯=150, we obtainCHI12(cχ2)={6,26,64,121}.Fig. 2shows the population objective functions (5)–(8) in case of homoscedastic normal distributions, withμD=2.56, i.e.J=0.8andCZ=0.81, for both a balanced (nD=nD¯=100, Panel A) and a non-balanced (nD=50<nD¯=150, Panel B) design. In the balanced homoscedastic scenario, the objective functions (5)–(8) reach their maximum in correspondence of the same true cut-point, i.e.copt=μD/2(for a proof of this equality see Appendix B). Analytically, this common cut-point occurs at the intersection between the normal probability density functions of diseased (i.e.,fD(c)) and non-diseased subjects (i.e.,fD¯(c)). Conversely, in the non-balanced homoscedastic case, the ROC-based methods lead to the same true cut-pointcROC, which differs from the one based on the minimumP-value approach method (5), beingcχ2>cROC. In particular, the true cut-pointcχ2of the minimumP-value approach increases with decreasing prevalence of the disease in the sample. A closed form for the cut-point can be derived only for the Youden index method (Liu, 2012).In order to investigate the effect of heteroscedasticity, we first reduce the standard deviation of diseased subjectsσDto 0.5 (Fig. 2 Panel C) and then increase it to 1.5 (Fig. 2 Panel D). In these heteroscedastic scenarios, the maximum points of the four objective functions are different even in the case of a balanced design. In the first case (Fig. 2 Panel C), we observe thatcER<cCZ<cJ<cχ2, while the opposite is observed in the second case, i.e.cχ2<cJ<cCZ<cER(Fig. 2 Panel D).Let us now assume thatXis Gamma distributed:XD∼G(αD=2.5,βD)for diseased subjects andXD¯∼G(αD¯=1.5,βD¯=1)for non-diseased subjects. This implies thatSD(c)=1Γ(2.5)(βD)2.5∫c∞x1.5e−x/βDdxandSD¯(c)=1Γ(1.5)∫c∞x0.5e−xdx. IfβDis set equal to {0.79, 1.22, 1.97, 3.82}, the corresponding maximum values of the Youden function (8) areJ(cJ)={0.2,0.4,0.6,0.8}, the corresponding maximum values of the concordance probability (7) areCZ(cCZ)={0.36,0.49,0.64,0.81}while the minimum values of the objective function (8) of the point closest-to-(0, 1) corner in the ROC plane approach areER(cER)={0.57,0.42,0.28,0.14}. As in the Normal distribution case, the corresponding maximum values of the Chi-square function (7) depend on the size of the sample; by consideringnD=nD¯=100,CHI12(cχ2)={9,32,72,128}. We set the Gamma parameters to ensure a wide variety of classification accuracies, ranging from a poor one (J=0.2andCZ=0.36) to a high one (J=0.8andCZ=0.81) (Schisterman et al., 2005).In these scenarios, the objective functions (5)–(8) do not reach the maximum in correspondence of the same true cut-point (Fig. 3). Moreover, a closed form for the true cut-point cannot be derived for the investigated methods (Liu, 2012).We compare the performance of the minimumP-value and the three ROC-based methods, Youden index, concordance probability and point closest-to-(0, 1) corner in the ROC plane, in the estimation of the optimal cut-point. We consider first the normal homoscedastic scenario with balanced design (nD=nD¯), where all the investigated methods identify theoretically the same true cut-pointcopt. Second, we analyze the non-balanced (specifically,nD<nD¯) normal case, where the ROC-based methods lead to the same true cut-pointcROC, which differs from the true cut-pointcχ2underlying the minimumP-value approach (5). Last, the Gamma case is also considered. All simulations are performed under the same parametric scenario introduced in Section  3.We follow the principles for sample size determination (Burton et al., 2006) to compute the number of simulated samples by assuming that the maximum tolerable distance fromcoptis equal to 6% of one standard deviation. This lead to 1014 simulated samples, but for the sake of simplicity we consider 1000 replications. Consequently, we separately generate for the diseased and non-diseased groups 1000 samples of sizenD=nD¯=50,nD=nD¯=100andnD=nD¯=200. Moreover, in the non-balanced design(nD<nD¯), we generate 1000 samples of sizenD=50,nD¯=100andnD=50,nD¯=150andnD=50,nD¯=200. For each sample, we determine by empirical numerical maximization (Fluss et al., 2005; Liu, 2012) the optimal cut-points estimatescˆχ2,cˆJ,cˆCZandcˆERfor the minimumP-value and the three ROC-based methods, Youden index, concordance probability and point closest-to-(0, 1) corner in the ROC plane, respectively. The relative bias of each method is computed byE[(cˆ.−c.)/c.], while mean square error (MSE) is also determined asE[(cˆ.−c.)2], wherecˆ.andcrepresent respectively the estimated and the true cut-point underlying each investigated method.Moreover, in order to estimate the standard deviation and the confidence interval (CI) for the optimal cut-point, we apply the bootstrap resampling technique (Carpenter and Bithell, 2000). Within each of the 1000 generated samples, random sampling with replacement is used to draw 200 bootstrap samples to calculate the bootstrap estimatecˆB(B=1,…,200). Then, we apply the basic percentile method, taking the 0.025 and 0.975 percentiles of thecˆBbootstrap distribution in order to construct a 95% CI of the optimal cut-point.Each bootstrap sample contributes one cut-point estimate, so that the standard deviation of the 200 cut-point estimates is used as the bootstrap estimator of the standard deviation(SDB)for the estimated cut-point. Within each of the aforementioned simulation scenario, the CI for the cut-point for each of the investigated methods is subsequently evaluated by computing coverage probability and mean length. Moreover, coverage symmetry of the bootstrap confidence interval is computed for the unbalanced design under Normal homoscedastic biomarker distributions.Simulation resultsThe results of the balanced design under Normal homoscedastic distributions are shown in Table 1. The relative bias of the investigated methods is small on all levels of classification accuracy. While the minimumP-value, concordance probability and point closest-to-(0, 1) corner in the ROC plane methods generally underestimate the true cut-pointcopt, the Youden index method overestimatescopt. By comparing the MSEs, it can be noticed that the point closest-to-(0, 1) corner in the ROC plane and concordance probability methods have better performance in the estimation of the optimal cut-point with respect to the other methods. Indeed, the MSE is inversely related to sample size. The performance of all methods improves with increasing classification accuracy.Table 2shows the bootstrap standard deviation, coverage probability and mean length of the 95% bootstrap CI for the cut-point for the balanced design under Normal homoscedastic distributions. TheSDBof the minimumP-value approach is systematically greater with respect to theSDBof the three ROC-based methods. 95% bootstrap CIs are systematically narrower when considering the scenarios with better classification accuracies, i.e.Jof 0.6 and 0.8, and CZ of 0.64 and 0.81. Moreover, the point closest-to-(0, 1) corner in the ROC plane method achieves the narrowest CIs with respect to the other methods in all the analyzed scenarios. Coverage probabilities are close to the nominal level, except for the highest classification accuracy scenario, i.e,Jof 0.8 and CZ of 0.81, when considering the total sample size of 200 and 400. Moreover, the coverage probabilities for the point closest-to-(0, 1) in the ROC plane approach were generally lower than the nominal level if compared with those from the Youden index method.Table 3shows the results of the unbalanced homoscedastic Normal case. It can be noticed that the truecχ2depends on the prevalence of the disease in the sample,nD/(nD+nD¯). In particular, a reduction of the prevalence determines a systematic shift to the right of the truecχ2, while the ROC-based methods lead to the same true cut-pointcROC, which differs from the one based on the minimumP-value approach method (5), beingcχ2>cROC.The relative bias of the investigated methods is small on all levels of classification accuracy, except for the lowest classification accuracy scenario, i.e.Jof 0.2 and CZ of 0.36, when considering the three ROC-based methods. The MSE is lower for the point closest-to-(0, 1) corner in the ROC plane method, too.Table 4shows the bootstrap standard deviation, coverage probability and mean length of the 95% bootstrap CI for the cut-point for the unbalanced design under Normal homoscedastic distributions. Even in this scenario, the SDBand mean length of the 95% bootstrap CI are lower for the point closest-to-(0, 1) corner in the ROC plane method with respect to the other investigated approaches. Coverage probabilities are also close to the nominal level, except for the highest classification accuracy scenario, i.e,Jof 0.8 and CZ of 0.81, where the coverage probabilities for all the investigate methods are lower than the nominal level. The coverage symmetry of the bootstrap confidence interval (Supplementary web-only Table 1, Appendix C) generally reveals a left coverage failure, while a right coverage failure is showed for the minimumP-value approach when considering the scenarios with better classification accuracy, i.eJof 0.6 and 0.8, and CZ of 0.64 and 0.81.Under a Gamma distribution assumption with a balanced design (Table 5), it can be noticed that the theoretical true cut-pointscχ2,cJ,cCZandcERare all different. However, we fail to recognize a systematic ordering between these theoretical cut-points. Concerning the relative performance of the investigated methods, we note a negligible relative bias in the estimate of the optimal cut-point, except for the minimumP-value approach in the scenario with poor classification accuracy,J=0.2. In all the analyzed cases, theSDBand mean length of 95% CI are lower for the point closest-to-(0, 1) corner in the ROC plane method with respect to the other investigated approaches (Table 6). Coverage probabilities are also close to the nominal level, except for the highest classification accuracy scenario, i.e,Jof 0.8 and CZ of 0.81.Summarizing, in all the analyzed simulation scenarios, the point closest-to-(0, 1) corner in the ROC plane and concordance probability approaches show a better performance in the estimation of the optimal cut-point with respect to the minimumP-value and Youden index methods. This finding is also confirmed by the bootstrap standard deviation and mean length of the 95% bootstrap CI. It has to be noticed, however, that in several scenarios methods do not lead to a common cut-point. Thus, the choice of the estimation method cannot be performed only relying on MSE considerations but also on the meaning of the objective function on which the estimation method is based.Case study leading to the same cut-pointAtrial fibrillation (AF) is a frequent arrhythmia associated with almost all heart diseases. An AF episode is defined paroxysmal (ParAF) when it spontaneously stops within 7 days from the onset and persistent (PerAF) when pharmacological or electrical interventions are needed for interruption.A continuous remodeling index (CRI) aimed to separate patients presenting ParAF from those with sustained PerAF (i.e., AF episodes interrupted 7 days or more after the onset) has been recently developed (Vincenti et al., 2012). Briefly, this index is computed for each AF patient using the individual values of theP-wave duration (SAPWd) and the left atrium diameter (LADd) asCRI=−12+0.13⋅LADd(mm)+0.05⋅SAPWd(ms). SAPWd is an expression of the intra-atrial conduction time, while LADd is a measure of atrial dimension. The modifications of intra-atrial conduction time and of atrial dimensions are characteristics of atrial remodeling.Supplementary Web-Only Table 2 (see Appendix C) reports some descriptive statistics of SAPWd and LADd for the ParAF and sustained PerAF groups. We can note that SAPWd is significantly longer in sustained PerAF than in ParAF patients (153±15 vs. 142±13 ms,P=0.004) while LADd is larger in sustained PerAF vs. ParAF patients (43±6 vs. 38±5 mm,P=0.002).Fig. 4Panel A shows the ROC curve of the continuous remodeling index, along with the indication of the Youden indexJ, the concordance probability CZ and the distance from the (0, 1) corner ER. The points on the normal QQ plot graphs of ParAF (Fig. 4 Panel B) and sustained PerAF (Fig. 4 Panel C) fall approximately on the straight diagonal line. Even if a small departure from normality emerges within the sustained PerAF group (Fig. 4 Panel C), the CRI could be considered normally distributed. As a confirmation, the Shapiro–Wilk non-parametric normal distribution test returns aP-value of 0.29 and 0.16, respectively for the ParAF and sustained PerAF groups. However, care must be used when interpreting normality test results for small samples. The theoretical distributional scenario of the CRI is shown in Fig. 4 Panel D. We tested the homoscedasticity assumption through the Bartlett’s test, that returns aPof 0.26.A cut-pointcis needed to dichotomize the CRI result to define a criterion to divide AF episodes into PerAF or ParAF, so that the criteria identifies a PerAF condition when CRI is greater or equal toc, and a ParAF condition when the CRI is less thanc. Since we are analyzing a relatively balanced design (33 vs. 26 patients) with Normal homoscedastic distributions, the investigated methods lead to the same cut-pointcˆopt=−0.9. We also estimate the 95% bootstrap CI estimate for the cut-point for each of the investigated methods, finding respectively for the minimumP-value, Youden index, concordance probability and point closest-to-(0, 1) corner in the ROC plane methods the following 95% CI estimates: (−1.12, 2.34), (−1.18, 0.46), (−1.12, 0.46) and (−1.09, 0.24). Indeed, the point closest-to-(0, 1) corner in the ROC plane method achieves the narrowest CI. This is consistent with the results of the normal homoscedastic simulation study.Case study leading to different cut-pointsWe use data from a nested case-control study (Etzioni et al., 1999) (available for free download at http://labs.fhcrc.org/pepe/book/#datasets). This study aimed to analyze longitudinally the variation of total serum levels of PSA for 71 cases of prostate cancer and 70 controls matched to cases on date of birth and number of serum samples available for analysis.PSA velocity (PSAV) measures how quickly PSA levels increase over time before prostate cancer diagnosis and it may have advantages over a single PSA measurement in differentiating between men with prostate cancer and controls (Smith and Catalona, 1994). Several methods are available to compute PSAV (Connolly et al., 2007). Given that PSA measurements are separated by a sufficient long time period (4.9 years for prostate cancer cases and 4.8 years for matched controls, see Supplementary Web-Only Table 3, Appendix C), in our case study we decide to compute PSAV through the rate of PSA change between the first and last PSA measurement.Supplementary Web-Only Table 3 (see Appendix C) shows some descriptive statistics of prostate cancer cases and controls. Our analyses are restricted to 57 prostate cancer cases and 60 matched controls reporting at least two PSA measurements. Mean ages are similar between men diagnosed with cancer compared with controls (62 vs. 60,P=0.07), while initial PSA levels (5.8 ng/ml vs. 1.2 ng/ml,P<0.0001) and last PSA levels before diagnosis (18.1 ng/ml vs. 1.7 ng/ml,P<0.0001) are different between the considered groups. The mean number of total PSA tests is not statistically significant different between men diagnosed with cancer compared with controls (3.8 vs. 3.9,P=0.71). PSAV is indeed higher in prostate cancer cases than in controls (3.7 ng/ml/year vs. 0.3 ng/ml/year,P<0.0001).Fig. 5Panel A shows the ROC curve of the PSA velocity, along with the indication of the Youden indexJ, the concordance probability CZ and the distance from the (0, 1) corner ER. The distributions of the PSAV within controls (Fig. 5 Panel B) and within the prostate cancer group (Fig. 5 Panel C) are positive skewed, with some overlapping. The PSAV follows a Gamma model both in cases and controls group, even if a small departure from Gamma distribution emerges for prostate cancer subjects (Fig. 5 Panel C).A cut-point c for the PSAV is needed to discriminate suspicious prostate cancer. Here, the minimumP-value approach selects as cut-pointcˆχ2=0.76ng/ml/year, while the three ROC-based methods identifies the same cut-pointcˆROC=0.63ng/ml/year. This finding is indeed consistent with the behavior of thecχ2with respect to thecROCobserved theoretically within the Gamma distribution simulation scenario described in Table 5. In fact, for relatively high values of classification accuracy, in this caseJˆ=0.7,cχ2tends to be greater thancROC.The bootstrap 95% CI estimates of the cut-point are (0.34, 1.04), (0.34, 0.94), (0.39, 0.82) and (0.39, 0.76), respectively for the minimumP-value, Youden index, concordance probability and point closest-to-(0, 1) corner in the ROC plane methods. This latter approach achieves the narrowest confidence interval. This is consistent with Gamma simulation results presented in Table 6.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
