@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Numerical study of wave barrier and its optimization design

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We develop an optimization design method for wave barrier.The barrier which has the best isolation performance is identified.We perform an extensive parametric study on the barrier isolation effectiveness.The barrier depth, width and Young׳s modulus are major concern in practical design.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Wave barrier,Vibration isolation,Parametric study,Optimization design,FEM,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A numerical investigation on the performance of wave barrier and a developed optimization design method for wave barrier are presented. Firstly, a two-dimensional (2D) numerical model is built in ABAQUS and the results are verified by previous publications. A comparative study of the 2D model and three-dimensional (3D) model is also carried out. Then, an extensive parametric study is committed to investigate the effect of each parameter on the barrier vibration isolation effectiveness, key parameters are identified. Unlike most of the previous work, an optimization design method has finally been developed to find out the barrier which has the best vibration isolation effectiveness. An example of optimization design for barriers made up of expanded polystyrene (EPS) geofoam is shown as well. This suggested method can provide useful guidelines for wave barrier design in practice.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Ground vibration generated by vibratory sources, such as earthquake, explosion, high speed trains, subways or cars has detrimental influences on the nearby buildings and residents, ranging from causing annoyance to structural damage and loss of life. In the densely populated urban regions and buildings housing sensitive equipment, ground vibration must be strictly controlled. Up to now, various vibration reduction methods have been used, one of them is the installation of wave barriers, like open trenches, concrete or bentonite trenches, sheet pile walls, gas-filled cushions and expanded polystyrene (EPS) geofoam, which are considered to be able to prevent waves from transmitting wave energy into the protected areas. Generally speaking, the geometry, location and the composition of wave barriers are the most important factors that affect the screening effect. In the past few decades, a number of researches including analytical, experimental and numerical studies have been carried out to investigate the effectiveness of wave barriers. For the analytical approach, White [1] studied the scattering of plane compressional and shear elastic waves incident obliquely on a cylindrical discontinuity in a solid. Knopoff [2,3], Mal and Knopoff [4] and Thau and Pao [5] investigated wave diffraction by spherical, rectangular and parabolic obstacles, respectively. Lee [6] analyzed the 3D scattering and diffraction of plane waves by a hemispherical canyon in the homogeneous elastic half-space. Avillés and Sánchez-Sesma [7] presented a theoretical study on the usefulness of a row of rigid piles as barriers for isolating elastic waves, using cylindrical coordinate systems to solve the problem of multiple scattering for circular cross-sections. Since it is difficult to obtain closed-form solutions due to the mathematical complexity except for very simple geometries and idealized boundary conditions, the analytical approach is limited. Therefore, experimental and numerical approaches were pursued. Woods [8] conducted a series of field tests on vibration screening by installing open trenches which were close to the vibratory source (designated as active isolation) as well as far away from the vibratory source (designated as passive isolation). Based on the experimental results, he provided some recommendations for the rational design of open trenches. Aboudi [9] used a combined perturbation-numerical approach to solve the problem of wave propagation across a thin barrier embedded in an elastic half-space. Al-Hussaini and Ahmad [10,11] performed a rigorous boundary element (BEM) algorithm incorporating higher-order elements to examine the influence of geometrical and material parameters on the screening efficiency of a rectangular barrier, and a simple model was developed for the horizontal vibration screening effect. Massarsch [12] presented the gas cushion method and described its applications in full-scale projects, the efficiency of the gas cushion method was assessed in different soil conditions. Murillo et al. [13] conducted a centrifuge parametric study to investigate the influences of various parameters (barrier depth, width, location and input frequency) in reduced scale models made of EPS isolation barriers within Fontainebleau sand, the EPS geofoam isolation efficiency was examined and some useful suggestions about the practical design of wave barriers were provided. Lu et al. [14] developed a numerical model to analyze the isolation of moving-load induced vibration using pile rows embedded in a layered poroelastic half-space. They pointed out that better isolation efficiencies could be achieved when there were higher speed of moving loads and when pile rows were embedded in two-layered poroelastic half-space with a softer overlying layer. Alzawi and EI-Naggar [15] conducted a full scale field experiment to study the performance of both open and in-filled trenches with geofoam material, the effect of the geometry and location of trenches on the screening efficiency was examined. Alzawi [16] developed a model for the barrier design using Multiple Linear Regression (MLR), an artificial neural network (ANN) model was also developed to predict the geofoam barriers isolation effectiveness in different soil conditions.To the best of the writers׳ knowledge, all the previous work which involved in parametric study mainly focused on the effect of single parameter on the barrier vibration isolation effectiveness. It is still unclear what will happen when mutual influences exist, while such mutual influences are very common in practice. The only exception is Wu [17] who used Taguchi method for the optimization of parameters of underground trench. However, his study was about the underground barrier, rather than surface barrier. Also, the investigation on the optimization of parameters in his work did not include the effect of barrier material, which is believed to play an important role in screening effect. To overcome these drawbacks, we carried out a numerical study using ABAQUS and PYTHON programming language, aiming to develop an optimization design method for wave barriers. Firstly, a 2D numerical model is created in ABAQUS and the result is verified by previous published literatures. Then, parametric study is committed to investigate the influence of each parameter on the barrier vibration isolation effectiveness, and key parameters are identified. Finally, Python scripts are drafted to optimize the combination of key parameters to find out the best barrier which is able to minimize the soil vibration. An example of optimization design for barriers made of expanded polystyrene (EPS) geofoam is shown as well. This developed method can be directly used in practice. For example, it is suitable to help optimize the barrier design for a particular site, which is one of the major research objectives in the ISVR (Institute of Sound and Vibration Research)׳s project [18]: Mitigation measures-transmission-trench and buried wall barriers.Fig. 1 shows a 2D plane-strain model constructed in ABAQUS. It has a length of 120m and a depth of 24m. A rectangle barrier is installed in a half space soil, its depth D, width W and inclination angle U are given as 5m, 0.5m and 90°, respectively. A dynamic load P, which is represented by a functionP=P0eiwt, is applied on the top surface of the soil and has a width of r. The quantities P0, ω and r are specified as 1kN, 100πrad/s and 1.25m, respectively. The distance L1 between the dynamic load and the wave barrier is 25m, and L2, which denotes the distance from the wave barrier to the point of interest (point a) on the ground surface, is assumed to be 25m. There is no horizontal displacement along the left side of the soil and no reflection boundary is applied on the right side and at the bottom. Based on the elastic wave theory, Rayleigh velocityvrin soil is derived as 250m/s, so Rayleigh wavelengthλrcan be calculated as(1)λr=2πvrω=5mTo perform the numerical modeling, explicit dynamic analysis procedure is adopted in ABAQUS. The soil and the barrier are modeled as homogeneous, isotropic and elastic media, using 4-node bilinear plane strain quadrilateral, reduced integration elements. The interface between them is assumed to be perfectly bonded.Table 1 provides the material properties of the model. It is noted that Rayleigh damping is adopted. To avoid reflected waves generated by soil boundaries, 4-node linear, one way infinite element is used to simulate the non-reflecting boundary conditions. In order to validate the convergence of numerical analyses, mesh convergence study is committed.Fig. 2 shows the amplitude of vertical displacement of ground surface beyond wave barrier with different element sizes. It is clear to see that models with crude meshes (corresponding element size: 1.0m×1.2m and 0.75m×0.9m) produce bad results. As the mesh becomes finer and finer, the results appear to gradually achieve convergence. The differences among the three curves (corresponding element sizes: 0.5m×0.6m, 0.4m×0.45m and 0.25m×0.3m) are very small. Considering that the finer the mesh is, the longer time ABAQUS takes to finish calculations, element size in this study is taken as 0.5m×0.6m, this agrees well with Kramer׳s suggestion [19] that the maximum element size should be less than one eighth of the shortest possible Rayleigh wavelength.Before committing the investigation of the screening effect of wave barriers, the ability that numerical model in ABAQUS can produce accurate results has to be verified. Since it is known that in the elastic wave theory, the wave velocity can be computed as(2)vp=E(1−ν)ρ(1+ν)(1−2ν)(3)vS=E2ρ(1+ν)(4)vR=0.87+1.12ν1+νvSwhere E=Young׳s modulus; ρ=density;ν=Poisson׳s ratio. AndvP,vSandvRare the velocity of compressional waves (P waves), shear waves (S waves) and Rayleigh waves (R waves), respectively. It is noted that those equations above can only be used in homogeneous isotropic and elastic medium without damping.Fig. 3 shows the motion of point a overtime with the assumption that wave barrier is replaced by soil in Fig. 1 and the soil medium have no damping. Based on Eq. (2)–(4), the wave velocity is calculated as(5)vp=E(1−ν)ρ(1+ν)(1−2ν)=3.3×108×(1−0.25)1750×(1+0.25)(1−2×0.25)=475.70m/s(6)vS=E2ρ(1+ν)=3.3×1082×1750×(1+0.25)=274.64m/s(7)vR=0.87+1.12ν1+νvS=0.87+1.12×0.251+0.25×274.64=252.67m/sTherefore, the first arrival time of P waves, S waves and R waves at point a are(8)tP=L1+L2vP=50m475.70m/s=0.1051s(9)tS=L1+L2vS=50m274.64m/s=0.1821s(10)tR=L1+L2vR=50m252.67m/s=0.1979sIt is noted that the three vertical lines from left to right in Fig. 3 exactly representtP,tSandtR, respectively. It can be seen from Fig. 3(a) that the time point when the point a begins to vibrate (caused by the first arrival of P waves) agrees well with the theoretical solution (i.e.tP). The initial displacements are quite small, because P waves carry relatively small wave energy. A sharp increase of displacement can be observed at about 0.2s when R waves which carry most of wave energy finally arrive, causing tremendous vibration. Again, it is found that the numerically predicted arrival time of R waves agrees well with the theoretically calculated one (i.e.tR). Similar phenomenon can be seen from the evolution of velocity and acceleration of point a, as shown in Fig. 3(b) and (c). Based on the analysis above, it is found that the numerical results produced by ABAQUS agree well with the solutions in classic elastic wave theory.A second comparative study is carried out for the case of soil–barrier system shown in Fig. 1. Observed fromFig. 4, which presents the amplitude of vertical displacement reduction ratio of soil (=(the amplitude of vertical displacement of soil with the barrier)/(the amplitude of vertical displacement of soil without the barrier)) on the surface due to the installation of wave barrier, it can be seen that the numerical results have a satisfactory agreement with those reported by Al-Hussaini and Ahmad [10] and Beskos et al. [20], using boundary element methods.Generally, the vibration isolation effectiveness of wave barrier can be evaluated by comparison of maximum displacement, velocity or acceleration with and without barriers. Study shows that velocity of vibration is a better measure of residential structure damage than either the displacement or acceleration [21]. Therefore, in this study, the velocity amplitude reduction ratio Arat point a (see Fig. 1) is chosen to assess the barrier vibration isolation effectiveness:(11)Ar=AbAswhere Aband Asare the velocity amplitude at point a with and without the barrier, respectively. Since the velocity has horizontal and vertical components, Arhand Arvare, respectively, used to express the horizontal and vertical velocity amplitude reduction ratio. These two ratios can provide a quantitative evaluation of screening effect of the barrier, for example, Arh=0.6, Arv=0.7, it means that 40% reduction in the horizontal velocity amplitude and 30% reduction in the vertical velocity amplitude at point a are achieved due to the installation of wave barrier.Due to the nature three-dimensional problem in reality, it should be more suitable to simulate the soil–barrier system in 3D than in 2D. However, the major problem is that 3D analysis requires much more time for calculation. If the 2D model can produce similar results as 3D model does, then 3D analysis can be avoided. This section focuses on the investigation of the feasibility of replacing 3D model by 2D model through the comparison of numerical results from 2D and 3D analysis. It is noted here that the examined barrier in 2D and 3D model is a “wall”, not a “pile” or a row of “piles”.Fig. 5(a) and (b) shows the 2D and 3D finite element model meshes built in ABAQUS, respectively, with red color representing wave barrier and blue color representing soil medium. For the 3D model, only one fourth of the model is created due to the symmetry, and the 3D infinite elements are used to simulate the no reflection boundaries. The lengths of the dynamic load and wave barrier are assumed to be 10m and 15m, respectively. Other parameters are the same as the ones used in 2D model.Fig. 6 presents the amplitude of vertical displacement reduction ratio due to the installation of wave barrier in 2D and 3D models. It can be seen the numerical results from 2D analysis agree well with the ones from 3D analysis. It is mentioned that the 3D models with different lengths of the dynamic load and wave barrier produce similar results (not shown here). Thus, it is inferred that the 2D model is sufficient to predict the vibration isolation performance of wave barrier. The following parametric study and optimization design are based on the 2D model.In this section, an extensive parametric study, including the material properties of barriers, the barrier dimensions, its positions, its damping ratio as well as the dynamic load, has been conducted to investigate their influences on the vibration isolation effectiveness. All the investigations are based on the model shown in Fig. 1, except the dynamic load, which is replaced by a sinusoidal loadP=P0sin(wt), since it is easier and clearer to study the influence of dynamic load in such form. Also, the values of damping ratio in the soil and barriers are given as 5%. Note that when the effect of one parameter is examined, all the other parameters are kept constant. Besides, to keep independency of the analysis on the exciting frequency of dynamic load, the geometric parameters of barriers and the distances discussed in this section are normalized by Rayleigh wavelength. The following dimensionless parameters are adopted:(12)d=Dλr,w=Wλr,l1=Lλr,l2=L2λrwhere d, w, l1 and l2 are dimensionless parameters of barrier depth, width, distance from vibratory source to the barrier and distance from the barrier to the point of interest (point a), respectively. The numerical results and analyses are presented as follows.Fig. 7 shows the effect of the ratio of Young׳s modulus (Eb/Es) on the vibration isolation effectiveness, where Eband Esare the Young׳s modulus of the barrier and soil, respectively. And Eb/Esis varied from 0.03 to 25. It can be seen that as the barrier Young׳s modulus is small (Eb/Es<0.2), both the horizontal and vertical velocity reduced significantly. Particularly, when Eb/Esis close to zero, the best isolation effect is achieved. This agrees with the general conclusion that open trenches are considered to be the best barriers, while Young׳s modulus of open trenches is zero. As the barrier becomes stiffer, both the vertical and horizontal velocity amplitude reduction ratio Arvand Arhfirstly increase dramatically, and then gradually reach to be stable values. It seems that large Young׳s modulus (Eb/Es>2.5) has little contribution in reducing vibration, but small Young׳s modulus (Eb/Es<0.2) is very effective. Moreover, the smaller the barrier Young׳s modulus is, the much greater vibration reduction is expected to be achieved.Fig. 8 shows the effect of the ratio of density (ρb/ρs) on the vibration isolation effectiveness. The density of the barrier and soil is defined as ρband ρs, respectively, andρb/ρsranges from 0.005–5. It can be seen, in general, that the larger the barrier density is, the better isolation effect the barrier produces. On the other hand, barriers with large density tend to be more efficient in reducing vertical vibration than reducing horizontal vibration, for example, when ρbis equal to 5ρs, the vertical velocity amplitude reduction ratio Arvreduces to 0.450, while for the horizontal response, Arhdecreases only to 0.946. The possible reason for this difference is that the vertical motion of the barrier tends to send wave energy deep into the soil. While for the barrier horizontal motion, it is more likely to transfer the energy into the protected areas [10]. Thus, more energy which results in vertical vibration is consumed, leading to a better vertical vibration isolation effect. Besides, the phenomenon that part of body waves are transformed into Rayleigh waves after they propagate the barrier may also amplify the horizontal vibration in the protected site. It should be mentioned, however, that material with too large density are probably unavailable in practice, for instance, when ρb=5ρs, which means the barrier density is about 8750kg/m3, material with such large density is rare in civil engineering.Fig. 9 represents the influence of barrier Poisson׳s ratio (νb) on the vibration isolation effectiveness. It is clear to see that both the horizontal and vertical velocity amplitude reduction ratio almost keep constant with an increasingνb. It seems that the response of soil at point a is not affected by the variation of the barrier Poisson׳s ratio. Therefore, it is inferred that the barrier Poisson׳s ratio has negligible influence on its vibration isolation performance.Fig. 10 shows the effect of barrier damping ratio (βb) on the vibration isolation effectiveness. Similar to the phenomenon observed in Fig. 9, the horizontal and vertical responses change little as βbincreases from 0 to 0.1. Therefore, the influence of barrier damping ratio can also be ignored.Fig. 11 shows the effect of barrier normalized depth (d) on the vibration isolation effectiveness. It is seen that with an increasing d, the vertical velocity amplitude reduction ratio Arvgradually decreases until it basically reaches to be stable values. On the other hand, barrier depth seems to have little impact on the horizontal response, the value of Arhchanges little with the variation of d. This appears to contradict with the general conclusion made by most researchers that deep barrier has a significant contribution in mitigating ground vibration. However, it should be noted that, as mentioned before, when one parameter is discussed, all the other parameters are kept constant. In this case, the width of barrier is 0.1, while the longest investigated depth is 2.0. This means that they are rather thin barriers. In fact, if a larger width of barriers is given, e.g. w=1.0, a different phenomenon can be observed.Fig. 12 presents the influence of barrier depth on the vibration isolation effectiveness when w=1.0. It can be observed that as d increases, both of the horizontal and vertical responses firstly amplify, and then attenuate dramatically until Arhand Arvreach to become stable values. Based on the phenomenon observed above, it may be stated that the thin barrier allows a significant part of waves to transmit through it directly, leading to poor isolation effect. But for the wide barrier, it enforces much more waves to travel along its borders and propagate deeply into the soil, causing substantial energy attenuation and dispersion. But when the barrier exceeds a certain depth, since the deeper part of the barrier hardly contributes to block Rayleigh waves, which carry most of wave energy and decay rapidly as they propagate deeply into the soil, thus, there will be little further improvement in the isolation effect. From the two figures, it can be generally concluded that barriers with a large depth contribute to reduce the ground vibration, but too slender barriers (i.e. barriers with very large depth but very small width) should be avoided. In addition, a limiting depth of barriers exists, a further increase in depth has little improvement in the screening effect.Fig. 13 shows the effect of barrier normalized width (w) on the vibration isolation effectiveness. As it can be seen, with an increasing w, the horizontal and vertical velocity amplitude reduction ratio Arhand Arvfirstly decrease and then increase, the major difference between the evolution of the two ratios is that there is a delay of the appearance of minimum value of Arvcompared with that of Arh. It is worth mentioning that many researchers concluded that the barrier width has minor or ignorable influence on the vibration isolation effectiveness, but many of them made such conclusion based on a narrow range of barrier width during their experimental or numerical investigations. In fact, wave barrier whose width is larger than its depth is a different barrier, which is called wave impeding block (also known as wave impeding barrier). The performance of such type of barrier is not fully investigated to date. From Fig. 13, it can be observed that an appropriate increase in width is beneficial. Particularly, when the barrier width becomes slightly larger than its depth (w=1.1 for Arh, and w=1.4 for Arv), the isolation effect basically becomes the best. However, a further increase in barrier width turns to become detrimental, the vibration reversely amplified. One possible explanation for this phenomenon is as follows: an increase in width imparts greater rigidity to the barrier, which means that the barrier has higher shear modulus. This strengths its ability to resist the impinging waves and results in more mode conversion [10]. As a result, the isolation effect is improved. However, as the width continuously increases, there are more chances for the occurrence of wave interference between waves that transmitted directly through the barrier and those that propagate under the barrier due to different wave velocity. The complicated wave interference may cause a re-amplification of vibration. Since shear waves which cause the vertical vibration propagate faster than Rayleigh waves which generate the main horizontal vibration (compressional waves also generate the horizontal vibration, but relatively small), larger barrier width is required for the appearance of minimum vertical vibration than for that of minimum horizontal vibration, this may explain the delay observed as mentioned above.Most of the previous researches on wave barriers focused on vertical barriers, which are inserted into the soil media totally vertically. But in some cases, inclined barriers are feasible in practice, for instant, it is possible to install wave barriers obliquely in soft clay soil. However, the isolation effect of inclined barriers has rarely been investigated.Fig. 14 shows the effect of the barrier inclination angle (U) on the vibration isolation effectiveness. As it can be seen, the best isolation effect does not occur when U=90°, but when U is slightly smaller or larger than 90°, for example, U=65°, U=115°. Therefore, if it is possible to build inclined barriers in reality, barriers with a slightly inclination angle away from the vertical direction are expected to have a better vibration isolation performance than the vertical ones.Fig. 15 shows the effect of the normalized distance (l1) from the vibratory source to the barrier on the vibration isolation effectiveness. In this study, it is assumed that the distance between the vibratory source and the point a keeps constant, namely, l1+l2=50m/5m=10. So when l1 increases, l2 will correspondingly decreases, and vice versa. The purpose of this setting is to investigate the effectiveness of active isolation and passive vibration at the same time and to find out the best barrier location when the vibratory source and the protected site are fixed. From Fig. 15, it is seen that there is not monotonic variation for both of the horizontal and vertical response, a series of relative maxima and minima of Arhand Arvappear alternately when l1 increases. Also can be seen that larger velocity reduction is achieved in the vertical direction than in the horizontal direction. In addition, better isolation effect can be observed in a rough sense when the barrier is close to the vibratory source or near the protected site (point a).Fig. 16 shows the effect of the amplitude of dynamic load on the vibration isolation effectiveness. Obviously, it is seen that the horizontal and vertical velocity amplitude reduction ratio Arhand Arvremain constant with an increasing load. It appears that the amplitude of load has no influence on the screening effect. This is reasonable, because both the soil and the barrier are assumed to be elastic and the interface between them is considered perfectly bonded. For the influence of exciting frequency, as mentioned before, all the barrier geometric dimensions and distances are normalized by the wavelength of Rayleigh wave, so the results of the parametric study keep independent with the exciting frequency of dynamic load. It should be pointed out, however, that the exciting frequency cannot be too high, otherwise, the element size will be very small, and the whole numerical model will become too large to be calculated. Fortunately, for the most common surface vibrations, like the traffic-induced vibrations, their frequencies are generally below 40Hz [22].Based on the parametric study conducted in Section 4, it is clear to see the effect of each single parameter on the barrier vibration isolation effectiveness. However, it is still unclear what will happen if mutual influences exist, for example, Fig. 11 shows that the depth of thin barrier (w=0.1) has little impact on the horizontal velocity reduction, but for the wide barrier (w=1.0), as shown in Fig. 12, large depth has a great contribution in improving horizontal isolation effect. Therefore, it is imperative to investigate the mutual influences of all the parameters so as to find the optimal combination of parameters, in other words, to commit the optimization design for wave barriers.Before committing the optimization design, one programming language called Python is introduced. Python script is a very powerful tool, it can easily accomplish tasks in ABAQUS like automating repetitive jobs, performing parametric study, accessing and extracting data from output databases, and even creating user interfaces according to the customer own habit. Actually, the parametric study above including creating models, changing values of investigated parameters and extracting the amplitude of velocity from output databases, all is done by writing and running Python scripts in ABAQUS. Compared with manual operation in the GUI mode (ABAQUS/CAE), Python script is fast, labor-saving and highly efficient.Concerning the optimization design for wave barriers, there are 9 investigated parameters during the parametric study, if all the parameters are included, and suppose each parameter has 8 levels, based on traditional optimum method, the total number of combination to be calculated will be (8)9=134217728. Using the current facility we have (ABAQUS version 11, Intel Core i5, Inner memory 12G), although Python script is efficient, each calculation takes only about 19.4s, due to the so large combination number, it is estimated that (134,217,728×19.4)/(24×60×60×365)=82.5 years are required to finish the calculations of optimization combination of parameters. Undoubtedly, this is unacceptable.Therefore, proper simplifications have to be made to reduce the calculation time. The developed method is suggested as follows:•Identify parameters that have major influence on the barrier vibration isolation effectiveness, select key parameters and ignore trivial ones. According to the results from the parametric study, it is clear to see that the barrier Poisson׳s ratio, damping ratio and the amplitude of dynamic load have little or no contribution to the soil vibration reduction. So these three parameters can be excluded during optimization design, causing the number of combination from (8)9=134,217,728 to (8)6=262,144, that is a huge decrease.Choose typical values of key parameters to reduce levels of parameters. Since the purpose of optimization design is to minimize the soil vibration in protected site, only values of parameters that can dramatically reduce the soil motion are expected to be chosen. In this case, based on the 2D model presented in Fig. 1 and the evolution of velocity observed during the parametric study, the typical values of key parameters are selected, which are shown inTable 2. Thus, the estimated number of combination is further reduced to 5×4×4×4×6×6=11,520.Write a Python script and run it in ABAQUS. In this study, it takes about 20.03h to finish the whole calculations. This period of time is generally acceptable.Tables 3 and 4 show the final calculating results for horizontal and vertical velocity amplitude reduction ratio at point a, respectively. Due to space constraint, only the best and the worst vibration isolation effect are presented.From Tables 3 and 4, it can be seen that different combination of parameters results in very different vibration isolation effectiveness. If the values of parameters are specified according to Sequence 1 in these two tables, the minimum Arhand Arvwill be achieved, which are 0.06551 and 0.04002, respectively. This is an extreme vibration reduction. It should be mentioned, however, that due to variety of constraints, like it is too expensive to build deep barriers, or it is difficult to insert inclined barriers in hard soil media, some values of parameters may be unavailable in practice. But the suggested method can still be used to optimize the barrier design, considering all the limitations in reality, for example, if the barrier which has a depth of 1.9 is too long, choose its depth as 1.6, from Table 3, it is seen that the horizontal velocity reduction ratio is 0.09218. It is still a very good vibration isolation result, or if the barrier has to be inserted vertically, just specify the value of inclination angle as 90° in Python script.In the section above, the optimization design is based on the best combination of parameters in order to minimize the soil vibration, for example, Young׳s modulus of barriers in Table 2 is assumed to be very small, while the density is very large. It is noted that materials with small Young׳s modulus and large density are likely to be unavailable in practice. Common wave barriers like concrete walls, sheet pile walls, EPS, gas-filled cushions do not have the properties provided by Table 2. Therefore, in a practical view, it is better to commit optimization design for wave barriers made of real material. Since EPS geofoam, which is a lightweight yet strong plastic material, is widely used in constructions, especially in ground fill applications [23,24], in this study, we choose EPS barriers as an example for the optimization design.According to the American Society for Testing and Materials [25], there are seven types of EPS geofoam, they are EPS12, EPS15, EPS19, EPS22, EPS29, EPS39, and EPS46. Its material properties are presented inTable 5. For Poisson׳s ratio of EPS geofoam, the following empirical equation proposed by Horvath [26] is adopted:(13)ν=0.0056ρ+0.0024where ρ is the EPS density (kg/m3).Similarly, a Python script is written for the optimization design of EPS barriers. Since each type of EPS has intrinsic material property, there is no discussion about the combination of different material parameters. Other values of normalized parameters are listed inTable 6. It should be mentioned that the inclination angle U=90° is included, for considering that vertical barriers are very common in practice. In addition, due to the fact that the barrier width is generally smaller than its depth in reality, the values of w are given to be relatively small.Tables 7 and 8, respectively, show the final results for horizontal and vertical velocity amplitude reduction at point a due to the installation of EPS barriers. Only the best and the worst isolation effects are shown. It is clear to see that EPS barriers with different types, dimensions and positions have quite different vibration isolation performance. Deep barriers which are close to the protected site and have an inclination angle slightly larger than 90° are more likely to produce better isolation effect, especially for the horizontal vibration isolation. These two tables can provide a reference for civil engineers to design EPS barriers in practice.A 2D numerical model is established in ABAQUS to investigate the performance of wave barriers in soil. The vibration isolation effectiveness is evaluated and analyzed through an intensive parametric study. The comparative study of 2D and 3D analysis shows that 2D model is sufficient to produce accurate results. Using Python programming language, an optimization design method for wave barriers is developed, and an example of optimization design for barriers made of EPS is presented as well. Based on the obtained results, the following understandings and conclusions are made:•The installation of wave barriers is effective in reducing ground vibration. Significant vibration reduction can be achieved if proper parameters are taken, as Tables 3, 4, 7 and 8 show.Decreasing the barrier Young׳s modulus or increasing the barrier density results in an increase in vibration reduction, but decreasing Young׳s modulus is more effective. On the other hand, the barrier Poisson׳s ratio, damping ratio and the amplitude of dynamic load have ignorable influence on the vibration isolation effectiveness.Large depth of barriers contributes to reduce soil motion, but a limiting value exists, beyond which an increase of barrier depth produces little further vibration reduction. Increasing barrier width is also helpful, wave barrier whose width is slightly larger than its depth performs better than those with other widths. In addition, it is noted that too slender barrier (i.e. barrier with very large depth but very small width) should be avoided in practice due to its poor isolation performance.Barriers with a small inclination angle away from vertical direction have a better screening effect than vertical ones. If it is feasible to install inclined barriers, slightly oblique barriers are encouraged. Besides, the location of barriers generally does not have remarkable influence on the vibration isolation effectiveness. But basically, barriers perform better when they are installed near the vibratory source or close to the protested site than in the intermediate areas.The developed method can be used for the optimization design for wave barriers in practice. Once all the possible available parameters are given, barriers ranging from performing the best to being the worst can be identified. With the suggested method, plus the experiences of engineers and the limitations in reality, the best choice of barriers is expected to become available.The current investigation aims to provide some general guidelines for the design of wave barriers. The most important finding is the optimization design method presented above, which can provide a valuable reference for practicing engineers to commit the barrier design in reality. It should be mentioned, however, that the numerical model in this paper assumes both the soil and the barrier are homogeneous, isotropic and elastic media, the interface between them is perfectly bonded, even if these assumptions corresponds to a simplification of the real situation, they provide a first approximation of the real behavior. Further investigation on developing more practical model needs to be carried out in the future. In addition, this suggested method is applied to protection against various harmonic surface waves, its applicability to the non-harmonic waves needs further analysis [27] as well.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
