@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Finite element modelling of steel–concrete composite beams with high-strength friction-grip bolt shear connectors

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Proposes new composite beam with high-level sustainability attributes.FE modelling is developed and invoked to assess the structural feasibility of the beam.Deconstructability of the novel beam is achieved using HSFGB shear connectors.FE model confirms highly ductile and more favourable strength than conventional beams.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Composite beams,Friction-grip bolt,Finite element model,Quasi-static analysis,Deconstructable,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
High-strength friction-grip bolts (HSFGBs), that can be easily unbolted during deconstruction and structural modification, are proposed as shear connectors between the steel beam and concrete slab of composite beams in lieu of conventional headed shear studs for which deconstruction is problematic. These beams are potential sustainable and recyclable element for modern construction, but research contributions on composite beams with HSFGB shear connectors are very limited. This paper develops a three-dimensional finite element model to investigate the structural behaviour of steel–concrete composite beams with HSFGB shear connectors. Material non-linearities and the interaction of structural components are included in the model. Quasi-static finite element analysis using the dynamic explicit procedure is adopted for the analysis. The accuracy and reliability of the proposed finite element model are validated by comparing their results with available experimental results. An example is contrived to elucidate the typical mechanical performance of the composite beam, which the finite element study shows is different to that normally encountered in composite beams with headed stud connectors. Parametric studies are presented to quantify the effects of the change in the bolt spacing, diameter of hole, bolt pretension and the longitudinal reinforcement on the behaviour of the beam, so that usable design rules may be crafted.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Many new medium-sized office building structures in urban environments have a somewhat short structural lifespan, because of changes of land use, increases in land value and the like. With composite steel–concrete structural systems being popular in constructing such medium-sized office buildings, deconstruction and re-use in deference to demolition is very difficult because the headed stud shear connectors welded to the top flange of the steel beam and embedded in the cast in situ concrete slab in the composite flooring system cannot be detached easily, rendering their reuse virtually impossible [1]. As an alternative, high-strength friction-grip bolts (HSFGBs) as shown inFig. 1 are proposed as shear connectors between the steel beam and concrete slab of a composite beam to replace conventional headed shear studs. The advantages of HSFGB shear connectors are that they can be used to connect precast concrete slabs and steel girders during construction and they can be unbolted to deconstruct the building at the end of its service life and to recycle or reuse its components in preference to expensive and environmentally-disagreeable demolition [2,3]. The use of this type of shear connector can also be an effective approach for the rehabilitation and strengthening of existing non-composite structures such as bridges [4]. Despite its attractiveness, little research can be found in the open literature on the behaviour of steel–concrete composite beams with HSFGB shear connectors.In the early 1970s, Marshall et al. [5] conducted an experimental study of the use of the HSFGBs as shear connectors in steel–concrete composite construction. More recently, Kwon et al. [4] investigated the behaviour of non-composite bridge beams strengthened by the use of post-installed shear connectors, while Liu et al. [6] presented numerical and experimental results that addressed the ultimate strength and the load-slip characteristics of HSFGB shear connectors in a proposed new sustainable composite beam. Pavlović et al. [7] also reported recent tests and analyses of push-out specimens using bolted shear connectors.To avoid the significant monetary expense and testing time required for conducting full-scale experiments, computational techniques have proven to be a highly effective alternative to study the structural response of composite beams. A comprehensive state of the art review on analytical and numerical formulations for the analysis of composite beams was presented ten years ago by Spacone and El-Tawil [8]. In the last decade, as a result of the enhancement in computer and software technology that allows complicated computational models to run faster and to post-process more easily than in the past, three-dimensional finite element models have attracted an increasing amount of attention from researchers. These three-dimensional finite element models are able to provide specific insight into the behaviour of composite beams, such as the stress and strain states under the composite action and the relative movement at the steel–concrete interface, some of which are difficult or even impossible to be completely observed in physical experiments, with this information being needed to contrive more efficient structural yet safe design guidance. Some of the initial work on three-dimensional finite element modelling of steel–concrete composite beams was reported by Thevendran et al. [9], Baskar et al. [10], El-Lobody and Lam [11] and Liang et al. [12], which discussed the modelling considerations involved in this kind of approach. Queiroz et al. [13] proposed a finite element model on the evaluation of full and partial shear connection in composite beams, while Vasdravellis et al. [14,15] simulated the non-linear response of a composite beam to investigate the effects of axial tension and compression on the flexural behaviour of the beam. Recently, for further improvement, more specific three-dimensional finite element models were presented by Tan and Uy [16] and Tahmasebinia et al. [17] to investigate the behaviour of a composite beam subjected to torsion and of a composite beam with steel trapezoidal decking, respectively. Such models tend to represent the shear connectors with three dimensional solid elements based on their material and geometric properties, thus the experimental results obtained from the push-out tests were not required [18].The main objective of this paper is to propose an accurate three-dimensional finite element model to investigate the behaviour of a simply supported composite beam with HSFGB shear connectors, which can lead to contriving specific design guidance for this application. The geometric and material non-linear behaviour of all the components are taken into consideration in the modelling. The finite element model is verified by comparing its results with experimental results available in the literature. The validated procedure is then used to study the typical full-range load–deflection response, failure mode, relative slip between the concrete slab and the steel beam and the strain distribution in a composite beam subjected to either uniformly distributed or concentrated loads. Parametric studies are then performed to investigate the effects of the variation in the bolt spacing, diameter of the clearance hole, bolt pretension and the configuration of the longitudinal reinforcement on the behaviour of the beam.A three-dimensional finite element model was developed using the commercial software ABAQUS [19], in order to simulate the behaviour of a steel–concrete composite beam with HSFGB shear connectors. The pertinent components include the concrete slab, steel beam, steel reinforcement and HSFGB shear connectors with washers. Both geometric and material non-linearity was considered in the finite element analysis. Formulations of the model geometry, element types, material behaviour and the solution technique are challenging, and detailed descriptions are outlined in the following sub-sections.Overviews of the finite element model developed in this study are provided inFig. 2(a) and (b), together with the relevant coordinate system in which the X and Z axes define the cross-sectional plane and the longitudinal beam axis is denoted as the Y-axis. Because of the symmetry of the specimens and the loading condition, only one quarter of the composite beam was modelled. For the concrete slab, the steel beam and a shear connector, a three dimensional eight node element (C3D8R) with a linear approximation of displacement, reduced integration with hourglass control, eight nodes and three translational degrees of freedom was used. The stresses at various points throughout the thickness of the element are provided at each integration node. For the steel reinforcement, a three dimensional truss element (T3D2) with a linear approximation of displacement, two nodes and three translational degrees of freedom was adopted. No moments or forces perpendicular to the centreline were supported for the truss element, as constant stress was assumed throughout the element. In order to reduce the computation time, a general size mesh was used for the overall member, with a fine mesh being adopted for the bolt shear connectors and for the region around the shear connectors in order to achieve accurate results. The approximate overall mesh scale was 40mm, with the smallest mesh scale being about 5mm. The details of the finite element mesh of the model are depicted in Fig. 2.Once all components of the model were properly positioned together into the assembly, appropriate interaction and constraint conditions were defined among the various components. The surface-to-surface contact interaction available in ABAQUS was applied at all of the interfaces in the model. The penalty contact method, which is well-suited for general contact modelling, was chosen as the mechanical constraint formulations. The HARD contact property was used to depict the contact behaviour in the direction normal to the interface plane, while for the tangential response the PENALTY option was specified by adopting the friction coefficient. The friction coefficients were assumed to be 0.45 for the normal interface between the steel and concrete components [2] and to be 0.3 for the greased interface, while the friction coefficient was taken as 0.25 for all of the other interactions. The embedded constraint was applied between the reinforcement and the concrete slab, so that the bars were embedded inside the slab by constraining the translational degrees of freedom of the nodes on the bar elements to the interpolated values of the corresponding degrees of the freedom of the concrete elements. The effects of the relative slip and debonding of the reinforcement with respect to the concrete slabs were ignored.For structural computations with the concrete slab, the density of concrete was assumed to be 2400kg/m3. The non-linear behaviour of the concrete material was represented by an equivalent uniaxial stress–strain curve as shown inFig. 3. For concrete in compression, two representative material properties were needed to capture the overall and local behaviour of the slab. Type 1 stress–stain curve, based on Hognestad׳s model [20,21] as shown in Fig. 3(a), was used to model the overall material behaviour of the concrete. Three parts of the curve can be identified. The first part is assumed to be in the elastic range initially, up to the limit of proportionality stress0.45fc′. The compressive cylinder strength of the concretefc′is equal to 0.85fcu, where fcuis the compressive cube strength of the concrete. The initial modulus of elasticity of the concrete is recommended as being(1)Ec=12.4×103+460fc′(MPa),with Poisson׳s ratio taken as 0.2. The second part of the curve is the non-linear parabolic portion starting from the proportional limit stress0.45fc′to the peak stressfc′. This part of the curve can be determined from the equation(2)σc=fc′[2εcεco−(εcεco)2],where the strain at the peak stress εcois taken as εco=0.002. The third part of the curve considers the strain softening after the peak stress, which is the linear descending fromfc′to the value0.85fc′. The strain in the concrete associated with0.85fc′and the ultimate strain of the concrete εcuat failure are assumed to be 0.0038 and 0.01, respectively. On the other hand, the type 2 stress–strain curve shown in Fig. 3(a) was used to model the material behaviour of concrete in the local areas around the shear connectors. A simple modification was made for the third part of the curve where instead of the linear descending part, the stress is assumed to be constant without a decrease after the peak compressive strength is reached. This perfect plastic behaviour is assumed for the modelling, since the benign behaviour of the concrete in compression has been observed in composite beam push-out tests [6]. This behaviour is probably because the concrete is confined in a triaxial stress state in the regions around the shear connectors, which would be expected to be more profound with HSFGB shear connectors because of the tension in the bolts.For concrete in tension, as illustrated in Fig. 3(b), the tensile stress was assumed to increase linearly with respect to the strain until the concrete cracks. In the absence of reported values, the tensile strength of concrete was assumed to be given by [22](3)ft=0.1fc′After the concrete cracks, the tensile stress decreases linearly to zero with a tension stiffening effect [23] coming into play. The value of the strain εtuat zero stress is usually taken as 10 times of the strain εtoat cracking. However, it has been found that this value is not adequate for concrete slabs in composite beams. In order to avoid unstable behaviour during the analysis, a total strain of 0.1 was used herein for the concrete slabs, as suggested by Liang et al. [12].The concrete damaged plasticity model available in the ABAQUS material library was used to model the concrete behaviour, being suitable for the material with different yield strengths in tension and compression. The yield function proposed by Lubliner et al. [24] with the modifications suggested by Lee and Fenves [25] was adopted to consider the different evolution of the strength characteristics under tension and compression. Non-associated potential plastic flow is assumed in the model, whereby the Drucker–Prager hyperbolic function is used as the flow potential. The material dilation angle and the eccentricity parameter were taken as 20° and 0.1 herein, respectively. The ratio of the biaxial compressive strength and the uniaxial compressive strength was taken as 1.16.The density of the steel in all of the components was assumed to be 7800kg/m3. As is conventional, a plastic model with von Mises’ yield function, associated plastic flow and isotropic hardening was used to model all the steel parts. The modulus of elasticity and Poisson׳s ratio of the steel were taken as 200GPa and 0.3 respectively. The material behaviour of the steel beam was represented by the tri-linear stress–strain relation shown inFig. 4. The yield strength fsy, yield strain εsyand the ultimate strength fsuneed to be input to define the stress–strain curve, while the strain at the onset of strain hardening εstand the ultimate strain limit εsuwere assumed to be 0.02 and 0.25 respectively. For the steel reinforcement a simpler elastic–perfectly plastic model without strain hardening behaviour is employed for which the yield stress is taken as fry=500MPa. A tri-linear stress–strain relationship proposed by Loh et al. [26], as shown inFig. 5, was used to simulate the material response of the high strength bolt shear connector. Unless provided, the ultimate tensile strength of the bolt fbtuwas assumed to be 785MPa. The response of the HSFGB is limited by a fracture strain of 0.15 [27].Symmetric boundary conditions were applied to the model. As shown inFig. 6, all nodes at the mid-span section of the beam (surface 2) were restrained from translating in the Y direction and from rotating in the X and Z directions. All nodes of the steel beam and concrete slab that lie on the other symmetry surface (surface 1) were prevented from translating in the X direction and from rotating in the Y and Z directions. For the application of the end support boundary conditions, a small region of the bottom flange of the steel beam at the location of the steel beam was converted to a rigid body. A reference point was specified on the rigid body to enforce the required restraints. A support with only its translational displacements in the X and Z directions restrained was defined herein to simulate a simply supported boundary condition.A solution of the non-linear problem was sought by employing the dynamic explicit analysis method available in ABAQUS. The explicit dynamic analysis is a time control method in which the equation of motion of the model is integrated in time using the explicit central-difference rule. It can be applied for quasi-static analysis and is exceptionally efficient for solving discontinuous and contact problems, for which the implicit formulation might encounter convergence issues. To perform a quasi-static analysis with this approach and to reduce the computational processing time and effort, it is useful to increase the mass of the model artificially provided so that its kinematic energy is maintained at a small value throughout the analysis. This can be achieved by mean of the SEMI-AUTOMATIC MASS SCALING option, which requires the specification of the minimum stable time increment to be used in the analysis based on which the relative mass scaling factors are determined and adopted in the analysis. The appropriate minimum time increment was tried and determined to be 10−6s.The analysis progress was divided into two steps. For the first step, the post-tensioning forces were applied to the bolts by using the orthotropic EXPANSION option. The expansion coefficients and the corresponding strains in the direction along the shanks of the bolts were defined to ensure the applied stresses agree well with the actual bolts stresses after post-tensioning. The loads were imposed on the beam during the second step of the analysis. For point loaded beams, the vertical concentrated load was applied as an imposed displacement on the top of the slab at the loading points; while for the uniformly distributed loaded beams, the external load was applied on the top of the slab along the beam by means of pressure. In order to reduce the solution׳s oscillating effect at the beginning of the loading process due to the discontinuous time derivative of the applied displacement, the smooth step amplitude function was applied. The smooth step function starts and ends tangentially to the horizontal line, so the applied load can vary smoothly, and the oscillation can be minimised.The deflection at the mid-span of the beam, the loading, the slip at the interface between the concrete slab and the steel beam, the strain distribution on the concrete slab, steel beam and the bolt shear connectors were all monitored during the analysis. In order to identify the modes of failure and the associated failure loads, specific failure criteria were defined. There are three possible failure modes of a composite beam under positive bending, viz. crushing of the concrete slab, excessive yielding of the steel beam, and the failure of shear connectors. Excessive strains on the concrete slab and the steel beam reaching their ultimate limit values indicated the concrete slab crushing and the steel beam rupture respectively, while the bolt shear connector fracture was reached when most of the strains in the weakest cross-section of the shank approached the expected fracture limit value.In order to validate the accuracy of the finite element model developed, the simply supported composite beam with HSFGB shear connectors tested by Kown et al. [4] has been analysed and the results were compared with the corresponding experimental data. The beam was 11.6m long and under a vertical concentrated load at its mid-span. The beam consisted of a W30×99 steel girder and a 2130mm wide by 178mm thick concrete slab. Stiffeners were welded to the web of the steel girder at the support and loading positions to prevent local buckling. The 22mm nominal diameter high-strength bolts were installed through 25mm diameter clearance holes in the concrete slab and 24mm diameter holes in the steel top flange and tightened to 175kN post-tension as shear connectors. The bolts were installed in pairs at every 725mm along the beam. There were a total of 32 shear connectors in the beam. Details of the composite cross-sections and the material properties are given inFig. 7(a) andTable 1 respectively.Fig. 8 shows the measured mid-span applied load and vertical deflection response of the composite beam as well as the results predicted by the finite element analysis. It can be seen that two curves are in very good agreement. The finite element model predicts the initial stiffness, the ultimate strength and the ductility of the composite beam very well. The ultimate load obtained from the finite element analysis was 1139kN, which was less than 1% less than the experimental one. The mid-span deflection at the peak load was 232mm, which is close to the test value of 240mm. The slight discrepancy of the post-peak load behaviour could be attributed to the asymmetric experimental behaviour such as the shear connectors suddenly failing at one end of the beam, which is caused partly by the various uncertainty factors that are inevitable in an experimental procedure. However, in the ABAQUS modelling, significant concrete crushing occurred on the top of the slab at mid-span at the end of test as shown inFig. 9(a). This failure mode agreed well with experimental observation as shown in Fig. 9(b). In order to illustrate the accuracy of the finite element model on predicting the local behaviour of the composite beam, the numerical and experimental results for the relationship between the mid-span deflection of the beam and the slip between the concrete slab and the steel girder at the support end are plotted inFig. 10. It is shown that the proposed model can predict the slip between the steel girder and the concrete slab with good precision.Another steel–concrete composite beam with HSFGB shear connectors, tested by Marshall et al. [5], was also analysed for the purpose of further validation. The beam that was analysed was simply supported with a span of 4m. The steel beam with hybrid cross-section was connected to the concrete slab by 16mm nominal diameter HSFGB shear connectors. The shear connectors were installed in pairs and considered to be uniformly distributed along the beam. There were total 20 shear connectors in the beam. During installation, the bolts passed through 20mm diameter clearance holes in the concrete slab and the steel top flange and a post-tension force 83.5kN was applied to the bolts. The beam was loaded at two points placed symmetrically at distances of 0.5m from the mid-span. Stiffeners were welded to the web of the steel beam at the support and loading positions to prevent local buckling. Details of the cross-section of the composite beam are shown in Fig. 7(b) and the material properties are summarised in Table 1.Fig. 11 shows the load–deflection curve obtained from the finite element analysis compared with the experimental results, from which it can be seen that the two results are in good agreement. The ultimate load obtained from the finite element analysis was 515kN, which was 2% less than the experimental one. In both results, the mid-span deflection at failure was 114mm. The finite element modelling also confirmed the experimental observation that the composite beam failed by crushing at the top of the concrete slab at mid-span. Therefore, it can be concluded that the finite element model developed is reliable and can accurately capture the fundamental behaviour of composite beams with HSFGB shear connectors.For the convenience of further investigation of the behaviour of steel–concrete composite beams with HSFGB shear connectors, a typical structural beam in a medium-sized office building was designed. Fig. 7(c) shows a typical cross-section of the composite beam, for the steel section was a W12×35 and the simply supported member of length 6m was subjected to a uniformly distributed loading. Ten pairs of 20mm diameter bolts pre-tensioned to a standard value of 145kN were distributed uniformly along the beam at 600mm spacing. The sample beam had the same material properties and pre-fabricated hole sizes as those of the tests of Kwon et al. [4] in the previous section, except that a concrete compressive strength of 40MPa was used for the slab and the coefficient of friction was assumed to be 0.45.The uniformly distributed loading versus mid-span deflection response of the composite beam is shown inFig. 12. Five characteristic points are identified on the curve, viz. Point A which defines the first significant slip occurring at the end of the beam; Point B defining initiation of the bolts bearing against the slab; Point C at which initial yielding of steel beam at the bottom flange occurs; Point D defining the ultimate load on the beam; and Point E at which failure occurs. At the initial loading, the beam shows linear-elastic behaviour, with full shear interaction between the steel beam and the concrete slab along the beam, arising from the friction-grip effects at the bolts through the application of post-tensioning. Fig. 12 shows that the theoretical initial stiffness value determined by assuming that the composite beam has full interaction, agrees well with the numerical result. The section can be regarded as fully composite at this stage. At a load of 35.9kN/m (Point A), the first significant slip at the steel–concrete interface occurs at the position of the bolts closest to the end of the beam, after the friction is overcome at these locations. The behaviour of the beam passes into a new regime for which there is some slip in the regions of zero interaction, and no slip in the regions of full interaction. The regions of zero interaction occur because of the clearance between the bolt and the pre-fabricated hole that was required for the practical installation of the HSFGB shear connectors. When the load increases to 92.9kN/m (Point B), the bolts close to the support ends start to bear against the slab in their clearance holes. The response of the beam encounters another regime for which the beam has regions of partial interaction governed by the bolt bearing effects (somewhat similar to conventional composite beams with headed stud shear connectors), regions of zero interaction and regions of full interaction, which leads to a slight increase of the stiffness of the beam. Almost simultaneously, the bottom flange of steel beam at the mid-span begins to yield at a load of 96.4kN/m (Point C). At Point D, the ultimate load of the beam is reached is 142.8kN/m, which is 3.6% higher than the value predicted by rigid plastic analysis with partial shear connection [29] using material yielding stress of cross-section as shown in Fig. 12. This is attributed to the strain hardening effect of the steel beam, which is not taken into account in rigid plastic analysis. After Point D, the load–deflection curve reaches a plateau to a maximum mid-span deflection of 280.2mm at Point E, which is about 1/42 of the span; the highly ductile behaviour of the beam being demonstrated. The failure mode of the composite beam is crushing of the concrete slab at its mid-span.Fig. 13 shows the deformed shapes of half of span of the hypothetical beam at different levels of loading.The relative longitudinal slip between the bottom surface of the concrete slab and the top steel flange at different bolt positions in relation to the uniformly distributed loading is shown inFig. 14. In the half-span specimen, the pairs of bolt shear connectors were distributed uniformly from its support end to its mid-span, with the corresponding numbers from No.1 to No. 5. It can be seen from Fig. 14 that there is almost no slip at the early stage of loading, before the friction at the steel–concrete interface is overcome. The first significant slip occurs at No. 1 bolt location when the beam is subjected to 35.9kN/m. As the bolt locations approach mid-span, the loads causing them to slip increase and the rate of slip thereafter increases. At a load of 92.9kN/m, the slip at No. 1 bolt location is 2.5mm, for which the bolts bear against the slab in their clearance holes. When the maximum load on the beam is reached, almost every bolt in the beam is bearing against the slab (with slips exceeding 2.5mm). The maximum value of the slips is about 7.8mm, indicating that the HSFGB shear connectors have not been loaded to their ultimate load capacity according to push-out test results performed on them [6].Fig. 15 plots the distribution of the slip along the half-span of the beam, showing the very small slip near the mid-span compared with the larger slip close to the end of the beam.Fig. 16 depicts the distribution of the relative uplifting movement between the bottom surface of concrete slab and the top steel flange along half of span of the beam. The distribution of uplifting is similar to that of the slip but the magnitude is only 1/10 as great, which can be neglected as is common in analysis. It is noted that there is dramatically abnormal uplifting behaviour near the mid-span at 140kN/m load as shown in Fig. 16. This could be due to the minor inelastic local buckling in the compressive parts of the steel beam, which is captured by the computational model.Fig. 17 shows the evolution of the strains with the uniformly distributed loading at the mid-span of the composite beam. At early stage of loading, the strains in the two materials at the interface are same because of the full shear interaction. Using the yield stress and elastic modulus of the steel flange, the yield strain is 1.895×10−3. It can be seen that when the load increases to 96.4kN/m, steel flange yielding is initiated. With the increase of the applied load, large inelastic tensile strains are sustained by the bottom flange while the top flange experiences a small elastic compressive strain.Fig. 18 shows the strain distribution through the depth of composite cross-section at mid-span at different levels of load. It can be observed that full composite action takes place at the early stages of loading, but after the friction at the steel–concrete interface is overcome, the neutral axis moves down as the load increases up until the initiation of bolt bearing and subsequent steel beam yielding. When the beam is loaded beyond the elastic range, the neutral axis moves up toward the top flange.Fig. 19 shows the longitudinal stress distribution at the mid-span of the steel beam just before reaching the ultimate load. It can be observed that the neutral axis is located at the top flange, which coincides with the location of the plastic neutral axis predicted by rigid plastic analysis.In practice, a structural beam is usually subjected to different loading cases, specifically to a distributed load or a concentrated load. This sub-section discusses the behaviour of the composite beam under a concentrated load applied at mid-span.Fig. 20 shows the relationship between the mid-span concentrated load and the deflection. It is seen that the behaviour of the composite beam is similar to that under uniformly distributed loading, with same five characteristic points defined on the curve. However, the sequence of the occurrence of the characteristic points is different. For the uniformly distributed load case, the process is A–B–C–D–E, but for the concentrated load case, the sequence is A–C–B–D–E. The initial yielding of steel beam (Point C) occurs before the bolts begin to commence bearing (Point B), but not far away. Compared with the deflection curve shown in Fig. 12 with comparatively stiff behaviour after first slip at Point A, Fig. 20 shows more flexible behaviour after Point A because all of the bolts experience the same shear flow force and slip. The ultimate failure load is 440.3kN, which is 6.9% higher than the value predicted by rigid plastic analysis. Beam failure is also caused by the concrete crushing on the top of the slab at mid-span. The ultimate deflection is 162.3mm which is about 1/72 of the span that can be characterised as ductile behaviour.Fig. 21 shows the mid-span concentrated load versus the slip at different bolt positions. It is noteworthy that under the concentrated loading, the bolts in the shear span overcome the friction and slip almost simultaneously compared to the sequential slip under the uniformly distributed loading as shown in Fig. 14, since the interface shear flow force for the concentrated loading is constant and that for the uniformly distributed loading is linear.In order to use the finite element model to illustrate the effects of variations in the bolt spacing, the diameter of the prefabricated hole, the bolt post-tension and the dimensions of the longitudinal reinforcement on the behaviour of a composite beam with HSFGB shear connectors, parametric studies have been conducted. Four groups of beams, each of which had one variable parameter, were investigated.Table 2 presents the parameters selected to study and the range of the variables. The rest of the parameters for the beam such as the span, material and sectional properties and the uniformly distributed loading were the same as that presented in Section 4.Fig. 22 shows the variation of load–deflection curves with respect to the change in the bolt spacing. The bolt spacing considered in the study was 375, 429, 500, 600, 750, 1000 and 1500mm, which corresponds to 16, 14, 12, 10, 8, 6, and 4 pairs of HSFGB shear connectors distributed uniformly along the beam respectively. The corresponding degrees of shear connection are 1.3, 1.15, 0.98, 0.82, 0.66, 0.49 and 0.33 respectively. It can be seen that with a reduction in the bolt spacing and an increase in the number of bolts along the shear span, the load leading to the first significant slip (Point A) is increased, as are the load causing the initiation of steel beam yielding and the ultimate load on the beam. When the bolt spacing increases from 1500mm to 375mm, the ultimate load increases by 14%. In Fig. 22, the upper and lower dashed lines represented the theoretical ultimate load of composite beam with full shear connection calculated by the sectional rigid plastic analysis, and that of non-composite beam based plastic moment capacity of steel beam only, respectively. It can be observed that all the ultimate loads obtained from finite element model are located between these two lines. This indicates that rigid plastic analysis overestimates the ultimate strength of the composite beam with full shear interaction, but the difference is only less than 2%. It can also be seen that despite a composite beam with a relatively large bolt spacing having a low degree of shear connection (such as the beam with 1500mm bolt spacing and corresponding degree of shear connection of 0.33), it has a 76% increase in the ultimate strength compared to the non-composite beam, which demonstrates the efficiency of the composite action achieved by adopting HSFGB shear connectors. On the other hand, by increasing the bolt spacing, the ductility of composite beam is extended. The only exception is the beam with 1500mm bolt spacing because it fails due to bolt fracture as shown inFig. 23, instead of by concrete crushing. However, due to the high strength and slip capacity of the HSFGB shear connector, the composite beam still exhibits considerable ductility, which provokes the feasibility of using only small numbers of HSFGB shear connectors for composite beam design and retrofitting in practice.Fig. 24 shows a comparison of the load–deflection curves with variation in the diameter of the prefabricated hole. The diameters of hole chosen in the analysis were 22, 23, 24, 26, and 28mm, which were 2, 3, 4, 6, and 8mm larger than the diameter of HSFGB shear connectors Db=20mm, respectively. The holes with 26mm and 28mm diameters can be categorised as oversized holes (that are 4mm larger than Dbbut not exceeding 1.25Dbor (Db+8)mm in diameter whichever is the greater). It is worth noting that for an oversized hole, the magnitude of the bolt load should be reduced by a factor that allows for the shape and size of the hole in relation to the bolt [30], which was taken as 0.5 herein. It was shown from Fig. 24 that as the diameter of the hole changes from 22mm to 24mm, the stiffness and ultimate strength of composite beam decreases but the changes are not significant. However, large differences can be observed when the diameter of hole increases to 26mm and 28mm. The ultimate load for the beam with a 22mm diameter hole is 10% higher than that with a 28mm diameter hole, since for a composite beam with oversized holes, the bolts near the mid-span of the beam do not bear against the concrete slab to provide a fully effective connection action at the ultimate loading stage.Fig. 25 shows the load versus slip at bolt position curve for composite beam with 28 (20+8)mm diameter hole. Indeed, it can be seen that the slip at the No. 5 bolt location is only 2.6mm at the end of test, which indicates that the bolts at this location do not bear against the slab. In order to improve the behaviour of the beam with an oversized hole, the bolts may be located towards the end of the beam. For a beam with a 28mm diameter hole, for example,Fig. 26 shows the comparison of the load–deflection relationship when the bolts are considered to be concentred and uniformly distributed along 1, 0.875, 0.75, 0.625 and 0.5 of the shear span near the support end. It was found that when the shear connectors were located near the end, the ultimate strength of the beam could increases by around 10%.Fig. 27 plots the load versus slip at bolt position curve for a composite beam with a 28 (20+8)mm diameter hole after the shear connectors were redistributed to within 0.75 of the shear span near the ends. The diagram indicates that the increase in strength is because every bolt along the beam provides effective connecting action through bearing at the ultimate load stage with the redistributed configuration.The effect of a variation in the bolt post-tension on the load–deflection response of a composite beam with HSFGB shear connectors is illustrated inFig. 28. Different bolt pretensions, viz. 75, 105, 135, 145 and 165kN were applied in the group of beams. Fig. 28 shows that by increasing the bolt tension, the loads causing the first significant slip (Point A) on the beam are increased. However, the influence of a change in the bolt post-tension on the ultimate strength is less noticeable.Fig. 29 shows the load–deflection curves for a group of composite beams with different spacing of longitudinal reinforcement in the concrete slab. The longitudinal reinforcement ratios satisfy the ACI׳s minimum standard requirement [31]. It can be seen that the effect of the spacing of the longitudinal reinforcement only on the behaviour of the composite beam is negligible.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
An accurate and reliable three dimensional finite element model has been developed to investigate the behaviour of simply supported steel–concrete composite beams with HSFGB shear connectors. The commercial finite element software ABAQUS was used for the modelling, and which required strategies to be implemented in the study. The structural components of the composite beam and their interactions were fully simulated, with the material non-linearity of the concrete slab, steel beam and HSFGB shear connector and the corresponding failure criteria being taken into consideration. The quasi-static finite element analysis using the dynamic explicit procedure was adopted for the analysis. The results obtained from the finite element analyses were verified against available test results. It was shown that the developed finite element model was capable of capturing the fundamental behaviour of the composite beam accurately.Invoking the validated model, the typical mechanical behaviour of a composite beam with HSFGB shear connectors was able to be elucidated. The composite beam was shown to exhibit benign structural performance in terms of stiffness, ultimate strength and ductility under either uniformly distributed or concentrated loading. Five characteristic points on the full range load–defection curve can be defined. Parametric studies of composite beams with different bolt spacing, diameter of their pre-fabricated hole, bolt post-tension and spacing of longitudinal reinforcement were performed using the finite element model. The reduction in the bolt spacing (so increasing the number of bolts in the shear span) leads to an increase in the ultimate strength of the composite beam. A composite beam with low degree of shear connection still achieves a much higher ultimate strength than its non-composite counterpart, with considerable ductility arising from the high shear resistance and slip capacity of the HSFGB shear connectors. By maintaining a constant bolt size, increasing the diameter of the pre-fabricated hole causes a decrease in the stiffness and ultimate load of the beam, particularly for the beam with an oversized hole. Locating the shear connectors near the support is an effective approach to improve the performance of composite beams with such oversized holes.