@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Implementation and evaluation of an Asbru-based decision support system for adjuvant treatment in breast cancer

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We design and built a decision support system for the treatment of breast cancer based on Asbru.The DSS is integrated with the electronic patient record in use in a Medical Oncology Unit.We evaluated the DSS in the multidisciplinary meeting for the decision of the adjuvant treatment.The results show an agreement of nearly 90% between the meeting decisions and the DSS recommendations.We discuss the reasons for non-agreement and additional insights into the design of effective DSS.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Clinical guidelines,Decision support systems,Asbru,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The domain of cancer treatment is a promising field for the implementation and evaluation of a protocol-based clinical decision support system, because of the algorithmic nature of treatment recommendations. However, many factors can limit such systems’ potential to support the decision of clinicians: technical challenges related to the interoperability with existing electronic patient records and clinical challenges related to the inherent complexity of the decisions, often collectively taken by panels of different specialists. In this paper, we evaluate the performances of an Asbru-based decision support system implementing treatment protocols for breast cancer, which accesses data from an oncological electronic patient record. Focusing on the decision on the adjuvant pharmaceutical treatment for patients affected by early invasive breast cancer, we evaluate the matching of the system's recommendations with those issued by the multidisciplinary panel held weekly in a hospital.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The gap between practice and best evidence in delivering health care services has been known well since long ago [1]. Although not always achieved, a major goal of health care systems is the provision of safe, cost-effective and evidence-based health care [2].Clinical Practice Guidelines (CPGs), defined as “…systematically developed statements to assist practitioner and patient decisions about appropriate health care for specific clinical circumstances” [3], promise to efficiently disseminate the ever increasing amount of available clinical knowledge in order to reduce the undesired variation in the provision of care and thus to improve the quality of the care [4].In real clinical settings, expert clinicians distil CPGs into simpler and more structured clinical protocols, i.e., a comprehensive set of rigid criteria describing the steps to managing a disease adapted to the local workflow and the available resources, easily usable in practice.The main challenge in the practical use of guidelines and protocols, however, is the efficient dissemination of their content. Traditional paper dissemination of CPGs is relatively ineffective in influencing physicians’ behavior [5], and the huge effort of guideline creation may not be matched by the level of adherence to them in everyday practice [6].By delivering specific options and recommendations to the user depending on the disease and patient conditions in an automated fashion, Computerized Decision Support Systems (CDSS) can improve the compliance of clinicians with protocols, especially when integrated into the clinical workflow [7,8].The domain of oncology is a promising field of application for CDSS’, because pharmaceutical treatment protocols are largely algorithmic, yet often complex. The cure of breast cancer in particular has seen an explosion of life-saving treatment advances in recent years and an overwhelming range of therapies and drugs is available today. To decide the best therapy, the oncologist has to assess and combine several different patient and disease parameters (patient age, tumor morphology, hormone responsiveness, disease stage, etc.), a job computerized systems are particularly good at.The integration of a CDSS into the IT infrastructure of a hospital, however, remains challenging as the data available in the Electronic Patient Records (EPR) at the point of care rarely meet the information referred to in the CPG in a direct way.To ensure the best quality of care, many cancer treatments are decided in a discussion attended by experts of the different specialties involved in the cancer diagnosis and care. At the same time, many decisions are still taken by single physicians and there is demand for a support of those less familiar with the protocol in all its details.This results in the following question discussed in this paper: How close can the decision of a CDSS, based on parameters found in the EPR, resemble that made by a multidisciplinary expert panel?The OncoCure project explored this question by designing a CDSS to implement the breast cancer treatment protocols used in the Medical Oncology Unit (MOU) of the S. Chiara Hospital of Trento (Northern Italy). In a first step, we compared the recommendations produced by the CDSS with recommendations by an expert panel. The result of this comparison is presented here. In a second step, we plan to deploy the CDSS in those cases where an expert panel is not available.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we describe related work. In Section 3 we describe the protocol concerned, the OncoCure CDSS, and the modeling process. In Section 4, we discuss how we explored the capability of the OncoCure CDSS as a supporting tool in the decision process; the results of the evaluation are expounded in Section 5. Finally, in Section 6, we discuss the results and their implication for designing effective CDSS’.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A variety of factors can hinder the effective implementation of a guideline-based CDSS in real clinical settings. The lack of interoperability with the existing EPR platforms is a great challenge, but not the only one. The decisions about the appropriate clinical actions are often the result of collective discussions in multidisciplinary care teams. In such contexts, the final decision, although based on clinical guidelines, may take into account a variety of factors that may not be directly represented in the EPR.In this work, we have evaluated an Asbru-based Computerized Decision Support System in a real clinical setting to assess its capability of performing the decision made by the multidisciplinary expert panel that discusses and decides the adjuvant treatment for breast cancer patients, using the objective parameters found in an oncological EPR. While the CDSS supports all decisions along the treatment path, our evaluation focussed on the initial decision as it is the one that is most important and most completely documented in clinical practice. This is a prerequisite to the further evaluation necessary to actually demonstrate the OncoCure CDSS capability to support the full oncological careflow over an extended period of time.The system showed a high level of agreement (more than 80%) with the panel of experts in recommending the most appropriate therapy in relation to the patient conditions and tumor characteristics. In spite of the “noisy” context, in which experts of different specialties involved in the provision of care expound and discuss the issues and findings pertaining to their part of the care process, the results of this study indicate that the oncologist leading the discussion applies the breast cancer protocols formalized in the CDSS knowledge base. Consequently, the OncoCure CDSS can effectively support the panel's decision regardless the evolution of the discussion.Moreover, the matching rate does not change over a relatively long period (more than 2 years). The last important change in the recommendations for the treatment of breast cancer was made in the 11th St. Gallen conference held in March 2009, which proposed a radically different treatment selection algorithm [42]. Following those recommendations, in 2009 we were able to review and update the OncoCure CDSS knowledge models before the evaluation study [39]. The results obtained show that the oncologists’ decision criteria are quite stable: they change them according to major consensus meetings proposals; hence, the possible updating to the CDSS knowledge base can be planned.The discussion of the results with the physicians leads to additional insights into the design and development of an even more effective CDSS, which will guide the future development of the system.User–system interaction. Our experience showed that the CDSS must allow the physician to enter subjective assessments that depend on complex implicit, hard to codify knowledge, but also on individual patient preferences. We call this kind of information holistic parameters.In 40 cases, the recommendations of the OncoCure CDSS matched the panel decision without the provision of holistic information. In 12 cases, holistic parameters had to be entered. In these latter cases, however, the OncoCure CDSS recommendations could not be considered completely wrong, since the heavier treatments suggested by the system are just those recommended by the protocols in the presence of those objective parameters. The oncologist decides for a lighter treatment having some additional knowledge that cannot be expressed easily in formalized models. Moreover, for all the 12 cases, we had to provide only two holistic parameters, very few, compared to the 12 primitive parameters extracted from the EPR. As a matter of fact, in 9 cases we had to provide the holistic information that the patient was not fit for chemotherapy: for age-related problems (6 patients), for psychiatric problems (2 patients), or for a particular cancer type not responding to CT for which precise indications do not exist; three cases were comorbid patients with contraindications to anthracyclines.Domain coverage. The guidelines for treating breast cancer do not cover all the parts of the domain equally well. Although this is less of a problem for breast cancer compared to other medical domains, still for some cases indications are not clear and/or concise. Examples of this problem found in our set of cases are tumors with clinical–pathological parameters that classify them as aggressive but very small in size (<0.5cm), surgically removed when their aggressiveness had not yet had serious consequences, or with a favorable histological type. In these cases, applying implicit knowledge, the oncologist prefers to choose a treatment with less side effects, although there is no corresponding recommendation in the protocol.Global view of the disease and the parameter thresholds. In some cases, the oncologist takes a more general view of the disease than prescribed in the protocols and considers that the association of certain parameter values indicates the necessity of a treatment different from that recommended. This happens, for example, when most of the parameters are close to the threshold for selecting a stronger treatment. In other cases, when only one parameter is just beyond the threshold that would suggest a stronger treatment, the oncologist may prefer the lighter one to reduce the impact on the patient, possibly after discussing the option with the patient herself.These findings highlight the dichotomy between the continuous nature of cancer biology and its representation in an executable model that can only be discrete. In modeling treatment protocols, in fact, it is necessary to define precise mathematical rules for selecting patients eligible for the different treatments based on finite parameter thresholds that, especially for values near the thresholds, may not represent well the biological reality. Modeling this knowledge in the CDSS continues to be very difficult.In the near future, we plan to provide the system to the oncologist in the MPD to be used during those panel's discussions that, for any reason, are attended by an oncologist less expert in breast cancer. We are in the process of acquiring sufficient data to thoroughly evaluate the system for the rest of the treatment process, which spans years.The original protocol that we modelled also included the treatment of metastatic breast cancer, which is a complex domain. However, it turned out that the protocol contained more of a draft for how to proceed than a concise guideline. While our technology permits for the coverage of this area, it is not yet sure that the knowledge acquisition necessary will be justified by the user benefit, mostly because the importance of holistic parameters queried on each encounter in this treatment phase increases and thus the benefits from EPR integration diminishes.None declared.