@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Load distribution on the radio-carpal joint for carpal arthrodesis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We analyze the load distribution through the wrist joint with several arthrodesis treatments.We used the rigid body spring model method on a 3D model of the wrist joint.We found the load distributions on each carpal articular surface of radius for each treatment.Obtained results allowed comparing the different treatments and their efficacy under static conditions.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Wrist analysis,Computational model,Arthrodesis,Hand loads,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Background and objectiveCarpal fusions are useful for treating specific carpal disorders, maximizing postoperative wrist motion, hand strength, reducing pain and instability of the joint. The surgeon selects the appropriate treatment by considering the degree of stability, the chronicity of the injury, functional demands of the patient and former patient's outcomes as well. However there are not many studies regarding the load distribution provided by the treatment. So, the purpose of this study is to analyze the load distribution through the wrist joint with an arthrodesis treatment and compare the results with a normal wrist.MethodTo this end the rigid body spring model (RBSM) method was used on a three-dimensional model of the wrist joint. The cartilage and ligaments were simulated as springs acting under compression and tension, respectively, while the bones were considered as rigid bodies. To simulate the arthrodesis, the fused bones were considered as a single rigid body.ResultsThe changes on the load distribution for each arthrodesis agree with the treatment objective, reducing load transmission through a specific articular surface. For example, for SLAC/SNAC II most of the treatments reduced the load transmitted through the radioscaphoid fossae, almost by 8%. However, the capitolunate (CL) arthrodesis was the treatment that managed to keep the load transmitted through the radiolunate joint closer to normal conditions. Also, in treatments where the scaphoid was excised (3-corner, 4-corner and capitolunate arthrodesis), the joint surface between the lunate surface compensates by doubling the transmitted force to the radius.ConclusionsThe common arthrodesis for treating SLAC/SNAC II-III, reduces, in fact, the load on the radioscaphoid joint. Alternative treatments that reduce load distribution on the radiocarpal joint should be three corner and capitolunate arthrodesis for treating SLAC/SNAC-II; and for SLAC/SNAC-III four corners with scaphoid excision. On Kienbock's disease. Scaphocapitate (SC) arthrodesis is more effective on reducing the load transmission through the radiolunate and ulnolunate joints. All arthrodesis treatment should consider changes on the load transmission, and also bones’ fusion rates and pain reduction on patient's outcomes.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Under high load conditions on the wrist, the cartilage that coat the bones can be compromised, affecting the functionality of the upper extremity, as in an osteoarthritis disease. Congenital wrist abnormalities can result in radiocarpal, ulnocarpal, and distal radioulnar joint incongruities, altering load patterns and cartilage degeneration [1]. There are several causes for wrist osteoarthritis, for example, an untreated case of avascular necrosis, as in Kienböck's disease, may lead to radiocarpal arthritis [1]. Congenital wrist abnormalities can result in radiocarpal, ulnocarpal, and distal radioulnar joint incongruities, altering load patterns and cartilage degeneration [1]. Another form of wrist osteoarthritis occurs at the Scaphotrapezium-trapezoid joint, which may befall without compromising all of the other joints of the wrist [1]. In addition, traumatic events could produce wrist arthritis, e.g., an injured ligament could produce intercarpal instability, altering wrist kinematic and joint loading, and degeneration of the radiocarpal joint [1]. Scapholunate advance collapse (SLAC) and scaphoid nonunion advance collapse (SNAC) are the most common patterns of wrist osteoarthritis (SNAC is caused by a trauma, whereas SLAC wrist may result from pseudogout and can appear without a history of injury), both of these are osteoarthritic diseases that involve an arthritic changes on the radioscaphoid fossae, and evolve until the capitolunate and radiolunate joint is affected [2]. Partial intercarpal arthrodesis are useful for treating specific carpal disorders [3]. Fusion of specific carpal bones can maximize postoperative wrist motion and hand strength while reducing pain and instability of the joint [3]. Hence, this arthrodesis has remained as an important alternative for the hand surgeon as a salvage procedure for patients with a wrist pathology [4], but there is still controversy regarding the appropriate surgical technique [5].The hand surgeon must take into account several factors when selecting an appropriate treatment option; the degree of stability, the chronicity of the injury, and functional demands of the patient [6]. The decision is also based on former patients’ outcomes, which provide useful data on pain reduction, final mobility, and fusion rates [2,3,5,7–10]. There are several studies on biomechanical behavior and force/pressure distribution on the articular surfaces for a normal wrist and one with arthrodesis [11,12]; one approach uses ex vivo specimens of the joint and pressure sensitive films [13]. Computational models are also applied to explore biomechanical behavior of joints contact forces and are useful to determine the efficacy of various surgical procedures and their performance [12].Traditionally, biomechanical computational models of the wrist have been based on finite element analysis (FEA), a useful methodology that, however, requires computational power, which limits its clinical applicability [11,12]. Depending on the problem at hand, more simplified analyses can be performed based on appropriate assumptions to determine solutions, e.g., rigid or deformable bones [12]. This is the basis of surface contact modeling (SCM) and rigid body spring modeling (RBSM); both of them without the need for a complex volumetric analysis [12]. With SCM it is possible to evaluate the joint mechanics from surface contact mechanics data alone [12]. On RBSM, which is an effective low computational cost approach, force distribution on static and kinematic analysis can be achieved when deformations are small [11]. This discrete element analysis method is useful as a tool for comparative purposes (normal vs. pathological, or pre- vs. post-op) when the aim of the study is analyze the contact area or contact stress profiles [14].Therefore, the aims of this study is to compare and evaluate the biomechanical effect of different wrist arthrodesis, and correlate this results to possible clinical outcomes; thereby establishing a relationship between surgeon choices and treatment results. For this end, a 3D-computational rigid body spring model – RBSM of the wrist joint under static equilibrium conditions was developed. Then the force distribution on the radiocarpal joint was analyzed and compared between treatments applied for the same disease. This study outlines predictions on the radiocarpal joint mechanics, and may be useful as a complement when weighing the suitable treatment option for a patient.3-D rigid body spring models (RBSM) of the hand were built following the methodology provided by a former study [15]. Then this model was modified in order to simulate different arthrodesis treatments on the wrist, and determine the force distribution on the radius articular surface. The results of each treatment were compared with those in normal conditions. The multi-body dynamic analysis software RecurDyn (Software based on CAE tools for multi-body dynamic analysis-MBD, by Functionbay, Inc. Seoul, Korea [16]) was used to analyze the models on static conditions.The geometry of the wrist was the same as in Márquez et al. [15], which was from the computer tomography of a living subject's (adult male with type II lunate) wrist, who volunteered and gave informed consent. The wrist was in a neutral pose with no alteration or disease on his joint and which was subsequently processed in Mimics 10.01 (Materialize, Belgium); the study was approved by the University's Ethics Committee. Then the meshes of the bones were imported on RecurDyn (Functionbay, Inc., Seoul, Korea), considering each bone as an independent rigid solid body. For anatomical references, check the hand and wrist bone anatomy shown in Fig. 1.A total load of 136.4N was distributed on the metacarpal distal tips, along each longitudinal axis, from distal to proximal. The magnitude of load applied on the metacarpal I, II, III, IV and V were 21.5N, 34.3N, 42.2N, 25.9N and 18.1N (Fig. 2), respectively, as in former studies [15,17–20], whose works also determined the load distribution on the radio-carpal joint. These values were based on theoretical calculations from reported literature [21–23], and simulate grasp maneuver of the hand [17,18], although the modeled position of the hand not necessarily reflects this movement. Cartesian components of the forces applied to each metacarpal were calculated based on the global system (Fig. 2), with origin on the average height of the metacarpals and near the palmar part of the radius, with the x-axis pointing medially, the y-axis pointing dorsally, and the z-axis on the proximal to distal direction.The boundary conditions were applied the same manner as in Márquez et al. [15]; the Ulna fixed on its proximal end, the Radius could only move over the arm's transverse plane, Metacarpals only moved on their longitudinal axis direction, and carpal bones were restricted to only move and rotate along the hand dorsal-palmar plane (Fig. 2).The cartilage was modeled as in Márquez et al. [15], i.e., as discrete elements (springs) distributed in the joints surfaces. The springs were placed so that their length would be the minimum possible, and perpendicular as possible to both surface. Also their stiffness was determined considering expression (1)[15,24,25]:(1)ki=(1−ν)E(1−2ν)(1+ν)*Aihiwhere hiis the average distance between the elements connected for a joint i, E is the cartilage Young's modulus (E=5MPa) [26–29]; v is the Poisson's modulus (v=0.45) [26,27]; Aiis the average area of all the interconnected elements for a joint. On the other hand, the force of each spring j of the joint i was proportional to changes in its length and calculated by Eq. (2):(2)Fj=ki(L0−L1)where kiis the spring constant, L0 is the resting length and L1 the final length. All models had elements with average area of0.18mm2, with a total of 14,410 cartilage springs for the normal wrist model.The triangular fibrocartilage complex (TFCC) was assumed to be interacting with the triquetrum, and modeled as springs connecting the ulna with the lunate and the triquetrum. The properties of this cartilage complex were computed in a similar way as those of the other articular cartilage on the wrist joint.The ligaments were modeled as in Márquez et al. [15], one spring per ligament, and the anatomic insertions of the 50 modeled ligaments on previous anatomical studies [30–32], as well as their stiffness [17,30], Table 1. The resting length of the ligaments was considered as the same when placed on the insertion points with the hand in neutral position, and their wrapping on the bones was not considered.On this study, the arthrodesis used as treatment for several the osteoarthritis diseases. This was achieved by considering the bones fused as a single body, by merging their meshes as a single .STL file format, and then importing these in RecurDyn as a single body. The cartilage and ligaments springs between the fused bones were not considered (Fig. 3).Below is shown the abbreviations used to refer to each treatment:-3Corner: Fusion of the lunate, capitate and hamate bones.3CornerNoS: Fusion of the lunate, capitate and hamate bones with scaphoid excision.SCL: Fusion of the scaphoid, capitate and lunate bones.4Corner: Fusion of the lunate, capitate, hamate and triquetra bones.CL: Fusion of the capitate and lunate bones.CLNoS: Fusion of the capitate and lunate bones with scaphoid excision.4CornerNoS: Fusion of the lunate, capitate, hamate and triquetra bones with scaphoid excision.SL: Fusion of the scaphoid and lunate bones.RSL: Fusion of the radius, scaphoid and lunate bones.SC: Fusion of the scaphoid and capitate bones.LTri: Fusion of the lunate and triquetral bones.STT: Fusion of the scaphoid, trapezium and trapezoid bones.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
On this study models of the radiocarpal joint were created, and conditions of arthrodesis treatments were simulated applying the rigid body spring model method (RBSM). Twelve arthrodesis treatments were simulated. The arthrodesis for treating SLAC/SNAC disease stages II–III, tends to reduce the load on the radioscaphoid joint, which is the purpose of the treatment.When scaphoid excision is needed, three corner and capitolunate arthrodesis should be considered for treating SLAC/SNAC-II; and for SLAC/SNAC-III four corners with scaphoid excision. For Kienbock's disease, triscaphe (STT) and scaphocapitate (SC) arthrodesis are suggested as a treatment, being the latter more effective on reducing the load transmission through the radiolunate and ulnolunate joints. All arthrodesis treatments should consider changes on the load transmission, as well as the bone fusion rates and the pain reduction of patient's outcomes.