@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Machine learning algorithms and forced oscillation measurements to categorise the airway obstruction severity in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Our aim was to develop automatic classifiers to help the categorisation of airway obstruction level in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).We used different techniques, including k-nearest neighbour (KNN), random forest (RF) and support vector machines with linear and radial basis function kernels.Feature selection methods were also used to improve the performance of the classifiers.Our findings revealed that KNN and RF classifiers improved categorisation accuracy.Our study and findings will contribute to improvement of tracking COPD progression and guiding therapy.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Clinical decision support,Classification,Artificial intelligence,Airway obstruction severity,Forced oscillation technique,Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The purpose of this study was to develop automatic classifiers to simplify the clinical use and increase the accuracy of the forced oscillation technique (FOT) in the categorisation of airway obstruction level in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The data consisted of FOT parameters obtained from 168 volunteers (42 healthy and 126 COPD subjects with four different levels of obstruction). The first part of this study showed that FOT parameters do not provide adequate accuracy in identifying COPD subjects in the first levels of obstruction, as well as in discriminating between close levels of obstruction. In the second part of this study, different supervised machine learning (ML) techniques were investigated, including k-nearest neighbour (KNN), random forest (RF) and support vector machines with linear (SVML) and radial basis function kernels (SVMR). These algorithms were applied only in situations where high categorisation accuracy [area under the Receiver Operating Characteristic curve (AUC)≥0.9] was not achieved with the FOT parameter alone. It was observed that KNN and RF classifiers improved categorisation accuracy. Notably, in four of the six cases studied, an AUC≥0.9 was achieved. Even in situations where an AUC≥0.9 was not achieved, there was a significant improvement in categorisation performance (AUC≥0.83). In conclusion, machine learning classifiers can help in the categorisation of COPD airway obstruction. They can assist clinicians in tracking disease progression, evaluating the risk of future disease exacerbations and guiding therapy.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
According to the World Health Organisation, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a serious global health problem. COPD is the fourth leading cause of death worldwide, with the mortality rate estimated to rise to the third-highest position by 2030 [1]. The main pathologic feature of COPD is chronic airway obstruction [2,3]. The majority of patients follow a path of disease progression that tracks the severity of airway obstruction. Thus, the assessment of airway obstruction severity is crucial to evaluate the risk of future exacerbations and to guide therapy [2,3]. This assessment is usually performed by spirometry; however, spirometry requires a considerable degree of effort and cooperation from patients. Elderly patients, those with an inability to comprehend, or those with serious medical conditions usually have difficulty in completing this test successfully [4]. There is an agreement in the literature that research into new technologies to improve non-invasive testing of lung function should be a priority [5–8].The Forced Oscillations Technique (FOT) allows for a simple, sensitive analysis of the respiratory system [9,10]. This method consists of applying small sinusoidal pressure variations to stimulate the respiratory system at frequencies higher than that of normal breathing and measuring the flow response. The FOT is performed during normal breathing, requiring only minimal cooperation and no forced expiratory manoeuvres. Thus, the FOT can be used in situations when standard measurement of lung function by spirometry is difficult, impractical or not feasible. The FOT characterises the respiratory input impedance (Zrs) and its two components, respiratory system resistance (Rrs) and reactance (Xrs), addressing different properties from that evaluated by forced expiratory flow. Indeed, this technique is likely complementary to spirometry [4]. This method has been successfully used in research environments for detailed studies of respiratory biomechanics [9–11] and represents the current state-of-the art in assessing lung function [12]. Despite the advantages of the FOT in terms of its non-invasiveness and lack of dependence on patient cooperation, the FOT has not become a standard methodology for the routine assessment of lung function. In the context of a diagnostic framework, although obtaining respiratory impedance values is easy, the interpretation of resistance and reactance curves and the derived parameters requires training and experience, and it is a difficult task for the untrained pulmonologist.To simplify the diagnostic use of the FOT, our group initially developed clinical decision support systems based on machine learning (ML) algorithms that were able to help diagnose COPD [13,14]. Continuing this research, we developed automatic classifiers able to help diagnose early smoking-induced respiratory abnormalities using the FOT [15]. These classifiers also contributed to the improvement of diagnostic accuracy [13–15]. However, these studies are not focused on the assessment of airway obstruction severity, which is of utmost importance in the therapy of COPD [2,3].Based on these promising results and limitations, we hypothesised that the use of ML algorithms associated with FOT measurements would help in the categorisation of airway obstruction severity in patients with COPD. There has been no research dedicated to this problem to date.In this context, the aims of this study were (1) to evaluate the capability of the FOT parameters alone to correctly differentiate between different COPD conditions; (2) to investigate several ML algorithms to help the categorisation of airway obstruction severity in patients with COPD; and (3) to identify the best configuration for this task.The remainder of this article is organised as follows. The healthy and COPD patient groups we examined are characterised in Section 2, along with a description of the measurement protocol. This section also presents the evaluated classifiers and describes the methods used for performance evaluation, classifier comparison, and experimental design. The third section presents the results, and the fourth section discusses the results with respect to the search for the best classifier and parameters for the categorisation of airway obstruction severity in the different stages of COPD. Finally, Section 5 summarises the main outcomes of this investigation and proposes future steps in this research topic.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We designed and evaluated several classifier systems to develop a clinical decision support system to assist in the categorisation of the degree of airway obstruction in patients with COPD. The use of the FOT parameters alone can only help in the identification of patients with high levels of airway obstruction. KNN and RF classifiers were the most robust classifiers, reaching values that allow accurate clinical diagnosis and identifying early respiratory obstruction (levels 1 and 2). In addition, the developed system may be helpful for simplifying the use of the FOT in routine assessments of lung function. These classifiers could enhance the medical services for patients with COPD, a potentially lethal disease.Future plans include (1) contributing to the diagnosis of airway obstruction in asthma, (2) applying interpretable models to make explaining the diagnosis achieved by the classifiers easier and (3) improving the understanding and management of COPD and its exacerbations by integrating ML algorithms and home monitoring using the FOT and telemedicine services.None declared.