@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Helical buckling and postbuckling of pre-stressed cylindrical tubes under finite torsion

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Bifurcation and postbifurcation of a tube under torsion for a residually-stressed elastic body using the finite element method.The material model is given by a residual-stress dependent nonlinear elastic constitutive law in terms of invariants.The dependence of bifurcation and postbifurcation behavior of tubes under torsion on residual stresses is illustrated and compared with results when there is no residual stress.The numerical results obtained for the (thin) tubes are compared with the (analytical) solution for the torsion of an infinitely long circular cylindrical membrane to validate the methodology.The numerical analysis implemented in this paper will help to promote use of non-linear methods of design in modern engineering.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Finite elasticity,Elastic tube deformation,Torsional instability,Residual stress,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper we analyze bifurcation and postbifurcation of a finite deformation boundary-value problem for a residually-stressed elastic body using the finite element method. In particular, the torsion of a circular cylindrical tube subject to radial and circumferential residual stresses is studied. The material model is given by a residual-stress dependent nonlinear elastic constitutive law in terms of invariants. Firstly, the numerical methodology able to capture the elastic stability of tubes under torsion is developed without including residual stress. The bifurcation point is initially estimated reducing the original problem to an algebraic eigenvalue problem. A nonlinear analysis is performed to capture the postcritical behavior. Secondly, prestress is introduced. The residual-stress dependent nonlinear elastic constitutive law is implemented in a finite element code. The dependence of bifurcation and postbifurcation behavior of tubes under torsion on residual stresses is illustrated and compared with results when there is no residual stress. Analytical solutions involve a complicated mathematical machinery that deals with specific material models and loads as well as, usually, a perfect geometry. Here, we provide a highly flexible approach that is implemented in a commercial finite element code, which allows this methodology to be easily used on other problems under different loading conditions and geometries. The numerical results obtained for the (thin) tubes are compared with the (analytical) solution for the torsion of an infinitely long circular cylindrical membrane to validate the methodology.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the last few years, the onset of bifurcation as well as the (quasi-static) propagation of different instability modes in thin-walled as well as thick-walled cylinders subject to several boundary conditions has been the focus of different investigations in the context of large (strain) deformation stability theory. Analytical solutions are usually found for relatively simple cases and they involve a complicated mathematical machinery. Postcritical behavior requires the use of theoretical analysis and numerical simulation together with experimental work to describe qualitatively and quantitatively the mechanics of nonlinear phenomena. It is clear that the combination of numerical and analytical approaches is a necessary tool to completely characterize and understand the bifurcation at hand. This has been successfully done for some problems including bulging instabilities (see [1–5]). Here, we deal with tubes under a finite torsion. As it was illustrated in [3,4] for the bulging mode, our attention is focused not only on the possibility to capture the buckling behavior but also on the possibility to implement the methodology in a commercial finite element code. We provide that approach and capture bifurcation and postbifurcation of tubes under finite torsion using the finite element commercial code Abaqus, although, suffice it to say, other commercial codes can be used. We focus on (helical) buckling of pre-stressed tubes under a finite torsion. Nevertheless, the methodology at hand can consider other boundary conditions that may give rise to other type of bifurcations. This clearly will promote the use of non-linear methods of design in modern engineering.Extension and torsion of circular cylindrical tubes as well as solid cylinders under large deformations have been analyzed by several authors for both incompressible and compressible isotropic materials (see [7,8,9,10–12], to name a few). Some general results for transversely isotropic materials (both incompressible and compressible) can be found in [13,17,14]. In particular, it has been shown that only certain directions of transverse isotropy are compatible with this deformation.Lately, residual stress has been included in the analysis. This has been motivated by several reasons. Firstly, residual stresses are often introduced in rubberlike materials during manufacturing processes affecting the material behavior (see, for example, [15]). Secondly, in soft biological tissues, residual stresses are produced during growth and remodeling and have an influence on the mechanical behavior of many organs such as arteries (see [18], for instance). Indeed, the effect of residual stress on the material behavior needs to be not only captured but also better understood.In the context of artery walls, residual stresses are often accounted for by the so-called opening angle method, which shows that when a ring of artery is cut it opens. This indicates that there are residual stresses and it has been employed in considering the torsion of a residually-stressed tube in, for instance, [16,17] among other papers.A more general approach to model residual stress regards it as a stress that is in equilibrium in the absence of external loads, see [19]. Following that work, a residually stressed transversely isotropic hyperelastic material in terms of invariants was provided by Hoger [20-22]. This formulation has been further developed to the case without a preferred direction and used to examine extension and torsion of a residually stressed solid cylinder in [23]. Furthermore, Merodio and Ogden [27] investigate the problem of pre-stressed tubes under a finite torsion where the pre-stress is introduced using the formulation exploited in [23]. The effect of residual stresses on the constitutive law can be regarded as a generalized structure tensor from which certain invariants can be formed.There are a few studies dealing with torsional instabilities in nonlinear elasticity (see [24–26]). Very recently, [24] considered the elastic stability of pre-stressed tubes under a finite torsion. Axial and circumferential pre-stretches were considered but theses pre-stresses were not modeled within the framework of residually stressed hyperelastic materials in which the material model is given in terms of invariants. The purpose of the present work is to extend the analysis of [27] into the analysis of the elastic stability of pre-stressed tubes under a finite torsion. Furthermore, we develop a numerical approach that is implemented in a finite element code. We capture both (helical) bifurcation and postbifurcation. In summary, two main goals guide this work. On the one hand, the elastic stability analysis of tubes under torsion. On the other hand, the development of a numerical methodology able to handle residual stress. This framework opens new possibilities in both scientific and professional practice.We use for simplicity the neo-Hookean model as a prototype form of strain energy function. The (analytical) torsional bifurcation solution for this model follows from Equation 66 (the so-called Riccati bulk equation) in [24], that has to be used with the appropriate (boundary) conditions collected in Table 2 of that paper. Indeed, this is a hazardous problem. To provide a computational framework able to study bifurcation and more importantly postbifurcation, instead of using [24], we turn to an analysis available in commercial finite element codes: the linearized eigenvalue methodology. This strategy allows, firstly, to make the paper self-contained, secondly, allows to compare different finite element solutions for the onset of bifurcation and, thirdly, allows to develop the framework within commercial finite element codes. The linearized eigenvalue methodology is shown to be a valid approach for the problem at hand because the torsion rates associated with the onset of bifurcation are sufficiently small. This is not the case for tubes of significant thickness. For more on the eigenvalue analysis and finite deformations, we refer to [28] which deals with growth-induced instabilities.The structure of the paper is as follows. The first few sections focus on torsion without pre-stress. The purpose is the development of a numerical methodology able to analyze torsion. In Section 2 the solution for the torsion of an infinitely long circular cylindrical membrane made of a neo-Hookean material which retains its circular cylindrical shape is presented. This allows us to, even further, keep the analysis self-contained and compare the results obtained from three different analyses. For simplicity, we consider tubes with one fixed end while the other end rotates with respect to its axis that do not change length with the deformation. A numerical procedure to analyze bifurcation and postbifurcation of hyperelastic cylinders under finite torsion is developed in Section 3. Firstly, the numerical procedure focuses on the onset of buckling, which is helical buckling. Secondly, a nonlinear static analysis able to capture postbifucation is performed. We compare the numerical results with the results given by the solution established in Section 2 to validate the numerical methodology. Our attention is focused not only on the possibility to obtain an appropriate methodology but also on the possibility to implement that numerical methodology in a commercial finite element code. For that purpose, we specifically focus on the finite element code Abaqus/Standard. In Section 4, the numerical methodology is used for various geometrical parameters (different lengths and thicknesses), which completes the analysis without prestress.In Section 5 residual stress is introduced as well as a particular form of residual stress appropriate for the considered geometry. The form of the strain-energy function in terms of invariants is given. More in particular, two prototype forms of strain-energy function that include dependence on the residual stress are introduced. These prototypes are implemented in Abaqus as a subroutine to be used for incompressible hybrid elements. The numerical methodology developed in Section 3 is used to analyze the elastic stability of pre-stressed cylindrical tubes subject to a finite torsion. Radial and circumferential residual stresses are considered. The dependence of the bifurcation results on the strength of the residual stress is studied. Finally, some conclusions are given in Section 6.The geometry of the problem at hand is given as follows. We consider a circular (thin-walled) tube of diameter D and thickness T in the reference configuration. The length of the cylinder is L and may be finite or infinite (L⪢R). Therefore, the right circular tube occupies the region(1)A≤R≤B,0≤Θ≤2π,0≤Z≤L,in its undeformed reference configuration where(R,Θ,Z)are cylindrical coordinates. In particular, we consider thatD=2Band thatT=B−A. The position vector of a material point can then be written(2)X=RER(Θ)+ZEZ,whereER,EΘandEZare unit vectors in the indicated directions.The tube is subject to a finite deformation given by a finite torsion. Furthermore, we consider that the cylinder remains a circular cylinder and that the length of the cylinder does not change with the deformation. In this deformed configuration the cylinder is described by(3)x=rer(θ)+zez,a≤r≤b,0≤θ≤2π,0≤z≤L,where r,θ=Θand z, are cylindrical coordinates in this configuration ander,eθandezare unit vectors in the indicated directions.Throughout next sections we consider the tubes just described. Nevertheless, and for the moment, we analyze a cylindrical membrane subjected (basically) to finite torsional deformation and obtain the analytical solution. This completely characterizes a baseline problem prior to the onset of bifurcation, which will guide our numerical analysis of bifurcation and postbifurcation in the next sections. This allows to keep the paper self-contained. Under these circumstances, the deformation gradient F that has components∂xi/∂Xαtakes the form(4)F=FrRer⊗ER+FθΘeθ⊗EΘ+ez⊗EZ+γeθ⊗EΘwhere γ is related to the finite torsion rate, and FrRandFθΘare stretches in the radial and azimuthal directions, respectively. In summary, we are taking a long and very thin tube with one fixed end while the other end rotates with respect to its axis without changing its initial length. The matrix of components of the deformation gradient is(5)F=(FrR000FθΘγ001).The incompressibility conditiondetF=1impliesFrR=1/FθΘ. The angle of rotation (torsional deformation) per unit (axial) length is(6)αL=2γDFθΘ.We further consider that the cylinder is made of isotropic, incompressible nonlinearly elastic material. In the context of nonlinear elasticity, the constitutive equations are given in terms of strain-energy functions that depend on certain deformation invariants. For simplicity, we take the strain energy density functionW=c(I1−3)where c is a (modulus) constant and I1 is the trace of the right Cauchy–Green strain tensorC, which is obtained usingC=FTFbeingTthe transpose. The value2cis the constant representing the shear modulus μ of the isotropic material in the undeformed configuration. The Cauchy stress tensorσis(7)σ=F∂W∂F−p1,where p is a Lagrange multiplier associated with the incompressibility constraint and1is the identity tensor. The Cauchy stress tensor particularized for the strain energy function at hand is(8)σ=2c︸μFFT−pI.Using (4) the Cauchy stress tensor can be written as(9)σ=(μFθΘ2−p000μFθΘ2+μγ2−pμγ0γμ−p).The value of p is obtained using the condition thatσrr=0. In addition, since no internal pressure is applied, it follows thatσθθis zero from which one can get the hoop stretchFθΘ. In particular, this givesFθΘ2−1/FθΘ2+γ2=0, which can be easily solved to obtain(10)FθΘ2=−γ2+γ4+42.The Cauchy stress is written as(11)σ=μ(00000γ0γ1−2γ4+4−γ2).Furthermore, the axial force is given byN=πσzzTD, where σzzis negative while the torque is(12)M=πσθzTD2FθΘ2=πμγTD2γ4+4−γ222.This completes the analytical solution for a cylindrical membrane. It gives the behavior prior to bifurcation for the asymptotic case of an infinite length and a circular membrane. During the numerical computations different values associated with the geometry can be taken. This includes various thicknesses as well as various lengths. The numerical solutions will depart from the solution for the membrane case. Nevertheless, the analytical solution will guide and validate the FE model.We have developed a finite element model to capture bifurcation and postcritical behavior of tubes under torsion. We describe here the main aspects.The geometry has been meshed with three-dimensional hybrid linear solid elements (C3D8R in the Abaqus notation). In general, the solution to a problem that deals with incompressible material behavior cannot be obtained in terms of the displacement history only, since a purely hydrostatic pressure can be added without changing the displacements. The hybrid formulation available in Abaqus solves this problem removing this behavior in the system. More in particular, the hybrid formulation treats the pressure stress as an independently interpolated basic solution variable which is coupled, using a Lagrange multiplier, to the displacement solution through the constitutive theory and the compatibility condition. In addition, this formulation avoids the problem of volume (strain) locking, which occurs if the finite element mesh cannot properly represent incompressible deformations.For the purpose of the discussion, we consider a cylinder withL/D=20andT/D=0.05. The number of elements in the thickness direction is 4. In addition, we take 48 elements in the hoop direction and 100 elements in the longitudinal direction. The total number of degrees of freedom is around 94,000. A detailed view of the mesh is shown in Fig. 1.One of the ends of the cylinder is fixed during the analysis. Kinematic coupling is enforced at the other end of the cylinder to allow rotation and to eliminate longitudinal extension of the cylinder. This is controlled by a node at the center of that end of the cylinder. Constraints are imposed to this particular node that prevents all its degrees of freedom except a (imposed) rotation about the cylinder axis.The model is analyzed implicitly using two procedures in Abaqus/Standard. Firstly, a critical buckling load analysis (an eigenvalue buckling analysis) is carried out. Secondly, a nonlinear static analysis that captures postbuckling is performed. Both approaches are described in the following sections.In this procedure the behavior of the structure is assumed to be almost linear up to the buckling load. The linear buckling analysis assumes the existence of a bifurcation point. This approach is useful for stiff structures, where the prebuckling response is almost linear. The structure is stiffly resisting the applied loads (torque and axial load) by means of the membrane forces in the shell prior to bifurcation.In this approach, the problem is simplified to an algebraic eigenvalue problem of the form(K0+λKΔ)v=0, whereK0is the elastic stiffness matrix at the base state andKΔis the differential stiffness matrix, the scalar λ scales reference loads to get the actual applied loads and it is also called load parameter or load multiplier andvis the mode shape of the incremental deformation at the critical state, i.e., the buckling mode shape.In our case, using the geometry described previously, we get a (helical) buckling mode for a rotation α obeyingDα/L=0.069and a torque M obeyingM/(μD2T)=0.046. On the other hand, using (6) and (10) one getsγ=0.034and using (12) the buckling moment is obtained asM/(μD2T)=0.053. The difference between the analytical solution and the numerical one is around 15%. This is mainly due to the thickness in the FEM. If thickness is taken half of the value, i.e.T/D=0.025, then, buckling is obtained for a rotationDα/L=0.023and a torqueM/(μD2T)=0.017. The analytical solution using (12) givesM/(μD2T)=0.018, which is close to the numerical solution. For these small deformationsFθΘ=1is a good assumption. The small deformation values confirm that the solutions of the eigenvalue method are accurate. Note that if the length of the cylinder is very long then the displacements will also be large even for small values of γ. Nevertheless, the internal energy can be properly handled.Fig. 2shows the first two buckling modes. The first one occurs forDα/L=0.069, as it has been already illustrated previously, and the second mode corresponds toDα/L=0.075. In the figure, both modes are displayed with a multiplicity order of 2 due to the free rotation along the axis of the buckling mode. In addition, and due to symmetric considerations, opposite senses of rotation give the same absolute value of rotation for bifurcation. Furthermore, the second buckling mode corresponds to the first buckling mode for a cylinder ofL/2. It follows that both buckling modes converge when the length of the cylinder tends to infinity.A nonlinear static simulation is performed. In particular, a gradual increment of rotation of one of the ends of the cylinder while the other end remains fixed is carried out. The analysis shows that there is a solution controlled by the rotation beyond the onset of bifurcation. Therefore, it is not necessary to use an arc length method like the modified Riks procedure available in Abaqus, although, indeed, this is other possible methodology. A geometric imperfection is introduced to avoid a strict bifurcation point and obtain a smooth solution path during postbifurcation. We introduce an imperfection scaling the first eigenmode described in the previous section with a maximum magnitude of 10−4 times the radius. To determine the bifurcation state the displacement of two points in the middle cross section of the cylinder are tracked during the analysis. The angle between the two points is 90°. Bifurcation is estimated when the relevant displacement history of both points differ. The displacements of these two points are plotted in Fig. 3. In this figure, the bifurcation point is shown to beDα/L=0.068, which is in agreement with the value 0.069 obtained using the eigenvalue analysis. The deformation for several rotations are shown in Fig. 4. Various deformed cross sections, which are along the length of the cylinder, are shown in Fig. 5for a rotationDα/L=0.092.Finally, values of torque and axial force vs rotation are given in Figs. 6 and 7, respectively. The analytical solution obtained in Section 2 is also shown for comparative purposes. The thickness of the cylinder in the FEM has a strong influence on the results and it is the main cause of the difference between the analytical solution (obtained for a membrane) and the finite element solution.Several cases have been analyzed using both the eigenvalue approach and the nonlinear simulation methodology to capture bifurcation of circular cylinders with different geometries. The results are summarized in Table 1.The first row corresponds to the study that has already been documented in the previous sections. The length of the cylinder in that case makes possible to consider that the numerical results must follow the analytical ones for an infinitely long cylinder. If length is taken half of the first case, rotation and torque associated with bifurcation are greater than their corresponding values for the first case, as it should be expected. This is shown in the second row of Table 1. The results for bifurcation obtained using the linearized buckling problem and the nonlinear simulation are in agreement, although their corresponding ones for very long cylinders show better agreement.If thickness is doubled with respect to the thickness of the first case then the rotation associated with bifurcation also is greater than the critical rotation for the first case. This is due to the increase in the flexural stiffness (in our case, with the cube of the thickness). The eigenvalue prediction and the nonlinear simulation approaches are in agreement. For the range of thicknesses we have considered, a good estimation of the rotation associated with bifurcation for long cylinders is(13)DαL≈11(TD)1.7.Values of torque vs rotation are shown in Fig. 8for two cylinders under torsion with thickness-diameter ratios of 0.10 and 0.05 whileL/D=20in both cases. Several imperfections are used, where the total magnitude of the imperfection is the radius multiplied by the imperfection at hand. It follows from the figure that the maximum torque is slightly higher than the critical torque associated with bifurcation in all cases. The (resisted) rotation beyond bifurcation is considerably higher for cylinders with smaller thicknesses, which shows ductile behavior. The final state during each simulation corresponds to the value of the rotation at the last converged configuration. It is a numerical fact, but physically it means that beyond that final state the evolution of the mechanical system may be discontinuous. In our simulations, we find that there is a sudden decrease in the tube stiffness. It follows that the structure can no longer resist the applied torque. It may be possible that a sudden jump in the rotation is needed to find a new configuration able to resist the torque. This process would be a dynamic one, which is outside the relevant range of the static analysis. More experimental data are necessary to guide these analyses.The elastic stability of tubes under a finite torsion has been analyzed lately in terms of different pre-stretches [24]. We develop here a different approach to the one used in [24] to treat prestress. In particular, we consider that the material model is given by a residual-stress dependent nonlinear elastic constitutive law that depends on a number of invariants (see [23]). This methodology can be implemented in a commercial finite element code, which opens the possibility of being widely used by engineers in many designs. Suffice it to say that the modeling of residual stress within this theoretical framework has the potential to be used in different problems with different boundary conditions and geometries.In what follows, we briefly describe, firstly, the methodology to introduce initial stresses in the constitutive law, secondly, the implementation of the constitutive law in the commercial finite element code at hand, and, thirdly, a particular form of residual stress appropriate for the considered geometry. Finally, we apply the methodology to torsional instabilities.In the literature, three main methodologies are used to introduce residual stresses (prestresses in the initial configuration). These are:1.To define a global virtual free stress configuration and to deform the structure from that virtual configuration to the initial configuration. This is the method followed to reverse the opening angle experiment performed in arteries.To define the material behavior with respect to a virtual free stress configuration (similarly to the previous method) and the initial stress distribution. At each material point the stretch tensor producing the prestress is computed, which defines the reference configuration at each material point. This is a methodology used, for instance, by Abaqus to define prestresses and it is available for isotropic materials.To define the strain energy as a function of the prestress. This formulation is more general than the previous ones and does not make use of a virtual configuration.In this framework, the strain energy function is of the formW(C,σ0), whereσ0is the initial stress in the reference configurationBr(see [27] for details). It is assumed that the residual stress is not accompanied by intrinsic couple stresses, so that it is symmetric (σ0T=σ0), and, in addition, the equilibrium equation(14)Divσ0=0,must be satisfied, whereDivis the divergence operator with respect to the reference configuration. It follows that there is no distinction between nominal or Cauchy stress for the residual stress since the deformation is measured from the reference configuration. There are no surface tractions andσ0must satisfy the boundary condition(15)σ0N=0on∂Br.Note thatσ0is a residual stress in the sense of Hoger [19] and it is distinguished from other types of initial stress, which may be associated with surface tractions.The particular strain energy function we consider is(16)W≔c(I1−3)+f2(I5−trσ0)+1−f4(I6−trσ0),whereI5≔tr(σ0C)andI6≔tr(σ0C2). In this case the small deformation shear modulus is not2c. Furthermore, residual stresses are necessarily non-uniform and geometry dependent, and the elastic response of a residually-stressed material body is therefore inhomogeneous. We refer to [27] for further details. The valuef∈{0,1}. If f=0, then (16) does not include the invariant I5 while if f=1 it follows that (16) does not include the invariant I6.The material model has been implemented in Abaqus as a subroutine (UMAT) to be used for incompressible hybrid elements. The user must provide the Cauchy stress tensorσ. In particular, the deviatoric stress must be provided for a fully incompressible user material (see [6]). The strain energy function (16) is rewritten asW¯(C¯,σ0), whereC¯≔I3−1/3CwithI3=detC=J2. The incompressibility condition is then imposed by the finite element code using a Lagrange multiplier.Now, the stress is given by(17)σ¯=2JF∂W¯∂CFT,where(18)∂W¯∂C=∂W¯∂Ii∂Ii∂C,with repeated index i following Einstein׳s summation convention.To render the Cauchy stress tensor in explicit form use is made of the formulas(19)∂I1∂C=1,∂I3∂C=I3C−1,∂I5∂C=σ0,and∂I6∂C=σ0C+Cσ0.It follows after some simple manipulations using (19) that(20)∂W¯∂C=I3−1/3(c1+fσ02−cI1C−13−fI5C−16)+(1−f)I3−2/3(14∂I6∂C−I6C−16).In addition, the tangent modulus tensor for invariant-based strain energy functions must be provided. The consistent (algorithmic) tangent modulus tensor in the finite element code we are using is(21)CJ≔1J∂(Jσ)∇J∂D,where(Jσ)∇Jis the Jaumann rate of the Kirchoff stress andDis the deformation rate defined as the symmetric part of the velocity gradientL=∂v/∂x. More specifically, the deformation rate is decomposed asL=D+Wand the (asymmetric) spin tensorWis used to define the Jaumann (objective) rate of a spatial tensor as(22)(•)∇J=∂(•)∂t−W·(•)−(•)·W.The consistent JacobianCJcan be computed as(23)CijklJ=Cijklc+12(δikσlj+δilσkj+δjlσik+δjkσil),where(24)Cijklc=4JFiαFjβFkγFlδ∂2W¯∂C2|αβγδ.The following formulas are needed:(25)∂C−1∂C|ijkl=12(Cik−1Clj−1+Cil−1Ckj−1)and(26)∂(σ0C+Cσ0)∂C|ijkl=12(δikσ0lj+δilσ0kj+δjlσ0ik+δjkσ0il),where it has been taken into account that the fourth order tensors act on symmetric second order tensors.More explicitly, using (20), (25) and (26) one gets that(27)∂2W¯∂C2=I3−1/3[−c3(1⊗C−1+C−1⊗1)−f6(σ0⊗C−1+C−1⊗σ0)+(cI19l+fI518)C−1⊗C−1−(cI13+fI56)∂C−1∂C]+(1−f)I3−2/3[I69C−1⊗C−1−16(C−1⊗∂I6∂C+∂I6∂C⊗C−1)−I6∂C−1∂C+14∂2I6∂C2],which completes the necessary details to implement the constitutive law at hand in the finite element code.The initial stresses that we consider were given in [27] and are(28)σ0RR=β(R−A)(R−B)and(29)σ0ΘΘ=β[3R2−2(A+B)R+AB],where β is the strength of the residual stress with units of stress per square length. It can be non-dimensional takingβ¯=cβ/(RT). This is an axisymmetric stress field withσ0zz=0.In particular, ifσ0zz=0, then any possible initial stress field has to obey the non-trivial component of the equilibrium equation (14), which is the radial equation(30)dσ0RRdR+1R(σ0RR−τ0ΘΘ)=0,with boundary conditions(31)σ0RR=0onR=A,B.We just note that (28) and (29) obey (30) since(32)d(Rσ0RR)dR=σ0ΘΘ.Numerically some iterations might be needed to establish the initial equilibrium of the residually-stressed tube. To enhance convergence decreasing the time step the strength of the residual stress β is linearly increased from zero to its actual value.To evaluate the influence of prestress on the elastic stability of tubes under torsion the methodology developed is applied to a cylinder withT/D=0.1andL/D=20. We introduce an imperfection with a magnitude of 10−3. To capture the initial stress field 8 elements are taken in the thickness direction and 48 in the hoop direction. In addition, 100 elements are used in the longitudinal direction. We further consider thatβ¯=1. Residual stresses are generated during a first step. Only one increment with two iterations were necessary to establish the equilibrium. The von Mises residual stress is plotted in Fig. 9. The radial and hoop residual stresses along the thickness direction are shown in Fig. 10. These stresses are high compared with the maximum value of the von Mises stress at the onset of (helical) bifurcation without prestress, which can be estimated from the results reported in Section 4 as(33)σmises=30.127·2cD2T︷Mπ(D4−(D−2T)4)2/32︸torsionalinertiaD2=0.38c.More specifically, it is easy to establish thatσ0mises/σmises=2.2whereσ0misesis the maximum value of the von Mises residual stress.Five cases are studied: one with no residual stress, and four more with prestresses corresponding to the combination of the values off∈{0,1}andβ¯∈{−1,1}. Values of the torque vs rotation are shown in Fig. 11for all cases. The value of rotation for (helical) bifurcation in each case is presented in Table 2. The quantitative effect of the relatively high prestresses that have been considered on the rotation and torque associated with the onset of (helical) bifurcation is moderate according to the results. Nevertheless, a comparison between the results allows us to conclude the following. A positive value ofβ¯, which implies tensile residual hoop stress in the outer wall of the tube, is associated with a critical rotation and torque for bifurcation that are smaller than the critical rotation and torque for bifurcation when there is no residual stress. On the other hand, a negative value ofβ¯, which implies compressive residual hoop stress in the outer wall of the tube, is associated with a critical rotation and torque for bifurcation that are greater than the critical rotation and torque for bifurcation when there is no residual stress. Finally, we note that the critical values for bifurcation when there is no residual stress are affected by both f=0 and f=1. Nevertheless, it is less affected by the invariant I5 (f=1) than by the invariant I6 (f=0). This is expected. As it has been previously described for Fig. 8, the final state during each simulation corresponds to the value of the rotation at the last converged configuration.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A numerical methodology able to capture bifurcation and postbifurcation of tubes under a finite torsion has been developed. This analysis involves a complicated mathematical machinery when it is carried out analytically. The finite element method is a helpful tool to handle and tackle this problem. Firstly, the problem is simplified to an algebraic eigenvalue problem to estimate the bifurcation modes. Secondly, a nonlinear analysis is performed to capture postbifurcation. We have shown that without prestress forD/L≥20and values of the thickness obeying0.05≤T/D≤0.10, which are of interest in arterial wall applications, the critical rotation is given approximately byDα/L≈11(T/D)1.7.To further show the capability of this procedure, residual stresses have been included. A general methodology to deal with stresses that are in equilibrium in the absence of external loads (prestresses) has been used and implemented in a commercial finite element code. This framework gives an additional procedure to handle prestresses and we believe it opens new possibilities in engineering practice since it can be easily implemented in commercial finite element codes. Prestresses have been shown to modify the results obtained when there is no residual stress mainly quantitatively although they may also be different qualitatively for other problems. Furthermore, a word of caution should be included regarding the eigenvalue analysis since it gives rise to the imperfection used later on during the nonlinear simulation. In general, it is possible that the pre-stress modifies quantitatively and qualitatively the analysis, changing the mode associated with the onset of bifurcation. In that case, a sensitivity analysis of the different variables involved can be crucial to determine the different critical modes and the imperfection that needs to be included.We have studied tubes with one fixed end while the other end rotates with respect to its axis without changing its initial length. The bifurcation captured with the methodology at hand is the so called helical bifurcation. Other boundary conditions give rise to other modes of bifurcation. The procedure that has been developed can be easily applied to other boundary conditions.