@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Prediction of fragmentation and experimentally inaccessible material properties of steel using finite element analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A fracture strain of 1×10−5 was found to initiate fragmentation of AISI 4340 steel leading to element deletion.The pressure loading profile can greatly influence the fragmentation behavior.Meshing procedures have a significant effect on the fragmentation behavior and the von Mises stress (tetrahedral mesh vs. brick mesh).Quadratic tetrahedral elements predict much higher stresses near the surface of the ring.Stress predictions during fragmentation is highly dependent on the distance from a newly deleted element.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Fragmentation,Finite element analysis,Johnson–Cook,High strain-rate,Lagrangian analysis,Eulerian analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
High strain-rate properties of materials are needed for predicting material behavior in extreme environments. The demand for high strain-rate properties continues to increase for commercial and military applications as the operating environments become more extreme, such as fragmentation, impact and explosions. To reduce time and expense, Finite Element Analysis (FEA) is being used to simulate these behaviors and reduce the number of experiments needed to characterize how a material performs at high-strain-rates. A finite element model for predicting fragmentation behavior of a high strength steel ring was developed using Abaqus Computer Aided Engineering (Abaqus) software. AISI 4340 steel, a low alloy Cr–Ni–Mo steel, was used in the analysis. The results of the finite element model were compared to the results from CTH, a two-dimensional Eulerian shock physics hydro-code. CTH was also used to develop a transient loading curve for the Abaqus model. The fracture strain in the model was adjusted to induce failure in the ring. Element deletion was used to model failure. A fracture strain less than 1×10−5 was needed to initiate fragmentation. The effects of mesh type and model defects were also investigated.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Material fragmentation at high strain-rates is difficult to characterize experimentally. Typically, a test article or projectile is subjected to a high-strain-rate that results in fragmentation. The fragments are collected and sorted into bins. Several fragments are examined under a microscope to determine failure characteristics, making this process very time consuming and expensive. In the past 60 years, many empirical material models have been developed to predict failure at high strain-rates to correlate with experimental results [1–4]. Most of these models rely on high strain-rate data obtained using the Split Hopkinson Pressure Bar (SHPB) or other high strain-rate testing. The SHPB method measures stress pulse propagation through a metal bar to predict the stress–strain relationships of a material [5,6]. There are shortcomings to this method as it requires many assumptions to be made, and loses accuracy when materials undergo tension testing at strain-rates above 103s−1[7,8]. Components can be designed to improve fragmentation behavior and identify failure initiation sites. The models help identify failure modes, and reduce the number of samples that need to be tested. For this effort, a model was developed that incorporates high strain-rate data from previous SHPB experiments in a constitutive material model to predict failure.A three dimensional solid model of a ring was developed using SolidWorks computer aided drafting (CAD) software [9]. The ring has a diameter of 81mm, a wall thickness of 7mm, and a notch depth of 3.5mm. The notch is 5.7mm tall with a 60 degree taper at the top. The ring was imported into Abaqus for analysis. The ring was partitioned into smaller sections to allow for the use of the automatic meshing function in Abaqus which is needed to utilize all mesh types when modeling high-strain-rate behavior. Partitioning in Abaqus was done by the three point method to develop a partitioning plane. The SolidWorks model of the ring is shown inFig. 1.The material properties used in the model of the ring were those of austenitized, quenched, and tempered AISI 4340 steel determined by Johnson and Cook [1,2]. The hardness of this steel was reported to be Rockwell C30, which would correlate to a mainly pearlitic microstructure. The standard, strain-rate independent material properties for this alloy are found inTable 1[1,2,10].High strain-rate properties were added to the model using the Johnson–Cook (J–C) plasticity model [1,2] This empirical model contains five experimentally determined constants and is commonly used to predict behavior of ductile materials under high strain-rate conditions such as explosive loading. This model is available in the Abaqus software by default [1,2,11]. It defines the von Mises flow stress of a material as a function of the power law relationship of plastic strain and strain hardening, strain-rate, and thermal softening. The J–C model is shown in Eq. (1)[1,2].(1)σ=[A+Bεpn][1+Clnεp⁎][1−THm]εp=equivalentplasticstrainεp⁎=normalizedeffectiveplasticstrainrateTH=homologoustemperature=(T−Troom)(Tmelt−Troom)The values of A, B, C, n, and m are experimental constants that are determined using uniaxial tension tests and the SHPB tests. Tmelt and Troom are the melting temperature of the alloy and the ambient air temperature, respectively. The material constants used in the J–C model and are found inTable 2[1,2].The J–C equation was used to predict the room temperature von Mises flow stress at six different strain-rates shown inFig. 2. The results indicate that the von Mises flow stress increases as the strain-rate increases. Strain is only plotted to 0.4 strain due to the fact that the Johnson–Cook model only predicts a linear increase in strength at large amounts of strain. This linear increase at large strains is due to the effect of the exponential power law factor in the equation.The J–C strength model was not the only constitutive material model needed in this analysis. The J–C fracture model was used to initiate the failure of the elements through the use of a fracture strain value. Fracture strain can be measured easily under uniaxial tension at quasi-static strain rates using an extensometer, but at high-strain-rates this may not be possible. Modeling a complex structure at various fracture strain values maybe the only way to identify the proper fracture strain. In modeling, once an element reaches the fracture strain value, it is deleted from the equation. The J–C fracture model does not follow a typical nucleation and growth model. It is dependent on strain, strain-rate, temperature, and pressure [1,2]. The benefits are that it is less complicated to use, and most of the parameters can be found using adjusted quasi-steady state data. The J–C fracture model is also built directly into Abaqus, and is fully compatible with the J–C strength model. The J–C fracture model is defined in Eq. (2)[2],(2)εf=[D1+D2expD3⁎σ⁎][1+D4lnε̇⁎][1+D5T⁎]whereεfis the equivalent strain to fracture, D1−–D5 are material constants,ε̇⁎is the dimensionless strain-rate, and T is temperature. Material constants for AISI 4340 from Johnson-and Cook are shown inTable 3[2].The first step was to start with an axisymmetric model of the ring to determine how large of a displacement was needed to initiate failure based on fracture strain. The fracture strain was introduced into the finite element solver using the J–C fracture model [11]. The values of fracture strain were arbitrarily chosen from very small strains to large strains, which necessitates multiple model runs. These values were input into the damage evolution option built into the Abaqus software. This option requires a displacement at failure input. This was set to the predicted fracture strain. Axisymmetric modeling allows for fast calculation times to determine rough values for overall von Mises stress, displacement and strain-rate before implementing a more calculation intensive 3D model. A dynamic, explicit analysis with an analysis time of 60μs was chosen for all models to cover the entire high-strain-rate event. An instantaneous pressure of 1.2GPa was applied to the inner side of the ring to simulate explosive loading conditions in the axisymmetric models and initial 3D modeling [12,13]. This value was chosen to give both a baseline value for evaluation, but also a maximum pressure load found in some high explosives. The model was constrained on top and bottom faces of the ring to prevent model runaway. Runaway is a condition where the model is under-constrained and does not perform as predicted. This boundary condition was propagated to all subsequent models. Once the baseline behavior was determined using axisymmetric modeling, a 3D model was developed. A time dependent loading curve was investigated using 3D modeling only.Two different methods that are commonly used to analyze dynamic material systems are the Lagrangian and Eulerian [14]. The difference between these two methods is that in a Lagrangian method, the mesh is associated with a certain section of the part, whereas in the Eulerian method, the mesh is associated with a larger computational domain and the part is not assigned to the mesh, but moves freely throughout the meshed domain. The advantage of using a Lagrangian analysis is that the mesh is fixed to certain coordinates on the part, making adding boundary conditions and contact parameters easy [15]. In contrast, in the Eulerian analyses, the material is constantly moving through the computational domain of the system, leading to greater difficulty in assigning boundary and contact parameters [15]. Eulerian models excel when high strain is expected due to the retention of the mesh geometry. Mesh distortion is a concern in Lagrangian finite element models and there are re-meshing techniques that are typically used to address this issue. The downside of having a fixed mesh in an Eulerian analysis is that the overall model domain must be much larger to prevent material from leaving the computational domain, which increases calculation time [15]. In this work, the Eulerian CTH code is used to determine the loading profile for the Lagrangian Abaqus 3D model. The deformation behavior is also compared between the two models.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this work, axisymmetric, 3D Lagrangian, and 2D Eulerian codes were used to model fragmentation of a high strength AISI 4340 steel ring. Several materials and finite element related conclusions have made. The materials related conclusions for this effort are:•A fracture strain of 1×10−5 was found to initiate fragmentation of AISI 4340 steel leading to element deletion around 30–40μs in all cases examined.Loading profile can greatly influence the fragmentation behavior as shown in the transient and steady-state casesThe peak von Mises stress found in both loading cases was approximately 1.5GPa.The Johnson–Cook model only predicts linear increases in plastic stress past the yield strength of the material, and does not account for material relaxation effects.Tensile high-strain-rate data is not readily available at these strain-rates, making this type of dynamic modeling very difficult.The finite element related conclusions for this effort are:•Meshing procedures have a significant effect on the fragmentation behavior and the von Mises stress. A linear brick mesh and linear tetrahedral mesh were found to provide the best agreement in stresses and fragmentation when reporting nodal stresses.Stress prediction during fragmentation is highly dependent on the distance from a newly deleted element.Brick elements provided the fastest convergence with the least amount of elements, decreasing calculation times.The outer three nodes of the quadratic tetrahedral elements greatly over-predicted the von Mises stress at the surface of the model compared to the linear tetrahedral elements and the linear brick elements.Stress over-prediction in quadratic elements is due to the addition of mid-nodes and reduced stress averaging across the element.There was good agreement with regards to the von Mises stress in axisymmetric and 3D Lagrangian models.Three dimensional fragmentation effects are lost in axisymmetric models.Axisymmetric modeling can be used to develop parameters for 3D models, reducing calculation times.Convergence in this modeling only was successful after mesh refinement and modifying time stepping to extremely small increments.