@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A Gini-based unit root test

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A Gini-based unit root test is developed.The test relies on the semi-parametric Gini regression.Includes an in-depth numerical comparison of the Gini-based test and existing tests.Simulations indicate the superiority of the Gini-based test in some design settings.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Time series analysis,Unit root tests,Gini regression,Bootstrap,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
A Gini-based statistical test for a unit root is suggested. This test is based on the well-known Dickey–Fuller test, where the ordinary least squares (OLS) regression is replaced by the semi-parametric Gini regression in modeling the AR process. A residual-based bootstrap is used to find critical values. The Gini methodology is a rank-based methodology that takes into account both the variate values and the ranks. Therefore, it provides robust estimators that are rank-based, while avoiding loss of information. Furthermore, the Gini methodology relies on first-order moment assumptions, which validates its use for a wide range of distributions. Simulation results validate the Gini-based test and indicate its superiority in some design settings in comparison to other available procedures. The Gini-based test opens the door for further developments such as a Gini-based cointegration test.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In most of the literature dealing with time series analysis, underlying dependencies of the time series are modeled based on variance and covariance as measures of variability and association, respectively. This research develops a unit root test that is based on the Gini Mean Difference (hereafter GMD) as an alternative index of variability. The GMD index shares many properties of the variance, but the former can be more appropriate for distributions that depart from normality or symmetry. This measure is less sensitive to extreme observations than the variance because it takes into account both the values of the random variable and its ranks. In addition, the GMD is defined solely under first-order moment assumptions. To clarify the notations, we distinguish between population parameters and estimators by using upper-case letters in the population version and lower-case letters in the sample version.We refer to a first-order univariate autoregression, denoted by AR(1), which satisfies(1)Yt=ϕ0+ϕ1Yt−1+εt,whereϕ0is the constant of the model,ϕ1is the parameter of the model andεtis an independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) innovation process. Ifϕ1=1, thenYtis nonstationary. Testing for stationarity by detecting a unit root is an important task in the analysis and modeling of time series. Dickey and Fuller (1979) developed a procedure to test for the presence of a unit root (hereafter referred to as the DF test). The main objective of the DF test is to determine whetherH0:ϕ1=1or, alternatively,H1:ϕ1<1.The distribution of the appropriatet-statistic, based on applying the OLS estimator for the nonstationarity parameter, is nonstandard and cannot be analytically evaluated. Dickey and Fuller (1979) used the Monte Carlo simulation method to tabulate the percentiles of the DFt-statistic distribution based onεt∼i.i.dN(0,σε2)innovations. The DFt-statistic is(2)DFt−stat=ϕˆ1OLS−1SˆD(ϕˆ1OLS),whereϕˆ1OLS=cov(Yt,Yt−1)cov(Yt−1,Yt−1)is the OLS estimator forϕ1,SˆD(ϕˆ1OLS)=(σˆε2(∑t=1nYt−12)−1)0.5andσˆε2is the least squares estimator.Extensive attempts to improve this test and to find alternative or superior tests followed. Leybourne (1995) suggested using the maximum of DFt-statistics based on applying the OLS regressions twice, looking both forward and backward at the series. The critical values for the test are obtained in a manner similar to that performed in the original DF test discussed above using Monte-Carlo simulation. Elliott et al. (1996) and Ng and Perron (2001) suggested a class of unit root tests that are based on generalized least squares detrending of the series and then applying the DF test on the detrended data.An important development in unit root tests includes the use of resampling methods for calculating critical values; see, for example, a survey of such methods in Palm et al. (2008). A first residual-based bootstrap version of the DF test was proposed by Ferretti and Romo (1996). Later, Moreno and Romo (2000) used a bootstrap procedure based on the LAD estimator, and more recently, Moreno and Romo (2012) suggested a family of unit root bootstrap tests for the infinite variance case.Another important development appears in Muller and Elliott (2003), who revealed that the initial condition(Y0)has a non-negligible influence on the finite sample performances of unit root tests. In general, it is difficult to rule out, a priori, the existence of small or large values ofY0. Elliott and Müller (2006) suggest statistics whose power is less sensitive to the size ofY0. Harvey and Leybourne (2005) and Harvey et al. (2009) recommend a union of test rejection decision rules to improve the performances of the statistical procedure.Hallin et al. (2011) propose a class of distribution-free rank-based tests for the null hypothesis of a unit root that takes into account several initial values for the series. They use three test statistics that are based on a choice of a reference density function, which need not be the unknown actual density of the innovations. The first test statistic is based on the Gaussian reference density and is defined asTvdW(n)=1n∑t=1n(tn+1−12)Φ−1(Rtn+1), whereRtare the ranks of the incrementsΔYt=Yt−Yt−1andΦdenotes the standard normal distribution. This statistic is also known as the normal or van der Waerden score. The second test statistic is based on the double-exponential distribution (Laplace or sign test scores),TL(n)=1n∑t=1n(tn+1−12)sign(Rtn+1−12). The third test statistic is based on the logistic distribution (Wilcoxon scores),TW(n)=π3n∑t=1n(tn+1−12)((1−n+1−RtRt)/(1+n+1−RtRt)). These three test statistics are denoted here as HAW-vdW, HAW-Laplace and HAW-Wilcoxon, respectively. Asymptotic results and simulated quantiles for these statistics for several sample sizes are given in Hallin et al. (2011). The results for finite samples indicate that for a broad range of non-zero initial values and for a variety of heavy-tailed innovation densities, the suggested rank-based tests outperform a variety of unit root tests.Rank-based tests, which intrinsically involve some loss of information of the real values, are expected to perform well under heavy-tailed distributions. In this paper, we propose a Gini-based unit root test that relies on both the real values and the ranks, while avoiding loss of information.The GMD is an alternative index of variability that is used in this research instead of the variance. The most prevalent presentation of the GMD index is the expected absolute difference between two independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) variablesX1andX2(Gini, 1914). Formally, the GMD ofXis defined as(3)GX=E|X1−X2|.Alternatively, the GMD can be expressed as a special case of a covariance, i.e., four times the covariance ofX, a random variable, andFX(X), its cumulative distribution function (Lerman and Yitzhaki, 1984). Formally,(4)GX=4COV(X,FX(X)),whereFX(X)is the cumulative distribution function ofX.The GMD index shares many properties of the variance, but the former can be more informative for distributions that depart from normality or symmetry. Both measures are based on weighted averages of the distances between each pair of i.i.d. variables. The fundamental difference is the method used to measure the distance. The GMD distance function is referred to as the “city block” distance, which allows one to move only in the vertical and horizontal directions. The variance distance function is Euclidean, which allows one to move in any desired direction.As mentioned, the GMD takes into account both the values of the random variable and its ranks, and hence, it is less sensitive to extreme observations than the variance. In addition, because Gini requires only first-order moment assumptions (Stuart and Ord, 1987), the GMD-based method is valid for a wide range of distributions and might be more appropriate for heavy-tailed distributions than variance-based methods. For the properties of the Gini covariance, see Schechtman and Yitzhaki (1987, 1999); Serfling and Xiao (2007); Yitzhaki (2003); Yitzhaki and Schechtman (2013).In this research we use the semi-parametric Gini regression method for AR(1) modeling. The semi-parametric Gini regression is a GMD-based regression method that relies on substituting the variance-based expressions in the OLS regression by the equivalent GMD terms (Olkin and Yitzhaki, 1992). Because it is based on imitation of the OLS formulas, this method enables the replication of some of its concepts. This type of Gini regression coefficient can be referred to as “covariance-based” because it is based on the properties of the covariance. It is semi-parametric because it does not require a specification of the functional form of the model. The regression coefficient can be expressed as a weighted average of slopes defined between each pair of adjacent observations of the explanatory variable (Yitzhaki, 1996).Let(Y,X)be a continuous bivariate random variable with expected valuesμYandμXand finite variancesσY2andσX2, respectively (finite variances are needed only for the OLS). Let the regression model beY=E(Y|X)+ε. The model is approximated by the following linear model, which needs to be estimated:Y=α+βX+ε. The OLS simple regression coefficient is(5)βO=COV(Y,X)COV(X,X).Replacing each covariance by the corresponding Gini covariance, we get that the simple Gini regression coefficient is(6)βN=COV(Y,F(X))COV(X,F(X)),whereFX(X)is the cumulative distribution function ofXandNindicates that we are dealing with the semi-parametric version of the GMD regression coefficient (Olkin and Yitzhaki, 1992). Note that in the numerator we have a covariance (betweenYandFX(X)), while the denominator is the GMD of the explanatory variable(X)divided by 4. It is worth mentioning that Eq. (6) can also be interpreted as an instrumental variable OLS estimator, where the instrumental variable isF(X).The estimator of the simple Gini regression coefficient can be expressed as(7)bN=cov(Y,R(X))cov(X,R(X))=∑i=1n(Yi−Ȳ)(R(Xi)−R̄(X))∑i=1n(Xi−X̄)(R(Xi)−R̄(X)),where the population covariance is replaced by the sample covariance, andF(X)is replaced by the rank ofXdivided byn, i.e.,R(X)=1n∑i=1nI(Xi⩽X)(based on a sample of sizen) (Olkin and Yitzhaki, 1992). In addition,R(Xi)=1n∑j=1nI(Xj⩽Xi),R̄(X)=∑i=1nR(Xi)/n,X̄=∑i=1nXi/nandȲ=∑i=1nYi/n. The estimator ofβNis a ratio of twoU-statistics. Therefore, it is a consistent estimator forβNand for large samples, its distribution converges to the normal distribution (Hoeffding, 1948).To estimate the standard deviation of the Gini regression coefficient, the classical jackknife estimation procedure (delete-1 jackknife) is used, as detailed in Yitzhaki and Schechtman (2013) and following Efron (1982). LetbN=bN((Y1,X1),(Y2,X2),…,(Yn,Xn))be the estimator of the Gini regression coefficient based on the bivariate sample of sizen, and let(8)b(i)N=bN((Y1,X1),(Y2,X2),…,(Yi−1,Xi−1),(Yi+1,Xi+1),…,(Yn,Xn))be the estimator of the Gini regression coefficient computed from a bivariate sample of size(n−1)after deleting theith pair of observations(Yi,Xi)(i=1,2,…,n)from the original bivariate sample. Then letb(⋅)N=1n∑i=1nb(i)N. The estimated standard deviation of the estimator is given by(9)SˆD(bN)=n−1n∑i=1n(b(i)N−b(⋅)N)2.The structure of the paper is as follows: Section  2 presents a Gini-based framework for modeling AR(1). Section  3 develops the Gini-based unit root test. Section  4 presents the finite sample performances of the suggested test and a detailed comparison to various existing unit root tests. Section  5 presents and discusses the conclusions.In this research we apply the semi-parametric Gini regression for AR(1) modeling. Using this method leads to two possible (Gini) regression coefficients, looking forward and backward at the series (to be defined below). In this case, beyond the applicability of the procedure under merely the first moment of the process, it offers additional information by comparing the resulting two coefficients. As such, it enables us to examine whether looking forward and backward at the series provides similar results.Generally, in the existing methodology two AR(1) regression coefficients are available, looking backward and forward at the series (Box and Jenkins, 1976). Using OLS, they areϕ1OLS1=COV(Yt,Yt−1)COV(Yt−1,Yt−1)andϕ1OLS2=COV(Yt−1,Yt)COV(Yt,Yt), respectively. Clearly, under homoscedasticity the covariance does not change with time, i.e.,COV(Yt,Yt)=COV(Yt−1,Yt−1); therefore,ϕ1OLS1=ϕ1OLS2.Following the semi-parametric Gini regression approach (Olkin and Yitzhaki, 1992), each covariance is replaced by the corresponding Gini covariance and the first Gini regression coefficient is(10)ϕ1G1=COV(Yt,F(Yt−1))COV(Yt−1,F(Yt−1))(Carcea and Serfling, 2012).The second Gini regression coefficient is(11)ϕ1G2=COV(Yt−1,F(Yt))COV(Yt,F(Yt)),which is not necessarily equal to the first. Only if the distribution of(Yt,Yt−1)is exchangeable up to a linear transformation willϕ1G1=ϕ1G2(e.g., ifεtare multivariate normally distributed random variables, thenϕ1G1=ϕ1G2). However, the two Gini regression coefficients are not necessarily equal.To estimate the Gini regression coefficients (Eqs. (10) and (11)), we imitate the OLS estimator by replacing each sample covariance with a sample Gini covariance. The estimators using the Gini method are(12)ϕˆ1G1=cov(Yt,R(Yt−1))cov(Yt−1,R(Yt−1))and(13)ϕˆ1G2=cov(Yt−1,R(Yt))cov(Yt,R(Yt)),where the bivariate observations used in the numerator of Eq. (12) are the members ofS1={(Y2,Y1),(Y3,Y2),…,(YT,YT−1)}; and for Eq. (13),S2={(Y1,Y2),(Y2,Y3),…,(YT−1,YT)}. For the denominators, in Eq. (12)Y1,…,YT−1are taken into account, and in Eq. (13)Y2,…,YTare taken into account. An alternative estimator ofϕ1G1based onL-comoments is given in Carcea and Serfling (2012). As the sample length increases, differences between the two alternative estimators become negligible. The backward and forward Gini regression coefficients (ϕˆ1G1andϕˆ1G2) are not necessarily equal. A comparison between them is informative in the context of examining whether looking forward and backward at the series gives similar results or whether time is reversible. This issue is treated thoroughly in Shelef and Schechtman (2011) and in Shelef (2013). It is possible to develop a test statistic for a unit root that combines the information from both the backward and forward Gini regression coefficients. Intuitively, as such a combined test is based on the additional measure(ϕˆ1G2), it is expected to result in superior performances. However,ϕˆ1G2is the Gini regression coefficient when looking forward in time, and therefore, it is less informative in the context of estimating the coefficient of the AR(1) model, which is generated backwards.A weak/covariance stationary process is defined as a process in which the mean, variance and autocovariances are unaffected by a change of the time origin. Using the Gini covariance, this definition can be extended to define a process in which the mean, GMD and Gini autocovariances are time-independent (are unaffected by a change of the time origin). The following conditions should hold for allt,t−s:1.a constant mean, i.e.,E(Yt)=E(Yt−s)=μa constant GMD for allYt, i.e.,G(Yt)=G(Yt−s)=COV(Yt,F(Yt))=COV(Yt−s,F(Yt−s))=GY.first direction:GCOV(Yt,Yt−s)=COV(Yt,F(Yt−s))=COV(Yt−j,F(Yt−j−s))=γG1(s)second direction:(14)GCOV(Yt−s,Yt)=COV(Yt−s,F(Yt))=COV(Yt−j−s,F(Yt−j))=γG2(s),In this section, we propose the Gini-based unit root test. The test is similar to the residual-based bootstrap test proposed by Ferretti and Romo (1996), but we replace the OLS regression with the Gini regression when estimating the AR(1) coefficient. The critical values for the test are found specifically for each user’s sample using a bootstrap procedure. The bootstrap relies on resampling the unrestricted residuals, that is, without imposing the null hypothesis (following the results in  Paparoditis and Politis, 2005). As mentioned, the initial condition can substantially influence the power properties of unit root tests in practice. Consequently, we examine the sensitivity to initial values, following Elliott and Müller (2006) and other recent papers (see, for example, Harvey et al., 2009; Hallin et al., 2011), taking into account several initial values. The suggested Gini methodology is a rank-based estimation that takes into account both the variate values and the ranks. Therefore, it combines the robustness of rank-based estimation with the sensitivity to the variate values, avoiding the loss of information that occurs in purely rank-based tests.Consider the following AR(1) modelYt=ϕ0+ϕ1Yt−1+εt, whereεt(t=1,2,…)is a sequence of i.i.d. random variables withE(εt)=0andϕ0=0(the process has no drift). We use asymmetric distributions and heavy-tailed distributions for the distributions ofεt(the normal distribution is used as a benchmark).The Gini-based DF (GDF) test statistic according to the Gini regression method is(15)GDF=ϕˆ1G1−1SˆD(ϕˆ1G1),whereϕˆ1G1is the first Gini regression estimator, as detailed in Eq. (12). The standard deviation is obtained using jackknife, deleting one pair of(Yt,Yt−1)each time, based on Eq. (9). We examined several other optional test statistics that rely on Gini regression. One optional test statistic was based on replacingϕˆ1G1withϕˆ1G2in the above equation. Another option was the maximum between the first and second test statistics (based onϕˆ1G1andϕˆ1G2), which resembles the test statistic suggested by Leybourne (1995). However, these alternative test statistics achieve relatively inferior finite sample performances for most design settings. Therefore, they are not presented here (although results are available in  Shelef, 2013).The bootstrap procedure for finding the critical values for the Gini-based test statistic specified above follows Li and Maddala’s (1996) guidelines for bootstrapping unit root tests and is similar to the procedure described in Ferretti and Romo (1996). The procedure addresses whether the sample comes from a stationary process based on critical values that were calculated specifically for the sample (without knowing in advance whether the sample comes from a stationary process and without assuming a specific distribution of innovations). In the first step, we use the original sample ofTobservationsY1,Y2,…,YTto calculate the residuals from the Gini regression, denoted asetG1.Next, a sample ofTvalues is drawn with replacement from theTcalculated residuals. These values are the bootstrapped residuals, which are denoted ase1G1∗,…,eTG1∗. The new bootstrapped series is then calculated underH0:ϕ1=1, so that(16)YtG1∗=Yt−1G1∗+etG1∗,whereY0G1∗is the median of the original sample. The Gini-based bootstrapped test statistic is(17)GDF∗=ϕˆ1G1∗−1SˆD(ϕˆ1G1∗),whereϕˆ1G1∗is the Gini regression estimator for the AR(1) model (Eq. (12)), calculated based on the bootstrapped sample, i.e.,ϕˆ1G1∗=cov(Yt∗,R(Yt−1∗))cov(Yt−1∗,R(Yt−1∗)).Finally, the sampling distribution ofGDF∗is employed to imitate the distribution of the test statistic underH0:ϕ1=1and to obtain critical values. The above procedure of generating starred innovations is repeatedMtimes and producesMvalues ofGDF∗. Based on these values, we denote the percentileswα∗as the largestw, such that the proportion of the obtainedMvalues ofGDF∗that are smaller than or equal towα∗is at most(α⋅100%). The decision rule at the significance levelαis to rejectH0if(18)GDF<wα∗.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper develops a Gini-based unit root test that relies on the semi-parametric Gini regression to estimate the coefficient of the AR(1) model and on the residuals bootstrap to find critical values for the test. The performances of the Gini-based stationarity test are examined for Normal, Laplace, Skew-normal and Cauchy distributions, which represent a variety of symmetric and asymmetric distributions, both with and without heavy tails.When comparing the Gini-based test to other existing tests, the Gini-based test statistic does not have an advantage whenY0=0(compared to  Ng and Perron, 2001) or when the innovations are drawn from the Cauchy distribution (compared to  Hallin et al., 2011). ForY0≠0, however, the Gini regression coefficient has much larger power in most design settings. A possible explanation is that the Gini-based autoregression method takes into account both the ranks and the real values of the observations, whereas rank-based methods omit the real values. Thus, the tests suggested by Hallin et al. (2011), which take into account only the ranks, have larger power for the very heavy-tailed Cauchy distribution. On the other hand, the Gini-based test statistic, which takes into account not only the ranks, has larger power for distributions that are less heavy-tailed, including Normal and Laplace (symmetric) and Skew-normal (asymmetric) distributions.Future research should broaden the Gini-based framework to test for cointegration of nonstationary time series based on the Gini regression coefficients and on the bootstrap to find critical values.