@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Modelling the prestress transfer in pre-tensioned concrete elements

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Three numerical models were developed to simulate prestress transfer in pre-tensioned concrete and validated against previous experiments.A closed-form expression is proposed to predict the transmission length and stress distribution along the tendon.A parametric study was conducted on factors affecting the prestress transfer.The use of thick wall cylinder theory in the modelling of prestress transfer was examined.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Prestressed concrete,Transmission length,Transfer length,Bond,Modelling,Finite element,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Three models were developed to simulate the transfer of prestress force from steel to concrete in pre-tensioned concrete elements. The first is an analytical model based on the thick-walled cylinder theory and considers linear material properties for both steel and concrete. The second is an axi-symmetric finite element (FE) model with linear material properties; it is used to verify the analytical model. The third model is a three dimensional nonlinear FE model. This model considers the post-cracking behaviour of concrete as well as concrete shrinkage and the time of prestress releasing. A new expression from the analytical model is developed to estimate the transmission length as well as the stress distribution along the tendon. The paper also presents a parametric study to illustrate the impact of diameter of prestressing steel, concrete cover, concrete strength, initial prestress, section size, surface roughness of prestressing steel, time of prestress release, and the member length on the transfer of stress in pre-tensioned concrete elements.cross sectional area of concretecross sectional area of prestressing steelinternal radius of cylinderexternal radius of cylinderthe nominal diameter of the prestressinglength of small element in longitudinal directionYoung׳s modulusconcrete Young׳s modulusprestressing steel Young׳s moduluseccentricity, which defines the rate at which the function approaches the asymptoteaverage longitudinal stress in concrete at xconcrete compressive strength after 28 days in MPalongitudinal stress in prestressing steel at xbond stress at xeffective prestress (beyond transmission zone)initial prestresstensile strengthDrucker–Prager hyperbolic function of flow potentialfracture energyratio of the second invariant on the tensile meridian to that on compressive meridiantransmission lengthnumber of mesh segments around the tendonradial pressureapplied internal pressure in the radial directionapplied external pressure in the radial directionhydrostatic pressurevon Mises equivalent stressdeformed nominal radius of the prestressing strands or barsnominal radius of prestressing steel barinternal radius of concrete cylinder which equals radius of steel bar after prestressingexternal radius of concrete cylinderage in daysdegree of temperatureradial deformation at a radius equal rradial deformation of pre-stressing bar at the outer perimeterradial deformation of concrete cylinder at the inner perimeterposition along the transmission lengthcoefficient of thermal expansionchange in temperatureshrinkage strainPoisson׳s ratioPoisson׳s ratio of concretePoisson׳s ratio of steelinitial equibiaxial compressive yield stressuni-axial compressive yield stressmaximum principal effective stressuni-axial tensile stress at failureapplied stress in the longitudinal directiontangential stresscoefficient of frictionangle of dilation

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The prestress force in pre-tensioned concrete elements is transferred from the steel to the concrete over a certain length, which is known as the transmission length. The formulae of the transmission length in the current design code are basically developed empirically for normal types of concrete. Because of the rapid innovation in construction industry and introducing of new types of concrete materials (i.e. high-strength, self-compacting etc.), experimental tests are needed to estimate the transmission length [1]. Models account for the new type of concrete material, based on the mechanical properties of materials which can be measured using simple tests, will be desirable [2].The transmission length is influenced by many factors such as diameter of prestressing steel, initial or effective prestress, concrete strength, type of release, type of tendon, bond condition, concrete cover, surface condition and size of the section on the transmission length [3–11]. To date, no full agreement exists on the factors used in formulae to predict the transmission length [3].The aim of this study is to develop a model that accounts for different concrete materials and reinforcing steel as a closed-form expression to predict the transmission length to be used in initial design stage where new concretes are used. Moreover, this study will develop a finite element model to understand the influence of different parameters on the prestress transfer.This paper is organised in nine sections. Sections 2 and 3 give a brief background about the previous modelling work and the transfer of prestress, respectively. In Section 4, an analytical expression to calculate the transmission length and the stress distribution is given. Axi-symmetric and 3D finite element (FE) models are developed in Sections 5 and 6. Section 7 presents a parametric study while Section 8 examines the assumptions used in the analytical model. Finally, a summary and conclusions are given in Section 9.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
A closed-form expression of the transmission length is presented in this paper based on a linear analytical model and the thick-wall cylinder theory. The paper also presents a 3D non-linear FE model considering the post-cracking behaviour of concrete in addition to different parameters such as concrete cover, initial prestress, concrete strength, concrete shrinkage and member cross section. It is found that the 3D non-linear finite element model is more accurate than the analytical model although the analytical model is more computationally efficient.The developed 3D FE model was then used to examine the assumptions of the thick-wall cylinder model to simulate the prestress transfer in pre-tensioned concrete elements which was found to be reliable. This model is also used to investigate the influence of prestressing steel diameter, concrete cover, concrete strength, initial prestress, section size, member length, time of prestress releasing, and surface condition of the tendon on the transfer of prestress force from steel to concrete in pre-tensioned concrete elements.The following conclusions can be drawn:•A linear closed-form expression has been proposed to predict the transmission length and the stress profile along the transmission zone. The proposed expression can be used in the initial design stage where new concrete materials are used and there is an absence of code-design formulae. The 3D non-linear FE model can be used as a tool to understand the phenomenon of prestress transfer considering different aspects.In the modelling of prestress transfer, it is not appropriate to account for the concrete shrinkage by subtracting the shrinkage losses from the initial prestress. Concrete shrinkage before release imposed non-uniform increase (at the end) and decrease (far from the end) of stresses along the member. The use of the thick-wall cylinder theory was found to be reliable in modelling the prestress transfer.The presented parametric study, based on the 3D FE model, provides useful information about the influence of steel diameter, concrete cover, concrete strength, initial prestress, section size, member length, time of prestress releasing, and surface condition of the tendon on the transfer of prestress force from steel to concrete in pre-tensioned concrete elements.The size of the element was found to have no significant effect on the prestress transferIn general, the paper has drawn advanced numerical simulations to improve the understanding of the prestressed transfer in pre-tensioned concrete. It has also proposed an analytical formula of the transmission length as well the stress distribution over the transmission zone.