@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Comparison of various 1D, 2D and 3D FE models for the analysis of thin-walled box with transverse ribs subjected to load factors

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Different 1D, 2D, and 3D FE models for the analysis of box structures are compared.Advanced models based on the Carrera Unified Formulation are developed.The effects of load factors are investigated.Efficiency of low-order models is acceptable if transverse stiffeners are introduced.Recommendations about the modelling of box structures are given.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Refined theories,Finite element method,Unified formulation,Box beams,Multi-bay box,Load factors,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper evaluates various Finite Element (FE) models for the static and dynamic analyses of single- and multi-bay metallic box structures. Load factors are considered in the static response, whereas free vibration analyses are addressed to compare the dynamic performances. Different FE models able to include cross-sectional deformations are compared. These comprise solid (3D) and plate/shell (2D) models, which are obtained by using a general-purpose commercial software. Results related to a hierarchical variable kinematic beam (1D) formulation, which opportunely degenerates into classical beam theories with rigid-cross section assumptions (e.g. Euler–Bernoulli and Timoshenko), are also addressed. Displacements as well as axial and shear stress fields are compared for various loading cases. Regarding dynamic analyses, fundamental and higher-order natural frequencies by various models are computed and the Modal Assurance Criterion is used to compare the eigenmodes. It is concluded that refined models are mandatory to accurately describe the static and dynamic characteristics of thin-walled box structures. Classical and lower-order refined beam models show severe limitations in capturing localized stress/strain fields as well as local mode shapes. Nevertheless, the accuracy of lower-order models is improved as a consequence of the adoption for transverse ribs, which lead to more rigid cross-sections.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Thin-walled box beams are widely used in many fields of the engineering and their major applications are those related to aerospace, civil, automotive and naval constructions. The analysis of this kind of structures requires the adoption for structural models able to foresee higher-order phenomena, such as elastic bending–shear coupling and restrained torsional warping [1] as well as 3D strain effects. It is clear that, due to the intricate nature of those phenomena, classical one-dimensional (1D) beam theories, such as Euler–Bernoulli Beam Model (EBBM) [2] and Timoshenko Beam Model (TBM) [3,4], are not suitable for the analysis of thin-walled box beams. The first beam theory for thin-walled closed cross-section structures made of isotropic materials was developed by Benscoter [5] on the basis of the work by Vlasov [6], whose beam model accounted for the stress-free conditions on the boundary surfaces by assuming a cubic approximation of the displacement field (i.e., a parabolic shear strains distribution). From then, a number of refined beam theories have been developed over the years for the analysis of thin-walled box beams and a brief overview is given below.Waldron [7] proposed the sectorial method of analysis for thin-walled beams subjected to torsional loading. In [8], a numerical method was used to obtain sectional deformations that, integrated over the cross-section, yielded to 1D higher-order beam equations for closed thin-walled structures. The same authors developed in [9] a fully coupled 10-degree-of-freedom (DOF) beam theory for the analysis of thin-walled closed piecewise straight beams. Recently, based on TBM and Benscoter beam theory, Wang et al. [10] developed a shear locking-free beam element with general closed thin-walled cross-section accounting for shear deformation, coupled bending–torsional effects and warping shear stress. Other important contributions are those by Prokić [11,12], El Fatmi [13–15], and the works based on the Variational Asymptotic Method (VAM) [16,17]. The Generalized Beam Theory (GBT), which was originally developed by Schardt [18,19] and then extended in several works (see for example [20–23]), has revealed good capabilities in dealing with thin-walled structures and it is also worthy of mentioning. Regarding composite anisotropic box beams, many refined beam models can be found in the literature (see for example [24–29]). However, the attention is focused on the analysis of box structures made of isotropic homogeneous material in this paper.Other approaches to the analysis of thin-walled box beams might be those deriving from the use of two-dimensional (2D) and three-dimensional (3D) structural theories, mainly plate/shell and solid finite element (FE) models, e.g. see [30–32]. In the present work, various 1D, 2D and 3D models for the analysis of metallic thin-walled box beams are compared. Both static response and free vibration analyses were performed and the commercial FEM (Finite Element Method) code MSCNastran[33] was used to produce solutions by 2D plate/shell and 3D solid models. On the other hand, 1D finite elements (FE) based on the Carrera Unified Formulation (CUF) [34] were used to obtain results from both classical and higher-order beam theories.CUF is a hierarchical formulation leading to higher-order models with no need for ad hoc assumptions. According to CUF, in fact, the kinematic field of 1D theories can be expressed as the expansion of generalized displacement variables on the cross-section via generic functions. 1D CUF theories have received considerably attention in the past and recent years. Two classes of CUF models have been developed depending on the type of cross-sectional functions. TE (Taylor-Expansion) models use Taylor-like polynomials to expand cross-sectional unknowns [35]. The order N of the polynomial determines the order of the beam theory. The capabilities of TE models in dealing with higher-order phenomena (e.g. constraint warping, cross-sectional deformations, torsion and coupling effects) have been demonstrated in recent papers for both static [36–38] and dynamic [39–42] analyses. Lagrange polynomials are used instead to discretize the displacement field on the cross-section in LE (Lagrange-Expansion) CUF models. Static analyses on isotropic [43] and composite structures [44] have revealed the strength of LE models in dealing with open cross-sections, localized boundary conditions and layer-wise descriptions of composite structures. Moreover, LE models have been recently used to carry out component-wise analyses of both aerospace [45,46] and civil engineering structures [47,48]. Furthermore, both TE and LE CUF models have been extended to include load factors [49] and non-structural masses [50] in recent works.In the next section, CUF is briefly introduced. The related FE formulation is then developed and the elemental matrices are expressed in terms of fundamental nuclei. Subsequently, numerical applications are proposed and 2D and 3D FE models compared to 1D CUF models for the analysis of box cross-section structures. Finally, the main conclusions are outlined.The notation assumed in this paper is hereinafter introduced. The adopted coordinate frame is presented in Fig. 1. Letuto be the transposed displacement vector,(1)u(x,y,z)={uxuyuz}TIn the framework of the CUF, the displacement field above the cross-section is the expansion of generic functions,Fτ,(2)u(x,y,z)=Fτ(x,z)uτ(y),τ=1,2,…,MwhereFτvary over the cross-section.uτis the displacement vector and M stands for the number of terms of the expansion. According to the generalized Einstein notation, the repeated subscript, τ, indicates summation. The choice ofFτdetermines the class of the 1D CUF model that has to be adopted. TE (Taylor-Expansion) 1D models are based on polynomial expansions, xizj, of the displacement field above the cross-section of the structure, where i and j are positive integers. For instance, the displacement field of the second-order (N=2) TE model is expressed by(3)ux=ux1+xux2+zux3+x2ux4+xzux5+z2ux6uy=uy1+xuy2+zuy3+x2uy4+xzuy5+z2uy6uz=uz1+xuz2+zuz3+x2uz4+xzuz5+z2uz6The order N of the expansion, which can be set as an input of the analysis, is arbitrary and it defines the beam theory. Classical EBBM and TBM beam theories can be obtained as special cases of the linear (N=1) TE model as shown in [35].The refined TE models described above are characterized by degrees of freedom (displacements and N-order derivatives of displacements) with a correspondence to the axis of the beam (see Fig. 2a). The expansion can also be made by using only pure displacement values, e.g. by using Lagrange polynomials as cross-section functionsFτ. This class of CUF models, which is referred to as LE (Lagrange-Expansion), was recently introduced in [43], where three- (L3) and six-node (L6) triangular elements as well as four- (L4) and nine-node (L9) quadrilateral elements were used to discretize the displacement unknowns on the cross-section of beam structures. In this paper, L9 polynomials are used. In the case of an L9 element the interpolation functions are given by(4)Fτ=14(r2+rrτ)(s2+ssτ),τ=1,3,5,7Fτ=12sτ2(s2−ssτ)(1−r2)+12rτ2(r2−rrτ)(1−s2),τ=2,4,6,8Fτ=(1−r2)(1−s2),τ=9where r and s vary from−1to+1, whereasrτandsτare the coordinates of the nine points whose locations in the natural coordinate frame are shown in Fig. 3. The displacement field given by an L9 polynomial is therefore(5)ux=F1ux1+F2ux2+⋯+F9ux9uy=F1uy1+F2uy2+⋯+F9uy9uz=F1uz1+F2uz2+⋯+F9uz9whereux1,…,uz9are the displacement variables of the problem and represent the translational displacement components of each of the nine points of the L9 element. The beam model can be further refined by discretizing the beam cross-section with a number of L-elements as shown in [43]. For instance, different cross-sectional meshes in the case of a square section beam are shown in Fig. 2b–d.The FE approach is adopted to discretize the structure along the y-axis. This process is conducted via a classical finite element technique, where the displacement vector is given by(6)u(x,y,z)=Fτ(x,z)Ni(y)qτiNistands for the shape functions andqτifor the nodal displacement vector,(7)qτi={quxτiquyτiquzτi}TFor the sake of brevity, the shape functions are not reported here. They can be found in many books, for instance in [31]. Elements with four nodes (B4) are adopted in this work, i.e. a cubic approximation along the y-axis is assumed. The choice of the cross-section discretization for the LE class (i.e. the choice of the type, the number and the distribution of cross-section elements) or the theory order, N, for the TE class is completely independent of the choice of the beam finite element to be used along the axis of the beam.The stiffness matrix of the elements and the external loadings vector are obtained by means of the principle of virtual displacements(8)δLint=∫V(δϵTσ)dV=δLextwhere Lintstands for the strain energy, Lextis the work of the external loadings and δ stands for the virtual variation.ϵandσare the strain and stress vectors, respectively. The virtual variation of the strain energy is rewritten using the constitutive laws, the linear strain–displacement relations and Eq. (6)(9)δLint=δqτiTKijτsqsjwhereKijτsis the stiffness matrix in the form of the fundamental nucleus. The derivation of the FE fundamental nucleus of the stiffness matrix is not repeated here for the sake of brevity, but it is given in [35], where more details about CUF can also be found. However, the components of the matrixKijτsare given in the following in the case of isotropic material:(10)Kxxijτs=(λ+2G)∫ΩFτ,xFs,xdΩ∫lNiNjdy+G∫ΩFτ,zFs,zdΩ∫lNiNjdy+G∫ΩFτFsdΩ∫lNi,yNj,ydyKxyijτs=λ∫ΩFτ,xFsdΩ∫lNiNj,ydy+G∫ΩFτFs,xdΩ∫lNi,yNjdyKxzijτs=λ∫ΩFτ,xFs,zdΩ∫lNiNjdy+G∫ΩFτ,zFs,xdΩ∫lNiNjdyKyxijτs=λ∫ΩFτFs,xdΩ∫lNi,yNjdy+G∫ΩFτ,xFsdΩ∫lNiNj,ydyKyyijτs=G∫ΩFτ,zFs,zdΩ∫lNiNjdy+G∫ΩFτ,xFs,xdΩ∫lNiNjdy+(λ+2G)∫ΩFτFsdΩ∫lNi,yNj,ydyKyzijτs=λ∫ΩFτFs,zdΩ∫lNi,yNjdy+G∫ΩFτ,zFsdΩ∫lNiNj,ydyKzxijτs=λ∫ΩFτ,zFs,xdΩ∫lNiNjdy+G∫ΩFτ,xFs,zdΩ∫lNiNjdyKzyijτs=λ∫ΩFτ,zFsdΩ∫lNiNj,ydyG∫ΩFτFs,zdΩ∫lNi,yNjdyKzzijτs=(λ+2G)∫ΩFτ,zFs,zdΩ∫lNiNjdy+G∫ΩFτ,xFs,xdΩ∫lNiNjdy+G∫ΩFτFsdΩ∫lNi,yNj,ydywhere G and λ are Lamé׳s parameters. If Poisson׳s ratio ν and Young modulus E are used one hasG=E/2(1+ν)andλ=νE/(1+ν)(1−2ν). The fundamental nucleus has to be expanded according to the summation indexes τ and s in order to obtain the elemental stiffness matrix.The virtual variation of the work of the inertial loadings is(11)δLine=∫VρδuTu¨dVwhere ρ stands for the density of the material, andu¨is the acceleration vector. Eq. (11) is rewritten using Eq. (6):(12)δLine=δqτiT∫lNiNjdy∫ΩρFτFsdΩq¨sj=δqτiTMijτsq¨sjwhereMijτsis the fundamental nucleus of the mass matrix whose components are provided below:(13)Mxxijτs=Myyijτs=Mzzijτs=ρ∫lNiNjdy∫ΩFτFsdΩMxyijτs=Mxzijτs=Myxijτs=Myzijτs=Mzxijτs=Mzyijτs=0It should be noted that no assumptions on the approximation order or on the choice ofFτfunctions (TE or LE) have been made in formulatingKijτsandMijτs. It is therefore possible to obtain refined beam models without changing the formal expression of the nuclei components. This is the key-points of CUF which allows, with only nine FORTRAN statements, the implementation of any-order of multiple class theories.The loadings vector which is variationally coherent to the model can be derived with relative ease in the case of a generic concentrated loadPacting on the application point(xp,yp,zp),(14)P={PuxPuyPuz}TAny other loading condition can be similarly treated. The virtual work due toPis(15)δLext=δuTPAfter using Eq. (6), Eq. (15) becomes(16)δLext=FτNiδqτiTPwhereFτand Niare evaluated in(xp,zp)and yprespectively. The last equation allows the identification of the components of the nucleus which have to be loaded, that is, it allows the proper assembling of the loading vector by detecting the displacement variables that have to be loaded. In the next section, the attention is focused on the special case of inertial loads.When using classical beam theories, translational as well as rotational load factors are usually applied with respect to the reference axis – or with respect to the shear axis if transverse stresses are also included. In this paper, the capability of the present refined beam models to take into account the effects due to 3D distributions of inertial loads is also highlighted. Let the following acceleration field be applied to the structure:(17)u¨0(x,y,z)={u¨x0u¨y0u¨z0}TThe virtual variation of the external work,δLext, due to the acceleration fieldu¨0is given by(18)δLext=∫VρδuTu¨0dVEq. (6) is substituted into Eq. (18). It reads(19)δLext=δqτiT[∫ΩρFsFτ(∫yNiNjdy)dΩ]q¨sj0where the term between square brackets is the fundamental nucleus of the mass matrixMijτs. The virtual variation of the external work is therefore written as(20)δLext=δqτiTMijτsq¨sj0=δqτiTPineiτwherePineiτis the nucleus of the loading vector due to the acceleration field. It is important to underline that arbitrarily 3D distributed accelerations can be applied for both TE and LE, even though they are beam models.The described beam formulation is herein compared to solid (3D) and plate/shell (2D) FE models from the commercial code MSCNastranfor the analysis of single- and multi-bay box beams. The structures addressed are made of an isotropic material. The material adopted is an aluminium alloy with the following characteristics: Young modulus, E, equal to 75GPa; Poisson ratio, ν, equal to 0.33 and density ρ=2700kg/m3. Unless differently specified, 10 B4 elements were used along the beam axis in the case of 1D CUF refined theories, whereas the element distributions of the 2D and 3D models resulted from convergence analyses. Four-node CQUAD and eight-node CHEXA elements (see Ref. [33]) were used to built 2D and 3D models, respectively.A cantilever box beam is addressed. In Fig. 4the geometry is shown. The geometrical data are as follows: a=0.8m, h=0.2m, t=0.01m. The length of the beam, L, is equal to 3.2m.In the first analysis case, the structure underwent a point load Fz=−500N at (a,L,h/2). The results from different models are shown in Table 1. Results are given in terms of displacements and stress components at selected points. Classical as well as refined beam models are compared to MSCNastran2D and 3D results. In particular, the results by EBBM and TBM are shown in rows 3 and 4 of Table 1. Second- to ninth-order TE models are given in rows 6 to 10. Regarding LE models, whose results are given in rows 12 and 13, two different cross-section meshes were used and they are shown in Fig. 5a, b. For the sake of clarity, in Fig. 5 the Lagrange nodes are not depicted; each rectangle represents an L9 element. In the last column of Table 1 the number of the degrees of freedom (DOFs) is also given for each model implemented. A comparison between different models can be appreciated in Fig. 6in terms of tip deformed cross-section. Fig. 7shows the axial stress component along one vertical edge at the clamped end according to EBBM, ninth-order (N=9) TE, LE, 2D plate and 3D solid models. For the same models, Figs. 8 and 9show the distributions of the shear stresses at the mid-span cross-section along the vertical and horizontal edges of the box, respectively. Fig. 8 clearly shows that none of the considered models are able to satisfy the homogeneous condition of the shear stress at the boundaries. This condition is partially fulfilled in Fig. 9 by the Solid model, which is “forced” to give nearly zero shear stress at x=0. The same result can be obtained by locally refining the LE model close to the boundary interface as shown in Fig. 10. Refined TE beam models as well as 2D plate elements are almost inadequate for the evaluation of the shear stresses in box beams. Further comments arise from the analysis as follows:1.As it is known, cross-section in-plane deformations are neglected by classical beam models, which are therefore not suitable for the problem under consideration.The increase in the order for TE models provides greater accuracy as Table 1 shows. Higher-order TE models give differences ranging from 27.3% (N=2) to 8% (N=9) with respect to the solid solution by MSCNastran.The results from LE models are able to detect the solid solution as demonstrated by the results in Table 1 and Figs. 7–9. Moreover, the computational efforts demanded by CUF 1D models are significantly lower than those required by the solid model.The cross-section discretization refinement for LE models is an effective method that leads to the 3D solution.In a second load case, the structure underwent a uniform inertial load. The load factor has a magnitude equal to 2g and is directed towards the positive verse of the z-axis, g being the gravitational acceleration. Table 2gives the vertical displacement, uz, and the stress components σyyand σyz. The last column of Table 2 shows the DOFs for each model implemented. Figs. 11 and 12show the distributions of the axial stress component respectively at the clamped end along the left vertical edge and along the span of the structure at x=0,z=−h/2. Higher-order TE, LE and MSCNastranmodels are considered in Figs. 11 and 12. Fig. 13shows the distribution of the shear stress at the mid-span cross-section along the vertical left flange. It should be underlined that:1.The results from the LE model match those from MSCNastransolid solution both in terms of displacements (errors ranging from 0.5% (10L9) to 0.08% (16L9)) and stress components. Moreover, the computational costs by the LE approach are significantly lower than those required by the solid model.A TE model with at least a sixth-order expansion (N=6) is necessary to obtain acceptable results if uniform gravity loads are considered.The 2D model, although characterized by almost the same number of DOFs of 1D LE models, is not able to catch the 3D results.A comparison in terms of displacement components between the LE and MSCNastranmodels is reported in Table 3. Fig. 15shows the deformed configuration by the tip cross-section from LE and MSCNastransolid models. The following comments are noteworthy:1.As it was shown in a recent work [49], TE models are not completely satisfactory when rotational accelerations are accounted for or local phenomena occur. For this reason TE models have not been considered for the analysis addressed here.Unlikely classical and refined TE beam theories, LE models are suitable in the case of cross-sections subjected to two opposite accelerations.It should be underlined that an appropriate distribution of nine-node elements above the cross-sections is effective in improving the solution.The same structure of the previous analysis case is addressed and free vibration characteristics are evaluated. Table 4shows the first ten natural frequencies from 1D classical, refined TE, LE, 2D plate and 3D solid models. The classical models EBBM and TBM are given in columns 2 and 3. The natural frequencies by the fourth-order (N=4), sixth-order (N=6) and eighth-order (N=8) refined TE beam models are given in columns 4, 5 and 6, respectively. Two different distributions of L9 elements above the cross-section were considered (10L9 and 16L9) as shown in Fig. 5a, b and the results are given in the 7th and 8th columns, respectively. In columns 9 and 10, MSCNastranshell and solid models are given and they are respectively referred to as 2D Plate/Shell and 3D Solid. For each model, the number of DOFs is given in the last row of Table 4 and information about the kind of the mode shapes are also given. “bx” indicates the bending mode along the x-axis whereas “bz” indicates the bending mode along the z-axis in Table 4. The differential bending mode, which is a mode characterized by the opposite bending of the vertical flanges in the yz-plane, is shown with the letter “d”. Finally with the letter “s”, a shell-like mode is indicated. A shell-like mode is a modal shape that involves a wide cross-section deformation. The term “shell” has been used because this kind of mode is usually detectable only if plate/shell models are used. Fig. 16shows a comparison between some selected modal shapes by the 16L9 LE and 3D MSCNastranmodels. The correspondence between the LE and 3D models is further underlined though the Modal Assurance Criterion (MAC). MAC is defined as a scalar representing the degree of consistency between two distinct modal vectors (see Ref. [51]) as follows:(22)MACij=|{ϕAi}T{ϕBj}|2{ϕAi}T{ϕAi}{ϕBj}{ϕBj}Twhere{ϕAi}is the ith eigenvector of model A, whereas{ϕBj}is the jth eigenvector of model B. The modal assurance criterion takes on values from zero (representing no consistent correspondence) to one (representing a consistent correspondence). MAC values between the 16L9 and 3D eigenmodes are graphically shown in a matrix form in Fig. 17. The following remarks can be made:1.Unlikely classical beam theories, higher-order TE and LE models are able to foresee global and local modes.At least an eight-order TE model (N=8) is necessary to detect shell-like natural frequencies.Bending, differential bending as well as shell-like modes are detected by LE models in accordance with MSCNastran2D and 3D models.The MAC matrix shows a perfect correspondence between LE and 3D models. However, modes 3–4 and 8–9 are exchanged between the two models.The number of the DOFs is very low in the case of CUF models if compared both to the shell and solid models.Two ribs were added at y=1.6m and y=3.2m to the box beam of the previous sections. The thickness t of the two ribs, which are made of the same aluminium alloy of the box except for the Young modulus that is ten times greater, is equal to 5mm. Each rib is discretized with a single B4 element in the case of CUF elements, whereas each box bay is made of 5 B4 elements.In order to evaluate the effects of the ribs on the static analysis response, the same load cases of Section 3.1 are addressed herein. In the first load case, a point load Fz=−500N was applied at (a,L,h/2). In Table 5the vertical displacements are shown together with axial and shear stress components at some selected points. Fig. 18shows the deformation of the tip cross-section by different models. For the same load case, Fig. 19shows the distributions of shear stress σxy. It should be underlined that:1.The structure is more rigid as a consequence of the addition of the ribs. Classical models are clearly more suitable for the analysis of multi-bay structures. This aspect is clear since the reduction of the committed error with respect to displacement components. By comparing the results with those from the solid model, in fact, the error from both EBBM and TBM is reduced by the 20% with respect to the case with no transverse stiffening members.Homogeneous condition of shear stress at the boundaries is easily satisfied if ribbed box beams are considered.If accurate stress descriptions are needed, higher-order models are mandatory. Taylor-type models require higher than sixth-order expansions to match the solid model solution.Lagrange-type models are able to deal with solid solution both in terms of stresses and displacements with a high reduction of DOFs.The 2D solution is not able to detect the 3D deformation and the distributions of the shear stresses.In the second load case the structure underwent the acceleration field shown in Fig. 14 and Eq. (21). Table 6quotes the cross-sectional displacement components measured at (0,L,−h/2) obtained by LE and MSCNastranmodels. Classical and TE models are not taken into account because of their ineffectiveness for the problem under consideration. The following general comments are worthy of investigations:1.As a general guideline, beam models (classical and refined) are extremely effective when multi-bay box beams are analysed. These structures are, in fact, more rigid within their cross-sectional planes. The mean percentage error with respect to the reference solid solution is about 2% if refined beams are used. The same error was equal to 10% in the case of the single-bay un-ribbed box.Unlikely the shell solution, LE 1D models are able to replicate MSCNastran3D results.CUF 1D theories are able to foresee the solid solution. Moreover, the computational efforts demanded by this approach are significantly lower than those required by the solid model.The vibrations of the two-bay box beam were further investigated. Table 7shows the first 10 natural frequencies, together with the number of DOFs for each model implemented. Columns 2 and 3 show the results from the classical beam theories. TE models from the fourth-order (N=4) to the eighth-order (N=8) expansions are considered in columns 4 to 6. The LE models are reported in columns 7 and 8, whereas the MSCNastranshell and solid are reported in columns 9 and 10. Fig. 20shows a comparison between some selected modal shapes by the 16L9 LE and 3D models. The correspondence between LE 16L9 and 3D models is underlined though the MAC, which is graphically depicted in Fig. 21. The following remarks can be made:1.As expected, classical theories and lower-order TE models are not able to provide torsional and local modes. The first bending modes are correctly provided by these models. Conversely, high bending frequencies are not detected since local phenomena occur.Higher than sixth-order (N=6) TE models are necessary to detect shell-like modes.In the case of LE models, a sufficiently rich distribution of L9 elements above the cross-sections is necessary to detect MSCNastranshell and solid modes.LE models are able to foresee the solid and shell solution with a significant reduction of DOFs. Good agreement is evident from the MAC matrix between LE and 3D models for the first nine modal shape. However, modes 6 and 7 are exchanged between the two models.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
Various 1D, 2D and 3D FE models have been used in this paper for static response and free vibration analysis of box beams. Both un-ribbed and multi-bay structures have been considered. 2D and 3D models have been obtained by using the well-known commercial software MSCNastran, whereas the Carrera Unified Formulation (CUF) has been used to formulate 1D classical and refined beam theories. In particular, both TE (Taylor-Expansion) and LE (Lagrange-Expansion) modelling approaches have been considered in the current work. The results show that classical and lower-order TE beam theories are ineffective in analysing box cross-section beams. The results by these models are improved as a consequence of the transverse stiffening members, which also have shown to play a role in the correct accomplishment of shear stress homogeneous condition at the boundaries for refined 1D, 2D and 3D models. Furthermore, the 2D models, although characterized by almost the same number of DOFs of LE models, have not been able to catch the 3D results for most of the problems addressed. On the other hand, it has been demonstrated that 1D CUF LE models are able to reproduce solid-like solutions with very low computational efforts for both single- and multi-bay box beams.