@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Coupled flexural–torsional vibration of spinning smart beams with asymmetric cross sections

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Spinning beams with asymmetric cross sections are formulated.Smart materials are considered in the formulation of the system.Transverse deflections in two orthogonal directions are coupled.Amplitude of the speed has obvious influence on the coupling coefficient.The PPF is applied to control of the beam with changed frequency.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Spinning smart beam,Coupled flexural–torsional vibration,PPF compensator,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, the electrical–structural modeling and control electronics of spinning smart beams with distributed piezoelectric sensor and actuator layers are considered. The governing equations of beams with asymmetric cross sections have been formulated incorporating the warping effect and the influence of spinning. For the purpose of verification of the model established, numerical results are compared with those given in relevant literature. Effects of spinning on natural frequencies and mode shapes are investigated for the boom in solar array of Hubble Space Telescope. In order to control the vibration of the spinning beam whose natural characteristics are changed with respect to spinning velocity, the positive position feedback (PPF) compensator is applied. Numerical results showed that the PPF approach is effective in vibration suppression of spinning smart beams.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Shafts, turbine blades, propellers, elastic linkages, satellite booms and many other spinning structures are widespread in various branches of structural engineering, such as machine design, robotics, aircraft dynamics, and spacecraft dynamics. So there has gotten a growing interest in the investigation of free vibration characteristics and vibration control methods of spinning beams. Flexible spinning beams suffer from unwanted transient deflection and residual vibration due to external loads or internal factors. These detrimental effects cause significant problems for position accuracy, throughput, fatigue, and safety for many types of systems. As a consequence, it is essential to accurately predict vibration characteristics such as natural frequencies and mode shapes. Moreover, developments of novel control method and effective actuators are critical to meet the increasing design requirements of modern structures.Due to the importance of such structures, many researchers have diligently pursued for decades and excellent work has been done on the dynamic analysis of spinning beams. Early investigations by Bishop [1], Dimentberg [2], Kane [3], Newland [4] and Bauer [5] etc. have laid the foundation for establishing a fully flexural–torsional coupling model for vibration analysis in spinning beams. In their work, the dynamic equations of the spinning Euler–Bernoulli beam were formulated based on the classical approach of differential equations. Subsequently, investigators proposed another several kinds of modeling methods and improved the analytical model for the free vibration analysis of a spinning beam. To sum up, the method formulating the dynamic equations can be roughly concluded into four categories: (1) analytical method; (2) assumed-modes method [6]; (3) finite element method [7,8]; and (4) dynamic stiffness method [9]. The models used by researchers are mainly Euler–Bernoulli beam model, Rayleigh beam model [10] and Timoshenko beam model [11–15] theories. Also, for spinning beams, researchers analyzed dynamical characteristics under different conditions, such as beams subjected to axial loads [12,16,17], three directional loads [15] or double cutting force and time-varying mass effects [18], tapered [19], anisotropic composite [20], fiber reinforced [21] thin-walled beams or beams with activated shape memory alloy [22], stepped beam [14], non-uniform beam [16], pre-twisted beam [23,24], beams subjected to different boundary conditions [25,26]. On the other hand, the dynamic stability of spinning structures around the longitudinal axis such as a shaft or an unconstrained beam has been widely investigated [22,27]. Qian et al. [28] conducted a non-contact dynamic testing of a highly flexible spinning vertical shaft.The previously cited mathematical models are developed for spinning beams with cross sections that have two symmetric axes in most cases, and have not discussed the case that the shear center and centroid are noncoincident. Moreover, only a few studies have been done on the dynamic analysis of spinning smart beams. The current investigation focused on formulating governing equations of asymmetric cross-sectional spinning beams bonded with smart materials.Smart materials have been extensively used as sensors and actuators bonded on or embedded in light-weight structures. As one of the smart structures, piezoelectric materials generate an electric charge when subjected to a mechanical stress, and they also yield mechanical deformation in response to an applied electric field. Active controllers utilizing the technique of piezoelectric materials have been implemented in several vibration suppression applications and considerable work has been conducted on the modeling of beams with piezoelectric actuators [29–34]. For spinning structures, Song et al. [35] modeled a flexible rotating shaft as a thin-walled composite beam of circular cross-section, incorporating smart materials technology. In this paper, we want to control the structural vibrations and deformations of the spinning beam by providing the voltage developed from the piezoelectric transducer (PZT) through compensators.Numerous active control method such as direct velocity feedback, strain rate feedback, optimum control, sliding mode control, independent modal space control method can be used to damp out undesirable vibrations of a flexible structures. The idea of positive position feedback control suggested by Caughey and Goh [36] is based on velocity feedback control. The PPF controller has served in the active vibration control of flexible beams [37], plates, grid structures [38] and so on. Fanson and Caughey [39] applied the technique in laboratory experiments on a thin cantilever beam and derived global stability conditions which are independent of the dynamical characteristics of the structure. Experimental robustness study of PPF in single mode and multimode vibration suppression is conducted [40]. Singla [41] conducted experimental studies for the active vibration control of a smart beam with mass uncertainty. Mahmoodi [42] proposed a novel PPF controller which is a modified version of PPF, employs a first-order compensator that provides damping control and a second-order compensator for vibration suppression. Orszulik [43] proposed an adaptive PPF for vibration suppression of flexible manipulator when the frequencies of the system are poorly known. PPF has turned out to be a solid strategy for vibration control. However, the effectiveness of PPF deteriorates when the natural frequencies of the structure have changed. A few papers have developed adaptive PPF controllers for constrained systems. In this paper, a variable PPF controller is adopted in order to suppress structural vibrations when the spinning flexible beam׳s natural frequencies vary with respect to time. Simulations are performed to verify the proposed approach.The aim of the present study is twofold. The first objective is to include the effects of warping and spinning in the coupled vibration analysis of flexible beams with asymmetric cross sections. The formulations are built on Euler–Bernoulli beam theory with the warping effects and rotatory rigidity while neglecting the effect of shear rigidities. Also in the present work the effects of PZT layers are considered and the PPF theory is adopted in order to suppress the smart beam׳s vibration.The system to be studied is depicted inFig. 1 in its deformed state. The basic element of the system is a beam that is of length L and is in an asymmetric uniform cross section. When the beam does not deflect, the x-axis is the shear center axis of the beam. The right end of the beam is free, while the left end (x=0) is connected to a base which spins about the longitudinal axis at a constant angular velocity denoted as Ω.Several pairs of piezoelectric patches distributed along the longitudinal axis are bonded on the top and bottom surfaces of the beam. One layer serves as a distributed sensor and the other as a distributed actuator. The piezoelectric patch is a single piezoelectric layer of uniform thickness hp. The piezoelectric patch is polarized along the hpdirection and the piezoelectric material is subject to an electric field E3 parallel to the polarization. Some patches are directly bonded to the beam surface and acted as sensors, providing sensing by the sensor voltage Vs. The other patches are acted as actuators, which as an active constraining layer that is activated by the control voltage Va. With appropriate strain control, through proper manipulation of Vs, the piezoelectric layers actuated by controlled voltages generate deformation so that the energy dissipation mechanism can be enhanced and the structural vibration can be damped out.In order to formulate the equations of motion of the spinning beam bonded with piezoelectric layers, a system at reference frames needs to be considered. Three orthogonal right-handed coordinate frames are used in order to describe the position vector R of a differential element dM at a point P.Frame OXYZ is a inertial frame which has an origin fixed at point O. Frame oxyz is a body frame, which in its initial state is coincident with the frame of OXYZ. During the beam is spinning, the frame oxyz is rotated with the x axis in the spinning angle velocity, so that the x axis remains parallel to the X axis of the frame OXYZ and the y and z axis are variable. The angle between the y axis and the Y axis is represented by the symbol φ. The origins of the frames OXYZ and oxyz are coincident, and these origins are fixed to shear center of the beam cross section in the clamped end. The third reference frame, Sξηζ, is the element coordinate of the differential beam element which is attached to the shear center S of the beam section. The frame Sξηζ is paralleled to the frame oxyz when the beam is in its undeformed state. The relative displacement between the frame oxyz and the frame Sξηζ is equal to the torsion angle at the right end of the beam. C represents the center of mass of the beam section and (ey, ez) denotes the coordinate of C in the frame Sξηζ.When the flexible beam undergoing a displacement, the section rotates an angle denoted by ϕ. During free vibration, a possible configuration of the system is shown inFig. 2. The deformation of a differential beam element located at a distance x from the left end is defined by spatial displacement u(x,t), v(x,t), w(x,t) and rotation ϕ(x,t) on x-axis. The u(x,t) represents the axial displacement in the x-direction while v(x,t) and w(x,t) represent the lateral displacement in the y-direction and z-direction respectively.The governing equation of the flexible beam containing piezoelectric patches is formulated based on the following assumptions: (1) for the elementary case of beam flexure and torsion using the Euler–Bernoulli beam theory partially takes into account Timoshenko effects, by including the rotatory inertia but not shear deformation or axial-force effects; (2) the warping effect is considered due to the fact that torsion induced warping occurs when the beam section is not circular; (3) the mass and stiffness of the adhesive between the main structure and PZT patches is neglected and (4) the strain of the beam׳s torsional deformation on PZT patches are neglected. Moreover, the deformation of the beam is small and yield to the linear conditions. The physical properties of materials of the beam and piezoelectric patches are elastic and constant.We consider the spinning beam undergoing flapping motion (displacement parallel to the plane of spinning) and torsional motion. Also, it is assumed that the shear center S and the center of mass C of the cross section are not coincident. For such a beam, the velocity of a typical deformed point with respect to the body reference frame can be defined as(1)υ(x)=u̇i→+v̇j→+ẇk→+[Ω+ϕ̇]i→×[ui→+(v+ey)j→+(w+ez)k→]where υ(x) is the velocity of the point. The overhead dot denotes partial derivatives with respect to time t.The kinetic energy of the system including PZT patches can be expressed as(2)T=Tb+Te⁎where TbandTe⁎represent the kinetic energy of the beam and the sum of the kinetic energy of the PZT patches, respectively.The potential strain energy of the flexible structure including sensor/actuator pairs is considered as below(3)U=Ub+Ue⁎The virtual work done by the PZT patches is given by(4)W=We⁎Neglecting the high order items, the kinetic energy can be simplified as(5)Tb=12∫0LρA(u̇2+v̇2+ẇ2)dx+12ρJp∫0Lϕ̇2dx+12∫0LρA[Ω2(v2+w2)−2Ωv̇w+2Ωvẇ]dx+12∫0LρA(e2ϕ̇2−2ezv̇ϕ̇+2eyẇϕ̇+2ezΩwϕ̇+2eyΩvϕ̇)dxThe symbols ρ, E and A denote the density, Young׳s modulus of the material and the area of the beam cross section. Jpis the polar moment of inertia and is given by(6)Jp=∬Ar2dηdζwhere r represents the distance between a certain point in the section and the center. The first and second integration in Eq. (5) are transverse kinetic energy and torsional kinetic energy of the beam, respectively. And the third and fourth terms are the kinetic energies contributed by spinning.The potential strain energy of the flexible structure including warping effects is considered as below(7)Ub=12∫0LEAu′2dx+12∫0LE(Izv″2+Iyw″2)dx+12∫0LGJpϕ′2dx+12∫0LEΓϕ″2dxwhere G denotes the shear modulus of the material. Iyand Izshow the second moments of area about the z-axis and y-axis, respectively, EΓ is warping rigidities. Primes denotes partial derivatives with respect to location x. For uniform beams, A, Iy, Iz, Jpand EΓ are constant throughout the span. The first and second integration in Eq. (7) are axial potential energy and bending energies of the beam, respectively. And the third and fourth terms are the rotational and warping energies, respectively.In the process to formulate governing equations of the beam, we assume the PZT patches are pasted in the z-direction face of the beam. According to the Euler–Bernoulli assumption, the stress and strain fields are uniaxial, along Ox; the axial strain S1 is related to the curvature w′′by(8)S1=−zw″where z is the distance to the neutral axis. We also assume that the piezoelectric layer is thin enough, so that the applied electrical field density E3 is constant across the thickness.The kinetic energy of the PZT patches is(9)Te⁎=12∑i=1np∫xixi+liρpiApiυ2dxwhere npis the number of the PZT patches, ρpiand Apiare the material density and cross sectional area of the ith PZT patch, respectively, xiand liis starting x-coordinate and length of the PZT patches, respectively.The potential strain energy of the sensor/actuator pairs is considered as below(10)Ue⁎=12∑i=1np∫xixi+lidx∫ApiEpiw″2z2dAwhere Epiis the Young׳s modulus of the ith PZT patch.The work done by the PZT patches is the combination of the conservative and non-conservative work terms, defined by integration over the volume of the PZT patches such that(11)We⁎=12∑i=1np∫xixi+lidx∫Api(ε33E3i2−2w″ze31E3i)dAwhere E3irepresents the applied electrical field density and ε33 is the permittivity.The axial displacement, transverse displacement and axial rotation are expressed in terms of the nodal displacement as(12)u(x,t)=Φx(x)qx(t)v(x,t)=Φy(x)qy(t)w(x,t)=Φz(x)qz(t)ϕ(x,t)=Φϕ(x)qϕ(t)where Φxis the space-dependent modal shape along the x-axis and qxis vector of time-dependent generalized coordinates along the x-axis. The same definitions apply to Φy, Φz, Φϕ, and qy, qz, qϕ.Substituting Eq. (12) into Eqs. (5), (7), (10) and (11), the kinetic energy, potential energy and work done by the PZT patches can be calculated as(13)T=12(q̇xTMxq̇x+q̇yTMyq̇y+q̇zTMzq̇z+Ω2qyTMyqy+Ω2qzTMzqz)+12(1+Ae2Jp)q̇ϕTMϕq̇ϕ−Ωq̇yTΓyzqz+ΩqyTΓzyq̇z−ezq̇yTΓyϕq̇ϕ+eyq̇zTΓzϕq̇ϕ+ezΩqzTΓzϕq̇ϕ+eyΩqyTΓyϕq̇ϕU=12(qxTKxqx+qyTKyqy+qzTKzqz+qϕTKϕqϕ+qϕTKϕϕqϕ+qzTKpqz)We⁎=12∑i=1np(γiVi2−2Viχiqz)=12VTγV−qzTχzVwhere Mx, My, Mz, and Mϕare mass matrices, Kx, Ky, Kz, Kϕ, Kϕϕand Kpare stiffness matrices, Γyz, Γyϕ, and Γzϕare coupling mass matrices. V is the electrode voltage matrix. And γ and χzare matrices related to properties of PZT and mode shapes of the elastic beam. The elements are given in Appendix A.Using the Hamilton׳s principle which is in its most general form and specify q=[qx, qy, qz, qϕ]T, the dynamic model of the flexible beam can be obtained in the following form:(14)Mq¨+Cq̇+Kq=−χVγV=χTqwhere χ is the extending matrix of χzin Eq. (13). The elements of sub matrices M, C and K are given in Appendix A.According to the upper equation, we can conclude that the transverse displacement along y and z direction and the axial torsion are coupled because the matrices M and C are undiagonal.The equation of motion is decoupled using the modal matrix U (q=Uη) and is presented here in modal form as(15)η¨+C¯η̇+Λη=−UTχVγV=χTUηwhere η denotes the modal coordinate, and(16)M¯=UTMU=identitymatrixC¯=UTCUΛ=UTKU=diag(ωi2)In the flexible beam, some PZT patches are used as actuators while the others are sensors. So the governing equation of the system becomes(17)η¨+C¯η̇+Λη=−BaVaVs=Gsγ−1BsTηwhere Baand Bsare distributed matrices of actuators and sensors after modal transformation, respectively. Vaand Vsare voltages of actuators and sensors, respectively. And Gsis the gain of the sensors.In order to damp the vibration of the beam containing PZT patches, segmented sensors and actuators with multi-input–multi-output (MIMO) controllers can be used. After obtaining the sensing signal Vs, the actuator voltage Vato be applied across the actuator can be determined using a control law as discussed below.In the present work, a type of classical control law, which is based on positive position feedback is considered. The conventional control law is invariable constant-gain feedback. In the case that the target system is time dependent, a novel variable feedback compensator is designed based on LQR scheme. Brief descriptions of the control law are given as below.The positive position feedback controller consists of a second order controller. The second-order system is forced by the position response which is then fed back to give the force input to the structure. The global dynamic equation with positive position feedback control law is given by(18)η¨+C¯η̇+Λη=−BaGξξ¨+Ccξ̇+Kcξ=KcBsTηThe system consists of two equations, one describing the structure and one describing the compensator. G is the feedback gain matrix of PPF, ξ is the compensator state, Ccis damp of the compensator, and Kcis the compensator stiffness matrix. The response, including vibrations and deformations of the beam, is indicated by the modal coordinate η. This response products a voltage on the piezoelectric sensor, which is input to the compensator. The compensator, consisting of a PPF filter, calculates the control voltage. As defined in equation, Baand Bsare the distribution matrices of actuators and sensors, respectively.Compared with Eq. (17), the voltage of actuators is calculated as(19)Va=−GξOnce the distribution matrices of actuators/sensors are defined, the parameters of PPF compensator waiting to be designed consist of filter damping matrix Cc, modal frequency matrix Kcand feedback gain matrix G.In order to effectively damp out a structural mode, obviously the case of active damping is required. In former literature, the stiffness matrix Kcis consistent with the natural frequencies of the target structure. The damping ratio of the PPF filter is usually chosen in the range of 0.5–0.9.The system in Eq. (18) can be expressed as(20)[η¨ξ¨]+[C¯00Cc][η̇ξ̇]+[Λ−BaG−KcBsTKc][ηξ]=0A state vector xmcontaining the modal displacement η, the modal velocity and the compensator is defined as follows:(21)xm=[ηη̇ξξ̇]T=[x1x2x3x4]TThe modal state-space model is built using the new state vector xm, and can be expressed as a self-governing system(22)ẋm=Axmwhere A(t) is the closed-loop system matrix, and is given as(23)A=[0I00−Λ−C¯BaG0000IKcBsT0−Kc−Cc]The eigenvalues of A give the damped natural frequencies and damping ratios. The system expressed in Eq. (22) is stable, if only A is negative definite.For the target structure studied in this paper, the natural frequencies vary with the spinning angular speed. So constant-gain and constant-frequency positive position feedback controller may exceed the stable region of the system. As a consequence the variable PPF controller with changing frequency and gain is proposed. The stiffness matrix Kc, damping matrix Ccand control gain matrix G of the PPF controller are both variant and Kcis consistent with the target structure. The variable PPF compensator extends capability of controlling structural frequencies and damping.The optimum control gain G is determined based on linear quadratic regulator (LQR) optimal control theory. In this, the feedback control system is designed to minimize a cost function or a performance index which is proportional to the required measure of the system׳s response. The cost function used in this case is given by(24)J=12∫0∞(xTQx+uTRu)dtwhere Q is a positive semi definite state penalty matrix and R is a positive definite control penalty matrix. Larger (relatively) elements in Q mean that we demand more vibration suppression ability from the controller. The purpose of the second term in Eq. (24) is to account for the effort being expended by the control system, so that small reductions in the output response are not obtained at the expense of physically unreasonable actuator input levels.The LQR control trajectory minimizes the objective function for arbitrary initial state, namely(25)minJ(x0,u)=J(x0,uopt)=x0TPx0where(26)P=Ps+PuPsand Puare positive definite matrices and are the solutions to matrix Ricatti equation(27)ATPs+PsA+Q=0ATPu+PuA+GTRG=0The energy dissipated depends on the initial states which are not always known. In the case that the initial state is assumed to be a random variable, minimization of expected value of J over the set of possible initial states is the same as minimizing trace(P). Moreover, it is necessary to keep the balance of actuators. So the objective function is defined as(28)trace(P)/∏i=12nλi2n→Minwhere λiis the ith eigenvalue of P.A genetic algorithm is preferable to some classical and traditional optimization algorithms in obtaining global optimal solutions.In this section, the dynamic equations of the flexible beam are validated and the PPF vibration control theory is applied to the system.First, the natural frequency analysis is applied to two example problems with mono-symmetrical cross sections, and the effects of warping stiffness are studied for comparison with the results from literature. After validating, the influence of the spinning angular speed on the coupled bending–torsional natural frequencies and mode shapes are investigated. Then the PPF compensator is used to damp the vibrational beam which is excited by impulse and random loads when the beam is in unchanged spinning angular speed. And performances of the invariable and variable PPF compensators are compared by a zero-input analysis when the beam is in changed spinning angular speed.For validating, two types of beams, i.e. the beam with a semi-circular open cross section (SC), and the other one with a channel cross section (CC) shown inFig. 3, are considered. After validating the present formulation, the beam with circular open cross section used in the solar panel of the Hubble Space Telescope is studied in static and vibration control analysis, as seen from Example III in Fig. 3.The physical properties of beams for validating are derived from Ref. [44], while physical properties for static and dynamic analysis are taken from Ref. [45], and they are presented inTable 1.Comparison of the first two numerical results for the current study with those given in published literature is presented inTable 2. Both examples apply to cantilever end conditions. It is necessary to clarify that all the results are derived in the case that the spinning angular speed is zero.The first seven natural frequencies are obtained by including and excluding the effect of warping stiffness. In Ref. [44], the authors only concentrate on the bending deformation in z-direction and the axial torsion. In this paper, the bending deformation in y-direction is also considered. The third and seventh modes for Example I are bending deformation in y-direction. For Example II the second and fifth modes are y-axial bending deformation. And when the beam׳s spinning angular speed is zero, the y-directional bending is decoupled with the z-directional bending and the axial torsion when the cross section is symmetric about y-axis. It is also concluded that the resulting frequencies are in good agreement with the ones from Ref. [44].The analysis of the natural frequencies of bending–torsion coupled Euler–Bernoulli beams has been presented taking into account the effects of warping effects and rotatory inertia. It is seen that when these effects are neglected, the errors associated with them become increasingly large as the modal index increased. The general effect of including warping is to increase the natural frequencies.To examine the effect of the spinning speed on natural frequencies and mode shapes of a beam, various values with the interval [0, 1.2πrad/s] for the spinning speed are considered for the Example III, and corresponding frequencies are presented inTable 3. The maximum spinning velocity is approximately chosen as the first radial frequency of the beam.The normalized modal shape functions of both beams are illustrated inFig. 4, respectively. The ϕ component of the mode shapes has been multiplied by the distance e in order to compare ϕ with the v and w components. Among the first six mode shapes of the beam, there did not exist axial deformation due to much higher axial stiffness. It is concluded that in any cases, the transverse deflection in z-direction and the torsional motion in x-direction are coupled. When the spinning speed is zero, the second and sixth modes are transverse deflections in y-direction while the other modes are transverse deflections in z-direction that are fully decoupled with y-directional deflections. When spinning speed is 1.2πrad/s, three types of deformation are coupled with the others.In order to evaluate the coupling effects, we defined a factor as coupling coefficient which is the ratio of amplitudes in the principal direction and secondary direction. The principal direction and secondary direction for each mode are defined as follows: when the spinning angular speed is 0, the principal direction is defined by the direction of which the transverse deflection is non-zero while the secondary direction is defined by the direction of which the transverse deflection is zero. The results of coupling coefficients with respect to the spinning speed and modal index are listed inTable 4. It can be concluded that the coupling coefficients increase as the increase of the spinning speed. As the modal index rises, the effect of spinning speed on coupling coefficients weakens since the influence of the Coriolis force becomes weaker compared with the others.The relative difference of natural frequencies due to the spinning angular speed is illustrated inFig. 5. It is evident that the spinning speed can change the dynamic characteristics of the beam. With increasing the spinning speed, a decrease in natural frequencies is observed except the second mode. The first frequency of the beam fall sharply concluded from the fact that the first frequency decreases by 44% when the speed increases from zero to 1.2πrad/s. The change of the second frequency can be divided to be two phases. When the spinning speed increases from zero, the second natural frequency increases while the third frequency decreases until the second equals the third frequency. Then the value of the repetitive frequencies decreases when the spinning speed increases continually. Mostly, as the modal index rises, the effect of spinning speed on natural frequencies weakens since motion amplitudes become smaller with increasing frequency, which corresponds to an insignificant change in reference kinetic energy.After validating the present formulation, a vibration control study has been made using the open circular section beam bonded with piezoelectric layers, as illustrated inFig. 6. In this section, the performance of the adaptive PPF compensator is evaluated. First, vibration histories under unchanged spinning speed for the open loop and closed loop system are compared. Then the vibration systems under changed spinning speed based on the invariable and variable controller are compared.In this numerical simulation example, there are five collocated sensor/actuator pairs evenly distributed on the beam surfaces in total. Two PZT layers of dimensions 54×20×1mm3 are bonded on bottom and top surfaces of the beam to act as a sensor and actuator respectively. Properties of PZT are given inTable 5. One end of the beam is attached to a moving base and the other end is free. The beam is divided into 50 elements. The stiffness and the mass of the piezoelectric layers are included in the model and the structural damping is neglected in this case. In order to reduce the freedom of the system, the first five elastic modes are reserved and higher order modes are ignored. The structural damping is specified as 0.005 in this case, as the aim is to access the effectiveness of the active control.An external impulse load of 0.1N is assumed to act at the free end of the beam in the z direction for 100ms duration. The vibration histories of the beam tip without and with the PPF controller (namely open loop and closed loop) are shown inFig. 7 when the spinning speed is 1.2πrad/s. It can be noted that the z-directional load excited both deflections of y-direction and z-direction whose maximum response values are 4.78mm and 41.66mm respectively. After 50s, the tip deflection of y-direction and z-direction reduced by 19.9% and 25.0% without the PPF controller while the tip deflection reduced by 98.3% and 98.0% with the PPF controller. The attenuation curve indicates that the vibration levels are reduced faster with the PPF controller.The effectiveness of the active control strategy in controlling the response of the beam subject to random load is demonstrated inFig. 8 wherein a random load of z-direction is applied to the free end. The random load whose mean value is zero is Gaussian distribution and the amplitude is 0.01N. The maximum amplitudes of three types of deformations are all reduced by almost 80% with PPF compensator compared to the uncontrolled cases.To demonstrate the advantage of the variable PPF for the active vibration suppression, a case is conducted: the moving base spins in a changed angular speed which changes from 0 to 1.0πrad/s. A initial displacement in z-direction is applied to the flexible beam. The invariable PPF controller represents that the compensator is designed when the spinning speed is 0 and used to control the beam regardless the beam׳s spinning speed. The variable PPF controller is depending on the spinning speed and has variable frequency and control gain. The results of the simulation are shown inFig. 9. It is clear that, from the comparison of curves, the vibration of the flexible beam with variable PPF controller has significantly been reduced. The system with variable controller has a faster setting time than the invariable controller.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In the present paper, the spinning flexible beam containing piezoelectric patches is formulated including electrical–structural coupling effects. The active vibration control performance of piezoelectric structures is studied using variable PPF control method which is based on output feedback.The spinning beam bonded with PZT layers has been formulated based on Euler–Bernoulli beam theory and Hamilton principle. Numerical results show that the spinning angular speed changed natural frequencies whose values decrease with respect to the increase of spinning speed in most cases. Also the spinning of the elastic beam induces the coupling of transverse deflections in two orthogonal directions and the amplitude of the speed has obvious influence on the coupling coefficient.The PPF compensator is used to control a cantilevered beam including distributed sensors and actuators subjected to impact load and random load on the tip. Results show the effectiveness of the controller by comparing closed-loop system with open-loop system. Nevertheless, the spinning beam may be unstable with the invariable PPF compensator because of the variation of natural characteristics. So a variable PPF controller with inconstant gain and frequencies is adopted to damp the beam system. In the numerical simulation, zero input analysis is conducted on a beam whose base spins in a changed angular speed which changes from 0 to 1.0πrad/s. The numerical simulation revealed that the variable PPF controller has a faster setting time than the invariable controller.(A1)Mx=ρA∫0LΦxTΦxdx+∑i=1np∫xixi+liρpApiΦxTΦxdxMy=ρA∫0LΦyTΦydx+∑i=1np∫xixi+liρpApiΦyTΦydxMz=ρA∫0LΦzTΦzdx+∑i=1np∫xixi+liρpApiΦzTΦzdxMϕ=ρJp∫0LΦϕTΦϕdx+∑i=1np∫xixi+liρpApiΦϕTΦϕdxΓyz=ρA∫0LΦyTΦzdx+∑i=1np∫xixi+liρpApiΦyTΦzdxΓzy=ρA∫0LΦzTΦydx+∑i=1np∫xixi+liρpApiΦzTΦydxΓyϕ=ρA∫0LΦyTΦϕdx+∑i=1np∫xixi+liρpApiΦyTΦϕdxΓzϕ=ρA∫0LΦzTΦϕdx+∑i=1np∫xixi+liρpApiΦzTΦϕdxΓϕy=ρA∫0LΦϕTΦydx+∑i=1np∫xixi+liρpApiΦϕTΦydxΓϕz=ρA∫0LΦϕTΦzdx+∑i=1np∫xixi+liρpApiΦϕTΦzdx(A2)Kx=EA∫0LΦx′TΦx′dxKy=EIz∫0LΦy″TΦy″dxKz=EIy∫0LΦz″TΦz″dxKϕ=GJp∫0LΦϕ′TΦϕ′dxKϕϕ=EΓ∫0LΦϕ″TΦϕ″dxKp=∑i=1npKpi=∑i=1npEpbpitpi(zi2+zitpi+tpi23)∫xixi+liΦz″TΦz″dxwhere bpiis the width of the ith PZT layer and tpiis the thickness of each PZT element, ziis the distance measured from the neutral axis of the beam to the mid-plane of the ith PZT layer.(A3)γi=lpibpitpiε33γ=diag(γi)χi=e31bpi(zi+tpi2)∫xixi+liΦz″Tdxχz=[χ1χ2⋯χnp]V=[V1V2⋯Vnp]Twhere Viis the electrode voltage.(A4)M=[Mx0000My0−ezΓyϕ00MzeyΓzϕ0−ezΓϕyeyΓϕz(1+Ae2Jp)Mϕ]C=[000000−2ΩΓyz−eyΩΓyϕ02ΩΓzy0−ezΩΓzϕ0eyΩΓϕyezΩΓϕz0]K=[Kx0000Ky−Ω2My0000Kz−Ω2Mz+Kp0000Kϕ+K˜ϕ]χ=[00χzT0]T.