@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A fluid structure interaction study of a viscous mechanism for energy absorption in protective structural panels

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A viscous mechanism is studied to improve the energy absorption of sandwich panels.Fluid structure interaction simulations were performed to assess the energy dissipated by plastic deformation and viscous dissipation in drop-weight and blast simulations of test specimens.The liquid flow speeds generated by the applied loads are found to be a critical factor.The viscosity of the liquid has a major effect on the viscous energy absorbed.The concept of viscous-assist is a viable means for improving the ability of protective panels and structures to withstand high-speed impact and blast loads.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Fluid–structure-interaction,Viscous,Dissipation,Blast,Panel,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Sandwich panels designed to resist blasts and high-velocity impacts usually dissipate most of the delivered energy through inelastic deformation of solids. A concept is explored in this study to improve the energy absorption of such structures by the addition of a viscous mechanism. The mechanism relies on the fact that when a viscous liquid is forced through narrow passages at high speeds, it undergoes high shear rates that cause viscous energy dissipation. A simple test specimen in the form of a steel tube with capillaries attached at both ends was chosen for study. Both empty and liquid-filled test specimens were subjected to experimental and simulated drop-weight impact tests and simulated blast load tests. Fluid structure interaction analyses in the form of Coupled-Eulerian–Lagrangian simulations were performed to assess the energy dissipated both by solid plastic deformation and liquid viscous dissipation in the drop-weight and blast simulations. The liquid flow speeds generated by the applied loads were found to be a critical factor in determining the contribution of the viscous mechanism. The moderate liquid flow speeds generated by the drop-weight impacts resulted in negligible viscous energy dissipation. The simulated blast loads generated much higher liquid flow speeds and as a result the viscous energy contribution to the total absorbed energy in the test specimens approached 30%. The viscosity of the liquid has a major effect on the fraction of energy absorbed in the form of viscous dissipation. Results of this study support the viability of the concept of viscous-assist for improving the ability of protective panels and structures to withstand high-speed impact and blast loads.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Panels designed for impact or blast energy absorption are usually either monolithic plates or sandwich constructions. Depending on the blast and impact intensities that are anticipated, these energy-absorbing panels can be constructed of metals such as steel or aluminum or of polymer matrix composites. Sandwich constructions can have cores that could be honeycombs, foams, and other such lightweight, energy-absorbing geometries [1,2]. For high intensity blasts and impacts, metals are still the material of choice for constructing energy absorbing panels [3]. Metals such as steel, when used in panels, are capable of absorbing a significant amount of energy from blasts and impacts thereby providing protection to the target. This energy is absorbed primarily by plastic deformation [4].A blast or high velocity impact event can cause damage to energy-absorbing panels in multiple ways. Severe penetration and perforation of the panel can result. Even without perforation, there could be extensive deformation causing harm to the target. Shock and stress waves can propagate through the panel and be transmitted onto the target. Deformation and stress wave mitigation can be accomplished by absorbing and redirecting the energy as it works its way through the panel. An example of utilizing this concept is the use of sacrificial cladding in the form of a ductile metal layer over a steel plate [5].The concept explored in this investigation involves the use of a viscous assist to the plastic energy absorption in protective structures. While this concept can be implemented in numerous ways, a simple sandwich structure is used as an illustrative model. Consider an array of metallic tubes bonded between two metal face plates, thus forming a sandwich panel. The tubes, filled with a viscous liquid, taper into capillaries at the ends (Fig. 1(a)). When a blast wave or high velocity impact event strikes this viscous-assist sandwich panel (Fig. 1(b)), the panel deforms with a significant amount of the energy absorbed in the plastic deformation of the face plates of the panel and the metal tubes. An additional energy dissipation mechanism that will be triggered is viscous in nature, as the liquid in the tubes is forced out through the capillaries. If a sizeable fraction of the energy absorbed is in the form of viscous dissipation, the resulting lower deformation in the panel will mean reduced penetration into the target.Several examples exist of the use of liquids for impact and blast energy absorption and stress wave mitigation. Su et al. [6] describe the analysis of a piston-cylinder device that mitigates propagating shock waves by repeated reflections, thereby reducing the peak pressure transmitted. Zakrajsek et al. [7] explored the use of water sheets to reduce the peak overpressure and impulse of a shock wave. They were able to experimentally demonstrate a reduction in the overpressure and impulse transmitted by a shock wave through the water sheet. Liquids containing nanoporous particles have recently been explored as energy absorbing media [8–10]. When such liquid suspensions are subject to a quasi-static or dynamic pressure, the liquid infiltrates into the pores and energy is absorbed and stored as interfacial surface energy at newly created liquid–solid interfaces in the nanopores [9]. Using liquids to absorb impacts in helmets has also been recently explored [11]. Stewart et al. [11] studied the use of fluid filled channels in helmet liners. Testing revealed that the presence of fluid filled channels within a helmet liner improves the helmet performance under impact loads, by decreasing the peak acceleration of the impact and increasing the duration of the impact. Deshmukh and McKinley [12] loaded a cellular solid with a magnetorheological fluid, thus creating a composite medium whose energy absorbing capability can be tuned using applied magnetic fields. Lee et al. [13] used shear thickening fluids to soak a Kevlar fabric to examine the ballistic impact resistance. They demonstrated an increase in ballistic resistance because of the presence of the shear thickening fluid.There has also been a lot of interest in investigating how liquid-filled tubes and pipes respond to impact loads [14,15]. This is very relevant for applications in the power generation and petrochemical industries. Nishida et al. [14] examined aluminum pipes filled with water and impacted by steel spheres. They found a strong dependence of the pressure generated in the liquid on the impact velocity. In a similar fashion, Lu et al. [15] found that the pressure of the water in water-filled pipes significantly affects the critical perforation energy of the pipes when impacted by projectiles.In this work, we explore the concept of a viscous-assist mechanism as a means of energy dissipation in a protective panel for blast and impact loads. The feasibility of the concept is explored by numerical fluid–structure-interaction simulations, and experimental testing. In Section 2, a preliminary assessment is performed to explore the viability of the viscous-assist mechanism to cause energy dissipation when viscous liquids are moved rapidly through narrow orifices. In Section 3, we assess the response of a simple viscous-assist test specimen to drop-weight tests. This is done through experiments and finite element simulations. In Section 4, finite element fluid–structure interaction simulations are conducted to assess the response of viscous-assist test specimens to simulated blast loads. Our conclusions are outlined in Section 5.The preliminary assessment involved idealized, conceptual models on paper. The aim was to establish order-of-magnitude estimates of viscous dissipation energy when a simplified geometry of a viscous-assist panel is subject to blast loads. A second goal was to confirm the conjecture that in the time scales associated with blast pressure pulses, viscous liquids can be moved at high speeds to dissipate energy.An order-of-magnitude estimate of the viscous dissipation energy was produced by considering a simplified, conceptual model of a viscous-assist sandwich panel. The conceptual panel consisted of two square, rigid flat plates of side length 30cm (12in.), sandwiching a viscous-liquid core. Capillaries of inside diameter 3mm (0.12in.) and length 2.5cm (1in.), spaced 2.5cm (1.0in.) apart, were arrayed around the periphery of the square sandwich panel. A side view of the concept sandwich panel is shown in Fig. 2(a). The effect of a blast pressure pulse acting on the upper square plate of the sandwich is simulated by the rapid downward motion of the plate with an effective downward ‘crushing’ velocity. When the upper plate is driven downward with a high velocity, and the bottom is held rigid, the viscous liquid in the middle is rapidly forced through the capillaries at high speed, thus dissipating some of the blast energy. Fig. 3shows a plot of the viscous energy dissipation rate per capillary as a function of the ‘crushing’ velocity of the upper plate. This dissipation rate is a function of the viscosity of the liquid, which was chosen to be a 30 weight motor oil for these calculations. Temperature dependence of the viscosity was also taken into consideration as can be seen in Fig. 3. The results of the analysis indicated that viscous energy dissipation rate per capillary can exceed 100kW, if the liquid is driven at high enough speeds. When dissipation in all tubes was considered, viscous-liquid flow in the capillaries accounted for 25% of the energy of the pressure pulse, a non-negligible amount. This proof-of-concept calculation demonstrated that when viscous liquids are moved at high speeds through narrow channels, viscous dissipation mechanisms can absorb a significant fraction of the input blast or impact energy.The assumption that a viscous liquid can be moved at high speeds when exposed to a sharp pressure pulse, in the same time-scale as the pulse, was also verified. To do this, we created a second conceptual model consisting of a long rigid tube with a capillary attached at one end (see Fig. 2(b)). For the purposes of the analysis, the rigid tube had an inside diameter of 2.5cm (1in.) and length 7.6cm (3.0in.), and was connected at one end to a capillary with a 1.0mm (0.04in.) inside diameter, and a length of 7.6cm (3in.). The tube and capillary were assumed to be filled with a viscous liquid (30 weight motor oil at room temperature). At the open end of the tube, an axial pressure pulse decreasing linearly over time from 350MPa (5.08×104psi) to zero was applied. The time duration of the pulse was 0.3ms. The peak pressure of 350MPa (5.08×104psi) was gleaned from blast-panel field test data where 1kg (2.205lbm) of TNT was used. The momentum, continuity, and energy equations were solved for compressible, one-dimensional, frictional flow using the method of characteristics and numerical methods. The results (Fig. 4) show that it takes 0.064ms for the liquid in the tube to begin to flow into the capillary, a fact consistent with the calculated sound speed in the liquid of 1200m/s (47,200in./s). Thus a viscous liquid will indeed flow as a fluid in the time scales associated with blast pressure pulses. It was also determined that the energy dissipation due to the movement of the liquid in a channel is approximately proportional to the third power of the flow speed. This points to the need for large liquid flow speeds to increase the assist in viscous-assist sandwich panels.The preliminary analyses described above provided initial support for the concept of viscous-assist in protective shields and panels. However the models considered were highly simplified. Moreover, the focus was only on the liquid and viscous dissipation. The deformation of the solids and more importantly the interaction of the solid and liquid were ignored. In what follows, the focus is on the fluid–structure interaction problem that develops when a liquid loaded solid specimen is subject to impacts or blasts. Both viscous dissipation in the liquid and plastic deformation in the solid are considered. The dependence of the viscous dissipation energy on liquid flow speed is examined by considering two different loading rates. A drop-weight test is studied to generate moderate liquid flow speeds and a simulated blast test is examined for larger flow speeds.Drop-weight tests were next explored to assess the feasibility of the viscous-assist concept. As mentioned earlier, the liquid flow speeds generated by such loading were expected to be moderate. Plastic and viscous dissipation energy were quantitatively determined by a combination of experimental tests and numerical simulations. In a panel such as illustrated in Fig. 1(a), energy dissipation mechanisms include plastic deformation by bending and stretching of the front and rear face plates, plastic deformation by the crushing of the tubes, and viscous dissipation by liquid flow through the tubes and end capillaries. The focus of the drop-weight testing was on the phenomena occurring in the deforming tubes and flow through the capillaries. Hence, a considerably simplified test specimen configuration was chosen. A single steel tube fitted with capillaries at both ends was utilized (Fig. 6). Drop-weight tests were conducted on these tube-capillary specimens, with tubes either empty or filled with a viscous liquid. Numerical finite element simulations were performed on these specimens as well. The experiments and simulations conducted and the results obtained are presented here.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
