@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
The impact force identification of composite stiffened panels under material uncertainty

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A hybrid method to address uncertainty effects in the impact force identification is presented.A parametric study is conducted to analyze the effects of material uncertainty on dynamic responses of composite stiffened panels.The technique of model updating is used to correct the modeling errors caused by material uncertainty.An improved inverse analysis technique based on FEM and mode superposition method is taken for impact force identification.The proposed method is validated on the composite stiffened panel and the effect of noise is finally discussed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Material uncertainty,Parametric study,Model updating,Impact identification,Inverse analysis method,Noise effect,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a synthesis approach to address the problem of uncertainty in the impact force identification. The effects of material uncertainty on dynamic responses of the structure are studied by using Monte Carlo simulation. Six parameters, including mechanical properties and thermal coefficients, are considered as independent random variables. A parametric study is conducted to select four parameters as the optimization variables in the following step of model updating. The technique of model updating is used to correct the modeling errors caused by material uncertainty. Then, an improved inverse analysis technique based on the finite element method and mode superposition method is taken for impact force identification. In this study, the present method is performed on a composite stiffened panel, and the effect of noise on the performance of identification is also discussed. The results of the study show that the developed approach is capable of identifying the impact location and reconstructing the force history accurately by reducing material uncertainty through the modal updating procedure.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
External impact events on aircraft and spacecraft structures are common phenomena in aerospace industry, such as bird-strike, runway debris collision and other similar loading events. These impacts may cause some hidden damages in the interior of composite materials, which will grow progressively and result in catastrophic failure of the structures. In recent years, structural health monitoring (SHM), as a promising technique for ensuring the structural integrity, is receiving more and more attention to meet the high demands for operation safety of structures and low cost maintenance.Generally, a SHM system is comprised of a sensing network, a signal processing module with advanced algorithms and other essential hardwares. According to the operating principle of sensors, it can be classified into two types of monitoring systems: active and passive damage detection [1]. For impact force identification, it can be regarded as a passive sensing system, which does not involve any actuation. Transducers built in structures are used to extract relevant signal information generated by impacts.Impact force identification mainly includes the impact location estimation and the force history reconstruction. In the area of impact location estimation, the most popular method is based on time-of-flight (TOF) [2,3], which is realized by minimizing the deviations between measured TOFs and calculated TOFs. However, the limitation reveals in two aspects: firstly, it is difficult to determine the exact TOF of the impact wave; secondly, it requires an accurate wave velocity, which varies with the impact frequency and is also directionally dependent for anisotropic composites. Liang et al. [4] proposed a distributed coordination algorithm which fused the strengths of the triangulation method and the inverse analysis method. These two methods coordinated in parallel to improve the preciseness and real-time of impact location. In addition, Chang et al. [5,6] proposed a method to estimate the impact location by calculating the centroid of power distribution over the entire structure from sensor signals. Though this method is easy without any complex algorithms, the accuracy of the results depends on the number of sensors to a large extent. The artificial neural networks (ANNs) [7–11] have been adopted to detect the impact location due to the development of artificial intelligence techniques in recent years. Worden et al. [7] used ANNs to find the impact location successfully, but it failed to detect the magnitude of the impact force. Haywood et al. [8] and Park et al. [9] carried out experiments to detect impact locations with an ANN algorithm. A tutorial overview of the basic theory, like data and sensor fusion, feature extraction and selection, ANNs etc., was given in [10]. However, the above applications of ANNs require a huge amount of impact data for learning through training tests, which is not practical for application. Sharif-Khodaei et al. [11] have overcome the above limitation by developing a metamodel, but it also brings another limitation of the requirement of an accurate finite element (FE) model.In the other field of the force history reconstruction, some researchers also developed various effective methods. Among these methods, one class is based on transfer function. Generally, the function can be obtained through three ways: analytical solutions [12,13], the FE method [14,15], and experimental tests [5,6,16,17]. Atobe [16] used experimental transfer matrices to estimate the structural response. It avoided using any analytical or numerical models of the structure. An optimization algorithm was then adopted to identify the force history by minimizing the deviation between the measured sensor responses and the estimated response. Park and Chang [5,6] developed an advantageous methodology which was based on a linear auto-regressive model with exogenous (ARX). Sets of limited training data in terms of impulse response were generated to derive ARX parameters. Recently, the time-reversal (T-R) technique in the application of impact identification has attracted much interest [15,17–20]. Based on the principle of the T-R concept, if sensor signals are reversed in time and re-emitted, the temporal and spatial convergence can be achieved simultaneously and the back-propagated elastic wave will converge at the impact location. Transfer function is usually used to realize the T-R procedure. Another class of impact identification methods relies on the numerical model of structures. Davendralingam [21] presented a method based on a sensitivity response approach in conjunction with a general finite element program to identify unknown parameter and force histories for nonlinear structures. Yan et al. [22] proposed a genetic algorithm-based approach for impact force identification. In this method, the impact location and force history are represented by a set of parameters, thus transforming it to a parameter identification problem. Hu et al. [23] employed Chebyshev polynomial to approximate the impact force history. By comparing the numerically estimated strains and the experimental ones, an optimization model was set up to solve this inverse problem by employing the quadratic programming method. The main drawback of Yan [22] and Hu [23] is its requirement of an accurate structural model, which is difficult for some complex structures. In addition, the technique of ANNs can also be used to reconstruct the force history [7].Although a lot of techniques have been conducted on this issue during the past few years, there still exist many problems in the transition from theory to practical applications. One major obstacle for the slow progress of its application is the existence of various uncertainties. In general, uncertainty in structural dynamic can be categorized into two types: epistemic uncertainty and aleatory uncertainty [24]. Epistemic uncertainty, also referred to as reducible uncertainty, is a potential deficiency that is due to lack-of-knowledge of quantities or processes of the system. Aleatory or random uncertainty occurs due to the physical variability in the system, and the randomness of material properties or environmental and operational conditions typically leads to aleatory uncertainty. This type of uncertainty is not mainly due to a lack of knowledge and is also referred to as irreducible uncertainty. Sohn [25] reviewed the effects of environmental and operational variations on real structures and presented research progresses in the area of data normalization. For composite structures, aleatory uncertainty of material properties is particularly important but has always been ignored. Due to the increased structural complexity and some inherent uncertainties involved in the manufacturing process [26], material uncertainties of composites are relatively higher than isotropic materials, thus causing the variation of structural response, like eigenvalues and eigenvectors. A number of studies have been conducted on the damage detection of composite structures with consideration of material uncertainty [26–31]. Murugan [26] and Georgiou [28] investigated the effect of uncertainty in composite material properties on the aeroelastic behavior of composite structures based on the techniques of Monte Carlo simulations (MCS) and Polynomial Chaos Expansion (PCE) respectively. Gayathri [27,29] studied the material uncertainty effects on frequency of composite plates with damage of matrix crack. Singh [31] investigated the effects of dispersion in material properties on free vibration response of composite plates with geometric nonlinearity. For a detailed review, the reader can refer to [32] which presented a comprehensive review of uncertainties involved in flight vehicle structural damage monitoring, diagnosis, prognosis and control and its challenges.In this work, material uncertainty is firstly considered before the impact force identification. Probabilistic analysis using MCS is performed to study the effect of uncertainty in mechanical and thermal properties on dynamic responses. Following that, a parametric study is conducted to find out the key parameters on the above responses. Secondly, modal updating is utilized to establish an accurate FE model. Then, Section 4 develops an inverse analysis technique for composite stiffened structures. It is based on the finite element method and mode superposition method to realize the impact force identification. Effect of noise in strain responses on the impact identification is finally examined in detail followed by conclusions.An FE model of a stiffened composite panel is formulated in this section. A dynamic analysis is carried out to study the dynamic characteristics of the structure, which is achieved by the widely used finite element software MSC.Nastran.Fig. 1 shows the details of the structure, and the clamped boundary is imposed on the upper and lower edges of the plate. The mechanical properties of laminate [33] are presented inTable 1.It is intuitive that temperature variation may change the dynamic response of structures. The effects of temperature variability mainly reveal in two aspects: the material stiffness and the boundary conditions of a system. In this section, the effect of thermal stress caused by temperature is considered, and it is applied on the structure as an initial condition, which may change the system stiffness and thus affect the dynamic behavior of structures. An initial temperature field is given as a prior condition and is shown inFig. 2. The thermal properties, thermal expansion coefficients [34], are also listed in Table 1.Probabilistic analysis is performed to study the effect of material uncertainty on the natural frequency of the structure. The technique of MCS, as a non-intrusive method, is performed in this study by considering mechanical properties(E1,E2,v12,G12)and thermal coefficients(α1,α2)as independent random variables, which are normally distributed. The coefficients of variation (COVs) forE1,E2,v12,G12are given in Table 1[33] and the COVs ofα1,α2are assumed as −0.05 and 0.05 respectively.According to the sample points of MCS, a multivariate quadratic regression model is established as:(1)yk=β0+∑i=1mβixi+∑i=1mβixi2+∑i=1m∑j=1,j≠imβijxixj,(k=1,…,n)wherexandyrefer to the independent random variables and natural frequencies respectively andmandnare the number of them.βrepresent the coefficients of the polynomial.On the basis of the above multivariate quadratic regression model, the contribution of each independent random variable on the natural frequency can be further calculated. First, the range of each independent random variable is normalized to [−1, 1], then the coefficients of the polynomialβcan be updated to a new set ofγby the method of least squares. Finally, the contribution percentage of each independent random variable can be calculated by(2)Pxi=γxi∑j=1m2+mγxiThrough the above parametric study, the key variables can be identified based on the contribution percentage.Fig. 3 illustrates the first six factors which have greater effects on the two representative responses, the 1st and 7th natural frequencies. For the rest ones, the first three factors are just the same as the 1st or 7th natural frequency. From the results, four independent random variables,E1,E2,G12,α2, are selected as the key variables in this study and the effects ofv12andα1on natural frequency responses can be neglected. To further verify the reliability of the selection strategy, another probabilistic analysis is carried out by considering the uncertainty of the four selected variables. The relevant cumulative distribution functions (CDFs) are compared inFig. 4 and the standard deviation (SD) of natural frequencies are listed inTable 2. It can be seen that the two curves almost overlap under the two conditions of total variables and four selected variables and the variation of SD is less than 0.6% when neglecting the uncertainty ofv12andα1.The technique of model updating aims to increase the quality of the FE model. In general, there are two approaches for model updating. The first approach updates the system matrix, mass, stiffness and damping, to replicate the measured response. However, it has destructed the matrices properties of sparse and symmetry, thus making the updating result loses its original physical meanings. Another approach only updates the selected structural parameters to maintain the physical characteristics of the structure, which is achieved by reducing the modal property differences between the FE model and the measurements based on an optimization algorithm. In this section, the second approach is adopted.In Section 2, four independent random variables have been selected as the key parameters for structural responses. In this section, these four parameters are taken as the optimization variables to realize the process of model updating, and their initial values and change intervals are listed inTable 3. The intervals are taken from the results of the previous MCS.The objective function is the sum of residual squares between the natural frequencies of analytical and measured, which is expressed as(3)obj=∑i=1m(ωi−ωi′ωi)2whereωi′andωiare the analytical and measured natural frequencies for the ith mode respectively, andmrefers to the number of modes considered, and the first 10 modes are considered. In this paper, the actual values of material parameters are assumed to be known, which are also listed in Table 3, and the measured frequencies are calculated using these values by MSC.Nastran instead of experiments. The genetic algorithm (GA) is then used to find the global optimal solution.GA is efficient in searching the optimum in the whole solution space for its heuristic nature. It generates the offspring and improves them through repetitive application of the selection, crossover and mutation operations. The optimization variables,E1,E2,G12,α2, are represented by four chromosomes in which the values of design variables are converted into a binary string of 0 and 1 characters. In the process of iterations, the tournament selection scheme is introduced to ensure fitter individuals to be selected for reproduction with a high probability. The selected parent populations then produce new offspring through two operations: crossover and mutation. The crossover strategy uses two-point crossover to create two children from two parents. In this section, the crossover and mutation probability is 0.8 and 0.03 respectively, and the number of the individuals is 100.The objective function varying with the iterations is illustrated inFig. 5. From the figure, it can be seen that the objective function converges through about 25 iterations. The results of the comparison of the updating parameters with initials ones are shown in Table 3. In addition, the maximum error of parameters is reduced to 2.3%, which has a significant improvement. The updating parameters are further used to realize the impact force identification in the next section. However, the drawback of GA optimization is that it usually sacrifices the computational time for accuracy of the global optimal solution.Actually, impact force identification is a classical inverse problem in dynamics, which is basically calculated from structural responses. It suffers from the ill-conditioned nature of the inverse problem, thus making it difficult to find an accurate solution. However, identification of impact location and force history is the first step and plays a vital role in SHM. In this section, an inverse method is developed to solve this issue.The method taken here is based on the Duhamel integral and Chebyshev polynomial base functions [23], which has also been improved for application of stiffened panels.Firstly, Chebyshev polynomials are employed to approximate the force history, which have reduced the number of unknown parameters. The expression is as follows:(4)P(t)=∑k=1KβkCk(t)whereKis the number of base functions,βis the corresponding coefficients, which needs to be identified later.Ck(t)is Chebyshev base function of degreek, and is given as(5)Ck(t)=cos[karccos(2t/T−1)]whereTis the time domain of force time.Then the modal displacement of a linear system can be estimated by Duhamel's convolution integral as(6)θit=fiTp∫otP(τ)h(t−τ)dτwhere p is the load vector,fiis the ith vibration mode, andh(t−τ)is impulse response function, as follows:(7)h(t−τ)=1ωi(1−ζ2)sin[ωi(1−ζ2)(t−τ)]exp[−ζωi(t−τ)]whereωiis the ith circular frequency andζis the damping parameter. In addition, Eq. (6) must satisfy the initial conditions:θi(0)=0andθ̇i(0)=0.Then, the modal displacement can be written as(8)θit=fiTp∑k=1KSki(t)βkwhere(9)Ski(t)=1ωi(1−ζ2)∫0τCk(τ)sin[ωi(1−ζ2)(t−τ)]exp[−ζωi(t−τ)]dτBased on the principle of modal superposition, the absolute displacements can be obtained by(10)u(t)=∑i=1Nfiθi(t)=∑i=1NfifiTp(∑k=1KSki(t)βk)=ϕ(t)ηwhereNis the number of modal data, and(11)ϕ(t)=[∑i=1NfifiTpS1i∑i=1NfifiTpS2i…∑i=1NfifiTpSKi]andηis the corresponding coefficients vector, as follows:(12)η=[β1β2…βK]TThen, the strain functionε(t,η)can be derived from displacements field by the transform matrixT, which will be discussed in detail in Section 4.3.(13)ε(t,η)=Tu(t)=Tϕ(t)ηFinally, an optimization model can be established by reducing the difference between the calculated strain functionε(t,η)and the assumed measured oneε⁎(t,η). The optimization model is:(14)min∑i=1N‖εi(η)−εi⁎‖2s.t.P(0)=0,P(t)≥0(t>0).The quadratic programming method is used to solve the above problem, andηcan then be obtained. Consequently, the force time can be constructed by Eq. (4).For impact location estimation, it can be achieved by traversing all finite element nodes on the entire structure to find the minimum error between the calculated strains and experimental ones. Thus, another optimization model can be set up as follows:(15)min∑i=1N‖εi(P)−εi⁎‖2∑i=1N‖εi⁎‖2Once Eq. (15) reaches at the minimum, the true impact location can be determined; then the corresponding force history can be regarded as the true impact force history.Therefore, through the above process, the impact force history and location can be identified simultaneously.For composite stiffened panels, the Kirchhoff plate theory is no longer applied here. The middle surface strains must be considered, so a four-node element is adopted and there are five degrees of freedom at each node, three translation degrees,u,v,wand two rotation onesθx,θy. The total strains are expressed as(16){εxεyγxy}={∂u0∂x∂v0∂y∂u0∂y+∂v0∂x}+z{∂θy∂x−∂θx∂y∂θy∂y−∂θx∂x}={εx0εy0γxy0}−z{χxχyχxy}whereε0andχare the middle surface strains and curvature, respectively.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
