@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An extended finite element method for hydraulic fracture propagation in deformable porous media with the cohesive crack model

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
A fully coupled XFEM model is used for hydraulic fracture propagation of porous media.The governing equations of porous media are derived using the generalized Biot theory.The fluid flow within the fracture is modeled using the cubic law in the Darcy law.The cohesive crack model is used for the nonlinear fracture process zone.The fluid leak-off and the length of crack growth are obtained during the solution.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Hydraulic fracturing,Fluid flow,Fracturing porous media,Cohesive crack propagation,XFEM,Fully coupled model,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, a fully coupled numerical model is developed for the modeling of the hydraulic fracture propagation in porous media using the extended finite element method in conjunction with the cohesive crack model. The governing equations, which account for the coupling between various physical phenomena, are derived within the framework of the generalized Biot theory. The fluid flow within the fracture is modeled using the Darcy law, in which the fracture permeability is assumed according to the well-known cubic law. By taking the advantage of the cohesive crack model, the nonlinear fracture processes developing along the fracture process zone are simulated. The spatial discretization using the extended finite element method and the time domain discretization applying the generalized Newmark scheme yield the final system of fully coupled nonlinear equations, which involves the hydro-mechanical coupling between the fracture and the porous medium surrounding the fracture. The fluid leak-off and the length of fracture extension are obtained through the solution of the resulting system of equations, not only leading to the correct estimation of the fracture tip velocity as well as the fluid velocity within the fracture, but also allowing for the eventual formation of the fluid lag. It is illustrated that incorporating the coupled physical processes, i.e. the solid skeleton deformation, the fluid flow in the fracture and in the pore spaces of the surrounding porous medium and the hydraulic fracture propagation, is crucial to provide a correct solution for the problem of the fluid-driven fracture in porous media, where the poroelastic effects are significant.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The problem of modeling hydraulic fracture propagation has attracted considerable attention since the early fifties. Interest in hydraulic fracturing is mainly because of its practical applications in a broad range of engineering areas. Hydraulic fracturing is the most commonly used stimulation technique of reservoirs. This technique is widely used in the petroleum industry to enhance the recovery of hydrocarbons, such as gas and oil, from underground reservoirs. The other important application of hydraulic fracturing includes the toxic or radioactive waste disposal. In hydraulic fracturing, a viscous fluid is injected into the fracture, which pressurizes the fracture faces (seeFig. 1). With increasing the internal pressurization, the fracture propagation criterion is met ahead of the fracture tip, leading to the hydraulic fracture propagation. In fact, the hydraulic fracturing process involves the pumping of a viscous fluid into the underground formation at a high enough injection rate to fracture the formation and drive the fracture hydraulically. The main objective of this paper is to develop a more reliable simulation tool on the basis of the extended finite element method (XFEM) for the hydro-mechanical modeling of the hydraulic fracturing problem.The problem of modeling fluid-driven fractures has been addressed by numerous papers, beginning with the pioneering work of Khristianovic and Zheltov [1] and Geertsma and de Klerk [2], who developed the so-called KGD model for the plane strain hydraulic fracture. The early research works provide analytical solutions for the hydraulic fracturing problem [3–7]. These solutions usually suffer from the limitations of the analytical models. There are various numerical approaches in the literature that have been proposed for the simulation of fracture in porous media: Boone and Ingraffea [8] presented a numerical procedure for the simulation of hydraulically-driven fractures in poroelastic materials combining the finite element method with the finite difference method, Simoni and Secchi [9] and Secchi et al. [10] modeled the hydraulic cohesive crack growth using the finite element method with mesh adaptation, Rethore et al. [11,12] simulated the fluid flow in fractured and fracturing porous media using the extended finite element method, Segura and Carol [13] proposed a hydro-mechanical formulation for geomaterials with pre-existing discontinuities based on the finite element method with zero-thickness interface elements, Lobao et al. [14] presented the finite element modeling of hydro-fracture flow in porous media using zero-thickness interface elements, Khoei et al. [15] and Barani et al. [16] performed the finite element analysis of fracture propagation using the cohesive interface elements, Sarris and Papanastasiou [17] modeled hydraulic fracturing in poroelastic media using the finite element method with cohesive elements, Carrier and Granet [18] developed a zero-thickness cohesive element for the simulation of hydraulic fracturing in poroelastic media, and Mohammadnejad and Khoei [19] carried out the extended finite element modeling of cohesive crack propagation in multiphase porous media. There are also plenty of papers that are concerned with the simulation of hydraulic fracture in non-porous materials [20–24]. In this paper, the extended finite element method is applied to simulate the hydraulically-driven fracture. For the more realistic modeling of the hydraulic fracture, the medium surrounding the fracture is treated as a porous medium, and the coupling between various physical phenomena is taken into account. The involved physical phenomena which govern the propagation of the hydraulic fracture in porous media include: the flow of the fracturing fluid within the fracture, the flow of the pore fluid through the surrounding porous medium, the deformation of the surrounding porous medium, the leak-off of the fracturing fluid from the fracture into the surrounding porous medium and the hydraulic fracture propagation. Challenging difficulties in the numerical modeling of fluid-driven fractures in permeable porous media emanate from the hydro-mechanical coupling between the partial differential equations governing the fluid flow within the fracture, the pore fluid flow in the porous medium surrounding the fracture and the solid deformation. This coupling is so strong that it results in a system of fully coupled nonlinear equations, which must be solved using an iterative solution procedure. Such a modeling allows to thoroughly simulate the hydraulic fracturing process and to predict the hydraulic fracture response to both fluid and formation properties. The numerical model developed here is based upon the mechanics of deformable porous media on the basis of the generalization of the Biot theory [25] in conjunction with the cohesive fracture mechanics, which provides a suitable framework to describe the coupled hydro-mechanical and fracture mechanisms occurring in the hydraulic fracture propagation. It is noted that in the model presented here, the fracture is not treated as a cracked porous material, unlike Ref. [19]. This results in a different equation for the fluid flow within the fracture, and subsequently a different relation for the fracture permeability.There are some differences between the numerical model presented herein and the classical models in the literature for the problem of the fracture driven by the injection of a viscous fluid. The essential differences between the two models concern the modeling of the near tip processes, which may significantly affect the hydraulic fracture propagation. Generally, the analytical solutions are based on the restrictive assumption that the hydraulic fracture is completely filled with the injected fluid. That is, the solution is obtained assuming that the fluid front coincides with the fracture tip. In the analytical solutions which account for the existence of the fluid lag, the fluid pressure in the lag region is assumed to be known, while the presented numerical model allows for the development of a priori unknown lag between the fracturing fluid front and the fracture tip. Moreover, the analytical solutions either are restricted to the limiting condition of zero fluid leak-off or incorporate the fluid leak-off from the fracture by the application of the Carter leak-off model [26]. This model assumes that the fluid leak-off is one-dimensional, which contrasts with the more general case where the fluid leak-off exhibits a two-dimensional flow pattern. In practice, when the hydraulic fracture is internally pressurized by injecting the fracturing fluid, the fluid may leak into the medium surrounding the fracture depending on the permeability of the medium. The proposed model calculates the leak-off of the fracturing fluid through the fracture faces into the surrounding medium on the basis of the fully coupled poroelastic analysis. Research works show that the injection pressure measured during the hydraulic fracturing treatment is higher than the one predicted by the classical models [17,18]. The discrepancy between the model predictions and the field measurements is due to the fact that the commonly used models consider the medium surrounding the fracture as a solid continuum and consequently neglect the pore pressure development and the fluid flow in the pore spaces of the surrounding medium. The proposed numerical model accounts for the poroelastic effects. It is illustrated that poroelasticity can have a strong influence on the hydraulic fracturing behavior.The XFEM has many advantages over the classical FEM, especially for problems with moving boundaries. In the classical FEM, the crack path is restricted to the inter-element boundaries, which usually encounters the problem of mesh dependency [27–29]. To overcome the sensitivity to the mesh generated and avoid the preferred directions when extending the crack, mesh adaptivity is required [30–33], which makes the crack growth simulation a computationally expensive and cumbersome process. Even when the crack path is known a priori, which is the case considered here, the cohesive zone models that are implemented into the FEM usually encounter problems. For instance, the intrinsic cohesive zone models, which are implemented easier into the FEM compared to the extrinsic cohesive zone models, induce the artificial compliance [34]. On the other hand, in the extrinsic cohesive zone models [28], where a new fracture surface is created by duplicating nodes that were previously bonded, the fracture criterion is based on the evaluation of traction at nodes along the potential fracture path located on the inter-element boundaries, whose accuracy is questionable due to the fact that the stress state only at Gauss points is exactly known. The difficulties confronted in the conventional FEM are handled by locally enriching the conventional finite element approximation with an additional function through the concept of the partition of unity, which was introduced in the pioneering work of Melenk and Babuska [35]. This idea was exploited to set up the frame of the XFEM by Belytschko and Black [36] and Moës et al. [37]. By appropriately selecting the enrichment function and enriching specific nodal points, the enriched approximation would be capable of directly capturing the local property in the solution [38,39].The hydraulic fracture propagation occurs as the progressive decay of the cohesive tractions transferred across the fracture process zone and the imposition of the fluid pressure onto the fracture faces by means of the fracturing fluid within the fracture. The tractions acting on the fracture faces give rise to the mechanical coupling, and the fluid leak-off through the fracture faces leads to the mass transfer coupling between the fracture and the porous medium surrounding the fracture. In the numerical modeling, in order to provide for the fracture opening and the fluid exchange between the fracture and the surrounding porous medium, some requirements must be met. The displacement jump requires that the displacement field be discontinuous across the fracture. The fluid exchange implies that the fluid flow, which is governed by the Darcy velocity of the fluid, in the normal direction to the fracture is discontinuous. Since the Darcy velocity is related to the fluid pressure gradient by means of the Darcy law, the normal gradient of the fluid pressure must be discontinuous across the fracture. In the context of the XFEM, the discontinuity in the displacement field is modeled by enhancing the standard piecewise polynomial basis with a discontinuous enrichment function. To model the discontinuity in the fluid flow normal to the fracture, the standard finite element approximation of the pressure field is enriched by incorporating a modified definition of the commonly used enrichment function for weak discontinuities. For the numerical solution, the unconditionally stable direct time-stepping procedure is applied to resolve the resulting system of strongly coupled nonlinear algebraic equations using the Newton–Raphson iterative algorithm. In consequence, the solid displacement and fluid pressure fields are obtained simultaneously together with the fracture length, the fracture process zone length, and the cohesive tractions. More importantly, the fluid leak-off is obtained as a part of the solution process without introducing any simplifying assumption. Moreover, the possibility of the fluid lag formation is determined as a result of the analysis, and the fluid lag size and the pressure within it are obtained directly in case that the fluid lag develops. Finally, two numerical examples are presented to demonstrate the capability and the efficiency of the developed model in the fully coupled simulation of hydraulically-driven fractures in deformable porous media. The effect of some parameters that have an influence on the hydraulic fracture propagation is studied further.The fully saturated porous medium is modeled as a two-phase system where the pores of the solid skeleton are fully filled with a single phase fluid. It is assumed that the porous medium surrounding the fracture is fully saturated by a wetting phase(w). It is also assumed that the porous medium remains under isothermal conditions. The topic of porous media has been covered inclusively in Ref. [40].In the mechanics of fully saturated porous media, the stress relation is expressed in terms of the modified effective stress to account for the compressibility of the solid grains as(1)σ''=σ+αmpwin whichσis the total stress vector,σ''is the modified effective stress vector,mis the identity vector,pwis the pore fluid pressure, andαis the Biot constant. In the continuum medium surrounding the crack, the constitutive equation of the solid phase is expressed by means of an incrementally linear modified effective stress–strain relationship as(2)dσ''=Ddεwhere D represents the tangential constitutive matrix of the continuum. Throughout this paper, the stress is defined as tension positive, while the fluid pressure is defined as compression positive.In order to describe the nonlinear fracture processes occurring ahead of the crack tip, the cohesive crack model is used. This model is an appropriate alternative when the size of the fracture process zone is not negligible in comparison with the crack length [41], which is a commonly seen feature for cracks in quasi-brittle materials, such as geomaterials and concrete. The cohesive crack concept was originally introduced by Barenblatt [42] and Dugdale [43] to describe the near-tip nonlinear processes taking place in brittle and ductile materials, respectively. Afterwards, the cohesive crack concept was extended to simulate the cohesive crack nucleation and propagation in concrete by Hillerborg et al. [44]. The numerical simulation of cohesive crack has been carried out using different approaches. Basically, the modeling of the cohesive crack growth with the XFEM was performed in Refs. [45–47].The nonlinear behavior of the material in the cohesive zone is characterized by a traction–separation law as(3)td=td(〚u〛)wheretdis the cohesive traction transmitted across the fracture process zone and〚u〛is defined as the relative displacement vector across the discontinuity, which is the difference between the displacement vectors at the two faces of the discontinuity. Indeed, the symbol〚〛denotes the jump across the discontinuity, which is further discussed later.The linearization of the cohesive relation (3) results in the following differential form(4)dtd=Td〚u〛in which T represents the tangential modulus matrix of the discontinuity, which is obtained from the relationT=∂td/∂〚u〛. In the case of the mode I failure, the material tangent can be simplified in the following form(5)T=nΓd∂tn∂〚un〛nΓdTwherenΓdis the unit normal vector to the discontinuity,tnis the normal cohesive traction, and〚un〛is the crack opening displacement. For the derivation of this relation, the interested reader is referred to Ref. [19]. The explicit expression for the material tangent given in Eq. (5) is obtained considering the constitutive model applied at the discontinuity.In this section, the strong form of the governing equations as well as the associated weak form is presented for the problem of the hydraulic fracture propagation in a deformable porous medium.The thorough modeling of the hydraulic fracture propagating in the porous medium involves the coupling of various physical phenomena, including the deformation of the solid skeleton, the pore fluid flow through the porous medium surrounding the fracture, the fluid flow within the fracture, the fluid exchange between the fracture and the surrounding porous medium, and the propagation of the hydraulic fracture. The partial differential equations governing the hydraulic fracture propagation in the porous medium consist of the equilibrium equation for the whole mixture and the continuity equation for the fluid flow inside the fracture and through the surrounding porous medium. The Darcy law with the constant intrinsic permeability is assumed to hold for the pore fluid flow in the porous medium surrounding the fracture. Assuming that the flow of the fracturing fluid within the fracture is steady, the Darcy law is valid for the fluid flow within the fracture [48]. Unlike the porous medium, the intrinsic permeability within the fracture cannot be assumed to be constant. Therefore, the Poiseuille or cubic law is employed to define the intrinsic permeability within the fracture. The validity of the cubic law has been confirmed in the case of the laminar flow of the Newtonian viscous fluid through fractures with smooth, parallel walls [48]. The deviation from the ideal parallel faces conditions causes an apparent decrease in the fluid flow through the fracture. This effect can be taken into account by incorporating a coefficient into the cubic law. In fact, this coefficient considers the influence of the fracture roughness and the fracture opening variation on the fluid flow.In low frequency range, the relative acceleration of the fluid phase with respect to the solid phase is negligible compared to the acceleration of the solid phase [49,50]. By taking this into account, the linear momentum balance equation for the porous medium can be written as(6)∇.σ+ρb−ρu¨=0whereu¨is the acceleration vector of the solid phase, b is the body force vector,ρis the average density of the whole mixture defined asρ=(1−n)ρs+nρw, in which n stands for the porosity of the porous medium andρsandρware the densities of the solid phase and the wetting phase, respectively, and the symbol∇denotes the vector gradient operator.The continuity equation for the flow of the pore fluid through the permeable porous medium surrounding the fracture is written as(7)1Qṗw+α∇.u̇+∇.ẇw=0whereu̇is the solid velocity vector,ẇwis the Darcy velocity vector of the pore fluid, and the compressibility coefficient is defined as1/Q=(α−n)/Ks+n/Kw, in whichKsandKware the bulk moduli of the solid and fluid phases, respectively. It is noted thatẇw/nis in fact the relative velocity of the pore fluid with respect to the solid phase. The conservation of linear momentum for the two-dimensional fluid flow results in the generalized Darcy equation. Assuming negligibility of the relative acceleration term of the fluid, the Darcy relation for the pore fluid flow through the porous medium surrounding the fracture can be written as(8)ẇw=kw[−∇pw+ρw(b−u¨)]wherekwis the permeability matrix of the porous medium with respect to the pore fluid, which is generally evaluated by the following expression(9)kw=kμwin which k denotes the intrinsic permeability matrix of the porous medium, which is simply replaced by a scalar value k for the isotropic medium, andμwdenotes the dynamic viscosity of the fluid. For a more detailed presentation of the governing equations for porous media see Ref. [51].The continuity equation for the fluid flow within the fracture is written as(10)1Kwṗw+∇.u̇+∇.ẇw=0whereẇwis the Darcy velocity vector of the fracturing fluid and is in fact the relative velocity of the fracturing fluid with respect to the solid phase, which is calculated as(11)ẇw=kwd[−∇pw+ρw(b−u¨)]in whichkwdis the fracture permeability with respect to the fracturing fluid. For a viscous fracturing fluid with Newtonian rheology, the fracture permeability is estimated according to the cubic law [48](12)kwd=1f(2h)212μwin which2his the fracture opening, and f is a coefficient varying from1.04to1.65. The parameter f accounts for the effect of the deviation from the ideal parallel faces conditions. In this relation,(2h)2/12fis in fact the intrinsic permeability of the fracture.In order to develop the equations governing the problem, the two-dimensional domainΩbounded by the boundaryΓis considered. As depicted inFig. 2, the domain contains the geomechanical discontinuityΓd. Throughout this paper,Γdis referred to as the discontinuity line, whileΓd+∪Γd−is considered as the boundary of the domain of the discontinuity.The essential boundary conditions are imposed on the external boundary of the body by the prescribed primary variables as(13)u=u¯onΓupw=p¯wonΓpwand the natural boundary conditions are imposed on the external boundary of the body by the prescribed traction and volume outflux as(14)σ.nΓ=t¯onΓtẇw.nΓ=q¯wonΓqwwheret¯is the prescribed traction applied on the boundaryΓt,q¯wis the prescribed outflow rate of the fluid imposed on the permeable boundaryΓqw, andnΓis the unit outward normal vector to the external boundaryΓ, where the usual conditionsΓu∪Γt=ΓandΓpw∪Γqw=Γhold.From the physics of the problem, the existence of the geomechanical discontinuity in the porous medium leads to the mechanical and mass transfer couplings between the fracture and the porous medium surrounding the fracture. The mechanical coupling arises from the fluid pressure exerted on the fracture faces by injecting a viscous fluid into the fracture and the cohesive traction transferred across the fracture process zone. The mass transfer coupling emanates from the fluid exchange between the fracture and the surrounding permeable porous medium. Regarding these, the essential and natural boundary conditions, which hold on the complementary parts of the external boundary of the body, complete with the following boundary conditions on the geomechanical discontinuity as(15)σ.nΓd=td−pwnΓdonΓd〚ẇw〛.nΓd=qwdonΓdwheretdis the cohesive traction acting at the fracture process zone,qwdis the leakage flux of the fluid along the fracture, i.e. the fully damaged zone and the fracture process zone, toward the surrounding porous medium, which implies that there exists a discontinuity in the normal fluid flow acrossΓd, andnΓdis the unit normal vector to the discontinuityΓdpointing toΩ+(nΓd=nΓd−=−nΓd+), as shown in Fig. 2. As already pointed out in the previous section, the notation〚⁎〛=⁎+−⁎−represents the difference between the corresponding values at the two crack faces. The cohesive crack concept implies that the cohesive tractions on either side of the crack are identical. Compatible with what was just mentioned, it is considered that the fluid pressure has the same value at both faces of the crack and pressure continuity from the crack faces to the surrounding porous medium holds along the crack boundary. It is noted that in imposing the boundary conditions distinction is made between the crack mouth and the internal boundary of the crack. Conditions at the crack mouth are imposed as the essential or natural boundary conditions on the external boundary of the body, while boundary conditions on the crack are the direct consequence of the governing equations.Integrating the product of the equilibrium and flow continuity eqations (6) and (7) multiplied by admissible test functions over the domain, applying the divergence theorem, imposing the natural boundary conditions, and satisfying the boundary conditions on the discontinuity result in the weak form of the governing partial differential equations. It is noteworthy that the mechanical and mass transfer coupling terms naturally appear in the weak form of the equilibrium and flow continuity equations as a result of the presence of the geomechanical discontinuity in the porous medium. In this manner, it is ensured that the coupling between the discontinuity and the continuum medium surrounding the discontinuity is met in the weak form. The weak form of the equilibrium equation for the fracturing porous medium is obtained as(16)∫Ω∇sη:σdΩ+∫Ωρη.u¨dΩ+∫Γd〚η〛.(td−pwnΓd)dΓ=∫Γtη.t¯dΓ+∫Ωρη.bdΩwhich must hold for any kinematically admissible test function for the solid phase displacementη, satisfying the homogenized essential boundary condition. In above,∇sdenotes the symmetric part of the gradient operator. The mechanical coupling term comes from the following derivation imposing the boundary condition on the discontinuity (see Eq. (15))(17)−∫Γd+η.(σ.nΓd+)dΓ−∫Γd−η.(σ.nΓd−)dΓ=∫Γd(η+−η−).(σ.nΓd)dΓ=∫Γd〚η〛.(σ.nΓd)dΓ=∫Γd〚η〛.(td−pwnΓd)dΓwherenΓd+andnΓd−are the unit normal vectors directed toΩ−andΩ+, respectively, as clarified in Fig. 2, and the superscripts + and − aboveΓdrepresent the two sides of the discontinuity. It should be mentioned thatnΓdhas been taken such thatnΓd=nΓd−=−nΓd+.Incorporating the Darcy law, the weak form of the continuity equation of fluid flow is given by(18)∫Ωζw1QṗwdΩ+∫Ωζwα∇.u̇dΩ+∫Ωkw∇ζw.∇pwdΩ+∫Ωkwρw∇ζw.u¨dΩ−∫ΓdζwqwddΓ=∫Ωkwρw∇ζw.bdΩ−∫Γqwζwq¯wdΓwhich must hold for any kinematically admissible test function for the wetting phase pressureζw, vanishing on part of the external boundary with prescribed pressure. The mass transfer coupling term in the weak form of the continuity equation (18) has resulted from the following sequence of statements and the imposition of the boundary condition on the discontinuity (see Eq. (15))(19)−∫Γd+ζw(ẇw.nΓd+)dΓ−∫Γd−ζw(ẇw.nΓd−)dΓ=∫Γdζw(ẇw+−ẇw−).nΓddΓ=∫Γdζw〚ẇw〛.nΓddΓ=∫ΓdζwqwddΓThe mass transfer coupling term implies that the Darcy velocity of the fluid normal to the fracture is discontinuous onΓd. According to the Darcy law, it is necessary that the gradient of the fluid pressure in the normal direction to the fracture be discontinuous onΓd. Thus, the set of kinematically admissible pressure fields as well as the test function space should include continuous functions with the discontinuous normal derivative onΓd.In order to arrive at a relation for the mass transfer coupling term emerging in the weak form of the continuity equation of flow in the porous medium surrounding the fracture, the fluid flow continuity equation inside the fracture (Eq. (10)) is considered. It is noted that in deriving the mass transfer coupling term, the fracture is treated in a completely different manner compared to Ref. [19]. The application of the divergence theorem and the incorporation of the Darcy relation lead to the weak form of the continuity equation of flow within the fracture as(20)∫Ω'ζw1KwṗwdΩ'+∫Ω'ζw∇.u̇dΩ'+∫Ω'kwd∇ζw.∇pwdΩ'+∫Ω'kwdρw∇ζw.u¨dΩ'+∫ΓdζwqwddΓ=∫Ω'kwdρw∇ζw.bdΩ'whereΩ'is the domain of the discontinuity (seeFig. 3). In what follows, the formulations are presented in the local Cartesian coordinate system(x',y'), where the directions ofx'andy'are aligned with the tangent and normal unit vectors to the discontinuity,tΓdandnΓd, respectively, as displayed in Fig. 3. The integrals over the domain of the discontinuity are performed in the local coordinate system, in which the integral over the cross section of the discontinuity is evaluated first. Regarding that the width of the discontinuity2his insignificant relative to its length, the variation of the fluid pressure across the discontinuity width is ignored. That is, the fluid pressure as well as its corresponding test function is assumed to be uniform over the cross section of the discontinuity. Hence, the first integral in Eq. (20) can be rewritten as(21)∫Ω'ζw1KwṗwdΩ'=∫Γd∫−hhζw1Kwṗwdy'dΓ=∫Γdζw2h1KwṗwdΓBy applying the divergence operator in the local coordinate system, the following expression is obtained for the second integral of Eq. (20) as(22)∫Ω'ζw∇.u̇dΩ'=∫Γd∫−hhζw∇.u̇dy'dΓ=∫Γd∫−hhζw(∂u̇x'∂x'+∂u̇y'∂y')dy'dΓwhereu̇x'andu̇y'are the components of the solid velocity vector projected on the longitudinal and transversal axes, respectively. It is supposed that the velocity component of the solid phase in the longitudinal directionu̇x'varies linearly withy'over the discontinuity width. In consequence, its derivative with respect tox'also varies linearly withy'. Taking this into account, the first contribution on the right-hand side of Eq. (22), which involves the tangential derivative, as well as the contribution which includes the normal derivative can be analytically integrated over the width of the discontinuity. Thus, specifying〈⁎〉=(⁎++⁎−)/2as the average of the corresponding values at the discontinuity faces, we arrive at the following relation for the second integral in Eq. (20)(23)∫Ω'ζw∇.u̇dΩ'=∫Γdζw2h12(∂u̇x'∂x'(h)+∂u̇x'∂x'(−h))dΓ+∫Γdζw(u̇y'(h)−u̇y'(−h))dΓ=∫Γdζw2h〈∂u̇x'∂x'〉dΓ+∫Γdζw〚u̇y'〛dΓSince the fluid pressure is supposed to be uniform across the width of the discontinuity, its derivative in the tangential direction is unvarying withy', and its derivative in the normal direction vanishes. This is also the case for its corresponding test function. In view of all these, the third integral in Eq. (20) can be solved analytically as(24)∫Ω'kwd∇ζw.∇pwdΩ'=∫Γd∫−hhkwd∇ζw.∇pwdy'dΓ=∫Γd∫−hhkwd(∂ζw∂x'∂pw∂x'+∂ζw∂y'∂pw∂y')dy'dΓ=∫Γd2hkwd∂ζw∂x'∂pw∂x'dΓIn agreement with the assumption made for the solid velocity in the direction tangent to the discontinuity, the solid acceleration in the tangential directionu¨x'also varies linearly withy'. As mentioned above, the derivative of the test function with respect tox'is constant over the discontinuity width, and its derivative with respect toy'has a zero value. Thus, we obtain(25)∫Ω'kwdρw∇ζw.u¨dΩ'=∫Γd∫−hhkwdρw∇ζw.u¨dy'dΓ=∫Γd∫−hhkwdρw(∂ζw∂x'u¨x'+∂ζw∂y'u¨y')dy'dΓ=∫Γd2hkwdρw∂ζw∂x'〈u¨x'〉dΓApplying the dot product and regarding that the body force, which is generally taken as the gravity acceleration, is constant over the entire domain and therefore the discontinuity width, the solution of the remaining integral over the domain of the discontinuity can be directly obtained by(26)∫Ω'kwdρw∇ζw.bdΩ'=∫Γd2hkwdρw∂ζw∂x'bx'dΓBy substituting the constituents of Eq. (20) and rearranging it, the mass transfer coupling term appearing in the weak form of the flow continuity equation in the porous medium is achieved as(27)∫ΓdζwqwddΓ=−∫Γdζw2h1KwṗwdΓ−∫Γdζw2h〈∂u̇x'∂x'〉dΓ−∫Γdζw〚u̇y'〛dΓ−∫Γd∂ζw∂x'2hkwd∂pw∂x'dΓ−∫Γd∂ζw∂x'2hkwdρw〈u¨x'〉dΓ+∫Γd∂ζw∂x'2hkwdρwbx'dΓIt is evident that the width of the discontinuity is equal to the normal component of the displacement jump vector at the discontinuity, i.e.2h=〚uy'〛.In this section, the weak form of the equilibrium and flow continuity equations is rendered in a discrete form by means of discretization firstly in space employing the extended finite element method and then in time applying the generalized Newmark scheme. The resulting system of fully coupled nonlinear algebraic equations is directly solved using the direct solution procedure.In order to capture the hydro-mechanical coupling associated with the tractions acting on the fracture and the fluid leak-off from the fracture, the displacement and fluid pressure fields must satisfy some requirements. To account for the displacement jump across the fracture, the displacement field should be discontinuous onΓd, referred to as the strong discontinuity. In addition, to take into account the fluid flow jump normal to the fracture, it is required that the fluid pressure field be continuous, while its gradient normal to the fracture be discontinuous onΓd, which is called the weak discontinuity.The extended finite element approximation of the displacement fieldu(x,t)can be written as(28)uh(x,t)=∑I∈NNuI(x)uI(t)+∑I∈NenrNuI(x)12(HΓd(x)−HΓd(xI))u˜I(t)whereNuI(x)is the standard finite element shape function of nodeI, the nodal setNis the set of all nodes in the discretized domain, and the nodal setNenris the set of enriched nodes, defined as the set of nodes in the mesh whose support, that is the support of their nodal shape function, is bisected by the discontinuity. To ensure that the displacement jump is zero at the discontinuity tip, the nodes belonging to the element edge on which the discontinuity tip lies are not enriched.uI(t)are the standard displacement degrees of freedom at nodeI. The enriched nodes in the nodal setNenrhold additional displacement degrees of freedomu˜I(t)associated with the shifted enrichment function1/2(HΓd(x)−HΓd(xI)). The discontinuous functionHΓd(x)is taken as the sign function centered on the line of the discontinuity. That is,HΓd(x)=sign(∅(x)), in which∅(x)is the level set function. The usual level set function is the signed distance function to the discontinuity.HΓd(xI)is the value ofHΓd(x)at the enriched node I. It follows from this definition that the enrichment function exhibits a unit jump across the discontinuity, so the displacement discontinuity acrossΓdcan be obtained.Symbolically, the enriched finite element approximation of the displacement field in Eq. (28) can be written in the following form(29)uh(x,t)=Nu(x)U(t)+Nuenr(x)U˜(t)in which,Nu(x)is the matrix of the standard shape functions, which include the usual piecewise polynomial shape functions possessingC0continuity,Nuenr(x)is referred to as the matrix of the enriched shape functions,U(t)is the vector of the standard displacement degrees of freedom, andU˜(t)is the vector of the enriched displacement degrees of freedom. Accordingly, the strain vector corresponding to the approximate displacement fielduh(x,t)can be written in terms of the standard and enriched nodal values as(30)εh(x,t)=B(x)U(t)+Benr(x)U˜(t)where the standard and enriched matricesB(x)andBenr(x)involve the spatial derivatives of the standard and enriched shape functions, respectively.The fluid pressurepw(x,t)is approximated as the linear combination of the standard and enriched shape functions as(31)pwh(x,t)=∑I∈NNpwI(x)pwI(t)+∑I∈NenrNpwI(x)(DΓd(x)−DΓd(xI))R(x)p˜wI(t)whereNpwI(x)are the standard finite element shape functions. Nodes inNenrhave their support bisected by the discontinuity. It is essential that the leakage flux vanish at the discontinuity tip. This is assured by requiring that the nodes on the element edge with which the discontinuity tip coincides not be enriched.pwI(t)are the standard pressure degrees of freedom andp˜wI(t)are the enriched pressure degrees of freedom corresponding to the shifted enrichment function(DΓd(x)−DΓd(xI))R(x). In the above relation,DΓd(x)is the distance function, which is defined as the absolute value of the signed distance function. That is,DΓd(x)=|∅(x)|. The distance function is continuous, whereas its gradient in the normal direction to the discontinuity is discontinuous onΓd(∇DΓd.nΓd=HΓd). Possessing this desirable property, the chosen enrichment function enables the approximate pressure field to be discontinuous in its normal derivative across the discontinuity, accounting for the leak-off of the fluid from the discontinuity.R(x)is a weight function with compact support, given byR(x)=ΣI∈NenrNpwI(x). This choice of the enrichment function shows a better accuracy as compared with the standard enrichment function [52].Likewise, the enriched finite element approximation of the fluid pressure field in Eq. (31) can be rewritten as(32)pwh(x,t)=Npw(x)Pw(t)+Npwenr(x)P˜w(t)whereNpw(x)is the matrix of the standard shape functions,Npwenr(x)is the matrix of the enriched shape functions,Pw(t)is the vector of the standard nodal degrees of freedom, andP˜w(t)is the vector of the enriched nodal degrees of freedom.Following the Bubnov–Galerkin technique, the test functions for the displacement fieldηand fluid pressure fieldζwin the discrete weak form are considered in the same enriched approximating space as the approximate displacement and fluid pressure fields, respectively. Satisfying the necessity that the weak form should hold for all kinematically admissible test functions results in the discretized form of the governing equations (16) and (18) as follows:(33)MuuU¨+Muu˜U˜¨+∫ΩBTσ''dΩ−QuwPw−Quw˜P˜w=FuextMuu˜TU¨+Mu˜u˜U˜¨+∫Ωenr(Benr)Tσ''dΩ−Qu˜wPw−Qu˜w˜P˜w+Fu˜int=Fu˜extMwuU¨+Mwu˜U˜¨+QuwTU̇+Qu˜wTU˜̇+CwwṖw+Cww˜P˜̇w+HwwPw+Hww˜P˜w−Fwint=FwextMw˜uU¨+Mw˜u˜U˜¨+Quw˜TU̇+Qu˜w˜TU˜̇+Cww˜TṖw+Cw˜w˜P˜̇w+Hww˜TPw+Hw˜w˜P˜w−Fw˜int=Fw˜extThe definition of the coefficient matrices and the force and flux vectors is given in Appendix A.The above equation system is then discretized in the time domain following the line of the well-known Newmark scheme. The link between the successive values of the unknown field variables at timetn+1and the known field variables at timetnis established by the following relations:(34)U¨n+1=a0(Un+1−Un)−a2U̇n−a4U¨nU̇n+1=a1(Un+1−Un)−a3U̇n−a5U¨nU˜¨n+1=a0(U˜n+1−U˜n)−a2U˜̇n−a4U˜¨nU˜̇n+1=a1(U˜n+1−U˜n)−a3U˜̇n−a5U˜¨nṖwn+1=a1'(Pwn+1−Pwn)−a3'ṖwnP˜̇wn+1=a1'(P˜wn+1−P˜wn)−a3'P˜̇wnwherea0=1/βΔt2,a1=γ/βΔt,a2=1/βΔt,a3=γ/β−1,a4=1/2β−1,a5=Δt(γ/2β−1),a1'=1/θΔtanda3'=1/θ−1. In these relations,Δt=tn+1−tnis the time increment, andβ,γandθare the Newmark parameters. To guarantee the unconditional stability of the time integration procedure, the Newmark parameters should be chosen such thatγ≥0.5,β≥0.25(0.5+γ)2, andθ≥0.5.In order to solve the system of fully coupled nonlinear algebraic equations at each time step, the direct solution procedure is employed. In this solution procedure, the Newton–Raphson iterative algorithm is implemented to linearize the nonlinear system of equations. By expanding the residual equations with the first-order truncated Taylor series, the following linear approximation is obtained(35)Ψi+1,n+1={Ψui+1,n+1Ψu˜i+1,n+1Ψwi+1,n+1Ψw˜i+1,n+1}={Ψui,n+1Ψu˜i,n+1Ψwi,n+1Ψw˜i,n+1}+J{dUi+1,n+1dU˜i+1,n+1dPwi+1,n+1dP˜wi+1,n+1}=0whereJis the well-known Jacobian matrix, defined as∂Ψi,n+1/∂Xi,n+1. The Jacobian matrix can be approximated as follows:(36)J=[a0Muu+∫ΩBTDBdΩa0Muu˜+∫ΩenrBTDBenrdΩa0Muu˜T+∫ΩenrBenrTDBdΩa0Mu˜u˜+∫ΩenrBenrTDBenrdΩ+∂Fu˜int/∂U˜a0Mwu+a1QuwT−∂Fwint/∂Ua0Mwu˜+a1Qu˜wT−∂Fwint/∂U˜a0Mw˜u+a1Quw˜T−∂Fw˜int/∂Ua0Mw˜u˜+a1Qu˜w˜T−∂Fw˜int/∂U˜−Quw−Quw˜−Qu˜w+∂Fu˜int/∂Pw−Qu˜w˜+∂Fu˜int/∂P˜wa1'Cww+Hww−∂Fwint/∂Pwa1'Cww˜+Hww˜−∂Fwint/∂P˜wa1'Cww˜T+Hww˜T−∂Fw˜int/∂Pwa1'Cw˜w˜+Hw˜w˜−∂Fw˜int/∂P˜w]where the superscriptsi,n+1are assumed for the matrices, inferring that the Jacobian matrix is updated at each iteration. Hence, at each time step a sequence of linearized system of equations is solved until the iteration convergence is achieved.It is evident that the formulation results in the non-symmetric Jacobian matrix notwithstanding the choice of the constitutive models applied in the continuum and at the discontinuity. It is beneficial to make the Jacobian matrix symmetric so as to save the core storage and computational cost. For this purpose, the first and second rows of the Jacobian matrix are multiplied by the scalar factor−a1to symmetrise it relative to the coefficients. Since the contribution of the dynamic seepage forcing terms to the solution is negligible compared to the other terms, the inertial matricesMwu,Mwu˜,Mw˜u, andMw˜u˜are omitted from the Jacobian matrix to obtain symmetry. Regarding the terms that involve partial derivatives of the interfacial flux vectors,∂Fwint/∂Uand∂Fw˜int/∂Uare eliminated to prevent the non-symmetry of the Jacobian matrix. As a matter of fact, the terms∂Fwint/∂U˜and∂Fw˜int/∂U˜are equal toa1(∂Fu˜int/∂Pw)Tanda1(∂Fu˜int/∂P˜w)T, respectively, which retains the symmetry of the Jacobian matrix. By the imposition of the above-mentioned simplifications, a symmetric approximation to the Jacobian matrix is reached as follows, provided that the tangential constitutive matrices of the cohesive crack and the medium surrounding the crack are themselves symmetric(37)J=[−a1(a0Muu+∫ΩBTDBdΩ)−a1(a0Muu˜+∫ΩenrBTDBenrdΩ)−a1(a0Muu˜T+∫Ωenr(Benr)TDBdΩ)−a1(a0Mu˜u˜+∫Ωenr(Benr)TDBenrdΩ+∂Fu˜int/∂U˜)a1QuwTa1Qu˜wT−a1(∂Fu˜int/∂Pw)Ta1Quw˜Ta1Qu˜w˜T−a1(∂Fu˜int/∂P˜w)Ta1Quwa1Quw˜a1Qu˜w−a1∂Fu˜int/∂Pwa1Qu˜w˜−a1∂Fu˜int/∂P˜wa1'Cww+Hww−∂Fwint/∂Pwa1'Cww˜+Hww˜−∂Fwint/∂P˜wa1'Cww˜T+Hww˜T−(∂Fwint/∂P˜w)Ta1'Cw˜w˜+Hw˜w˜−∂Fw˜int/∂P˜w]in which the partial derivatives of the interfacial force and flux vectors are given by the following expressions(38)∂Fu˜int∂U˜=∫ΓdNuTTNudΓ∂Fu˜int∂Pw=−∫ΓdNuTnΓdNpwdΓ∂Fu˜int∂P˜w=−∫ΓdNuTnΓdNpwenrdΓ∂Fwint∂Pw=−a1'∫ΓdNpwT2h1KwNpwdΓ−∫Γd∇NpwTtΓd2hkwdtΓdT∇NpwdΓ∂Fwint∂P˜w=(∂Fw˜int∂Pw)T=−a1'∫ΓdNpwT2h1KwNpwenrdΓ−∫Γd∇NpwTtΓd2hkwdtΓdT∇NpwenrdΓ∂Fw˜int∂P˜w=−a1'∫Γd(Npwenr)T2h1KwNpwenrdΓ−∫Γd(∇Npwenr)TtΓd2hkwdtΓdT∇NpwenrdΓFrom the computational aspect, one main difficulty encountered when implementing the XFEM deals with the numerical integration in the presence of the strong and weak discontinuities. The discontinuous nature of the solution in this case requires a special treatment to accurately integrate the non-smooth enrichment functions appearing in the enriched part of the approximation. To carry out the numerical integration in this case, a common approach is that the numerical integration of the elements bisected by the discontinuity be performed separately on each sub-element into which the element is divided. In practice, in order to be able to perform the integration over these sub-elements on either side of the discontinuity, each sub-element is partitioned into triangles over which the standard Gauss quadrature is applied. The remaining elements which are not cut by the discontinuity are integrated using the conventional Gauss quadrature scheme. Moreover, a number of Gauss points must be set along the one-dimensional segments of the discontinuity delimited with the element edges to integrate the mechanical and mass transfer coupling terms along the discontinuity.Regarding the crack growth simulation, some issues involved in implementing the modeIfracture with the XFEM are discussed. These issues may considerably affect the accuracy of the solution and the computational efficiency of the crack growth modeling. Under the assumption of the pure opening mode, the crack propagates along the straight line. Thus, in view of the fact that the direction of crack propagation is known in advance, the partitioning is carried out within the elements which are to be bisected by the crack as the crack propagates at the onset of the dynamic analysis. This avoids the need for transferring history variables, the issue that arises in the integration scheme adapted when a discontinuity is introduced within an element. To be consistent with the cohesive fracture mechanics, the crack growth criterion is extracted from the cohesive crack concept, which characterizes the debonding of the solid skeleton. Therefore, in order to determine when the crack propagates, the tractions are calculated directly at the Gauss points along the potential crack path. Consequently, the Gauss integration points which need to be set on the discontinuity segments to integrate coupling terms over the discontinuity are placed beforehand. The stress field at these Gauss points, located on the trajectory of the potential crack, can be calculated correctly, so it can be relied upon to predict the instance of crack extension. It is emphasized that the potential crack is fully coherent prior to the satisfaction of the crack growth condition. In this way, the modified effective stress component in the direction normal to the crack line, computed asnΓd.σ''.nΓd, is checked against a threshold for the cohesive crack extension at the Gauss points lying on the potential crack path. This normal stress is identical to the maximum principal tensile stress, and in harmony with this the shear stress is zero along the crack growth direction. This means that the crack propagates in perpendicular direction to the maximum principal stress direction as expected for the modeIcrack propagation. The checking algorithm is carried out element by element beginning from the one ahead of the crack tip. If on the considered element the normal stress to the crack line at all Gauss points on the potential crack trajectory attains the cohesive strength of the materialσc, the discontinuity is introduced within the element. This procedure continues until the aforementioned stress condition for insertion of a discontinuity is violated. In this manner, the existing discontinuity can propagate into more than one element at each time step.This strategy for the modeIfailure makes it possible to relieve the stress evaluation at the crack tip whose accuracy is questionable regarding the fact that the stress state only at Gauss points is exactly known. Moreover, this strategy avoids the data transfer between the old and new Gauss points, which is inevitable when the element partitioning is carried out for numerical integration. It is well-known that in transferring history variables, there is no guarantee that the transferred quantities satisfy the constitutive equations together with the governing equations simultaneously. Therefore, this approach makes the modeIcrack growth implementation practically very efficient. It is noted that the length of crack extension, one main concern when extending a discontinuity, is obtained during the analysis rather than set in advance. In the extended finite element framework, once decohesion of the solid skeleton is initiated in an element, enriched nodes, to which enriched degrees of freedom are added, are introduced into the element to impose the discontinuity within the element. Hence, during the crack propagation modeling, some unenriched nodal points become enriched as the crack enters their support. It is recalled that no enrichments are added to the nodes on the element edge touched by the crack tip.In order to exemplify a part of the wide range of problems that can be solved by the proposed approach and to validate the performance of the computational algorithm in modeling of the hydraulic fracturing problem, two examples are solved based on the fully coupled numerical model. The first example shows a comparison between the numerical results of the proposed model and those having recently been presented by Carrier and Granet [18], demonstrating the validity of the proposed model in simulating the hydraulically-driven fractures in all the propagation regimes. In the second example, the results obtained from the numerical simulation are compared with those obtained analytically by Geertsma and de Klerk [2], which corresponds to the hydraulic fracture propagation under the limiting case of the zero fluid leak-off and under the assumption that the fracturing fluid is incompressible. Then, the influence of the permeability of the porous medium surrounding the fracture, the flow rate at the injection point and the fluid viscosity on the hydraulic fracture propagation is examined.The problem under consideration is a hydraulic fracture propagating in an infinite, permeable porous medium under plane strain conditions. This example is presented to verify the proposed numerical model by comparing the simulation results with those obtained by Carrier and Granet [18] performing the finite element analysis. The fracture is driven hydraulically by an incompressible Newtonian viscous fluid injected into the fracture at a constant injection rateQ=0.0005m2/s. The injection rate is imposed as the prescribed fluid inflow rate on the external boundary where the fluid is injected.Fig. 4 displays the geometry together with the boundary conditions of the hydraulic fracturing problem. A confining in-situ stress of magnitudeσ0=3.7MPaacts perpendicular to the direction of fracture propagation. The in-situ stress field is imposed as the initial stress field. A compressive far-field stress of the same value is applied as the external load at the far top and bottom edges to establish system equilibrium initially, as shown in Fig. 4. The initial pore water pressure is assumed equal to the atmospheric pressure. The linear elastic constitutive law is considered for the medium surrounding the fracture, and in the cohesive zone the linear softening cohesive law is employed. The material properties of the problem are listed inTable 1. For the fracture analysis, the cohesive fracture parameters of the material are set as follows: the cohesive strengthσc=1.25MPaand the cohesive fracture energyGc=120N/m, which is the area under the softening curve. Regarding the adopted traction-separation law, the critical fracture opening at which the fracture has fully developed and the cohesive traction transferred across the fracture has reduced to zero is obtained as2Gc/σc. In numerical modeling, once the normal relative displacement exceeds the critical opening, the normal cohesive traction is set to zero. The parameterfin Eq. (12) is assumed equal to1.0. Because of the symmetry in geometry and loading, the hydraulic fracture propagation occurs under the pure opening mode.The utilized finite element mesh consists of the bilinear quadrilateral elements, as shown in Fig. 4. In order to ensure the solution convergence and to obtain the mesh independent results, the details of the traction distribution in the cohesive zone must be captured properly. Therefore, it is necessary that the cohesive zone be discretized by a sufficient number of elements so as to accurately resolve the cohesive traction distribution and to arrive at a converged solution. In the XFEM context, Moës and Belytschko [46] suggest using a minimum of about two elements in the cohesive zone. To meet this condition, the area along the potential fracture path is discretized with a sufficiently fine mesh. The area away from the region where the hydraulic fracture develops is discretized with a coarser mesh. For temporal discretization, the time increment ofΔt=0.01sis used. The considered time increment is so small that the results are not affected by the time domain discretization.A comparison is first made with the finite element results presented in Ref. [18] for the case where the hydraulic fracture propagates in the toughness-dominated regime. In this case, the intrinsic permeability of the porous medium is chosen ask=1×10−15m2and the dynamic viscosity of water asμw=1×10−4Pas. The results of the crack mouth opening displacement and the position of the crack tip and the cohesive zone end are shown inFigs. 5(a) and (b), respectively, as a function of time. As can be seen, the matching is very good, which puts in evidence the efficiency of the presented procedure to model the hydraulic fracture propagation in the toughness-dominated regime. Fig. 5(b) also displays the size of the cohesive zone during the evolution of the fracture. It can be found that the cohesive zone length is nearly0.8m, the same value as that reported in Ref. [18]. Fig. 5(c) shows the time history of the crack mouth pressure. It is observed that the fluid pressure at the crack mouth decreases rapidly as the crack propagates and reaches almost a steady value when the crack tip proceeds far away from the injection point.Fig. 6(a) presents the distribution of the effective stress normal to the fracture propagation direction att=20s. The length of the cohesive zone can also be distinguished from this figure. As expected, the cohesive traction transferred across the fracture process zone is a decreasing function of the fracture opening, vanishing as soon as the fracture opening exceeds the critical value. In the area ahead of the fracture tip, the normal effective stress reduces from the maximum tensile stress, which is equal to the cohesive strength of the material, and tends to the compressive in-situ stress far away from the fracture tip. The corresponding fluid pressure distribution and crack opening profile are shown in Figs. 6(b) and (c), respectively. As can be seen, the fluid pressure is highly positive along the fracture and suddenly drops near the fracture tip. In the area ahead of the propagating fracture tip, the fluid pressure reduces to values below the initial pore pressure and then approaches the value of the initial pore pressure far away from the fracture tip. From this figure, it is confirmed that the fluid pressure distribution within the fracture is almost uniform in the toughness-dominated case.Fig. 7 shows the comparison of the crack mouth opening displacement, the crack length and the crack mouth pressure as a function of time fork=1×10−14m2andμw=1×10−1Pas, corresponding to the viscosity-dominated regime. As can be seen, the results predicted by the XFEM closely match the numerical results represented by Carrier and Granet [18] using the FEM with zero-thickness cohesive elements. Excellent agreement between the two solutions demonstrates the capability of the proposed model in simulating the viscosity-dominated hydraulic fracture propagation.The second example involves a fracture driven by the injection of a Newtonian fluid at the constant flow rate of0.0001m2/sin an infinite poroelastic medium. The geometry and boundary conditions of the problem together with the finite element discretization are depicted inFig. 8. The mesh size is fine enough to represent accurately the distribution of the traction and fluid pressure in the direction of the propagating fracture and to guarantee the mesh independence and numerical convergence of the solution. For the time domain discretization, the time increment ofΔt=0.01sis used. This time increment is small enough to achieve results independent of the temporal discretization. Initially, it is assumed that the stress field is zero and the pore water pressure is equal to the atmospheric pressure. The material properties considered in this numerical example are given inTable 2. The linear softening cohesive law is applied to simulate the nonlinear behavior of the material in the cohesive zone. The parameters of the cohesive crack model are taken asσc=0.45MPaandGc=143N/m. Due to the symmetry, the hydraulic fracture propagates under modeI.In the limiting case where there is no fluid leak-off and under the simplifying assumption that the fracturing fluid is incompressible, the numerical solution to this problem corresponds to the well-known plane strain KGD solution derived by Geertsma and de Klerk [2]. To produce these conditions, the surrounding porous medium is assumed to be impermeable(k=6×10−15m2)and the fracturing fluid is considered incompressible. The KGD solution can be expressed in the following form [2,3](39)CMOD=1.87(μ(1−ν)Q3G)1/6t1/3L=0.68(GQ3μ(1−ν))1/6t2/3CMP=1.135(G3Qμ(1−ν)3L2)1/4+SwhereCMODis the crack mouth opening displacement,Qis the injection rate,μis the fluid viscosity,νis Poisson's ratio,Gis the shear modulus,tis time,Lis the crack length,CMPis the crack mouth pressure andSis the in-situ stress normal to the crack growth direction.Fig. 9 compares the numerical solution with the corresponding analytical solution for the case of the hydraulically-driven fracture in an impermeable porous medium. A good agreement is obtained between the profiles of the crack mouth opening displacement and crack length. Obviously, there is a discrepancy between the profiles of the crack mouth pressure. As discussed before, there is evidence that the analytical models usually underestimate the injection pressure encountered in hydraulic fracturing field operations [17,18]. The observed increase in the injection pressure required for propagating the fracture is as a result of ignoring the porous behavior of the medium surrounding the fracture and therefore the changes in the pore fluid pressure, which significantly affect the effective stress distribution. The need for considering the medium surrounding the fracture as a porous medium and modeling the coupling between the solid skeleton deformation and the pore fluid flow in the surrounding medium is confirmed viewing that the obtained injection pressure is higher than that predicted by the analytical solution.In the following, the effect of some main parameters on the fracture dimensions, i.e. the fracture opening and the fracture length, and the injection pressure as a function of time and on the distribution of the normal effective stress and the fluid pressure along the potential fracture path is investigated. The considered parameters include the porous medium permeability, the injection rate and the viscosity of the fracturing fluid, which in fact affects the fracture permeability according to the cubic law. First, the effect of the permeability of the surrounding porous medium is investigated. The time history of the crack opening displacement at the injection point, the crack length and the fluid pressure at the injection point is plotted inFig. 10 for different permeabilities. From this figure, it is observed that the hydraulic fracture propagates slowly in high permeability porous media compared with the low permeability ones, and the resulting crack mouth opening is smaller. Consequently, the shorter and smaller hydraulic fractures are obtained in the case where the porous medium is highly permeable. Moreover, a higher injection pressure is needed to hydraulically drive the fracture in highly permeable porous media. It is also found that the injection pressure does not change very much with the medium permeability.Fig. 11(a) represents the normal effective stress distribution in the direction of the propagating hydraulic fracture for porous media with different permeabilities att=10s. The results reveal that the peak of the normal effective stress profiles corresponds to the fracture tip position, where the fracture opening is zero, and the peak value equals the cohesive strength of the material, as expected. Moreover, with increasing the distance from the fracture tip, the stress decreases rapidly and approaches the initial stress value. In the fracture process zone, the cohesive tractions applied on the fracture faces exhibit a decaying behavior according to the adopted cohesive law. Fig. 11(b) shows the corresponding fluid pressure distribution. Comparing these profiles indicates that in the case of highly permeable porous media, the fluid pressure exhibits a descending manner towards the initial pore pressure value. It is also observable that in porous media with low permeability, the negative pressure develops in the area near the fracture tip. Such negative pressure does not occur in highly permeable porous media. Physically, the region close to the fracture tip where the fluid pressure becomes negative is interpreted as the fluid lag region. Thus, the formation of the fluid lag can be expected in low permeability porous media. The achieved results confirm that the considered mesh is fine enough to resolve the details of the cohesive traction developing in the fracture process zone and the fluid pressure distributing within the fracture. Comparing the fracture opening profiles in Fig. 11(c) shows that the created fracture is longer and its opening is larger in porous media with lower permeability.In the next stage, the influence of the injection rate on the overall characteristics of the hydraulic fracture is studied.Fig. 12 shows the plots of the crack mouth opening displacement, the crack length and the crack mouth pressure versus time for different injection rates. It is visible that the higher injection rate results in the faster fracture propagation. This implies that the velocity of the hydraulic fracture propagation is directly dependent on the injection rate. Furthermore, the injection pressure required for propagating the hydraulic fracture is lower and the resulting fracture opening at the injection point is larger in the case of the higher injection rate. It is also observable that changes in the injection rate do not cause significant changes in the required injection pressure.Figs. 13(a) and (b) display the distribution of the normal traction and the fluid pressure in the direction of the hydraulic fracture propagation for different injection rates att=10s. It is observed that the negative pressure takes place in the area close to the fracture tip for high injection rates. Moreover, the higher injection rates induce higher negative pressures. The development of the negative pressure in the near tip area of the propagating fracture implies that there exists a lag between the fracturing fluid front and the fracture tip. The fluid front position is assumed to be at the point where the fluid pressure changes sign. The corresponding fracture opening profiles are compared in Fig. 13(c), showing that as the injection rate increases, both the length and the width of the fracture increase as well.To examine the effect of the fracture permeability, numerical simulations with different fluid viscosities are performed, keeping the permeability of the porous medium equal tokw=2×10−11m2/Pas. According to the cubic law, an increase in the viscosity of the fracturing fluid results in the subsequent decrease in the permeability of the fracture.Fig. 14 displays the plots of the crack mouth opening displacement, the crack length and the crack mouth pressure as a function of time for different fluid viscosities. It is found that with increasing the fluid viscosity, the crack mouth opening increases, but the crack length decreases, contrary to the behavior observed previously. Moreover, as the fluid viscosity increases, the injection pressure required to propagate the hydraulic fracture increases considerably compared with the previous cases.Figs. 15(a) and (b) show the distribution of the normal effective stress and the fluid pressure along the direction in which the hydraulic fracture propagates for different viscosities of the fracturing fluid att=10s. In accordance with what was observed in the previous example for the toughness-dominated hydraulic fracture propagation, the fluid pressure exhibits nearly uniform distribution along the fracture for the low viscosity fluid. As the viscosity of the fracturing fluid increases, the fluid pressure tends to distribute non-uniformly along the fracture, declining rapidly from its maximum value located at the injection point for the highly viscous fluid. As a consequence, the injection pressure needs to be much higher for the higher viscosity fluid. In all cases, the fluid pressure approaches its initial value far ahead of the fracture tip. The sudden drop of the fluid pressure is more pronounced in the case of the low viscosity fracturing fluid. It is noted that the fracture tip propagates at a speed depending on the mechanical properties of the surrounding porous medium, while the fracturing fluid within the fracture flows at a speed depending on the fracture permeability defined by the cubic law. Therefore, the formation of the fluid lag is more likely in the region of reduced pressure near the fracture tip in the case where the injected fluid is highly viscous. In contrast to the behavior exhibited by variations in the medium permeability and the injection rate, the fracture opening profiles displayed in Fig. 15(c) show a different behavior. The flow of the lower viscosity fracturing fluid induces the longer fracture length and the smaller fracture opening.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In the present paper, the problem of hydraulic fracturing in porous media was simulated numerically, and the influence of some main parameters on the hydraulic fracture behavior was investigated. The fully coupled formulation was established based upon the linear momentum balance equation and the flow continuity equation, which accounts for the solid skeleton deformation as well as the fluid flow in the porous medium, along the fracture and through the fracture sides toward the surrounding porous medium. In contrast to the analytical solutions, no simplifying assumption was made regarding the fluid lag. The size of the fluid lag region and the value of the pressure within it are obtained directly during the analysis as a result of the interaction between the fluid flow within the fracture and the fracture propagation. In analytical models, the leak-off of the fracturing fluid into the surrounding medium is assumed to be zero or to conform to the one-dimensional Carter model, while the fluid leak-off is a complex process which must be accounted for through a fully coupled numerical model as presented here. In conformity with the hydraulic fracturing field observations, the proposed model predicts higher injection pressure than the analytical one, which emphasizes the importance of treating the medium surrounding the fracture as a porous medium. The proposed approach was successfully applied to examples involving a fracture driven hydraulically in a poroelastic medium due to the fluid injection. Apart from proving the applicability and efficiency of the method in simulating fluid-driven fractures, the numerical simulations illustrated the capability of the method to resolve the details of the hydraulic fracturing process. It was concluded that depending on the velocity of the fracture tip and the velocity of the fracturing fluid inside the fracture, which are characterized by the porous medium and the fracturing fluid properties as well as the injection rate, the fracturing fluid may not necessarily reach the tip of the fracture. Thus, the fluid lag may develop behind the fracture tip.