@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
gHRV: Heart rate variability analysis made easy

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
gHRV is an open source tool for HRV analysis.gHRV is implemented in python and binaries are available for Linux, Windows and Apple OS X.It imports and exports files in several formats and creates high quality plots that can be exported to file.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Heart rate variability,Open source,Signal processing,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this paper, the gHRV software tool is presented. It is a simple, free and portable tool developed in python for analysing heart rate variability. It includes a graphical user interface and it can import files in multiple formats, analyse time intervals in the signal, test statistical significance and export the results.This paper also contains, as an example of use, a clinical analysis performed with the gHRV tool, namely to determine whether the heart rate variability indexes change across different stages of sleep.Results from tests completed by researchers who have tried gHRV are also explained: in general the application was positively valued and results reflect a high level of satisfaction. gHRV is in continuous development and new versions will include suggestions made by testers.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) are one of the most important causes of death in developed countries. The American Heart Association (AHA) elaborates each year statistics on heart disease, stroke, other vascular diseases, and their risk factors, and, in the 2013 report, it is stated that the percentage of mortality rates due to CVDs was 40.6% for high blood pressure; 13.7% for smoking; 13.2% for poor diet; 11.9% for insufficient physical activity; and 8.8% for abnormal glucose levels [1].Given the high incidence of cardiac diseases, much research efforts are devoted to this subject: several systems and algorithms have been already developed to help clinicians in detecting and classifying heart defects (arrhythmias, heart blocks, etc.) [2,3] and respiratory diseases [4–6].The heart rate (HR) can be defined as the number of heartbeats per unit of time, usually minutes. At rest, the normal heart rate for adults ranges from 60 to 100beats/min, and a lower heart rate usually means a more efficient heart function and better cardiovascular fitness. However, heart rate is not constant, and presents variations as a means to adapt to internal and external stress factors. Heart rate variability (HRV) refers to the beat-to-beat alterations in heart rate. These alterations can be detected by time-domain, frequency-domain, and non-linear analysis of the electrocardiogram (ECG).One of the most used techniques is spectral analysis, which provides a quantitative analysis and an evaluation of the neurovegetative nervous system. The LF (low frequency) components, with frequencies ranging from 0.04 to 0.15Hz, is influenced by both sympathetic and parasympathetic systems, while HF (high frequency) components, containing frequency components greater than 0.15Hz, estimate the parasympathetic tone related to respiratory rhythm [7]. There are many possibilities in this approach: in [8] other spectral regions are proposed, while in [9] a different method of spectral estimation is applied.Apart from the LF and HF parameters, other interesting HRV index is the LF/HF ratio, that can be a good method for measuring the balance between the sympathetic and parasympathetic systems. LF/HF ratio could also serve as an estimator of sympathetic activity comparing it with HF power [7]. In this way, HRV turns out to be a non-invasive electrophysiology test for studying several diseases, such as myocardial infarction [10], diabetes [11], or sleep apnea [12] and clinical consensus has been achieved on the utility of HRV for diagnosis of the previous diseases [13]. For myocardial infarction, spectral analysis in patients who have survived an acute infarction indicated a reduction in total and individual power spectral components [10]; then, HRV analysis can be used as an indicator of risk. In neuropathy associated with diabetes mellitus, a reduction in time-domain values of HRV indicates a negative prognostic value, and also precedes the clinical expression of autonomic neuropathy [11]. Besides, it has also been reported a very reduced HRV value in patients with a recent heart transplant [14] and an undetectable LF spectral band in many tetraplegic patients [15].In the time-domain analysis, several parameters are usually calculated [13]: (i) SDNN: standard deviation of intervals between consecutive heart beats, (ii) pNN50: proportion of interval differences of successive intervals greater than 50ms., (iii) r-MSDD: root mean square of successive differences, (iv) IRRR: difference between third and first quartile of the intervals distribution, (v) MADRR: median of the absolute differences of the RR intervals, (vi) TINN: the triangular interpolation of intervals histogram, and (vii) HRVi: integral of the density distribution divided by the maximum of the density distribution. Time-domain variables, for example, indicate that HRV is higher in trained individuals compared with their age- and weight-matched sedentary controls, and it was shown that there was a strong correlation between these variables and age and sex [16].Referring to non-linear analysis, a Poincaré plot is a visual representation of the dependence between successive RR intervals which indicates the degree of the heart failure in a subject [17,18]. This plot is often quantified by fitting to an ellipse where SD1 and SD2 are the semi-axis of this ellipse. SD1 is related to the fast beat-to-beat variability in the data, while SD2 describes the longer-term variability, SD1/SD2 showing the ratio of short interval variation to the long interval variation. Other useful parameter is Approximate Entropy (ApEn), a measure of the disorder in the HR signal which quantifies the regularity and complexity of time series [19]. Finally, Fractal Dimension (FracDim) is also considered as a measure of complexity [20].Given the proved value of HRV analysis, several studies have dealt with the possibility of employing HRV parameters for developing screening programs in routine medical procedures. Heitmann et al. developed a screening tool for a first diagnosis of general practitioners, based on the application of linear and non-linear methods of short-term HRV analysis in both young and elderly men [21]. Haney and Wiklund studied the possibility of using HRV analysis as a screening tool for anesthesia-related hypotension [22]. Obstructive sleep apnea screening employing HRV was developed by Roche et al., concluding that this method can be an accurate and inexpensive screening tool [23].Commercially available equipment for ECG monitoring, which normally offers robustness and constant updating, does not usually include functionalities for HRV analysis. This is due to the fact that HRV analysis has not been yet included in the standard diagnostic protocols and thus, manufacturers have not considered this a priority when developing software systems. Because of this, these applications, even if they have part of the required functionality, are not always the adequate tools to cope with the specific requirements. However, an increasing number of developers and researchers do not resign to these limitations, and develop their own computer programs, adapted to their particular needs.This paper presents a software tool for HRV analysis, that can be easily executed on Windows, GNU Linux or Apple OS X operating systems. Furthermore, it is open-source and very flexible, in terms of both data format and processing possibilities. The rest of the paper is organized as follows: in Section 2 we briefly review the state of the art in the field of tools for HRV analysis. Features of gHRV are described in depth in Section 3, while Section 4 contains an example of analysis of an electrocardiographic record. Finally, conclusions and future work are presented.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In recent years, the number of tools capable of performing heart rate variability analysis has increased substantially, as it has been mentioned earlier in this paper. However, we believe that until now none of them combined the following features:•Free open-source software.Binaries available for Windows, GNU Linux and Apple OS X platforms.Capable of reading annotated ECG records and instantaneous heart rate files.Automatic and manual filtering of the instantaneous heart rate signal.HRV analysis in the time and frequency domains and non-linear analysis.Automatic HRV analysis in different intervals or episodes.Fully visual interface, requiring no programming skills.Creation of reports and capability of exporting them, results, data and plots.Therefore we believe that gHRV could be useful for all researchers and clinicians who wish to develop HRV analysis without the need to become programmers. The sample run included in Section 4.1 of this paper is itself a quick user guide, complementary to the user manual available on the gHRV web site.gHRV is a suitable complement to other tool developed in our group: RHRV [37], a toolbox of the very well known statistical environment R, useful to researchers with certain programming skills.Researchers who have tried gHRV expressed a high level of satisfaction. The most remarked point is its ease of use and its intuitive nature, but they also pointed out some weaknesses and areas for improvement, such as (a) improve the information and recovery possibility in case of errors, (b) implement “undo” for interpolation or signal edition, (c) improve the interactive features in plots or (d) include new algorithms or file formats. Some of the volunteers’ suggestions have already been implemented in the current version, such us an improved zoom mode for the plots, exportation of Heart Rate signals to text files in various formats, configuration of axis limits in Poincaré plots or possibility of renaming episodes tags. Other suggested features will be introduced in upcoming versions.