@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Numerical modeling of friction stir welded aluminum joints under high rate loading

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We apply a nonlinear consistent finite element based method for predicting shear band formation.Fundamental impact analysis cases are investigated for friction stir welded aluminum joints.Results provide insight into the failure process and the effect of microstructure on response.Failure generally initiates at material zone interfaces rather than process-weakened areas.Results suggest the importance of manufacturing methods which minimize abrupt property changes.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Computational mechanics,Shear band,Friction stir weld,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Prediction of shear band formation and other strain localization processes presents many computational challenges that must be overcome to enable dynamic failure prediction and material design of ductile material systems. The current work presents a finite element based computational framework accounting for this critical deformation process, as applied to a detailed investigation of friction stir welded (FSW) aluminum joints. A stir welded joint has several zones, each with distinct microstructural characteristics and material properties. For applications in Army land vehicles, which may be subject to under-body blast, an understanding of the energy absorption capability of these joints is needed. Thus material inhomogeneity, dynamic loading, and detailed understanding of small scale failure processes must all be accounted for to accurately model FSW material behavior. In this study, an implicit nonlinear consistent (INC) or monolithic solution technique is used to predict shear band formation and estimate the energy absorption and failure strain of a stir welded aluminum joint. It has been shown that failure initiating at material interface regions can be predicted, and furthermore that abrupt material property gradients predominantly contribute to FSW joint failure.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
High strength lightweight aluminum alloys offer potential advantages as replacements for traditional steels in many Army vehicles in terms of weight specific mechanical properties. Unibody chassis construction, as opposed to body on frame construction, is being pursued to lend enhanced rigidity to maintain structural integrity during potential under-body blast events. Since unibody construction requires the elimination of bolted joints, weldability of the chassis material is crucial. Alloys from the aluminum 2XXX and 5XXX series are notoriously difficult to weld with conventional techniques, but can be joined with Friction Stir Welding (FSW) [1].FSW is a solid state joining process, which has recently been shown to be capable of producing joints in aluminum up to 76.2mm thick [2,3]. The FSW tool consists mainly of a shank, shoulder, and pin (shown in Fig. 1), which rotate as they advance, stirring the material together. Significant inelastic deformation, heat production, and dynamic recrystallization occur during this process, which results in the formation of several zones with distinct microstructure and material properties [4–9].Fig. 2shows a cross-section of a typical FSW joint, in this case 2139 Aluminum, which illustrates the nature of these distinct material zones. The material zone most immediately surrounding the high-torque tool pin, inserted between the welded plates, is characterized by an upper and a lower weld nugget. The upper and lower weld nuggets are zones B and A, respectively, in Fig. 2. This comes as a direct influence of the tool pin on the material grain structure as well as the thermal properties of the material and recrystallization processes. The tool shoulder creates a great deal of friction in contact with the plate surface during the FSW process which generates an inordinate amount of heat in comparison to the bottom of the plate [10]. The difference in thermal inputs and boundary conditions thus creates a through thickness variation in recrystallization and grain growth which leads to the distinct lower and upper weld nuggets, marked as zones A and B, respectively in Fig. 2. Note that for thin welds there is no readily discernible difference between the upper and lower nuggets; however, welds of, at least 2cm thick are of the greatest interest for Army land vehicle applications. At this thickness there is a clear distinction between the upper and lower nuggets, as shown in [11,12]; just outside of the weld nugget, zone C in Fig. 2, is a third material zone which is still subject to both the mechanical and the thermal influence of the FSW stirring pin. Further from the tool is a fourth material zone, too distant to be influenced by mechanical stirring, but still subject to thermal microstructural effects as heat is conducted away from the FSW joint during processing. This is known as the thermal affected zone and is marked by zone D in Fig. 2. The importance of accounting for these variations must be noted, and they will play a significant role in the simulations below. Computational modeling of the FSW process, aimed at numerically predicting the FSW joint zones, has been carried out by [13–15] on joints 6.35mm thick and by [16–18] on joint 7mm thick. Additional computational studies by [19,20] sought to determine how the FSW process parameters such as tool advancement speed affect the final weld. The studies cited above used either a Lagrangian or an Arbitrary Lagrangian Eulerian (ALE) type of numerical formulation with adaptive remeshing. However, Eulerian formulations are also available [21].In this study, we numerically model high rate loading of a small cross section of a stir welded joint. The goal is to develop a predictive capacity for energy absorption and failure of FSW joints in dynamic loading, as well as to gain an understanding of the relationship between an FSW joint microstructure and the resulting energy absorption capability and failure strain. It is found that the presence of the abruptly changing material zones leads to significantly reduced energy absorption capacity of the FSW joint in comparison to two benchmark tests with uniform material properties. The benchmarks used the material properties of the unaffected material and the lower nugget, the nominally weakest of the weld zones. This suggests that weld capacity can be improved by altering the FSW process parameters such that the final weld contains more smoothly varying zones.Preliminary formulations showing reliable, mesh insensitive results for shear bands have been studied at small strains in [22]. The governing equations considering small strain deformation are as follows:(1)ρu¨i=σij,j(2)σ̇ij=Cijklelas(dkl−32σ¯g(σ¯,T,γ¯p)skl−αṪδkl)(3)γ¯̇p=g(σ¯,T,γ¯p)(4)ρcṪ=κT,jj+χσ¯g(σ¯,T,γ¯p)where the unknown fields are the displacement ui, the stress σij, the temperature T, and the equivalent plastic strainγ¯p. The material parameters are the density ρ, the elastic modulus Celasijkl, the thermal expansion constant α, the specific heat c, and the thermal conductivity κ. The function g is the inelastic constitutive law, which hardens with increasing plastic strain and strain rate, and softens with temperature. Note that an additive split of the deformation rate into elastic, inelastic and thermal parts has been used. A J2 plasticity model has been employed; the inelastic constitutive relation thus depends on the Von Mises stressσ¯such that(5)σ¯=32sijsijwhere the deviatoric stress sijis defined as(6)sij=σij−13σkkδijHeat is produced in proportion to the inelastic work rateσijdijp=σ¯g. The so-called Taylor Quinney fraction χ determines how much inelastic work is converted to heat and is typically chosen as a constant in the range of 0.85–0.95 for most computations [23].The PDE model was discretized in a mixed finite element framework with a monolithic nonlinear solution scheme, where all four of the unknown fields above are updated simultaneously. The discretization and time marching scheme can be found in [22]. We define the weak form residual of the system asF[p], wherep=[uσTγp]Tis the solution field. Here, u is the displacement,σthe stress, T the temperature and γpthe equivalent plastic strain.It is important to note that at each time step, Newton iterations are performed until convergence, in contrast to split solution schemes [24–27], where the solution is updated with one way coupling. Thus, given some approximation to p at time step n+1 and Newton iterationk:pn+1,k, we seek to improve this approximation with the update(7)pn+1,k+1=pn+1,k+δpwhereδpis the Newton correction. The linearized problem with respect toδpis then(8)J[pn+1,k]δp+F[pn+1,k]=0The product of the JacobianJand the Newton correction is then found by computing the first variation of the residualFin the direction ofδp.A key point in our formulation is the computation of the Jacobian matrix analytically, avoiding the use of numerical differentiation procedures, which can be expensive. Thus consistent linearization of the nonlinear PDE system (employing the definition of Gateaux derivative [28]) leads to the following element Jacobian matrix [22]:(9)Je=[MuKu00KσMσ+GσσGσTGσγ¯p0GTσMT+(KT+GTT)GTγ¯p0Gγ¯pσGγ¯pTMγ¯p+Gγ¯pγ¯p]Mdenotes the mass matrices,Kthe stiffness matrices arising from linear material behavior, andGthe matrices arising from nonlinear material behavior. Note that the Jacobian is not symmetric, and indicates strong coupling between equations as plasticity is initiated and the shear band forms.This model incorporates two key aspects of successful shear band modeling: the use of thermal diffusion as a regularization parameter, and the use of a monolithic nonlinear solver to eliminate splitting errors at every time step. Thermal diffusion acts as a localization limiter, implicitly defining the width of the shear band. Without diffusion, the only localization limiter is the mesh size, leading to artificial shear bandwidths. Thus, introduction of a length scale via thermal diffusion in the governing equations leads to mesh independence and reliable solutions. Even with diffusion, the use of a monolithic nonlinear solver was found to drastically reduce the resolution necessary to obtain converged results. A split scheme strictly speaking is mesh insensitive if diffusion is included, and converges to the same result as the monolithic scheme in the limit of infinitesimal time step. However, in practice, it is found to exhibit unreasonably slow convergence with finite time steps and mesh sizes as shown in Fig. 3. This is due to the fact that shear band constitutive models are strongly coupled and very sensitive to the small errors which occur due to operator splitting.An additional relevant development shown in [22] is the use of the Pian–Sumihara stress interpolants [30], which can be shown to be locking free for large nearly incompressible deformations (which is the case in shear bands). The use of these interpolants is shown to lead to increased convergence rate and decreased computational cost in comparison to irreducible interpolations on the same mesh.This monolithic formulation for predicting strain localization effects is adapted to a finite element model of an FSW joint that accounts for the distinct material properties unique to each material zone formed during the welding process. The characteristic dynamic load cases are simulated and then evaluated in terms of stress–strain response and energy absorption capacity.A symmetric model of the FSW joint has been created, as seen in Fig. 4, which also shows the loading configurations tested. The model accounts for property variations in each FSW zone as shown in Table 1. These parameters were fit from the experimental data by [11,12]. The stir weld process involves extensive inelastic deformation as well as dynamic recrystallization in the upper weld nugget. Due to the recrystallization, the grain size in the upper nugget is larger than that of the lower nugget. However, contrary to expectation given the grain size in the respective regions, the experimental data show that the upper weld nugget has a higher yield strength than the lower weld nugget. It is suspected that the reason for this is a higher dislocation density in the upper nugget [31]. At present, transmission electron microscopy which could confirm this hypothesis is not available, but this is not crucial to the numerical results presented here (Tables 2 and 3).The 5mm by 5mm region represents a submodel focused on the key region of interest with the greatest property mismatches and potential for failure initiation. Dynamic loading using a velocity boundary condition was employed to simulate the major components of a blast event, i.e. in-plane tension, through-thickness compression, and transverse shear, as illustrated in Fig. 4. Two loading rates of 1E3s−1 and 1E4s−1 were investigated. By way of comparison to the actual FSW material configuration (referred to as “SW” in all results to follow), a region of uniform monolithic untreated aluminum material was tested (referred to as “UA”). Further, as the lower weld nugget possesses the nominally weakest material properties of the FSW joint, a test case investigating a region of uniform aluminum with lower weld nugget properties was investigated (referred to as “LN”). The purpose of this is to further gage the effect of non-uniformity in the material properties of the weld joint on the energy absorption.The graphs in the following section show two measures of energy absorption by the part, the rate of strain energy(Ẇ)and the strain energy(W). These quantities are integrated over the part so that(10)Ẇ(t)=∫VσijdijdV(11)W(t)=∫0tẆ(τ)dτwhere V is the volume element, t is the time, σijis the stress and dijis the rate of deformation.Ẇat a given time can be interpreted as the rate at which the part is storing energy.Following the experimental work of Marchand and Duffy [32], shear band formation occurs in three stages. Stage 1 consists of homogeneous deformations, and includes the linear elastic range, yielding point, and the inelastic strain hardening range. Stage 2 occurs after the stress has passed through a peak, leading to initial strain softening that corresponds to localized deformations, and is often referred to as localization. Stage 3, also known as stress collapse, is marked by significant strain softening and precipitous drop in the load carrying capability of the material, leading to strong localization and intense plastic deformation associated with shear bands. Note that it is possible for Stage 3 deformations to develop at a material point or neighborhood of material points while the joint has reserve capacity. It is very difficult to rigorously distinguish between Stage 2 and Stage 3 deformations. Investigations on mathematical stability conditions for shear band models such as [33–36] generally do not coincide with Stage 3 deformations since instability is a necessary, but not sufficient condition for severe localization. On the other hand, it has been observed by [37] that shear bands grow rapidly after a 90% reduction in stress. Thus, this is a reasonable criterion for shear band initiation at a material point. Since our main concern here is the energy absorption capacity of the joint as a whole, we define global failure whenẆdrops below 90% of its peak value, which indicates that the material has lost significant ability to dissipate energy. The capacity of the material is then defined asWat failure. SinceẆis a volume averaged quantity, it represents a global failure criterion. It is also of interest to identify from which weld zone or zone interface failure originates. For this purpose, identification of Stage 3 deformations as a local failure criterion is also useful. In the results below, this information is tabulated showing the nominal strain andWat global failure, using the criterionẆ(t)≤0.9maxẆ(t). In addition, the failure origin is noted by determining which area of the weld is the first to enter Stage 3 deformation.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
