@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Variationally consistent quadratic finite element contact formulations for finite deformation contact problems on rough surfaces

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Extension of previous work of the authors on constitutive contact laws in combination with the dual mortar method for contact problems to quadratic finite elements.Suggestion of a Petrov Galerkin dual mortar approach for quadratic finite elements to avoid consistency errors in case of large curvatures or high gradients.Modification of the presented algorithms considering multi-point constraints like cyclic symmetry or directional blocking on the contact zone.Verification of the derived algorithms with industrial motivated examples including various contact zones, large deformations and plasticity.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Contact with regularization,Dual mortar methods,Perturbed Lagrangian formulation,Quadratic elements,Petrov–Galerkin,Industrial applications,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Although different discrete formulations for contact problems have been widely studied during the last decade, the numerical simulation of complex industrial applications is still challenging. While suitable Lagrange multiplier based formulations are well-known for their consistency and stability in the case of classical model problems of Coulomb type, rough surface contact laws and additional multi-point constraints are much less understood. In this paper, we focus on a quadratic finite element approach for quasi-static calculations and extend ideas from our previous work on constitutive contact laws combined with suitable solutions for multi-point constraints like cyclic symmetry on the contact boundary. The popular dual mortar method is used to enforce the contact constraints in a variationally consistent way without increasing the algebraic system size. To avoid possible consistency errors of the dual mortar approach in case of large curvatures or gradients in the contact zone, an alternative quadratic Petrov–Galerkin mortar formulation is presented. Numerical examples demonstrate the robustness of the derived numerical algorithm. Special focus is set to industrial motivated applications involving large deformations and plastic effects as well as rough surfaces on the micro-scale.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Although a lot of progress has been made in the implementation of contact algorithms in commercial codes, solving non-linear contact problems within the FEM framework is still a challenging task when facing large plastic deformations, non-linear material laws and multi-constrained contact problems of industrial relevance. This led to new research activities in this field. For a more general overview on contact problems, we refer to the monographs by Johnson [1] or Bowden/Tabor [2] for contact between rough surfaces, the monographs by Kikuchi/Oden [3] and Eck [4] for existence and uniqueness results, to the monographs by Willner [5], Laursen [6] and Wriggers [7] for computational aspects and to the monograph by Cotrell/Hughes/Bazilevs [8] for isogemetrical formulations.The most popular approaches to enforce the contact conditions are the penalty method and the Lagrange multiplier method or combinations of both like the augmented Lagrange method or the perturbed Lagrange method. Within the penalty framework a spring between a slave location and a master surface is generated modelling the contact traction as a function of the displacements, if the non-penetration condition is violated. This approach is often combined with a node-to-surface formulation [9]. More recent contact formulations combine the penalty method with a Gauss point-to-surface formulation [10,11] to overcome the drawbacks of the node-to-surface formulation.If contact problems between two deformable bodies and non-matching meshes are considered, the Lagrange multiplier setting is strongly related to mortar methods introduced originally in the context of domain decomposition techniques by Bernardi [12] and Ben Belgacem [13]. Mortar methods are characterized by the introduction of an additional variable to model the traction across the interface and a weak formulation of the interface constraints leading to a surface-to-surface approach. They were adapted to small deformation contact problems by Ben Belgacem [14] and later expanded to large deformation contact [15], curved interfaces and large sliding [16,17] and dynamical problems [18–20].Among the mortar methods, the dual mortar method [21] has become of interest [22–24] since it enforces the non-penetration condition in a variationally consistent way without increasing the system size. Exploiting the duality between displacement and traction spaces in the definition of the discrete nodal basis functions, the Lagrange multiplier can be locally condensed from the global system before solving. Thus a pure displacement based system results in each load-step. Combined with a semi-smooth Newton method [25,26], one obtains a flexible, robust and efficient tool for contact problems since all non-linearities of the system (material, geometry and contact conditions) can be handled within the same iteration loop.Another current area of research is the isogeometric analysis for contact problems to enable a tighter connection between CAD and FEA. Here the same smooth and higher order basis functions are used for the representation of the CAD geometry as well as for the FEA solution fields. Although showing very promising results in the field of domain decomposition [27] or in contact simulation combined with a Gauss point-to-surface [28–30] or a mortar formulation [30–34], the isogeometric methods complicate the local problem treatment due to the broader support. This possibly results in inaccuracies in the boundary between contact and no-contact regions [29] and can be seen as a limitation to industrial applications. Therefore this paper uses the well studied dual mortar method in combination with quadratic finite elements as a reasonable compromise between linear finite element formulations and the full isogeometrical approach.Most publications dealing with the mortar method restrict their considerations to linear finite elements. But for industrial applications, these possibly show numerical artefacts like shear locking, volumetric locking and hour-glassing. Quadratic finite elements on the other hand approximate curvilinear interfaces more accurately and lack these numerical artefacts while at the same time avoiding the costly step switching to the isogeometrical approach. Thus they are quite attractive from the point of accuracy and computational complexity. Quadratic finite element formulations have been studied for the standard mortar formulation by Puso et. al. [16] and for the dual mortar formulation by Popp et. al. [35] expanding the ideas from Lamichhane and Wohlmuth [36]. Here these ideas are picked up and combined with the previous work of the authors on constitutive contact laws due to rough surfaces on the micro-scale [37,38].Another critical point dealing with the dual mortar method can arise in set-ups with curved interfaces leading to a possibly non-physical evaluation of the weighted dual gap due to the non-positive part of the dual basis functions. A similar issue has also been regarded in case of mesh-tying and simple contact situations in [39]. In case of general contact problems, the problem with the dual gap can be avoided using a Petrov–Galerkin dual mortar formulation combining the benefits of the standard and the dual Lagrange multiplier method in the linear setting [40]. Here this idea is picked up and extended to quadratic finite elements with microscopic rough surfaces.The third criteria bridging the gap to industrial applications of the dual mortar method is the ability to handle hanging nodes on the slave surface or single and multi-point constraints like directional blocking and cyclic symmetry in the contact zone. For the latter case, this results in an over-constrained system for these slave nodes carrying both, the Lagrange multiplier and a multi-point constraint. Here we extend an idea presented in [41] for mesh tying. This also solves the problem of hanging nodes on the slave surface.The outline of the present work is as follows: We start with a brief problem definition in Section 2. The extension of the dual mortar method with regularized contact conditions to quadratic elements is presented in Section 3. Two different approaches are studied: a quadratic–quadratic method and a quadratic–linear method. In Section 4, the quadratic–linear dual mortar formulation is combined with a Petrov–Galerkin approach to overcome the problem with the dual gap. The adoption of the algorithm solving over-constraints or hanging nodes is presented in Section 5. In Section 6, various numerical examples demonstrate the robustness of the derived algorithms. The examples involve plastic effects as well as rough surfaces on the micro-scale. Special focus is set here to industrially motivated examples: a film forming process, a fir tree contact in an abstract turbine and a complex disk blade foot contact with a retainer.We start with a brief overview on the quasi-static 3D two-body contact problem in a non-linear elasticity setting [3,5]. As one can see in Fig. 1, the two contacting bodies, a slave body s and a master body m with domainsΩα∈R3,α=s,m, are undergoing motion during the time interval[0,T]described by the mappingφα:Ωα×[0,T]→R3,Xα↦xα=φαXα,t,α=s,m, which maps material pointsXαof the reference configuration to the current configurationxα. The displacements are defined asuX,t=φX,t−Xwithu=(us,um)onΩ=Ωs×Ωm. The boundary of the bodies∂Ωαis divided into three disjoint sets, the Dirichlet boundaryΓDα, the Neumann boundaryΓNαand the potential contact boundaryΓcαwith their spatial counterpartsγDα,γNαandγcα. It holdsΓ¯Dα∪Γ¯Nα∪Γ¯cα=∂Ωα. In terms of the displacementsu, the deformation gradientF=∇[X+u(X,t)], the right Cauchy–Green tensorC=FTFand the Green–Lagrange strain tensorE=1/2(C−1)=1/2(∇u+∇uT+∇u∇uT)can be defined. Non-linear material laws are considered assuming the existence of an energy densityW=W(C)including isotropic plasticity with multiplicative split [42–44].The strong form of the two-body contact problem. Finduα:Ωα×[0,T]→R3satisfying(1a)balanceequation{∇·Pα+ρ0αb¯α=0,in(0,T]×Ωα,(1b)boundaryconditions{uα=u¯α,in(0,T]×ΓDα,Pαn=t¯α,in(0,T]×ΓNα,Pαn=tcα,in(0,T]×Γcα,(1c)initialconditions{uα·,0=u0α,inΩα,wherePis the first Piola–Kirchhoff stress tensor. The first equation describes the balance of momentum with∇·Pαbeing the internal forces andρ0αb¯αbeing the body forces acting onΩα. On the Dirichlet boundary, we assumeu¯α=0and on the Neumann boundaryPαn=t¯α, wheret¯αis a given surface force. The contact tractiontcαand the actual contact zone are not known a priori and have to be determined numerically. For the quasi-static approximation used in this paper, the inertia forces are neglected and the time interval[0,T]is split into small load incrementst0=0,…tn=T.For the contact constraints, we define for each point on the slave surface the orthogonal system(n,τ1,τ2), withn=n(X,t)being the current normal on the slave surface in the pointXat time t andτ=(τ1,τ2)the corresponding tangents, see Fig. 1. In terms of this nomenclature, we define the projection operatorPt:Γcs→Γcm,X⟼Pt(X)which takes a pointXof the slave surface in the current configuration and projects it onto the master surface in direction of the current normaln(X,t), see Fig. 1. With the projection operator Pt, the gap function in the normal direction can be defined for the current configurationGn(Xs,t)≔[X+u(X,t)]n=nT·(φs(Xs,t)−φm(Pt(Xs),t)). Finally the Lagrange multiplier is defined as the negative contact traction on the slave sideλ=−tcs.Now the normal contact conditions with regularization due to the roughness on the micro scale on Γcscan be stated as follows, see Fig. 2(a) and (b):[u]n−Gnc(λn)≤g0∧λn≥0∧λn·([u]n−Gnc(λn))=0.Here the linearised version of the normal contact is utilized assuming small deformations on the contact boundary withg0=−Gn(Xs,t0)and the regularisation operatorGnc(λn)defined like in [37].For the tangential contact, the incremental form of Coulomb׳s law is employed to resolve the path dependency with a linear regularization:Φ(λn,λτ)≔∥λτ∥−b≤0∧[u̇]τ−1aτλ̇τ=γ̇λτ∥λτ∥∧γ̇≥0∧γ̇·Φ=0,withaτbeing the tangential stiffness also called stick slope and the friction boundb=μ·λn. The smooth transition between sticking and slipping as in Fig. 2(c) is modelled using the serial–parallel Iwan model [45]. For simplicity we restrict our considerations here to one Iwan element per slave node for the tangential contact and a linear regularization of the normal contactGnc(λn)=(1/an)λn. The case of no friction is included setting μ=0 and the perfect Coulomb law by settingaτ=∞. Hard contact in normal direction can be modelled settingan=∞. For details on the regularized versions of the used contact laws, we refer to [37,38].To get to the weak formulation of the two-body contact problem, the balance of momentum (1a) is multiplied with the test functionsδuαand integrated over the domainΩα. Performing a partial integration and inserting the boundary conditions yieldsδΠint,ext(u,δu)+δΠc(λ,δu)=0.For the functional analytical classification of the used function spaces, we refer to [21]. To get to the discretized term of the contact work, the test functions for the displacementsδuare discretized with standard basis functionsδuαh=∑p=1nαδupα·ϕpand the Lagrange multipliers λwith dual basis functionsλh=∑p=1nsλp·ψp. The dual basis functions ψp are constructed as a linear combination of the standard basis functions and requiring integral-positivity using the biorthogonality condition(2)∫γcsψi·ϕjdS=δij∫γcsϕjdSin the current configuration. Separating the nodes into slave nodesS, master nodesMand all other nodesNand using the definition of the well-known mortar matrices(3)D[p,q]=∫γcsψp·ϕqdSI3p,q∈S,B[p,q]=−∫γcsψp·(ϕq○Pt)dSI3p∈S,q∈M,the discrete version of the virtual contact work can be stated as(4)δΠch(λ,δu)=(δuS)TDTλ+(δuM)TBTλ,withλ=(λ1T,…,λnsT)T,λp=(λp,1,λp,2,λp,3)Tandδu=(δu1T,…,δunallT)T,δup=(δup,1,δup,2,δup,3)T. It has to be noted that the coupling matrices are deformation dependent in the fully non-linear settingD=D(u)andB=B(u). In order to avoid the complex derivation of the fully deformation dependent solution here, we use a combined fix point and Newton approach and setD=D(u¯)andB=B(u¯)withu¯being the solution of the last load increment. From the numerical point of view, this is suboptimal, i.e. the super-linear convergence rate of a global semi-smooth Newton method is lost. However other system non-linearities (plasticity and friction) need small load increments to resolve the path dependencies and thus one has a good start iterate in each incrementation step. Moreover, this allows more easily to exploit the full advantage of the dual Lagrange multiplier concept since only then the matrixDis diagonal and no Jacobian has to be taken into account.The termδΠint,ext(u,δu)for the virtual internal and external work is reformulated and discretized with standard basis functions. To solve the non-linear discrete equation due to material non-linearities or non-linear strain calculation, a Newton–Raphson algorithm is used, resulting in a linear system(5)K·Δuk+[DB]Tλk+1=rk,uk+1=uk+Δukin every Newton–Raphson iteration with tangent matrixK=DδΠint,exth(uk,δu)and residuumrk=fexth(uk)−finth(uk). Herefexth(uk)describes the discrete external forces andfint(uk)hthe discrete internal forces. It has to be noted, that the dependency onδuof these two force vectors has been omitted here for better readability, but has to be kept in mind for the transformation introduced in the next section. For details, we refer to the monograph [5,6]. The weak formulation and discretization of the contact constraints for quadratic finite elements will be dealt with in Section 3.The main feature of the dual mortar method for linear finite elements is a diagonal coupling matrixDon the slave side in the term of the virtual contact work since the dual basis functions ψpare constructed satisfying the biorthogonality condition (2). Thus the Lagrange multiplier can be condensed trivially from the global linear system before solving. In the construction of the dual basis functions one uses∫γcsϕidS>0,∀i=1,‥,nin order to achieve∫γcsψidS>0,∀i=1,‥,nneeded in the weak contact condition. Unfortunately this condition is violated for edge basis functions of quadratic Hex20 and Tet10 elements. Therefore an element-wise linear basis transformationTeis introduced transforming the standard basis function ϕito the transformed standard functionsϕi˜satisfying∫γcsϕ˜ids>0∀i=1,‥,n[35,36] at the expense of loosing the Lagrange basis properties ofϕ˜p. Then the dual basis functions ψican be constructed satisfying the alternative biothogonality condition(6)∫γcsψi·ϕ˜jdS=δij∫γcsϕ˜jdS.There are plenty of possibilities in the choice ofTe, but we restrict our considerations to two differentTe.The first possibility is the quad–quad method. Here locally quadratic basis functions are employed for the displacements and the Lagrange multiplier. Also every node of the quadratic slave surface carries a Lagrange multiplier contribution. The basis transformation for quadratic elements and the quad–quad method for a Q8 surface has the following form:(7)(ϕ˜1ϕ˜2ϕ˜3ϕ˜4ϕ˜5ϕ˜6ϕ˜7ϕ˜8)T=(ϕ1ϕ2ϕ3ϕ4ϕ5ϕ6ϕ7ϕ8)T·(10000000010000000010000000010000αα001−2α0000αα001−2α0000αα001−2α0α00α0001−2α)︸Teq.Choosingα=1/5, it holds∫eleϕ˜i>0∀i=1,‥8and∑i=18ϕ˜1=1(partition of unity is untouched) for the reference element and distorted versions of it, see [35]. This choice of α also guarantees integral positivity for Tet10 elements. But one looses the Kronecker-delta property for the corner nodes.The second possibility is the quad–lin method. Here the displacements are discretized with quadratic basis functions, but the Lagrange multiplier is approximated with a linear combination of the linear basis functions and only the corner nodes carry Lagrange multiplier degrees of freedom. The basis transformation for quadratic elements and the quad–lin method for a Q8 surface has the following form:(8)(ϕ˜1ϕ˜2ϕ˜3ϕ˜4ϕ˜5ϕ˜6ϕ˜7ϕ˜8)T=(ϕ1ϕ2ϕ3ϕ4ϕ5ϕ6ϕ7ϕ8)T·(10000000010000000010000000010000αα0010000αα0010000αα0010α00α0001)︸Tel.Choosingα=1/2, it holds∫eleϕ˜i>0∀i=1,‥8and∑i=14ϕ˜1=1(partition of unity only in corner nodes). With this choice of α a hierarchical basis is built and even point-wise positivity is guaranteed for Hex20 and Tet10 elements needed later for the Petrov–Galerkin method introduced in Section 4. Again the Kronecker-delta property of the transformed basis gets lost for the corner nodes. Also one has to note, that with this method, one looses surface information for curved interfaces and coarse meshes, since contact will only be enforced in corner nodes of the slave surface. On the other hand the active set iteration within the semi-smooth Newton method is expected to converge faster for very fine meshes, since less slave nodes have to be iterated.With the definition of this transformed basis functions, the displacements on the slave side can now be written in two different ways:uS=∑p=1nsϕp·up=∑p=1nsϕ˜p·u˜pq, withu=Tu˜andu˜=T−1u. HereTis the global transformation matrix assembled withTel,qover all slave faces. Applying the basis transformation in the discretization of the contact virtual work on the slave side yields(9)δΠcs(δu,λ)=δuTT−TTTDTλ=δu˜q,TD˜Tλ,with the diagonal matrixD˜[i,j]=∫γcsψi·ϕ˜jdSI3=δij∫γcsϕ˜idSI3and the rectangular matrixD[i,j]=∫γcsψi·ϕjdSI3,i,j∈S.The discretization of the weak contact conditions for the quadratic case are stated as follows: Findλh∈Mhsuch that(10)〈[u]nh−Gnc(λnh),νnh−λnh〉+〈([u]τh−[u¯]τh)−Gτc(λτh−λ¯τh),ντh−λτh〉≤〈gn,νnh−λnh〉,νh∈Mh(λh)with(u¯h,λ¯h)being the solution of the last load increment. As in [37,38] one wants to perform a mass lumping and approximates the regularization termsGn,τc(λh)with the transformed standard basis functions(11)Gn,τc(∑p=1nsψp·λp)=∑p=1nsϕ˜p·gn,τc(λp),in order to guarantee diagonality of the contact law inλ, otherwise the semi-smooth Newton method looses its locality. Then the weak discrete contact condition in normal direction for pointp∈Sreads as follows:(12)u^pn−gnc(λsp)≤gp∧λspn≥0∧(u^pn−gnc(λsp)−gp)·λspn=0withu^S=D·uS+B·uMandλs=D˜λ. Analogously, one gets the discretized weak tangential contact conditions:(13){∥λspτ∥−bp≤0∥λspτ∥−bp<0⇒∥u˜pτ−1aτ·λ˜spτ∥=0∥λspτ∥−bp=0⇒∥u˜pτ−1aτ·λ˜spτ∥>0with the friction boundbp=μλspnand definingu˜p≔u^p−u¯^p,λ˜s≔λs−λ¯s. That means that the weak contact conditions (12) and (13) decouple point wise for the pair(u^,λs)and the semi-smooth Newton method is derived with respect to this pair. For the semi-smooth Newton method the following non-linear complementary functions are used:(14)CnP(λsp,u^p)=λspn−max{0,λspn+c(u^pn−gp−gnc(λspn))}for the normal direction and(15)CτP(λsp,u^p)=max{bp,||λspτ+c2(u˜pτ−1aτλ˜spτ)||}·λspτ−bp·(λspτ+c2(u˜pτ−1aτλ˜spτ)),withbp=μ·max{0,λspn+c(u^pn−gp−gnc(λsp))}andc2=min{aτ,c}for the tangential direction analogously to [37,38]. The non-linear complementary function in normal direction decomposes the slave nodes carrying Lagrange multiplier contributions in Newton iteration k into two sets, the active nodesAand the inactive nodesIvia(16)Ak≔{p∈S:λspnk+c(u^pnk−gnc(λspnk)−gp)>0},Ik≔{p∈S:λspnk+c(u^pnk−gnc(λspnk)−gp)≤0}.The non-linear complementary function in tangential direction decomposes the setAkfurther in sticking nodes and slipping nodes. For details on the semi-smooth Newton method, we refer to Appendix A.The general approach can be summed up as follows: The dual basis functions ψiare constructed on basis ofϕ˜iwith the biorthogonality condition (6) and the matrix representation of the weak discretized and linearized two-body contact problem is derived in(Δuk,δu,λk+1,δλ). Especially the linearization in the Newton–Raphson procedure is performed with respect to the standard basis and thus with respect tou. Afterwards the system is transformed to(Δu˜q,k,δu˜q,λk+1,δλ). Details of this transformation are skipped here, but can be found in Appendix B. In contrast to [35] this transformation has to be performed independently of the choice of the method (quad–quad or quad–lin), sinceD˜may loose its full rank due to other constraints like additional directional blocking or cyclic symmetry or hanging nodes, see Section 5. At the end the full advantage of the dual mortar formulation is exploited and the Lagrange multiplier is condensed from the global system usingλk+1=D˜−T(r˜k−K˜kΔu˜q,k)leading to(17)(KNNKNMK˜NIK˜NAKMN+B˜ATK˜ANKMM+B˜ATK˜AMK˜MI+B˜ATK˜AIK˜A+B˜ATK˜AAK˜INK˜IMK˜IIK˜IAGnK˜ANGnK˜AM+NBAGnK˜AIGnK˜AA+ND˜AARτK˜ANRτK˜AM+LτBARτK˜AIRτK˜AA+LτD˜AA)·(ΔuNkΔuMkΔu˜Iq,kΔu˜Aq,k)=(rNrM+B˜ATr˜Ar˜IGnr˜A+hnRτr˜A+hτ)withB˜A=D˜AA−1BA. For the definitions ofhn,hτ,N,Gn,RτandLτ, see Appendix A. One has to note that the condensation ofλis deliberately performed with the balance of forces and not with the contact condition to avoid an ill-conditioning of the matrix system due to the regularisation parameters anandaτfor high regularisation parameters. Although the focus of this paper lies in the contact of rough surfaces, one does not want to renounce one of the main advantages of the Lagrange multiplier method, namely the ability to model a mathematically ideal contact, hard contact in normal direction and a perfect Coulomb law in tangential direction. Doing so, one ends up with a multi-scale algorithm for quadratic elements being able to model ideal contact for micro- or nano-scale models and constitutive contact laws for larger scales. The problem arising with the weighted dual gap will be handled in the next section.A general problem using the dual mortar method for solving contact problems is the weak formulation of the non-penetration condition(18)δλnp(∫γcsψpϕpdS)upns−δλnp∑k=1nm(∫γcsψpϕkmdS)uknm≤δλnp∫γcsψpg0dSin the discrete setting for pointp∈S(here without regularisation and in the linear setting for simplicity). Due to the construction of ψpit holds that∫ψpg0dS<0ifg0=const<0. But for a non-constant gap function g0 there exist set-ups whereg0(ξ,η)<0,∀−1≤ξ,η,≤1but∫γcsψpg0dS>0. That means that a slave node can be set active, even if there is still a gap between the bodies and some non-physical pushing apart occurs. This situation can occur due to high gradients in the model or high curvatures modelled with very few elements or sharp edges in the continuum model. An example of the problem with the dual gap is shown in Section 6.2. Also this can be triggered by a coarse curved slave mesh and a finer curved master mesh [39]. These problems arise due to the non-positive part of the dual basis functions and were already considered in [39] for mesh-tying problems and simple contact situations. In many situations, the problems linked to the dual basis functions can be avoided by simply switching the master and the slave side or by refining the mesh in this region, since the severity of the induced numerical artefacts are h-dependent.In case of complex industrial models, one often cannot refine the model in the contact zone due to solver or cluster limitations or time issues and thus another solution to the problem is needed. A solution to this dual gap problem can be found adapting ideas from [46] introducing a smoothing operator I switching from the dual space to the trace space of the displacements for selected terms in the discretization of the weak contact conditions. The same is achieved by using a Petrov–Galerkin approach and thus discretizing the variation of the Lagrange multiplierδλwith different basis functions than the Lagrange multiplier itself. For linear finite elements this method was utilized by Popp et al. [40]. Here the Lagrange multiplier is discretized with the dual basis functionsλ=∑p=1nsψp·λpbut the variation of the Lagrange multiplier is discretized by the standard basis functionsδλ=∑p=1nsϕp·δλpleading to the weak non-penetrability condition(19)∑k=1ns(∫γcsϕpϕkdS)ukns−∑k=1nm(∫γcsϕpϕkmdS)uknm≤∫γcsϕpg0dS.Thus the point-wise positive standard basis functions remedy the problem with the dual gap for linear elements. This idea can be extended to quadratic elements for the quad–lin mortar method using the transformed standard basis functionϕ˜pfor the discretization of the variation of the Lagrange multiplier(20)δλ=∑p=1nsϕ˜p·δλp,since the transformed basis functions coincide with standard basis functions for linear elements for the corner nodes. But one inherits the loss of surface information from the quad–lin method, since only corner nodes carry Lagrange multiplier contributions. The same idea cannot be used for the quad–quad mortar method since the transformed basis functions are not point-wise positive in this case (only setting α=0.5 leads to point-wise positive transformed basis functions coinciding with the quad–lin method).Using the Petrov–Galerkin quadratic–linear mortar approach, from now on referred as PG quad–lin method one ends up with six different coupling matrices in the discrete set-up instead of three for the quad–lin method. In the term for the contact forces, one has the slave–slave couplingDD[p,q]=∫ψp·ϕqdSI3and its transformed counterpartD˜D[p,q]=∫ψp·ϕ˜qdSI3=δpq∫ϕ˜qdSI3as well as the master–slave couplingBD[p,q]=∫ψp·ϕqdSI3. For the weak contact condition one ends up with the slave–slave couplingDP[p,q]=∫ϕ˜p·ϕqdSI3, its transformed counterpartD˜P[p,q]=∫ϕ˜p·ϕ˜qdSI3and the slave–master couplingBP[p,q]=∫ϕ˜p·ϕqdSI3.Having these different coupling matrices, the global system matrix is calculated analogously to Section 3 using the weighted pair(u^,λs)=(DPuS+BPuM,D˜Dλ)in the construction of the semi-smooth Newton method. Then the Lagrange multiplier is condensed from the global system usingλk+1=D˜D−1(r˜k−K˜kΔu˜q,k)leading to(21)(KNNKNMK˜NIK˜NAKMN+B˜ATK˜ANKMM+B˜ATK˜AMK˜MI+B˜ATK˜AIK˜A+B˜ATK˜AAK˜INK˜IMK˜IIK˜IAGnK˜ANGnK˜AM+NBAPGnK˜AI+ND˜AIPGnK˜AA+ND˜AAPRτK˜ANRτK˜AM+LτBAPRτK˜AI+LτD˜AIPRτK˜AA+LτD˜AAP)·(ΔuNkΔuMkΔu˜Iq,kΔu˜Aq,k)=(rNrM+B˜ATr˜Ar˜IGnr˜A+hnRτr˜A+hτ)withB˜A=D˜AAD−1BAD.Remark 1Now the problem with the dual gap can be avoided, but one has to have a closer look into the implications of the used Petrov–Galerkin approach, see Fig. 3. Here one considers a very simple set-up with linear elements, where a rigid form with sharp edges (in red) is pressed into a soft block assuming mathematically ideal contact. One can see clearly in Fig. 3(b) that one can resolve the sharp edge with the dual mortar method resulting in point-wise hard contact as also achieved for example with an augmented Lagrange method. Using the Petrov–Galerkin approach one introduces a mesh-dependent point-wise overlap of the two bodies due to the weak contact condition as also induced by the standard Lagrange method, see Fig. 3(c) for the solution using a coarse mesh and see Fig. 3(d) for the solution using a fine mesh. Especially in complex forming processes with edged tools, this mesh-dependent effect may be undesirable.The main focus of this paper lies in quasi-static problems. But for extensions to dynamical quadratic problems, the dual Petrov–Galerkin method may corrupt the conservation of energy due to the inherent asymmetry of the approach. Using the standard dual mortar method, the contact or mesh tying constraints do not generate any energy. Let us clarify this behaviour with a simple mesh tying example leading to a static matrix system(22)(δuT,δλT)·(KC1TC20)·(uλ)=δuTKu+δuTC1Tλ+δλTC2u,with the coupling matricesC1,C2. For the standard dual mortar method it holdsC1=C2and thusuTC1Tλ+λTC2u=0sinceC2u=0. IfC1≠C2as it is the case for the Petrov–Galerkin method, thenuTC1Tλ+λTC2u=uTC1Tλ≠0. This potentially causes a non-physical energy growth by the constraint and may lead to instability in the time integrator.The last pieces limiting the derived algorithm are multi-point constraints and hanging nodes in the contact zone. These will be treated in the next section.When considering complex industrial applications with several parts in contact, typically not the whole set-up is modelled numerically, but a sub-model with multi-point constraints like cyclic symmetry or directional blocking applied to the boundaries is generated. In this context, it can occur that a slave node carrying a Lagrange multiplier contribution additionally has a multi-point constraint on it leading to an over-constrained linear system. There are basically two possibilities for solving this problem. In some cases, the Lagrange multiplier on the slave node can be kept under the assumption that the equivalent multi-point constraint for the Lagrange multiplier is known. Then both dependent degrees of freedom, from the displacements and the Lagrange multiplier, can be condensed from the global system matrix before solving. But this can lead to a non-diagonal condensed coupling matrixD˜and increases the computational costs for inverting it. Also for most multi-point constraints in industrial applications, the equivalent constraint for the Lagrange multiplier cannot be derived trivially [44, p. 96f]. The simpler solution is removing the Lagrange multiplier contribution for this slave node and redistributing it to the neighbouring nodes during the construction of the dual basis functions ψp. This is very similar to the classical mortar situation of cross-points [41]. Here a redistribution of the nodal basis function to the other nodes is required, otherwise a constant traction force cannot be preserved. The same can be done for hanging slave nodes like in Fig. 4(a), when parts of the slave surface overlap the master surface. Here it is not favourable to keep the hanging nodes active, since it would result in non-physical displacements and stresses in the numerical simulation.In this paragraph, the redistribution of the Lagrange multiplier contribution of one Q8 surface using the quad–lin method will be shown in more detail to clarify the procedure. Other cases can be derived analogously. Let us now consider one Hex20 element with one hanging slave node, see Fig. 4(b). It holdsλ|face=∑i=14ψi·λpwithψ=A·ϕ˜calculated using the biorthogonality condition on the common area (light blue in Fig. 4(b) with triangulation due to segmentation of the slave surface [24]). Node one is a hanging node and its Lagrange multiplier contribution is redistributed to the nodes two and four,λ1=0.5·λ2+0.5·λ4, since the edge nodes do not carry Lagrange multiplier degrees of freedom. This leads toλ|face=∑i=14ψ^i·λpwithA^=(0000a^21a^22a^23a^24a31a32a33a34a^41a^42a^43a^44),a^ji=aji+0.5·a1i.It still holds∑i=14ψ^i=1. Consequently the coupling matrixD˜restricted to the current slave surface using the altered dual basis functions becomesD˜=(0000D˜21D˜220000D˜330D˜4100D˜44)ThusD˜looses its diagonality, but the Lagrange multiplier can nevertheless be condensed without extra cost, sinceD˜restricted to all slave nodes carrying Lagrange multipliers is still a diagonal one and can be inverted trivially. All hanging nodes with no Lagrange multiplier contributions are treated as master nodes in the linear system.In this section, we study a variety of industrially motivated examples with microscopic rough surfaces and different contact zones including large plastic deformations. The surface roughness resulting in regularized contact laws is considered in all examples but is not the main focus in this paper. For a detailed study we refer to [37,38]. Here a comparison between the different numerical approaches for quadratic elements is made. All numerical calculations are carried out with the open-source FEM package CalculiX (www.calculix.de) [44].The first numerical example is a simple test case demonstrating the advantages of the modification of the dual mortar method for multi-point constraints in the contact zone. One considers two nested steel pipes (E=2.1×105MPa) as visualized in Fig. 5(a). Since the model is axial symmetric only 30° of the pipes are modelled with Hex20 elements and a cyclic symmetry tie is applied to the sides of the model, see Fig. 5(b) marked in blue. For simplicity, all nodes are fixed in axial direction and one sets ν=0.0 (reduction of the model to the 2D case). Furthermore two nodes of each pipe belonging to the symmetry tie are fixed in circumferential direction to guarantee static mounting. Then a pressure of 100MPa is applied to the inside of the inner pipe (marked with green) to expand both pipes in one linear-geometrical quasi-static step. In this set-up, the slave surface touches the cyclic symmetry tie and would lead to an over-constrained system. As a naive approach, we remove all slave faces with nodes in the cyclic symmetry tie from the slave surface formulation. Then we compare the results to the modification introduced in Section 5 keeping all slave nodes and simply removing the Lagrange multiplier contribution from the over-constrained nodes. In both cases, we use the quad–quad mortar method and set for the contact interaction a normal stiffness ofan=5×107MPa/mm, μ=0.2 and the tangential stiffnessaτ=5×103MPa/mm.Looking at the norm of the displacements, one would expect a linear distribution from the outer to the inner pipe in this simple example. As one can see clearly in Fig. 6(a), the naive approach fails to reproduce the physical behaviour of the model and violates the contact condition near the cyclic symmetry tie (Fig. 6(b)). However, the modification introduced in Section 5 reproduces the physically correct displacements and even satisfies the contact condition in the nodes of the cyclic symmetry due to the active Lagrange multiplier distributions of the surrounding slave nodes, see Fig. 6(c). The same can be observed looking at the worst principal stress (WPS) defined as the maximum of the absolute value of the principal stresses times its original sign (Fig. 7). Here one can see the correct solution for the modified algorithm in Fig. 7(b) compared to the naive approach leading to non-physical results in Fig. 7(a). Thus this example shows clearly the need of the proposed modifications facing industrial applications.The second numerical example is inspired by the pharmaceutical industry and shows clearly the benefit of the Petrov–Galerkin dual mortar formulation for quadratic elements. The model consists of a cylindrical hollow matrix, a thin plastic film and a cylindrical indenter with rounded edges pressing out a pill form of the plastic film, see Fig. 8(a) for a visualisation without the plastic film. Since the model is axial symmetric, only 30° are modelled and the two sides of the model are blocked in circumferential direction (Fig. 8(b)). It has to be noted that therefore the slave nodes at the boundary of the contact zone loose their Lagrange multiplier degrees of freedom using the modification introduced in Section 5. Also the thin plastic film is fixed to the indenter at one end and to the matrix at the other end. The plastic film is set to be the slave body and the matrix and the indenter are the master bodies. The matrix and the indenter have the material properties of steel, but are modelled as rigid to save computational time. This is justified by the fact that their deformation can be neglected compared to the plastic film. For the thin film the elastic material properties E=5000MPa and ν=0.3 are used. Since the model shows a forming process, we use the incremental plasticity with multiplicative split implemented in CalculiX due to [42,43] with the following data pairs, von Mises stress versus the equivalent plastic strain, for the isotropic hardening curve: (50.0MPa,0.0), (100MPa,0.3), see Fig. 8(e). The thin film consists of Hex20 elements and a few Wedge15 elements at the pointy end of the model as one can see in Fig. 8(c). Though modelled as rigid the matrix and the indenter are meshed with Hex8 and Wedge6 elements to carry the geometrical information, but all their degrees of freedom are blocked and thus removed from the calculation. Using this mesh, the problem with the dual gap occurs at pointp∈Sas one can see in Fig. 8(d), since∫γcsg·ψpdS>0whileg≤0for the two standard dual mortar formulations (quad–quad and quad–lin method). We perform a quasi-static non-linear geometrical calculation in 600 increments and move the indenter down by 6mm. For the contact interaction a normal stiffness ofan=5×104MPa/mm, the friction coefficient μ=0.2 and the tangential stiffnessaτ=102MPa/mmare used.The plastic forming process is illustrated in Fig. 9. In Fig. 9(a)–(c), three positions of the indenter are shown. Here the von Mises stress is plotted during the displacement of the indenter. In Fig. 9(d), one can observe large plastic deformations of the film due to the high von Mises stress leading to rupture of the thin film in practice.A special focus is set to the first increment of the calculation, since it illustrates perfectly the problem with the dual gap. Here, the indenter moves down 0.01mm and all deformations remain elastic. Fig. 10shows the resulting displacements after the first increment for the three different methods presented in this paper amplified by a factor of 100. One can see clearly the non-physical pushing apart between the matrix and the film due to the use of the dual basis functions in the evaluation of the weighted gap for the quad–quad method in Fig. 10(a) and for the quad–lin method in Fig. 10(c). Only the PG quad–lin method reproduces the correct physical behaviour, see Fig. 10(e). The non-physical pushing apart also results in a higher worst principal stress within the film as one can see in Fig. 10(b) for the quad–quad method and in Fig. 10(d) for the quad–lin method and compared to the PG quad–lin method in Fig. 10(f). This numerical example thus clearly demonstrates the need for the Petrov–Galerkin dual mortar formulation for quadratic elements as an alternative to the classical dual mortar formulations.The next example focuses on a fir tree contact between a simplified blade foot with blade and a simplified disk in a jet turbine demonstrating the robustness of the three different dual mortar methods for quadratic elements. As one can see in Fig. 11(a), one considers the rotating part of a high pressure turbine exposed to a centrifugal force. Here one has a disk of radius 300mm assembled with 20 blades. For simplicity, only1/20of the whole disk is modelled and everything is meshed with Hex20 elements, see Fig. 11(c). All parts are modelled as steel with E=2.1×105MPa and ν=0.3, and we perform a non-linear geometrical calculation with friction in one quasi-static step. A centrifugal force of7000turns/minis applied to the whole model in 10 load increments (dt=0.1·ω2withω=2π·7000·(1/60s)). The bottom of the disk is fixed in all directions, the left and the right side of the disk is fixed in circumferential direction, see Fig. 11(b). In the contact zone, the disk and the blade foot are modelled with different curvatures leading to an overlap at the beginning of the calculation. We deliberately employ a coarse mesh in the contact zone in order to show the effects of the different methods facing curvatures. For the contact simulation a normal stiffness ofan=106MPa/mmis used. Friction is modelled with μ=0.3 andaτ=5×105MPa/mm.Fig. 12shows the contact pressure and resulting worst principal stress for the quad–quad method at the end of the step. One can see clearly the four localized contact zones due to the different curvatures on the master and the slave side. It has to be noted that the contact pressure is not visualized using the node values of the Lagrange multiplier in normal direction, but the interpolation with the transformed basis functionsϕ˜as a smoothing of the discontinuous dual approximationI∑i=1nsψiλi=∑i=1nsϕ˜iλi=ϕTTλ,withTdefined in Eq. (7) for the quad–quad method and in Eq. (8) for the quad–lin and the PG quad–lin method. Some scattering between the corner and the end nodes can be observed for the quad–quad method (Fig. 12(a)). That might be due to the long drawn-out Hex20 elements used in the contact zone and can also be seen in the worst principal stress (Fig. 12(b)). With the two linear approaches, the scattering is avoided since the distributions of the standard basis function are not redistributed with the transformationT, but a hierarchical basis is built with the drawback of only linear approximation properties in the Lagrange multiplier and the loss of surface complexity since only corner nodes carry Lagrange multiplier contributions.Having a closer look at the contact pressure at the top right contact zone (Fig. 13(a) marked with yellow dots) for the different methods, one can see clearly that the quad–quad method has the highest maximum value for the contact pressure, since the linear methods are not enforcing contact in mid nodes. This results in an approximately 24% lower maximum contact force for this coarse mesh for the linear methods leading to a more anti-conservative stress calculation in the whole part (approximately 50–100MPa lower for critical positions) compared to the quad–quad method.From the numerical point of view, the quad–lin method yields the best performance looking at the total and the average number of iterations, see Table 1. The quad–quad method required more iterations in total and per increment since all slave nodes carry Lagrange multiplier distributions and the semi-smooth Newton method needs more iterations to find the correct active set. The PG quad–lin method performed worse than the classical quad–lin method due to the smoothing used in the derivation of the Petrov–Galerkin method. The average number of iterations per increment of about 7 for all three methods is partly owed to the different curvatures in the contact zone between the disk and the blade foot leading to a higher number of active set changes for the normal contact and partly to the changes between sticking and slipping of the active nodes due to friction during the step. But in total there are only minor performance differences for all three methods.An even more complex example of industrial relevance is considered in the following. Again a blade foot disk contact is modelled but with a retainer holding the blade foot within the disk, see Fig. 14(b). Here the retainer is removed from the model for better visibility of the fir tree contact between disk and blade foot. In practise, the retainer (Fig. 14(a)) has to withstand a certain critical force and the numerical simulation can help in the design of prototypes satisfying this criteria. Therefore the blade foot is pushed out of the disk by a rectangular block like in Fig. 14(c) and (d). The model consists of Hex20 and Tet10 elements with around 180,000 nodes in total and all parts are modelled as steel with E=2.1×105MPa and ν=0.3. For the contact simulation we usean=106MPa/mm, μ=0.2 andaτ=5×105MPa/mm. A quasi-static non-linear geometrical calculation is performed in 20 load increments with friction but without plasticity. In reality, the large displacements in the retainer will result in plastic deformations, but in contrast to example 6.2 here the focus lies in resolving the various contact zones. Indeed, this is a challenging example, since there are 21 different potential contact zones (disk–blade foot, disk–retainer and blade foot–retainer) and because of the high non-linearities in the system due to friction and large deformations. Also no additional static mounting is used for the blade foot and the retainer and they are kept in place only via the contact definitions.The calculation converged for all three different methods. Here one has a closer look at the results for the retainer. In Figs. 15 and 16, one can see the scaled worst principal stress at the top and at the bottom of the retainer for the three different numerical methods. We restrict our observations to the qualitative behaviour of the retainer and show no absolute values since the resulting stresses without plasticity are very high and do not mirror the correct physical behaviour. Nevertheless the transition from areas under pressure (in blue) to areas of tension (in red) can be seen clearly. One can observe clearly the contact to the disk at the lower part of the retainer indicated with red in Fig. 15(d) and the contact to the blade foot and to the disk at the upper part of the retainer in Fig. 16(d). Only small differences in the solution of the worst principal stress for the different methods are obtained, mainly in the contact to the disk at the lower part of the retainer, see Fig. 15(a)–(c) and in the contact to the blade foot at the upper part of the retainer, see Fig. 16(a)–(c). Looking at the numerical behaviour, one sees that the PG quad–lin method needed the most iterations in total, the quad–lin method needed 15 iterations less, since it uses less slave nodes carrying Lagrange multipliers than the quad–quad method, see Table 2. Also the maximum number of iterations per increment again is highest for the PG quad–lin method. But in total there were only minor differences between the methods for this example conforming the robustness of the dual mortar method facing challenging examples of industrial relevance.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, a dual mortar formulation for quasi-static large deformation contact problems being able to handle quadratic finite elements in the context of rough surfaces on the micro-scale was presented. In order to overcome the problem with the dual gap for quadratic elements in case of high curvatures or high gradients in the model, the Petrov–Galerkin formulation for linear elements was extended to the quadratic case. As a last limitation to industrial applicability of the derived algorithms, a solution including multi-point constraints like cyclic symmetry and directional blocking as well as hanging nodes on the slave surface was presented. Combining all presented extensions, one obtains three different methods, the quad–quad method, the quad–lin method and the Petrov–Galerkin quad–lin method, for the quadratic case having a powerful tool for industrial contact problems as confirmed by various numerical examples. Nevertheless one has to carefully choose an appropriate method dependent on the problem set-up weighting the benefits and drawbacks of the different methods against each other. The first example of two nested pipes clearly shows the benefit of the suggested border treatment modifications having multi-point constraints like cyclic symmetry. Example two, the film forming example involving plasticity, demonstrates the need of the Petrov–Galerkin dual mortar method for quadratic elements in case of high curvatures in the contact zone. The example of an abstract disk blade foot contact shows the robustness of all three different methods facing overlap, although it stresses the drawback of the linear methods in loosing surface information for coarse meshes resulting in potentially anti-conservative stress values. The last complex turbine example again confirms the robustness of the three different methods facing large deformations, various contact zones and minimum static mounting.