@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Finite element seismic safety assessment of water intake structures

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We seismically analysed 4 concrete gravity water intake structures with openings using 3D FE fluid-structure interaction.We developed an equivalent "stick-model" using beam elements and a modified Westergaard formulation for openings.The proposed "stick models" provide hydrodynamic thrust within approximately 10% of the reference 3D FEM analyses.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Finite elements,Fluid structure interaction,Seismic safety assessment,Concrete hydraulic structure,Hydrodynamic pressure,Water intake structure,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a methodology to assess the seismic safety of concrete gravity water intake structures of typical hydroelectric facilities. Water intake structures are characterized by large voids for the gates and penstock embedded in concrete. In practice, the well-known Westergaard formulation (WF), assuming a vertical rigid wall, is most often used to represent hydrodynamic pressures. However, the validity of the WF for water intake structures has not been addressed in the past. A parametric analysis is performed herein using four 40m high intake structures with upstream opening void ratio, χ, ranging from 0% to 30% of the concrete surface in contact with water. Three-dimensional finite element models (FEM) with potential-based incompressible fluid elements are used in steady-state and transient seismic fluid–structure interaction (FSI) analyses to consider water in the penstock as well as in the reservoir. Modification factors which depend on χ are derived from the 3D FEM such that a Westergaard modified formulation (WMF) is proposed to represent adequately FSI. Simplified structural models using beam-column elements with section properties accounting for the presence the penstock opening and the proposed WMF are used as an efficient alternative to complex 3D FEM. A seismic safety assessment of an intake considering ground motions of return periods ranging from 200 to 10,000 years are used to assess the safety level of the intake structure. The internal forces and residual sliding displacements are computed. It is shown that the proposed WMF and the simplified stick model formulation provide hydrodynamic thrust within approximately 10% of the reference 3D FEM. The seismic response (i.e. base shear) is also adequately predicted using the proposed simplified modeling strategy.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
The May 12, 2008 Wenchuan earthquake in China of Magnitude 7.9 has emphasized the importance of safety assessment for dams subjected to large ground motions [1]. Wieland reported damage to the gate room structure of the intake tower of the 156m high Zipingpu concrete face rockfill dam [1]. These events bring a better understanding of the hazards that can affect hydraulic structures. Improvement of guidelines and regulations for the seismic safety assessment of the various appurtenant structures to concrete dams is imperative to ensure public safety [2–4]. While much attention has been focused on the evaluation of seismically induced hydrodynamic pressure and related seismic gravity dam response [5–9], few research works have been conducted on appurtenant structures such as free standing circular water intake structures [2,10,11]. However, an accurate hydrodynamic pressure evaluation for stability assessment of concrete gravity water intake structures with large upstream face openings (Fig. 1) requires the finite element (FE) solution of a fluid–structure interaction (FSI) problem of complex geometry that, to the best of the authors' knowledge, has not been reported in the literature. A concrete water intake may be vulnerable to cracking and sliding, but also to the failure of gates and electromechanical equipment. Paultre et al. [12] reported on situ forced-vibration testing of a closed gate of the Beauharnois 22m high intake structure leading to a fundamental period T1 of 0.125s with 6% critical damping. Simple 2D FE models using the classical Westergaard added mass approach [7] to represent the reservoir gave a fundamental period T1 of 0.124s. However the effect of the gate opening with water inside the intake in contact with the reservoir was not investigated. The classical Westergaard formulation (WF) is widely used because of its simplicity. It has originally been developed for rigid structures impounding incompressible fluid. Since then, corrections have been suggested to improve this formulation, such as the Cecoefficient to take the compressibility of water into account [13]. Other simplified approaches have also been proposed to consider the flexibility of the dam [5,6,14]. However, the appropriate way to define and implement an added mass model for an intake structure with conduct openings has not been studied in the past.This paper first investigates the effect of penstock surface openings in contact with the reservoir on the hydrodynamic pressure of four 40m high three-dimensional water intake (FE) models. The fluid in the reservoir and in the intake is modeled using an Eulerian formulation with the upstream face surface opening ratio, χ, varying from 10% to 30%. A simplified added mass Westergaard modified formulation (WMF) is derived to estimate seismic hydrodynamic pressures for intake structures. A simplified intake “stick“ model combining beam-column elements with cross-sectional properties accounting for openings and the WMF is proposed as an efficient alternative to the 3D FSI FE models (FEM) for practical applications. Steady-state and seismic time-history analyses are conducted to compare the proposed stick model with a WMF to the classical WF using FEM as reference solutions. Finally, the proposed simplified intake model with WMF is applied to illustrate a seismic safety assessment of water intake structures for earthquake ground motions with systematically increased intensity.Three existing gravity water intake structures located in Canada, shown inFig. 2, are studied to define the main characteristics that affect the intake response when subjected to dynamic loads.Table 1 presents the height, the concrete volume and mass, the volume void ratio, the water mass, the upstream face surface opening ratio, χ, and the fundamental periods of the dry and wet structures. The face surface opening void ratio, χ, ranges from 10% to slightly beyond 20%. The volume void ranges from 6% to 33%. The average height of the structures is 45.8m. The fundamental periods of the dry structures, ranging from 0.04s for the smallest to 0.19s for the tallest, increases by 11–21%, respectively, when the fluid effects are included. These periods were computed using the simplified method as described by Miquel and Bouaanani [6] assuming incompressible water and a simplified “stick” model of the intakes as described later in the paper. The characteristics of these water intake structures (Table 1) are used later in the study to define models for parametric analyses.The interaction between a reservoir and an intake structure makes the dynamic analysis of such systems complex [14]. Different methods have been proposed to compute the hydrodynamic pressure due to seismic loads. Westergaard [7] proposed to represent the effect of hydrodynamic pressure of the fluid as added masses, m (yi) with a parabolic distribution (Fig. 5a, Eq. (1)).(1)m(yi)=7/8ρwViHres(Hres−yi)where, ρwis the water density, yiis the elevation of node “i”, Hresis the reservoir height, and Viis the tributary volume of water associated to node “i”.This formulation is based on incompressible water, an infinite upstream reservoir and a rigid vertical wall in contact with water. It is however still widely used in practice because of its simplicity. Moreover, it has been shown to be accurate as compared to more rigorous FE fluid formulation for low frequency seismic motions [15]. For earthquake excitations with larger frequencies, water compressibility may affect the results. Fenves and Chopra [14] derived a simplified hydrodynamic pressure formulation based on rigorous frequency-domain fluid–structure interaction analysis using finite elements including the flexibility of typical gravity dam cross sections. Miquel and Bouaanani [6] also proposed a practical method to evaluate the seismic response of gravity dams. This simplified formulation, either with compressible or incompressible water assumptions, is based on the approximation of the fundamental mode of vibration of the dry structure using a cubic equation and thus takes into account the flexibility and geometry of the structure. It is also possible to use the FE method in the time domain to compute the hydrodynamic pressure as well as the internal forces in the dam. The Lagrangian [16,17] or Eulerian [17,18] finite elements are generally used to model the reservoir. The Lagrangian method uses the nodal displacement as degrees of freedom while the Eulerian method uses the nodal pressure. The Lagrangian method is delicate to use because it requires the control of zero energy deformation mode due to the absence of shear stiffness of water elements. The Eulerian method can be implemented using either compressible or incompressible water assumptions.The Eulerian method is used in this study as implemented in the computer program ADINA [19]. Bouaanani and Lu [18] have studied the performance of a combination of free surface, absorbing and fluid–structure compatibility boundary conditions. They concluded that these boundary conditions were appropriate to model the reservoir using the Eularian approach. In this work, a reservoir volume having the same thickness of the intake structure is considered as illustrated inFig. 3b. A free surface condition is placed at the top of the reservoir such that the hydrodynamic pressure is zero. A rigid boundary condition implying that the derivative of hydrodynamic pressure, p, to the normal of reservoir surface is set to zero at the left face, the right face, as well as the bottom and downstream faces of the reservoir. An infinite boundary condition is placed at the upstream limit to truncate the reservoir and prevent the pressure waves to be reflected in the domain of study. A reservoir length at least twice its height is required for accurate results [6]. Finally, fluid–structure interface elements are placed between fluid and solid nodes. These interface elements allow the compatibility between the nodal fluid pressures and the nodal displacements of the structure.Wilson [15] and Shimamoto et al. [20] studied the effect of the set-back of a spillway gate located at the top of a spillway pier on the seismic hydrodynamic pressure intensity and distribution. Both concluded that the set-back reduced the hydrodynamic pressure mainly in front of the gate as compared to the classical WF. Wilson [15] studied the effect of this set-back at the base of the gate and showed that the reduction of the pressure was more important at this level than at the base of the spillway.Four FE models, D1-0 to D4-30, described inTable 2 are developed using Table 1 to define their key characteristics. The height of the models is fixed to 40m, slightly below the observed average height in Table 1 (45.8m). The upstream face surface opening ratio, χ, of the water conduct in the upstream vertical wall is selected to vary from χ=0% (D1-0) to χ=30% (D4-30). Parameter χ=20% (D3-20) represents a typical value in Table 1 with χ=10% and χ=30% being lower and upper bound values. The material characteristics are given inTable 3[21]. The fundamental period of the dry structures is approximately T1=0.09s. The elongation of the period of the wet intake ranges from 10% to 17%, which is similar to the 10–20% range reported in Table 1.The geometry of the intake models is created in a CAD software, and then imported in the ADINA finite element software [19]. The intake models are presented inFig. 4. The D2-10 model finite element mesh is shown in Fig. 3a. 9301 Four node solid finite elements with incompatible modes are used to model the concrete structure and 60,540 four node incompressible fluid elements are used to model the reservoir, as well as 1177 potential-based fluid elements for the water conduct. The model contains 18,602 displacement degrees-of-freedom (DOF) and 61,717 pressure DOF. The reservoir length, 120m, is set equal to three times the reservoir height. The displacement degrees of freedom are fixed in the x direction (Fig. 3b) assuming symmetrical repetition of the intake structural components. The base of the intake is fixed for simplicity.Simplified 2D “stick” models operating in the upstream–downstream directions are constructed for each intake structure using series of prismatic beam-column elements in SAP2000 [22]. These models are identified as SD1-0 to SD4-30. The structural elements are vertical and “rigid“ links are used to connect the centers of gravity of each cross section. Following preliminary convergence studies, the structural elements representing the concrete intake body are fixed to a maximum length of 1m. The properties of each structural element are the center of gravity, the cross-sectional area, A, the shear area, As, and the moment of inertia, I. These properties are computed at each section located at the ends of the elements with due consideration of the voids due to the water conduct. The computation of the sectional properties is done using the ProSec modules of the Prokon software [23]. The rigorous shear area of arbitrary sections with openings is computed in ProSec from a finite element discretization of the cross-section. The theoretical background for these computations can be found in Gruttmann and Wagner [24]. For a rectangular cross-section without opening, the shear area, As, is usually taken as 5/6 of the cross-sectional area to conserve energy between the exact parabolic shear stress distribution and an approximate uniform shear stress distribution. For the water intakes analyzed, the rigorous results for Asare used. However, it was found that using the approximate value As=5/6A did not significantly affect the periods of vibration as well as the dynamic response of the models.At each section, the area of the water conduct is computed. The area is then converted into a tributary mass by multiplying it with its tributary height and water density. Rigid links are used to connect the concrete center of gravity and the water center of mass. Alternatively one can lump the tributary water mass in the conduct to the concrete mass considering also the rotational inertia.Fig. 5 presents typical cross-sectional properties for Model SD2-10.Fig. 6 presents the complete SD2-10 simplified “stick” model. 40 beam-column elements connected by 35 rigid link elements are used to model the concrete structures, resulting in 123 primary DOF. 33 rigid link elements are used to model the water conduct.A parametric analysis is conducted to propose and validate a Westergaard modified formulation (WMF). The objective is to avoid the use of fluid finite elements and better represent the variation of the magnitude and distribution of hydrodynamic pressure acting on the different intake structures using added masses in time domain dynamic analyses. Water compressibility was therefore not considered in this study. Steady-state analyses are performed on the four 3D finite element intake models to establish reference solutions. Water pressures at the face of the intakes are computed using a low frequency cyclic loading with a 1g intensity to compare these results with classical Westergaard formulation [15]. The WMF is based on Westergaard's basic equation (Eq. (1)), with three correction factors, F1, F2, and F3. The correction factors are found to be dependent on the face surface void ratio, χ. The intake wall in contact with water is divided in three zones: (1) above the opening, (2) in front of the opening, and (3) below the opening. The first correction factor, F1 modifies the pressure above the opening, the second factor, F2, modifies the pressure in front of the opening, and the third factor, F3, modifies the pressures from the bottom of the opening to the bottom of the intake structure. The correction factors are derived considering the ratio between FE reference solutions and the classical Westergaard formulation (Eq. (1)) as follows(2)F1=−0.65χ+0.90(3)F2=−2.40χ2−1.60χ+1.00(4)F3=−0.55χ+1.00Fig. 7 presents the comparison of the computed hydrodynamic water pressures from the FE steady-state analyses and the WMF. A very good agreement can be seen between the FEM (reference) solutions and the proposed WMF. Local pressure differences at the base of the intake can be explained by the FE geometry and boundary condition. Inserting χ=0 (no opening) in Eqs. (2) and (3) leads to an average F=0.97 which indicates minor discrepancies between the classical WF and FEM. An integration of the hydrodynamic pressure using the trapezoidal method is made along the face of the intake to compute the resulting base shear. Similar computations are done for a lift joint located at the inferior limit of the conduct opening (Fig. 4). The resulting shear forces are presented inTables 4 and 5. Taking the typical value of χ=0.2 as an example the following ratio of the Westergaard shear forces over the FEM shear forces are calculated (1) above the opening: 1.45, (2) in front of the opening: 1.27, and (3) beneath the opening: 1.16. The classical WF is thus producing larger hydrodynamic thrust than FEM. The results in Tables 4 and 5 show the improved accuracy brought by the proposed WMF as compared to the WF, especially at the joint lift (Table 5). For a typical value of χ=20%, the D3-20 FE model gave a shear force of 1.54MN as indicated in Table 5. The WMF gave a shear force of 1.60MN that is 3.8% above the reference FEM. However there is a large discrepancy between the WF (2.06 MN) and the FEM leading to a shear overestimation of 33.7%.Fig. 8 presents the frequency response functions with 5% viscous damping of the base shear for the 3D FEM as well as the stick models with the WF and the WMF. The base shear is a key response parameter to assess the global sliding stability of an intake. As there is an increase in opening, there is a decrease in the base shear magnitude at resonance. Fig. 8 also indicates that the WMF develops the peak base shear at a closer resonant frequency to the FEM than the WF. A significant part of the base shear at resonance is due to the inertia forces computed from the concrete. This improvement provided by the WMF is important because a small difference in the loading frequency can lead to a significant difference in the steady-state response of the structure.Fig. 9a shows the frequency response functions for the displacement of FEM D4-30 as well as models SWF-30 and SWMF-30 at elevation h=25m (Fig. 4). The FEM D4-30 and the SWMF-30 are in excellent agreement over the complete frequency range. The SWF-30 overestimates the displacement at resonance from 32mm at 8.18Hz as compared to 23mm at 9.82Hz for the FEM and SWMF. The local displacement response is much more affected by the FSI modeling formulation than the global base shear response.The difference in steady-state structural response, as indicated above, may not be as important in the case of seismic excitations due to the presence of broad frequency content. To assess the seismic safety of the intake structures, a series of ground motion records corresponding to recurrence periods ranging from 200 years to 10,000 years were developed as indicated inTable 6. These ground motion records are compatible with target horizontal design spectra proposed by Ko and Schellenberg [25] for a site located on rock in Eastern Canada. The simulated time histories are generated as described in Limoges and Léger [26] as well as Wanotkorkul and Filiatrault [27].A first series of linear dynamic time history analyses are conducted using the 2500 years return period ground motions. Fig. 9b compares the resulting base shear for the FEM D4-30 and the SWFD4-30.Fig. 10 presents comparisons of the base shear of the 3D FEM and of the four stick models with the WMF. A first qualitative comparison can be made between the WMF (Fig. 10b) that shows a better agreement with the FEM reference solution than the WF results (Fig. 9b). The root mean squares (RMS) of the base shear computed from the three FSI modeling procedures (FEM, WF, WMF) are presented inTable 7. The maximum resulting base shear during the ground motions are shown inTable 8. The RMS calculation shows the improved base shear estimate from the proposed WMF. Using the D3-20 FEM as a typical reference, the WMF has a 9% difference, which compares favorably to the 29% discrepancy of the WF. The comparison of the maximum base shears, even though less meaningful than the root mean square calculation, confirms an improvement of the adequacy of the proposed formulation (WMF 6.6% difference vs. WF 14.8% difference with FEM reference solution). The results in Tables 7 and 8 show similar trends for the other intake models.A progressive methodology for seismic safety assessment of gravity dams has been presented by Ghrib et al. [28].Table 9 presents a summary of the methodology with 5 levels of increasing complexity ranging from the pseudo-static (seismic coefficient) method to nonlinear time history analysis. In general, when stability or performance criteria cannot be met using a specific level of analysis, an analysis of the next higher level has to be performed. It was shown that the seismic response of concrete gravity water intake structures can be efficiently performed using a simplified stick model with the proposed WMF as compared to complex FEM with fluid elements. The use of a stick model enables the computation of the transient axial P(t), shear V(t) and bending moment M(t) resultant at a particular elevation using cross-sectional results. These resultants can be used in an extension of the gravity method in a dedicated post-processor to compute crack length as well as sliding safety factors [26,29]. This method can be considered conservative because the force resultants are not modified when cracking is taking place while producing period elongation.In this section, as an application example of the proposed simplified intake structure modeling, an incremental dynamic analysis (IDA) is performed using model SWMF4-30 (largest water conduct opening). Two performance indicators are studied, the base sliding safety factor (SSF) (Eq. (5) using material properties defined in Table 3) and the residual sliding displacement.(5)SSF(t)=P(t)tanϕ+cLuncrackedbV(t)where Luncrackedis the maximum uncracked length and b the section depth.Fig. 11a presents the application of a post-processor developed while computing the SSF for the ground motion of recurrence period 2500 years. These data indicate that a safety sliding factor smaller than one could occur but only for a very short period of time. Therefore, SSF(t)≤1 does not necessarily indicate that the general safety of the structure is compromised [30]. Small residual sliding displacement might be acceptable. Residual sliding displacement can be estimated considering the difference between the applied shear force and the mobilized shear resistance. Assuming a constant net driving shear force during a time step with SSF(t)≤1, a double integration of Newton's second law is performed to estimate the sliding displacement of the base (Fig. 11b). For the intake structure analyzed, a 1mm residual displacement has been computed which is considered acceptable.Fig. 12 presents a synthesis of the evolution of the SSF and residual sliding displacement for all ground motions presented in Table 6. The proposed method is a robust and efficient seismic safety assessment approach for water intake structures. Within the context of a progressive seismic safety assessment methodology, the proposed simplified model should be used prior to complex 3D FEM.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
This paper proposed a simplified method to assess the seismic safety of concrete gravity water intake structures using a “stick” model made of beam-column elements. A Westergaard modified added mass formulation (WMF) accounting for a penstock opening in contact with the reservoir was developed. 3D-FEM were developed as reference solutions using incompressible potential-based fluid elements with upstream opening void ratio, χ, ranging from 0% to 30% of the concrete surface in contact with water. Cyclic loadings were applied to assess the effects of increasing χ on the magnitude and distribution of seismic hydrodynamic pressures. The difference between the classical Westergaard added mass formulation (WF) and the reference FEM solutions was quantified and correction factors were proposed to define a WMF. Steady-state analyses were carried out to compare the accuracy of the proposed WMF and WF. An incremental linear dynamic time-history analysis was performed using the proposed simplified modeling methodology. According to the results presented herein, the following conclusions are drawn:•The classical Westergaard formulation is an adequate method for practical FSI modeling if the dam (intake) structure has very small openings. The results show that the WF slightly overestimates the pressure along the complete face of the dam. Eqs. (2)–(4) confirm this fact. Indeed, when there is no opening, χ=0 and the average of the correction factors is 0.97.The classical Westergaard added mass formulation can be used as a FSI modeling for intake structures with openings, but it results in an overestimation of the hydrodynamic pressure, especially at a lift joint near the opening (30–40% difference in hydrodynamic shear force in Table 5).Hydrodynamic pressure distribution and intensity along the intake upstream face is to be divided into three zones. For each zone, the correction factors, F1, F2 and F3 in the proposed WMF are found to be linear or quadratic functions of the opening void ratio, χ, and provide a significant improvement over the WF as a FSI modeling method.The presence of reservoir and water inside the intake elongates the dry structure fundamental period by an average of 16% for typical intake structures ranging from 12m to 90m in height.A simple beam-column “stick” model combined with the WMF can be used efficiently instead of a complex FEM using fluid element to study the response of a water intake structure.Six earthquake records were used to illustrate an application. However, guidelines require the use of a much larger number of records to quantify the mean response and its dispersion to assess the seismic safety of a hydraulic structure. It is then apparent that the use of the proposed simplified model is efficient in a number of ways. First, the required modeling and computational resources are less demanding than in the case of a 3D FEM of an intake structure. Secondly, the representation of lift joints with a single node reduces the interpretation complexity of the output results.Pending additional studies, it appears reasonable to use the proposed correction factors for water intake structures with χ within the range for which the factors were derived.