@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Numerical modeling and experimental verification of through silicon via (TSV) filling in presence of additives

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Influence of additives is considered by a set of experimental Tafel curves.TSV filling experiments have been carried out to validate the modeling results.Superfilling of through silicon via can be predicted with this numerical modeling.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Through silicon via,Copper electro-chemical deposition,Superfilling,Tafel curve,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Copper electro-chemical deposition (ECD) of through silicon via (TSV) is a key challenge of 3D integration. This paper presents a numerical modeling of TSV filling concerning the influence of the accelerator and the suppressor. The diffusion–adsorption model was used in the simulation and effects of the additives were incorporated in the model. The boundary conditions were derived from a set of experimental Tafel curves with different concentrations of additives, which provided a quick and accurate way for copper ECD process prediction without complicated surface kinetic parameters fitting. The level set method (LSM) was employed to track the copper and electrolyte interface. The simulation results were in good agreement with the experiments. For a given feature size, the current density for superfilling could be predicted, which provided a guideline for ECD process optimization.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
3D integration with through silicon via (TSV) has emerged as a promising alternative to achieve further improvements for future electronic systems with high density, high band-width, low-power, and small form-factor [1–4]. Presently, typical 3D-TSV applications include MEMS, CMOS image sensor (CIS), stacked memories, and hybrid memory cube (HMC). Compared with the conventional 2D integration approach, the vertical interconnects are formed through the wafer to enable communication among the stacked chips, where copper electro-chemical deposition (ECD) of TSVs is a key challenge. The size of TSV varies from 5 to 70μm in diameter for different applications, with an aspect ratio between 3 and 15 [5–8]. On the other hand, the ECD process relies heavily on the size of TSV, and the process development requires the establishment of a range of operation parameters, such as the chemical composition of the bath, the fluid flow conditions, and the current density. Optimization of the operating conditions which satisfy a large range of applications by experiment requires a substantial and costly effort. A methodology to predict the TSV ECD behavior can significantly reduce the number of experiments.The challenge of copper ECD is to overcome the pinch-off effect due to the concentration of electric field at the opening of TSV. Recently, the superfilling method was proposed to achieve the void-free filling profile, where the copper deposition rate at the lower part of TSV is larger than that at the opening of TSV. Many efforts have been made to realize the superfilling of TSV using either complex chemical additives or periodic pulse reverse current [9–12]. The theoretical description of the superfilling mechanism has been extensively studied for years. A general diffusion-adsorption theory has been widely used in explaining the superfilling phenomena [13–20], as shown in Fig. 1. In this model, it is assumed that additives which interact with copper deposition are consumed at the wafer surface under diffusion control. Two types of additives have been considered in the copper ECD model, the accelerator and the suppressor. The suppressor adsorbs at the wafer surface and inhibits the copper deposition. The accelerator has a competitive adsorption with the suppressor but it does not prevent copper deposition. As shown in Fig. 1, the suppressor adsorbs on all the surface of the wafer, however, the suppressor consists of large molecules that is difficult to diffuse to the bottom of the via. As the plating proceeds, the suppressor at the bottom of the via is depleted, and the accelerator takes place of the suppressor and promotes the copper deposition at the bottom. This mechanism has been verified by Kim’s [13].The boundary condition of cupric ion consumption is crucial for the diffusion-adsorption model, which changes with the concentrations of additives. Methodologies to study the effects of the additives on the surface reaction have been developed for copper Damascene process in advanced CMOS technology. Li et al. [14] and Zheng et al. [15] have employed a kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC) method to study the molecular features of copper deposition. Andricacos et al. [16] has developed a profile evolution model that can simulate superfilling of trenches and vias. Kobayashi et al. [17] modified the model in that the additives were consumed at a constant rate. Cao et al. [18] and Wheeler et al. [19] corrected the copper deposition rate by the surface coverage of suppressor. However, most models did not consider the potential variations around the surface, which had little influence the on copper Damascene process, but may be significant for TSV copper deposition, owing to the much larger feature size of TSV.In this study, a numerical model for TSV ECD was developed to understand the TSV filling process and process optimization. The boundary conditions were derived from a set of experimental Tafel curves with different concentrations of additives, which provided a quick and accurate way for copper ECD process prediction without complicated surface kinetic parameters fitting. The superfilling TSV profile can be predicted with this numerical modeling. Validation of the modeling with experimental results has also been presented.The electroplating process includes fluid flow of electrolyte, transport of charged and neutral species, and electrochemical reactions on electrode surfaces, which can be described by three equations. The transport equation for species is given by:(1)∂∂t(Ci)+∇·(UCi)+∇·(ziωiECi)=∇·JiwhereCiis the concentration of speciesi,Uis the velocity of bulk flow,zis the valence,ωis the mobility,Eis the electric field, andJis the diffusion flux. One assumption is that in the diffusion layer near the electrode surface, convection is neglected and mass transport is dominated by diffusion and electromigration. Thus the second term on the left of Eq. (1) could be neglected.The conduction equation for electric current is given by:(2)∇·(σ∇ϕ)=F[∇·(U∑iZiCi)+∑iZi(∇·Ji)]whereσis the electrical conductivity,ϕis the electrical potential, andFis the Faraday constant. The first term on the right represents the source due to ion convection. The second term on the right represents the source due to ion diffusion. Based on the diffusion layer assumption, the first term on the right of Eq. (2) could be neglected.The Eqs. (1) and (2) are closed by the cathode boundary condition containing current density, surface overpotential and surface concentrations of ions. This cathode boundary condition is usually given by the Butler–Volmer equation with a correction factor of additive surface coverageθ[18–20]:(3)i=i0(θ)cCu2+,0cCu2+,∞exp-α(θ)FRTη(θ)whereiis the surface current density,i0(θ)is the exchange current density with correction factorθ,cCu2+,0andcCu2+,∞are the cupric ion concentration on the cathode surface and that in far-away regions,α(θ)is the electrochemical transfer coefficient with correction factorθ,η(θ)is the overpotential with correction factorθ. Usually, one or two surface coverage correction items amongi0(θ),α(θ), andη(θ)are included in each model. However, the surface coverageθ, which is calculated from electrochemical measurements, requires a large amount of experiments.A secondary current model using an experimental Tafel curve as the cathode boundary condition can also do a good job matching the experimental data [21]. However, the secondary current model lacks of the capability to predict additive depletion. In this study, a group of experimental Tafel curves were employed to determine the cathode boundary condition, so that the additive depletion effects were involved. The Tafel curves under different concentrations of additives were measured to provide the boundary condition. The current density was assumed to be first order in the concentration of cupric ion:(4)i=cCu2+,0cCu2+,∞f(η,cAcc,cSup)where f(η, cAcc, cSup) represents the measured Tafel curves of current density and overpotential under different concentrations of accelerator and suppressor.The model and boundary conditions are illustrated in Fig. 2. The aspect ratio of the via and the pitch of the via are given by H/D and W, respectively. An infinite set of TSVs were assumed in this model. As typical experimental configurations contained more than 20 TSVs in a line, the model symmetry assumption was acceptable.Based on the diffusion layer assumption, the concentration fields are governed by diffusion in this model:(5)∇2cCu2+=0(6)∇2cAcc=0(7)∇2cSup=0The Eqs. (5–7) subject to the constraint that the concentrations are equal to the bulk concentrations aty=δ.The rates of reactions at the cathode surface for both additives are assumed to be first order in the concentration and surface current density:(8)-DAcc∂cAcc∂n=kr,AccicAcc(9)-DSup∂cSup∂n=kr,SupicSupThe tracking of copper and electrolyte interface is also important for the copper ECD modeling. Several methods have been developed to deal with this variable-boundary characteristic of the simulation. Kobayashi et al. [17] proposed a string model to predict boundary moving. Song et al. [20] reported an arbitrary Lagrangian–Eulerian approach to deform the meshed grids. Wheeler et al. [19] and Hughes et al. [22] employed a level set method (LSM) to track the copper and electrolyte interface. Compared with the string model and Lagrangian–Eulerian approach, the LSM does not require the moving of nodes or deformation of grids, which was adopted in this study.The commercial multi-physics software CFD-ACE+ from ESI Group was employed to solve the equations with user programmed boundary conditions. Along with the electrochemical module, CFD-ACE+ has a powerful fluid dynamics module, which can be used in the reactor scale or multiscale ECD simulations [21]. The experimental Tafel curves were used as the cathode surface boundary condition. A level set method (LSM) was employed to track the copper and electrolyte interface for time dependent simulation to obtain the filling profile evolution.The model described in Section 2.1 contained several parameters, which were obtained by electro-chemical experiments. The electrolyte we used in this study was a methanesulfonic based solution SYS 2510 from Shanghai Sinyang Corporation, which was specially developed for the TSV filling process. Three additives were proposed – the accelerator UPT 3320A, the suppressor UPT 3320S and the leveler UPT 3320L. The electro-chemical analysis was performed in a three-electrode cell using a 760D bipotentiostat electrochemical workstation from CH Instruments. The working electrode was a nonpatterned platinum circular electrode with 2mm in diameter, and the counter electrode was also platinum. After measuring each electrolyte sample, the electrodes were cleaned using copper etching solution followed by rinse in DI water to restore to the initial status. Linear sweep voltammetry was performed to figure out the Tafel curve. Three electrolyte samples with different concentrations of additives were measured, as shown in Fig. 3. Curve (a) represented the result of the origin additive formula recommended by the additive provider. Curve (b) and (c) represented the results with less accelerator and suppressor respectively. With these curves, the current density for the given overpotential under certain concentration of additives can be calculated by linear fit. Other parameters were listed in Table 1.The TSV ECD deposition was affected by various factors: the geometry of TSV, the plating tank design, the additive type and concentration in the bath, and the current form and density. In this study, the current form and density were explored, because it was convenient to modulate for process optimization, which had a significant influence on TSV deposition result [10]. Cathode current density varies with different geometry of TSV and plating conditions. In our simulation, current density from 0.3ASD (Ampere/dm2) to 4.6ASD was applied, which was extracted from the experiments.The simulation results of filling profiles evolution were shown in Fig. 4, as well as the initial cathode surface current density along the TSV sidewall and bottom under different current densities. It can be seen that different current densities led to different filling profiles. When an average current density of 0.32ASD was applied, as shown in Fig. 4(a), a pinch-off filling profile was formed. The initial cathode surface current density showed that the current density at the wafer surface was about 0.36ASD, which was much larger than 0.29ASD at the bottom of TSV. As the current density increased to 1.0ASD, as shown in Fig. 4(b), superfilling was realized with a void-free TSV filling. The initial cathode surface current density showed that the current density at the wafer surface was about 0.9ASD, which was 18% less than 1.06ASD at the bottom of TSV. As the current density continued to increase to 2.97ASD, as shown in Fig. 4(c), the pinch-off filling profile appeared again. The initial cathode surface current density showed that the current density at the wafer surface was about 3.04ASD, which was larger than 2.94ASD at the bottom of TSV.Experiments were carried out to validate the numerical modeling. Blind vias with diameter of 50μm and depth of 100μm were etched using deep reactive ion etching (DRIE) in 4-inch wafers. Low temperature ICP-CVD (inductively coupled plasma chemical vapor deposition) was employed to deposit silicon oxide layer for sidewall insulation. Then TiW/Cu layer was deposited as barrier layer and seed layer for electrochemical deposition. The electrolyte used in the experiment was the same as that of Tafel curve measurements.During copper electro-chemical deposition, different current densities were applied in the experiment according to the simulation results. As shown in Fig. 5, the TSV electro-chemical deposition results were in good agreement with the simulation results in Fig. 4. Fig. 5(a) showed the experiment result under the current density of 0.3ASD, a large void can be seen in the middle of the TSV. Clearly, the pinch-off effect can be observed at a small current density. Fig. 5(b) showed the copper ECD result with the current density of 1.0ASD. A void free filling was achieved. The superfilling effect can be observed with a moderate current density, which was consistent with the simulation results shown in Fig. 4(b). Fig. 5(c) showed the copper ECD result with the current density of 3.0ASD. A conformal deposition result can be observed as the superfilling power of the electrolyte declines with the increment of current density. This phenomena was predicted by the simulation results in Fig. 4(c).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study, a methodology to evaluate the influence of the accelerator and the suppressor on TSV filling was developed using the diffusion-adsorption model. The boundary conditions were derived from experimental Tafel curves under different concentrations of additives, which provided a quick and accurate way for copper ECD process prediction without complicated surface kinetic parameters fitting. The level set method (LSM) was employed to track the copper and electrolyte interface for time dependent simulation to obtain the filling profile evolution. The simulation results were in good agreement with the experiments. For a given feature size, the current density for superfilling could be predicted, which provided a guideline for process optimization.