@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A low-cost real time virtual system for postural stability assessment at home

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Equilibrium conditions control is very important in the elderly and in many pathologies.Equilibrium control is commonly evaluated by using a stabilometric platform.A low-cost virtual stabilometric platform is presented.Results demonstrate that the virtual stabilometric platform is equivalent to a physical one.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Virtual stability assessment,Stabilometric force platform,Body model representation,Recognition and tracking algorithms,Home use medical device,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Background and objectiveThe degeneration of the balance control system in the elderly and in many pathologies requires measuring the equilibrium conditions very often. In clinical practice, equilibrium control is commonly evaluated by using a force platform (stabilometric platform) in a clinical environment.In this paper, we demonstrate how a simple movement analysis system, based on a 3D video camera and a 3D real time model reconstruction of the human body, can be used to collect information usually recorded by a physical stabilometric platform.MethodsThe algorithm used to reconstruct the human body model as a set of spheres is described and discussed. Moreover, experimental measurements and comparisons with data collected by a physical stabilometric platform are also reported. The measurements were collected on a set of 6 healthy subjects to whom a change in equilibrium condition was stimulated by performing an equilibrium task.ResultsThe experimental results showed that more than 95% of data collected by the proposed method were not significantly different from those collected by the classic platform, thus confirming the usefulness of the proposed system.ConclusionsThe proposed virtual balance assessment system can be implemented at low cost (about 500$) and, for this reason, can be considered a home use medical device. On the contrary, astabilometric platform has a cost of about 10,000$ and requires periodical calibration. The proposed system does not require periodical calibration, as is necessary for stabilometric force platforms, and it is easy to use. In future, the proposed system with little integration can be used, besides being an emulator of a stabilometric platform, also to recognize and track, in real time, head, legs, arms and trunk, that is to collect information actually obtained by sophisticated optoelectronic systems.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Human postural stability is a multidisciplinary topic of great interest since it has a huge impact on several aspects of everyday life. How individuals maintain balance, have correct and efficient postural position, prevent falls and the occurrence of severe injuries are aspects that relate to medicine and neurophysiology, biomechanics and robotics, as well as rehabilitation, occupational safety, ergonomics and sport science applications. One-third to one half of the elderly people (over 65) has some difficulty with balance control [1]. Evidence has been collected suggesting that falls in the elderly are due to difficulties in adapting one's balance in response to changes in sensory information [2], as well as increased sway in the medio-lateral (ML) and anterior–posterior (AP) directions compared to young adults [3]. Body sway is defined as the slight postural movements made by an individual in order to maintain or to recover a balanced position.Body stability analysis serves to evaluate the body sway of an individual and is useful to estimate the status of the equilibrium and the risk of a fall connected with the current situation.In body stability analysis, the following parameters are evaluated: posture, balance, centre of mass (and, consequently, centre of gravity), centre of pressure and time to contact [4,5].Posture describes the orientation of any body's segment relative to the gravitational vector. It is an angular measure from the vertical. Balance describes the dynamics of body posture to avoid falls. It is related to the inertial forces acting on the body and the inertial characteristics of body segments. Typically, body sway is evaluated by measuring some parameters: the excursions of the centre point of pressure (COP) or the centre of gravity (COG) derived by the centre of mass (COM).COM is a point equivalent of the total body mass, corresponding to the weighted average of the COM of each body segment in the space. It is a passive variable controlled by the balance control system and it is mainly affected by the mass distribution and the skeletal structure. COG represents the vertical projection of the COM onto the ground. COP is the point location of the vertical ground reaction force vector. It represents a weighted average of all the pressures over the surface of the area in contact with the ground. The COP reflects both the horizontal location of the COG and the reaction forces due to muscular activity.The manuscript is structured as follows: Section 2 provides related works on postural stability analysis; Section 3 describes the system assumptions; Section 4 contains the system design and the reconstruction algorithm description; Section 5 defines the testing protocol; Section 6 presents the results and discussion, and Section 7 contains conclusions and future work.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
