@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Multimodal analysis of startle type responses

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Startle type responses were analyzed by multimodal physiological, speech and facial features.Acoustic startle probes, airblasts, images, sounds and composite stimuli were used.Dominant responses occurred in skin conductance, eye blink, head movement, speech fundamental frequency and energy.Strongest responses were obtained for composite stimuli, what illustrates an approach to enhance the power of elicitation.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Startle response,Multimodal analysis,Physiological, speech and facial features,Airblast,International Affective Picture System,International Affective Digitized Sounds,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Background and objectiveThis article presents a multimodal analysis of startle type responses using a variety of physiological, facial, and speech features. These multimodal components of the startle type response reflect complex brain–body reactions to a sudden and intense stimulus. Additionally, the proposed multimodal evaluation of reflexive and emotional reactions associated with the startle eliciting stimuli and underlying neural networks and pathways could be applied in diagnostics of different psychiatric and neurological diseases. Different startle type stimuli can be compared in the strength of their elicitation of startle responses, i.e. their potential to activate stress-related neural pathways, underlying biomarkers and corresponding behavioral reactions.MethodsAn innovative method for measuring startle type responses using multimodal stimuli and multimodal feature analysis has been introduced. Individual's multimodal reflexive and emotional expressions during startle type elicitation have been assessed by corresponding physiological, speech and facial features on ten female students of psychology. Different startle eliciting stimuli like noise and airblast probes, as well as a variety of visual and auditory stimuli of different valence and arousal levels, based on International Affective Picture System (IAPS) images and/or sounds from International Affective Digitized Sounds (IADS) database, have been designed and tested. Combined together into more complex startle type stimuli, such composite stimuli can potentiate the evoked response of underlying neural networks, and corresponding neurotransmitters and neuromodulators as well; this is referred to as increased power of response elicitation. The intensity and magnitude of multimodal responses to selected startle type stimuli have been analyzed using effect sizes and medians of dominant multimodal features, i.e. skin conductance, eye blink, head movement, speech fundamental frequency and energy. The significance of the observed effects and comparisons between paradigms were evaluated using one-tailed t-tests and ANOVA methods, respectively. Skin conductance response habituation was analyzed using ANOVA and post hoc multiple comparison tests with the Dunn–Šidák correction.ResultsThe results revealed specific physiological, facial and vocal reflexive and emotional responses on selected five stimuli paradigms which included: (1) acoustic startle probes, (2) airblasts, (3) IAPS images, (4) IADS sounds, and (5) image-sound-airblast composite stimuli. Overall, composite and airblast paradigms resulted in the largest responses across all analyzed features, followed by sound and acoustic startle paradigms, while paradigm using images consistently elicited the smallest responses. In this context, power of response elicitation of the selected stimuli paradigms can be described according to the aggregated magnitude of the participants’ multimodal responses. We also observed a habituation effect only in skin conductance response to acoustic startle, airblast and sound paradigms.ConclusionsThis study developed a system for paradigm design and stimuli generation, as well as real-time multimodal signal processing and feature calculation. Experimental paradigms for monitoring individual responses to stressful startle type stimuli were designed in order to compare the response elicitation power across various stimuli. The developed system, applied paradigms and obtained results might be useful in further research for evaluation of individuals’ multimodal responses when they are faced with a variety of aversive emotional distractors and stressful situations.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Startle stimuli represent various sudden and intense events that cause defensive responses, like a quick muscle contraction, activation of various facial and skeletal muscles within a few milliseconds, leading to a whole body reflex that serves to protect the back of the neck and eyes [1]. Three different components of the startle response should be distinguished [2]. First, muscle contractions protect vulnerable structures, like the neck or the eye ball. Beyond this immediate physical protection, a brief surge in activation of the autonomic nervous system (ANS) and endocrine response prepares the individual for a flight-or-fight response. This vegetative component of the startle response is reflected in a number of physiological signals, such as blood pressure [3], heart rate [3], skin conductance [4] and respiration [4]. Finally, ongoing cognitive processes are disrupted and attention is rapidly reoriented to the threatening stimulus [5,6].Multimodality in startle type stimulation refers to a variety of visual stimuli, like images and video clips, and narratives with high arousal and application-specific associative contexts and semantics, which are superimposed on traditional startle stimuli. Such composite stimuli create more complex multimodal emotion elicitation with relatively high evoked response potentiation, referred to as elicitation power [7]. Such stimulation simultaneously targets several somatosensory cortex regions, including auditory, visual and tactile areas, and results in the broadest activation of different neural networks associated with potential traumatic events and experience. With such comprehensive semantically specific stimuli, a subject's potential deficits regarding his/her cognitive personal appraisal or hidden traumatic associative memories can be better assessed. Multimodality in the startle type response refers to reflexive and emotional reactions which can be captured by characteristic multimodal response signatures, like increased skin conductance, heart rate, contraction of the neck muscles, eye blink and laryngeal reflexive reactions, as well as emotional, cognitive and behavioral responses.This paper presents an integrated multimodal analysis of responses to startle type stimuli via selected physiological, speech and facial features, unlike previous research works that typically focus on a single modality in combination with standard electromyogram (EMG) measurements of the eye blink startle response via the orbicularis oculi muscle. For example, in the physiological modality, Alpers and colleagues have conducted simultaneous analysis of orbicularis oculi, heart rate and electrodermal activity [8]. In the speech modality, the fundamental frequency (F0) startle response analysis was proposed and studied by Sapir and colleagues [9], who compared F0 to invasive EMG measurements of the laryngeal muscle response. In the facial modality, there have been a few studies of startle responses focused on automated eyelid detection and tracking in high-speed videos [10,11], as well as motion tracking of head and upper-body startle response with comparison to EMG measurements of the orbicularis oculi[12]. In comparison with previous papers, startle responses in this paper were analyzed simultaneously via dominantly expressed physiological, speech and facial features, i.e. skin conductance, speech fundamental frequency, speech energy, eye blinks and head movement. Additionally, we have designed and evaluated a series of elicitation paradigms for startle type responses using visual, auditory, or tactile stimuli, as well as their combination, which has not been done previously.The concept of the system for generation of various startle type stimuli and multimodal analysis of associated startle type responses by measuring physiological, vocal and facial reactivity is shown in Fig. 1. The system is built around Lenovo S30 Workstation with Intel Xeon Processor E5-2620 v2 (15M Cache, 2.10GHz), 32GB of memory, and nVidia Quadro K200D graphics card, running Microsoft Windows 8.1 Pro operating system. Four system displays are related to: a display for supervisor system management, such as stimuli specification and specification of channels for multimodal data acquisition; two displays for stimuli presentation to the participants as well as experimenters; and a display for real-time visualization and tracking of selected multimodal response features like skin conductance, speech energy and fundamental frequency, eye blink, head translation etc. Systems for multimodal data acquisition include: Nexus-10 mark II device with 10 channels including skin conductance, electrocardiogram (ECG), respiration, skin temperature, blood volume pulse, EMG, as well as Biopac MP150 unit with ECG100C, RSP100C, EMG100C, GSR100C and SKT100C modules for physiology acquisition; voice acquisition system headset Sennheiser PC 360 and throat microphone Telex TM750R; video acquisition system Logitech C920 webcam.The basic building blocks for stimuli generation are:•The acoustic startle module which generates 108dB (A) Sound Pressure Level (SPL) 40ms white-noise bursts with 0ms rise and fall times, delivered by a Samson audio amplifier and Sennheiser PC 360 professional audio headphones.The airblast delivery module [13,14] which includes Messer air tank, solenoid valve, camelback with nozzle attached to hose and solenoid controller. The 140p.s.i. airblast is triggered by Measurement Computing DIO24 PCI Card.Elicitation of emotion based on images and/or sounds [15] which includes a variety of audio and visual databases like International Affective Picture System (IAPS) [16], International Affective Digitized Sounds (IADS) [17], NimStim Face Stimulus Set [18] and Nencki Affective Picture System [19].Short highly arousing and negatively valenced visual stimuli and sounds may potentiate the emotional effects of acoustic startle elicitation paradigm. To enhance power of response elicitation in composite paradigms, highly arousing aversive IAPS video images and IADS sounds can be combined with 250ms 140p.s.i. airblast probes delivered to the participant's occiput. Additional aversive stimuli that can be delivered include highly irritating but not painful 500ms electric shocks ranging from 0.5 to 5.0mA, using electrodes attached to the fourth finger of the non-dominant hand. The goal of multimodal emotion elicitation is to provide a variety of stimuli, which are capable of eliciting broadband emotional startle type responses, in order to analyze the participant's vulnerabilities or robustness to complex aversive visual, auditory and tactile distractions.Multimodal reactivity to startle type stimuli has been analyzed through five test paradigms which were designed and presented to ten female students, whose multimodal responses were captured via skin conductance, speech fundamental frequency and energy, as well as eye blinks and head movement. The paradigms contained established startle stimuli as well as their augmentation with the visual and auditory context and semantics which may elicit more complex multimodal physiological, facial and vocal responses, reflecting interactions of higher cognitive cortical structures, the brain stem and the emotional limbic system. For this purpose, IAPS images of unpleasant scenes, such as scenes of fear, disgust and mutilation, were selected with congruent sounds. Specifically, each of the five test paradigms is described below:1.Acoustic Startle Probes: Acoustic startle probes were simple white noise stimuli without any audio context and semantics. The acoustic startle reflex is elicited by auditory stimuli greater than 80dB [20]; the current study used 108dB.Airblast Stimuli: Airblasts are aversive auditory and tactile stimuli, which also elicit startle response. Airblasts are usually directed to the larynx [21], but in this paper they were pointed to the occiput, due to interference with the participants’ phonation and throat microphone (laryngophone) sensor.IADS Sounds: Sudden and loud sounds based on IADS database were used as startle stimuli as well. These stimuli, unlike acoustic startle probes and airblasts, have specific semantics which additionally elicit emotional responses.IAPS Images: Image context and semantics predominantly elicit emotional responses, rather than startle responses. Image-based emotional elicitation included a variety of visual databases, as described in the previous section.Composite Stimuli: More real-world startle type stimuli included a combination of multimodal effects, i.e. sounds, images, tactile sensing. Specifically, in this paper a combination of airblast with unpleasant IAPS/IADS images and sounds was used.Ten female students recruited from the University of Zagreb, Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences participated in the study. The selected participants were physically and mentally healthy, without any cardiovascular medical conditions, 18–19 years of age. All participants completed PTSD Checklist–Civilian Version (translated to Croatian), and their scores were below the cut-off level 30 for PTSD [22]. Two additional inclusion/exclusion criteria were used: the score on the emotional expressivity questionnaire [23] and the score on the anxiety sensitivity questionnaire [24,25]. Participants had to reach a high score on the emotional expressivity questionnaire (score≥57) in order to select those with more intense emotional reactions. Assessment of students’ anxiety sensitivity was added to eliminate participants for whom stimuli and physiological reactions (such as increased heart rate) could provoke panic attacks. Participants were required to have relatively low scores in the anxiety sensitivity questionnaire (score≤40).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
The system for evaluation of startle type responses based on multimodal analyses of predominant physiological, acoustic and facial features was developed and tested on a sample of first-year female students of psychology. Subjects with higher emotional scores were selected in order to demonstrate the effectiveness of the developed system and experimental paradigms for multimodal response elicitation and analysis of startle type responses. Among physiological features, skin conductance response revealed the largest differences between Stimulus and No Stimulus conditions. The most evident Stimulus vs. No Stimulus differences in speech features were observed in fundamental frequency (F0) and root-mean-square energy. The most significant differences in facial features occurred in eye blinks and forward-backward head movement. Among the five selected paradigms, the composite paradigm composed of airblast and congruent aversive images and sounds induced more stress in comparison with other paradigms causing higher activation of the sympathetic nervous system. At the same time, the paradigm containing only aversive image stimuli exhibited the lowest sensitivity, i.e. it was the paradigm in which startle response was not observed at all. The largest effect size for Stimulus vs. No Stimulus conditions across all paradigms and participants was observed for speech energy, followed by eye blink, skin conductance, z-translation and F0. It was also evident that, across all paradigms, some participants were more sensitive responders to the startle type stimuli, while other participants were less sensitive responders. Even in a relatively homogeneous group with statistically relevant similarities between individuals, there were visible individual differences, which might indicate more or less individual resiliency/vulnerability to aversive startle type stimuli. Different dynamics of specific response channels were visible from the multimodal analyses of startle type response; e.g. eye blink exhibited a short response time vs. the longer response time of skin conductance.Decreased or attenuated skin conductance startle type responses over time were an indication of decreasing sympathetic activation. However, it could be expected that different startle modulations as well as different order of presented paradigms might also have influence on overall startle type responses and response habituation. All together, it means that emotional and attentional factors may strongly interfere with reflexive response, making the overall net effect of startle response either more or less intense.Overlaying aversive stressors on basic startle stimuli warrants more exploration in applied research regarding human resilience or vulnerability to stress. In this paper, a composite paradigm which includes congruent negatively valenced and highly arousing IAPS images/IADS sounds superimposed on airblasts showed the highest response elicitation power. These superimposed emotional contents could increase or decrease startle response, i.e. modulate physiological [48] and other multimodal variables. Therefore, enhancing power of response elicitation by semantically and contextually specific stimuli, as well as cross-correlation analysis of context and semantics of selected startle type stimuli with individually relevant context and semantics, deserves more attention in future work, particularly in broader research on cognitive regulation of emotion [49,50]. Other viable research directions may address generalizability of findings obtained in this paper, by multimodal analyses of startle type responses in males vs. females or in different age groups. Likewise, these analyses can be applied in clinical research setting, e.g. with posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) patients and healthy controls, which is the specific focus of our ongoing research collaboration with the Department of Psychiatry, University Hospital Center Zagreb. Outlined research directions are compatible with the developed research system demonstrated in this paper, which has been designed as a general purpose test-bed for analysis of startle type responses, as well as multimodal emotion elicitation and analysis.The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest.