@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Sphere intersection 3D shape descriptor (SID)

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Descriptive and compact feature descriptor based on sphere intersection operator.Fast and meaningful feature detector based on the descriptor.Shape retrieval framework for evaluation against state-of-the-art benchmarks.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Mesh processing,Descriptor,Signature,Similarity,Retrieval,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Graphical abstract

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Databases of 3D models are becoming nowadays available in a number of disciplines, including computer graphics, CAD, and medicine (Veltkamp and Hagedoorn, 2001). As a result of the extensive growth of 3D databases, shape-retrieval techniques are becoming valuable tools for analysis and discovery. The SHREC contest and benchmark (Boyer et al., 2011) have been stimulating forces in this field.A common method for matching objects is to represent each object as a set of local shape features sampled from the object's surface. For a pair of objects and a given correspondence between their features, similarity is measured by comparing the corresponding features using a cost function (e.g., Belongie et al., 2001; Chua and Jarvis, 1997; Johnson and Hebert, 1999). Nevertheless, shapes and features can be represented in many different ways, and finding an appropriate representation that is amenable to surface matching is still an open research problem.Our descriptor is inspired by the Shape Context descriptor recently explored by Kokkinos et al. (2012). Similarly, we sample the continuous surface into a discrete set of samples. Nevertheless, instead of discretization into bins, we utilize continuous 1D surface curves as a more informative representation of the shape. Our idea is that shape characteristics, especially subtle ones require high-order descriptions to represent them appropriately. For example, the tip of the octaflower in Fig. 2 (right) is a complex feature and singular point which cannot be described using principal curvatures. Using our descriptor, we represent the region using explicit 1D curves sampling the surface, thus capturing the feature as can be seen in the graph.At the core of our shape descriptor computation is a simple sphere and surface intersection operation. Essentially, we grow spheres on the surface and compute their intersection with the surface at several predefined scales. The intersections result in a set of parameterized curves that represent excerpts of the local surface. For each point we accumulate the set of curves. The set of curves is then transformed to the frequency domain, resulting in a compact yet effective 2D representation of local 3D geometry.We define a shape similarity metric based on the correlation between “interesting shape features” and curvature, following the observation of Marr (1982). To compare two shapes, we filter out smooth or flat regions, and compare the curved regions by measuring the distance between their descriptors.We evaluate our work by performing both qualitative and quantitative analysis. For qualitative evaluation we use multiple shapes with different characteristics and deformations (see Figs. 2, 8 and 1). For quantitative evaluation we use the SHREC 11 non-rigid benchmark (Boyer et al., 2011) and SHREC 12 abstract shapes benchmark (Biasotti et al., 2012). The results show that SID outperforms most state-of-the-art algorithms used in the comparison in terms of retrieval rates. With regards to MeshSIFT (Smeets et al., 2013), although retrieval rates are similar to us, we observe that SID holds favorable properties in terms of speed, meaningful keypoint selection and consistency of keypoint selection.Our contributions are as follows:•A descriptor which captures the shape via explicit sampling of the surface with continuous 1D curves at keypoints. Our descriptor is informative and distinctive (see Fig. 2).An efficient and meaningful feature detection scheme based on our descriptor formulation.A shape retrieval scheme which offers a unique balance and combination of correctness, speed and handling multiple classes of shapes.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
