@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
PopED lite: An optimal design software for preclinical pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic studies

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We have created a software PopED lite in order to increase the use of optimal design in preclinical drug discovery.PopED lite is designed to be simple, fast and intuitive so that it is highly useful in practice and complements existing tools.Key functionality of PopED lite is demonstrated by three case studies from real drug discovery projects.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Optimal experimental design,preclinical drug discovery,Model-based drug discovery,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Background and objectiveOptimal experimental design approaches are seldom used in preclinical drug discovery. The objective is to develop an optimal design software tool specifically designed for preclinical applications in order to increase the efficiency of drug discovery in vivo studies.MethodsSeveral realistic experimental design case studies were collected and many preclinical experimental teams were consulted to determine the design goal of the software tool. The tool obtains an optimized experimental design by solving a constrained optimization problem, where each experimental design is evaluated using some function of the Fisher Information Matrix. The software was implemented in C++ using the Qt framework to assure a responsive user-software interaction through a rich graphical user interface, and at the same time, achieving the desired computational speed. In addition, a discrete global optimization algorithm was developed and implemented.ResultsThe software design goals were simplicity, speed and intuition. Based on these design goals, we have developed the publicly available software PopED lite (http://www.bluetree.me/PopED_lite). Optimization computation was on average, over 14 test problems, 30 times faster in PopED lite compared to an already existing optimal design software tool. PopED lite is now used in real drug discovery projects and a few of these case studies are presented in this paper.ConclusionsPopED lite is designed to be simple, fast and intuitive. Simple, to give many users access to basic optimal design calculations. Fast, to fit a short design-execution cycle and allow interactive experimental design (test one design, discuss proposed design, test another design, etc). Intuitive, so that the input to and output from the software tool can easily be understood by users without knowledge of the theory of optimal design. In this way, PopED lite is highly useful in practice and complements existing tools.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Poorly designed experiments often lead to uninformative experimental results. For example, poorly chosen dosage and observation/sampling times in an animal experiment can lead to inaccurate characterization of drug candidates. In order to minimize the risk of running uninformative experiments in drug discovery, we have investigated how researchers in industry reason about experimental design and what needs they have in this area, constructed design optimization strategies to meet these needs, and implemented the software PopED lite to disseminate these strategies.Decisions in preclinical drug discovery are largely based on inference of data from cell-based assays and animals exposed to drug candidates. Accurate efficacy and safety estimates of each test compound are pivotal for proper compound ranking. Mathematical models are commonly used to formally integrate available information in order to gain system-level understanding of pharmacological effects and to make informed decisions [12,26]. These models are usually composed of two parts; the pharmacokinetics (PK) part representing what the body does to the drug, and the pharmacodynamics (PD) part representing what the drug does to the body [9].Several compounds are tested during the compound selection phase of a drug discovery project. Estimated model parameters (e.g., clearance and potency) are used to quantitatively characterize each compound. Naturally, the uncertainty of parameter estimates must be taken into account. To increase certainty, it is not uncommon that in vivo PK/PD studies are repeated several times using the same or structurally similar compounds. The design of the experiment (e.g., when to take the blood samples, how much compound to administer) can have large influence on the parameter estimation certainty. One can reduce the number of experiments by optimizing the design of each experiment using prior information of the compound (or of similar compounds). Therefore, experimental design of preclinical studies is an important component of overall success in drug discovery.Although there have been significant developments in optimal design for clinical studies [8,13–15,17,18], the use of optimal design in preclinical studies is still limited [23,24]. For example, in many preclinical studies, experiments are manually designed based on small scale trial-and-error using simulation tools. Occasionally, sampling times are fixed for all test compounds. Thus, we hypothesize that there is significant room for improvement in the experimental design of preclinical studies. Specifically, one could replace the manual exploration of the experimental design space by an automatic procedure. By utilizing optimal design software, one can obtain the optimal design based on thousands or even millions of algorithmically generated simulations with no more effort than running one simulation using a standard simulation tool. For example, in the first case study of this paper, 90000 designs were compared automatically in about 10s.There are many software tools available that can potentially be used to design preclinical PK/PD studies [4,10,11,16,18,21]. We initially used one of these, PopED [18], to support the design of preclinical PK/PD studies. During this exercise, we learned how preclinical experiments were designed in drug discovery and identified several causes for optimal design not being used in these studies. Specifically, we identified three key characteristics of the preclinical experiments that need to be taken into account when designing optimal design tools in this area.Firstly, experimental designs for preclinical studies are often done routinely and are often based on relatively simple mathematical models. Therefore, high flexibility of the software tool may not be necessary. Besides, high flexibility of a software tool incurs more user inputs which can demotivate unexperienced users and increase the risk of user errors.Secondly, the costs of preclinical experiments are low compared to clinical studies; however, the experiments are run more frequently. The design-experiment cycles are in the order of weeks for preclinical studies, and often the experimental designs are adjusted during discussions with experimentalists. We have even observed cases where a fixed experimental design for a series of compounds were used for the sake of practicality. Thus, a quickly obtained rough optimal design is often more useful in practice than a carefully optimized design with long computation time.Thirdly, the majority of preclinical experimentalists are not used to optimal-design terminology. Thus, we need to translate this terminology to the terminology widely used among preclinical experimentalists in order to make optimal design tools accessible.Based on these characteristics, we have identified three general themes as important for the design of the tool: level of flexibility, accuracy and technicality. These three themes are elaborated in Section 2. Furthermore, we have made several design choices in the implementation and these are detailed in Section 3. Based on these design choices, PopED lite was developed closely with preclinical experimentalists while assisting real case studies to ensure usability and usefulness as illustrated in Section 4. This section also include a comparison of PopED lite to the already existing tool PopED in R with respect to computational speed and accuracy.The resulting software, PopED lite, “a simple, fast and intuitive playground for experimental design”, is available for Mac and for Windows (http://www.bluetree.me/PopED_lite).PopED lite was designed to be simple, fast and intuitive in order to bring optimal design into the regular workflow of preclinical animal experiments in the pharmaceutical industry. This design goal was based on our experiences from several realistic case studies and on discussions with many preclinical experimental teams. Specifically, together with an industrial drug-discovery team we conducted a retrospective study (Case study 1) and with another team we designed experiments using the preliminary version of PopED lite (Case study 2) as well as with the current version (Case study 3). To achieve the design goal we have attempted to balance the level of flexibility, accuracy and technicality of the software tool.PopED lite focuses on optimization of the dosage and PK/PD sampling (observation) times to improve the accuracy of the parameter estimates of fixed effect PK/PD models. Preclinical experiments are characterized by relatively small group sizes, and animals with small genetic differences. The main interest is to predict the human situation, and focus is on average levels and not on variability, as translation of the latter is associated with very high uncertainty. Therefore, the use of nonlinear mixed effect modeling is not as central as in the clinical setting, and key questions can often be addressed by standard deterministic (fixed effect) PK/PD models. PopED lite implements standard compartmental PK models (1-, 2-, and 3-compartment models with linear and nonlinear elimination, and linear absorption), as well as commonly used PD models. For the PD models, the user can alternatively input a regular mathematical expression in the form of a function or an ordinarily differential equation (ODE). By limiting the scope of optimal design to models that are routinely used in drug discovery projects, we aim to make PopED lite simple and user-friendly.We have decided to discretize both sampling time and dosage search space, so that the optimal design can be chosen from a combination of practical sampling schedules and allowed possible dosages. We have observed that a precisely optimized experimental design is seldom practically useful. For example, in practice one may only be able to sample every 5th minute and a discrete search space for sampling or dose times is sufficient. By discretizing the sampling time and dosage the design space will shrink to finite, and we can reduce the computational cost of the design optimization while avoiding unrealistically precise experimental designs. By focusing on a “good enough” optimal design rather than a precisely optimized design, we aim to make PopED lite fast and hence useful in short design-experiment cycles.Preclinical studies are designed by cross-functional teams (e.g., biologists, chemists, and PK/PD-modelers), that generally lack training in numerical computation and information theory. Therefore, optimal-design specific jargon should be avoided in the software interface, and PopED lite is designed to only display terminology that is familiar to these teams. Based on the information specified by the user, PopED lite chooses an appropriate design optimization strategy. By not assuming user-knowledge of optimal design theory, we aim to make PopED lite intuitive so that the idea of optimal design can be introduced to preclinical experimentalists.In summary, the design philosophy of PopED lite is to create the simplest, fastest, and most intuitive optimal design software tool that maintains a reasonable level of flexibility, accuracy and technicality for use in preclinical drug discovery.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
