@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
An integrated finite element-based simulation framework: From hole piercing to hole expansion

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Developed an integrated FE framework from hole piercing to hole expansion.Accurately captured the shear edge burr formation trend in the hole-piercing models.Carried Shear edge information after hole-piercing into hole-expansion model.The calculated HER in the hole-expansion model correspond well with experiments.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Hole piercing,Hole expansion ratio,Finite element simulations,Aluminum alloys,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
An integrated finite element-based modeling framework is developed to predict the hole expansion ratio (HER) of AA6111-T4 sheet by considering the piercing-induced damages around the hole edge. Using damage models and parameters calibrated from previously reported tensile stretchability studies, the predicted HER correlates well with experimentally measured HER values for different hole piercing clearances. The hole piercing model shows burrs are not generated on the sheared surface for clearances less than 20%, which corresponds well with the experimental data on pierced holes cross-sections. Finite-element-calculated HER also is not especially sensitive to piercing clearances less than this value. However, as clearances increase to 30% and further to 40%, the HER values are predicted to be considerably smaller, also consistent with experimental measurements. Upon validation, the integrated modeling framework is used to examine the effects of different hole piercing and hole expansion conditions on the critical HERs for AA6111-T4.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In stamping operations of automotive body panels, steel and aluminum sheet metal workpieces are subject to blanking, trimming and piercing processes, including edge trimming, hole piercing, and window blanking, etc. In addition to geometric imperfections such as burrs, mechanically sheared or trimmed edges also contain excessive plastic deformation and local damage along the perimeter of the workpiece subjected to shearing operations. These shear-induced edge imperfections can lead to edge cracking in the subsequent stamping and forming operations, hence considerably compromise the formability of the materials.Cracks stemming from previously sheared edges is a well-known problem for forming, and there are abundant experimental studies for steels [1–4] studying hole expansion of pierced holes. Still, predictive analyses on the influences of shearing processes/parameters on the subsequent formability are scarce due to the following difficulties: (1) accurately predicting the sheared edge geometry and damage and (2) effectively and accurately incorporating the above-predicted shearing-induced edge geometry and damage into the subsequent formability simulations.Due to various global initiatives for improved fuel efficiency, aluminum sheets have received increasing attention in recent years as a practical replacement for steel sheets targeting vehicle weight reduction. Although there are numerous studies about shearing-induced defects in aluminum sheets, systematic and quantitative studies detailing the influences of the various shearing process parameters on the edge cracking during subsequent forming processes are quite limited.Golovashchenko et al. studied edge cracking during tensile stretching of both aluminum [5] and steel [6,7] sheets trimmed along a straight line. Experimental observations after fracture of the trimmed part showed that tensile stretchability can decrease in excess of 50% depending primarily on the cutting clearances. It was reported that the planar failure mode varies from shear-type failure typical for small clearances to splitting-type failure where the cracking starts from the edge and propagates normal to the edge across the width of samples, usually observed in case of large cutting clearances. Hu et al. [8] developed an integrated finite element-based framework to study the tensile stretchability of previously trimmed AA6111-T4 aluminum sheets. The integrated framework includes a two-step finite element modeling analyses. First, a two-dimensional (2D) plane strain trimming model simulation is performed considering various trimming parameters such as clearance, punch radius and scrap support, etc. Next, the predicted edge geometry, plastic deformation and damage are carried over to the subsequent three-dimensional (3D) half dog-bone tensile model for stretchability predictions. The linkage between the two models is established with an ABAQUS/Python post- and pre-processing script, ABAQUS CAE and a user material subroutine (VUMAT). It has been demonstrated that the predicted stretchability results quantitatively compare well with experimental observations, including variation of tensile elongation, planar failure modes, and multiple edge cracking behaviors with varying cutting clearances.Sartkulvanich et al. [9] used 2D axis-symmetric finite element models to simulate both the hole piercing and the subsequent hole expansion processes in DP590 steel. The burr geometry and strain and damage information from the blanking simulations are carried into the hole expansion process, and the calculated critical hole expansion ratios (HERs) defined by formula (1) were compared with experimental measurements for different blanking clearances.(1)HER=Df−D0D0×100%where HER is the percentage change in the diameter (Df) of the expanded hole before a through-thickness edge crack can be detected in reference to the originally pierced hole (D0).Using the 2D axis-symmetric model to represent the hole blanking process is a well justified assumption. However, the 2D model is not sufficient to capture the edge cracking behavior during hole expansion test because the experimentally observed radial cracks along the edge cannot be represented in the 2D model where cracks may propagate in the direction deviating from the radial direction. Therefore, there is a lack of clear explanation on edge cracking in the finite element model, and the calculated HER for different hole piercing clearances may not be reliable. In the current work, the integrated framework developed by Hu et al. [8] is employed, and the 2D axis-symmetric hole piercing model with a rather fine mesh is selected to accurately account for the highly nonlinear contact geometry between the sharp-corner of the piercing tool and the sheet being processed. The 3D model is used for the subsequent hole expansion process with consideration of the sheared edge information predicted from the previous hole piercing model. The HER is calculated and examined for different cutting clearances and compared with experimental measurements.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
•An integrated modeling framework carrying edge conditions from hole piercing to hole expansion has been used to predict the influences of various hole piercing parameters on subsequent hole expansion formability for aluminum alloy AA6111-T4.By using previously calibrated material and damage properties, the hole piercing models predict burr formations only for clearances greater than 30%, which corresponds well with experimental observations. No burrs are observed for clearances 20% and below.By incorporating the edge geometry and deformation incurred during the hole piercing process, predicted critical HERs show small variations for clearances less than 20%, while the values drop substantially after clearances exceed 30%. This corresponds quite well with experimental results.Similar to those demonstrated in trimmed straight edge stretchability, the integrated framework shows that removing the initial plastic strain at the hole edges can significantly enhance the critical HERs for all piercing clearances.Predicted results also show that using dull punch with a sufficient large corner radius can eliminate burr formation and improve critical HERs.