@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
A family of Piola–Kirchhoff hybrid stress finite elements for two-dimensional linear elasticity

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We introduce a new framework for the development of hybrid stress finite elements for linear elasticity.The introduced framework relies on a Piola–Kirchhoff transformation.A new family of finite elements is derived taking advantage of the special structure of this framework.The proposed finite elements may have arbitrarily curved edges.The introduced finite elements satisfy in strong form the equilibrium differential equations.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Finite elements,Hybrid stress method,Complementary energy,Piola transformation,Equilibrium,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
We introduce a new framework for the development of hybrid stress finite elements for two-dimensional linear elasticity. A family of arbitrarily shaped elements is derived which takes advantage of the special structure of this framework. The key feature is to explicitly approximate, in the parent domain, either the second Piola–Kirchhoff, the first Piola–Kirchhoff, or the Cauchy stresses, and to enforce the divergence-free condition in the physical domain using their corresponding first Piola–Kirchhoff projections. The introduced finite elements may have arbitrary curved edges, and internally satisfy in strong form the equilibrium differential equations. Furthermore, under certain conditions, the new elements may lead to statically admissible stress distributions, by also verifying equilibrium of tractions on the element boundaries. Feasibility and effectiveness of the proposed elements are numerically verified through several benchmark tests.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Hybrid stress finite elements were first introduced by Pian and his co-workers in the mid 1960s in the framework of the two-dimensional linear elasticity theory [1–4]. Since then, they have experienced significant developments and have been successfully applied to many engineering problems. For a comprehensive review on these formulations the reader is referred to [5]. More recent research developments can be found e.g. in [6–8]. The main advantages of these elements over traditional displacement-based finite elements are faster convergence, higher stress accuracy, and immunity to numerical locking. Special families of these elements are the so-called equilibrium elements [9–11], which can provide statically admissible stress distributions. Pairing these solutions with kinematically admissible ones allows us to obtain strict bounds of the error, both in terms of energy and local quantities of interest [9–13]. However, the need to enforce equilibrium on the stress approximation basis imposes severe geometric restrictions on traditional hybrid equilibrium elements. To avoid these limitations, a new hybrid equilibrium method based on the approximation of the contravariant components of the stress tensor defined in the parent domain was presented by the authors in [14,15]. This new method can be used to obtain statically admissible solutions for element geometries with arbitrarily curved edges, even with a small number of elements and relatively low degree approximations.The present work follows that line of research, and introduces a new framework for the development of hybrid stress finite elements. Additionally, a family of arbitrarily shaped elements is derived which takes advantage of the special structure of this framework. The variational setting of this framework relies on a hybrid form of the well known complementary energy functional, involving both stress fields and boundary displacements as fundamental variables. The key feature is to explicitly approximate the stresses (second Piola–Kirchhoff, first Piola–Kirchhoff, or Cauchy stresses) in a local reference system and to enforce the divergence-free condition using their corresponding first Piola–Kirchhoff stresses. The first Piola–Kirchhoff stresses are computed using the Piola transformation that maps stresses from the parent domain to the physical domain using the Jacobian matrix associated with the corresponding geometric mapping. The Piola transformation is employed in this work in the context of a tensor-field mapping. The application of the Piola transformation in the context of a vector-field mapping has been recently considered in [16]. The proposed procedure leads to Cauchy stresses that satisfy a priori the equilibrium differential equations inside elements with a general mapping and, under certain conditions, may lead to statically admissible stress distributions. Several numerical benchmark tests will be presented to assess the performance of the new elements.We emphasize that the Piola transformation is used in the present work to map stresses from the parent domain to the physical (undeformed) domain, and not from the undeformed domain to the deformed domain, as is typically the case in the non-linear elasticity framework. Therefore, the various stress measures adopted in the paper, namely, Cauchy, first Piola–Kirchhoff and second Piola–Kirchhoff stresses, well known from the non-linear continuum mechanics theory, are not related by the actual geometric mapping of the elements from the undeformed to the deformed configurations, but rather by the geometric mapping from the master element to the physical (undeformed) element. In the same way, the deformation gradient is used in this work as the Jacobian matrix associated with the geometric mapping from the master element to the physical (undeformed) element and it does not represent any physical deformation measure of the elements. Although the proposed elements have been developed exclusively for linear elasticity problems, we believe the use of these nomenclatures will make the extension to the non-linear elasticity setting more straightforward.This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we state the boundary-value problem and present some of its associated variational formulations. In Section 3 we introduce the Piola transformation and show how it can be employed in the framework of the present problem to determine divergence-free stress fields. The proposed Piola–Kirchhoff hybrid stress finite elements are then thoroughly described in Section 4. Some practical aspects for the computational implementation of the new elements are briefly described in Section 5. Finally, we present some numerical results in Section 6 and state the fundamental conclusions that can be drawn from this work in Section 7.LetΩ∈R2denote a body undergoing a displacementuas a result of applied body forcesb, tractionst¯and prescribed boundary displacementsu¯. Further, letΓ=ΓN∪ΓDdenote the boundary of Ω, withΓNandΓDthe Neumann and Dirichlet parts, respectively, such thatΓN∩ΓD=∅. For simplicity, the body is assumed linear elastic, homogeneous, and isotropic with Young׳s modulus E and Poisson׳s ratio ν.The strong form of the boundary-value problem governing the response of a two-dimensional body consists of the following three sets of differential equations in a Cartesian reference system(x1,x2)to be solved in Ω(1a)ε=DuinΩ(1b)DTσ+b=0inΩ(1c)ε=CσinΩrepresenting compatibility, equilibrium and constitutive relations, respectively, withD=[∂∂x100∂∂x2∂∂x2∂∂x1]andC=1E′[1−ν′0−ν′10002(1+ν′)]whereE′=E,ν′=νfor plane stress problems, andE′=E/(1−ν2),ν′=ν/(1−ν)for plane strain problems.εandσare the infinitesimal strain vector and the Cauchy stress vector, respectively, represented in Voigt׳s notation.Additionally, the following sets of boundary conditions must hold:(2a)u−u¯=0onΓD(2b)Nσ−t¯=0onΓNwithN=[n10n20n2n1]whereu¯andt¯are the prescribed displacements and tractions, respectively, and njare the components of the external unit normalnofΓN.The total potential energy associated with vectoruis the one-field functionalΠp:Uk(Ω)→Rgiven by(3)Πp(u)=U(ε(u))+F(u)Ukis the kinematically admissible space defined asUk={u∈H1(Ω)2:u=u¯onΓD}, withH1the standard Sobolev space. U represents the strain energy given by(4)U(ε(u))=12∫Ωε(u)·C−1ε(u)dΩand F represents the external potential energy defined as follows:(5)F(u)=−∫Ωb·udΩ−∫ΓNt¯·udΓThe Legendre transform of U is the complementary strain energy Ucdefined as(6)Uc(σ)=−U(ε)+∫Ωσ·εdΩ=∫Ω12σ·CσdΩ=∫ΩWc(σ)dΩwhere Wcis the complementary strain energy density.Introducing Eqs. (1b) and (2b) into the framework of the total potential energy functional (3) by means of the Lagrangian multiplier method and using the Legendre transform (6) leads to the following two-field augmented Lagrangian:(7)Lc(σ,u)=−Uc(σ)+∫Ωε(u)·σdΩ−∫Ωb·udΩ−∫ΓNt¯·udΓ+∫Ω(DTσ+b)·udΩ+∫ΓN(t¯−Nσ)·udΓThis, in turn, after integrating by parts, leads to the one-field total complementary energy functionalΠc:Us(Ω)→R(8)Πc(σ)=−Uc(σ)+Fc(σ)where Fcrepresents the external complementary energy given by(9)Fc(σ)=∫ΓD(Nσ)·u¯dΓUsis the set of statically admissible functions defined asUs={σ∈H(div;Ω):DTσ+b=0,inΩandNσ−t¯=0,onΓN}, whereH(div;Ω)={σ∈L2(Ω)3:DTσ∈L2(Ω)2}, withL2the space of square integrable functions.Hybrid stress finite element methods can be developed on the basis of the hybrid complementary energy functionalΠc⁎:Us⁎(Ω,ΓN)→Rgiven by(10)Πc⁎(σ,uΓ)=∫Ω12σ·CσdΩ−∫ΓN(Nσ−t¯)·uΓdΓ−∫ΓDNσ·u¯dΓwithUs⁎={(σ,uΓ)∈H(div;Ω)×L2(ΓN)2:DTσ+b=0,inΩ}. This energy functional can be derived from the total complementary energy functional defined above by introducing the Neumann boundary conditions (2b) into the framework of the complementary energy using the displacement vectoruΓ, defined onΓN, as the Lagrangian multiplier vector. It can be easily shown that a pair(σ,uΓ)∈Us⁎is a solution to the boundary-value problem if, and only if, the energy functionalΠc⁎is stationary with respect to both its arguments.In the context of the finite element discretization, the Piola transformation is adopted to map stresses from the parent domainΩ^, defined in the curvilinear reference system(ξ1,ξ2), to the physical (undeformed) domain Ω, defined in the Cartesian reference system(x1,x2), see Fig. 1.The Cauchy stress tensorσ̲can be defined as the Piola transform of the first Piola–Kirchhoff stress tensorP̲as follows:(11)σ̲=1JP̲F̲TwhereF̲is the Jacobian matrix associated with the geometric transformation that maps coordinates from the parent domain into coordinates in the physical domain as follows:F̲=[∂x1∂ξ1∂x1∂ξ2∂x2∂ξ1∂x2∂ξ2]and(12)J=det(F̲)Note that, whileσ̲is defined in the physical domain,P̲is a two-point tensor, working between the parent domain and the physical domain. It is also worth mentioning thatσ̲is a symmetric tensor, whereasP̲is non-symmetric in general.An alternative one-point stress tensor (defined in the parent domain) is the second Piola–Kirchhoff stress tensorS̲, which is shown to obey(13)P̲=F̲S̲UnlikeP̲, the second Piola–Kirchhoff stress tensorS̲is symmetric.The Cauchy stress tensorσ̲, defined in (11), can therefore be rewritten as(14)σ̲=1JF̲S̲F̲TMaking use of the relations given above, Eq. (1b) can be rewritten as(15)1JDIV(P̲)+b=0inΩwithDIV(P̲)=[∂P11∂ξ1+∂P12∂ξ2∂P21∂ξ1+∂P22∂ξ2]The first and second Piola–Kirchhoff stress tensors,S̲andP̲, respectively, can be written in vectorial form asS=[S11S22S12],P=[P11P22P12P21]The Cauchy stress vectorσcan be written in terms of the stress vectorsSandPas(16)σ=TSSand(17)σ=TPPwithTSandTPthe following transformation matrices:(18)TS=1J[F112F1222F11F12F212F2222F21F22F11F21F12F21+F11F22F11F22],TP=1J[F110F1200F220F21F210F220]The process involved in the formulation of the proposed elements is analogous to that used for the development of other hybrid stress elements, see e.g.[11], which are a generalization of the equilibrium elements developed by Fraeijs de Veubeke [9,10]. The stresses are independently approximated in each element such that they locally verify (1b). The inter-element equilibrium is weakly enforced a posteriori, and, under certain conditions, it results satisfied in strong form. The governing system of equations imposes, in weak form, compatibility of the corresponding strains.In the framework of the present work, stresses are taken as the fundamental approximate field variables. As it will be shown later on, the adopted stress approximation, either second Piola–Kirchhoff, first Piola–Kirchhoff or Cauchy representation, plays an essential role in the performance of the developed finite elements. We will study the formulations associated with each of these three stress approximations. In all cases we start with a complete polynomial basis which, in general, is not divergence-free.The first Piola–Kirchhoff stresses are obtained from the stress approximations using the adequate transformation. The conditions leading to a divergence-free basis are then determined for the specific geometry of each element using the equilibrium differential equations (15).The general framework will be introduced in the present section, whereas the most relevant implementation aspects will be presented in Section 5.As mentioned above, the key aspect of the proposed finite element formulation is to adopt either the second Piola–Kirchhoff, the first Piola–Kirchhoff, or the Cauchy stress vectors as the fundamental approximate stress fields. This obviously leads to three different finite element formulations.We therefore use one of the following approximations for the stress vectors within an element:(19)Seh=SeβSe+Se0(20)Peh=PeβPe+Pe0(21)σeh=Σeβσe+σe0whereSe,PeandΣeare the matrices representing the assumed bases for the approximation of the second Piola–Kirchhoff, first Piola–Kirchhoff and Cauchy stresses, respectively, andβSe,βPeandβσeare the element vectors of stress parameters. Each column of eitherSe,PeorΣerepresents a self-equilibrated stress state. Their components are expressed in terms of the local coordinates(ξ1,ξ2).Se0,Pe0andσe0are particular solutions of the non-homogeneous equilibrium equations (1b). The procedure to compute the stress approximation matricesSe,PeandΣeis elaborated in Section 5.2. A technique for the determination of the particular solutions is presented in Section 5.3.The degrees of the polynomial functions used for the stress approximations are denoted by ds, dpanddσ, or, generically, asdΨ. Similarly, the degree of the stress approximations in the hybrid equilibrium formulation is denoted as dhef.To simplify the notation, the subscript e, used to identify the element, is dropped from this point of the text onwards.Plugging (19) into (16) gives the approximate Cauchy stress vector as(22)σh=TShSh=TSh(SβS+S0)Alternatively, if we make use of (20), the approximate Cauchy stress vector comes out as(23)σh=TPhPh=TPh(PβP+P0)The displacements on edge j are interpolated as(24)uΓjh=UΓjqΓjwhereUΓjis the assumed displacement matrix, withj=1,2,…,nedg. nedgis the number of edges of the element. The components ofUΓjare complete polynomial functions expressed in terms of the parametric coordinates of the edges, andqΓjis the vector of displacement parameters associated with edge j. These approximations are independently defined on each edge, unlike what is commonly adopted in most hybrid stress finite element formulations. This allows us to strictly enforce inter-element equilibrium.The discretization of the hybrid complementary energy (10) leads to(25)Πc⁎h(σh,uΓh)=∫Ω12σh·CσhdΩ−∫ΓN(Nσh−t¯)·uΓhdΓ−∫ΓDNσh·u¯dΓThe final expression for the discretized hybrid complementary energy will depend on the selected stress approximations, i.e., on whether we adopt the approximate Cauchy stress vector as given by (21), (22) or (23). We therefore define the discrete version of the hybrid complementary energy in the following general form:(26)Πc⁎h(s,q)=sT∫Ω12ΨTΛhTCΛhΨdΩs+sT∫ΩΨTΛhTCΛhψ0dΩ−sT∫ΓNΨTΛhTNTUdΓq−∫ΓN(ψ0TΛhTNT−t¯T)UdΓq−sT∫ΓDΨTΛhTNTu¯dΓ−∫ΓDψ0TΛhTNTu¯dΓwhere quantitiess,Ψ,Λhandψ0represent general vectors/operators that depend on whether we select the second Piola–Kirchhoff, the first Piola–Kirchhoff, or the Cauchy stress components as the fundamental approximation variables, as defined in Table 1, and I is the standard 3×3 identity matrix.The stationarity conditions ofΠc⁎h(s,q)with respect tosandqare(27a)∫ΩΨTΛhTCΛhΨdΩs+∫ΩΨTΛhTCΛhψ0dΩ−∫ΓNΨTΛhTNTUdΓq−∫ΓDΨTΛhTNTu¯dΓ=0(27b)−∫ΓNUTNΛhΨdΓs−∫ΓNUT(NΛhψ0−t¯)dΓ=0.They represent the element compatibility equations and the inter-element equilibrium equations, respectively, and can be recast in matrix form, for element e, as(28)[FeAeTAe0][seqe]=[vefe]where(29)Fe=∫ΩeΨeTΛehTCeΛehΨedΩis the element flexibility matrix,(30)Ae=−∫ΓNeUeTNeΛehΨedΓis the inter-element equilibrium matrix,(31)ve=∫ΓDeΨeTΛehTNeTu¯dΓ−∫ΩeΨeTΛehTCeΛehψe0dΩis the vector of equivalent strains due to the imposed displacements and to the particular solution. Finally,(32)fe=∫ΓNeUeT(NeΛehψe0−t¯e)dΓis the vector of equivalent boundary tractions.Simple direct allocation operations on the elementary systems of equations are needed to set up the assembled system for the finite element mesh, as described in [11]. The assembled system presents the same symmetric structure as the corresponding elementary systems.The global vectorssandqcollect the elementary stress parameters,se, and the boundary displacement parameters,qe, respectively. The assembled flexibility matrix, F, is sparse diagonal, and the assembled inter-element equilibrium matrix, A, is also block sparse.In a row of A, which expresses equilibrium on a given edge, the only non-zero contributions correspond to stress parameters of the elements that are adjacent to that edge.As mentioned in [11], the governing system can be condensed taking advantage of the positive definite nature and of the block diagonal structure of F. By doing so, the dimension of the global system becomes equal to the number of boundary displacement parameters.The new elements were implemented in aMatlab®code [17], where the expansions of polynomial expressions, as for example in Eqs. (34) and (42), were automatically generated. This was achieved by processing the general analytical formulas in aMathematica®code [18], which directly produces the required Matlab subroutines.Finite elements of triangular and quadrilateral shapes can be used, based on the usual master geometries represented in Fig. 2. Only linear or quadratic and bi-linear or bi-quadratic transformations were implemented to perform the mapping from the parent element to the physical element, but the extension to other polynomial transformations is straightforward.The Cartesian coordinates are expressed as functions of the local coordinates by(33)xjh(ξ1,ξ2)=∑i=1nnodesϕi(ξ1,ξ2)xjiwith xijthe element nodes coordinates, ϕithe element shape functions, and nnodesthe number of nodes of the element. Taking dGas the highest coefficient in ξ1 and ξ2, this expression can be expanded into a polynomial expression, leading to a direct definition of the Jacobian matrixF̲h, whose elements can be written as(34)Fh(i,j)=∂xih∂ξj=∑k=0dG∑l=0dGFh(i,j)klξ1kξ2lTo approximate the stresses in triangular elements we start with a complete basis with monomialsξ1kξ2lup to the degreedΨ, which requiresl+k≤dΨ. For quadrilaterals we use the product of complete bases in ξ1 and ξ2. This leads to an approximation which, when expressed in terms of the monomials, verifiesl≤dΨ∧k≤dΨ. In both cases we limit the projection of the approximation function along an edge of the parent element to be a polynomial of, at most, degreedΨ.It is possible to express the approximations of the coordinates as functions of nodal values by using the standard two-dimensional elements, T3, T6, T10, T15, …, for triangles and Q4, Q8, Q9, Q16, …, for quadrilaterals. Nevertheless, we note that the main advantage of this choice – a simple physical interpretation of the nodal variables – is lost when the basis is constrained to become self-equilibrated.As previously mentioned, the stresses are approximated independent of each element and need to satisfy the equilibrium equations pointwise within each element. To accomplish this, we developed a new framework that makes use of the Piola transformation to map the approximated stresses onto equilibrated stresses. The proposed framework takes advantage of the polynomial nature of the resulting equilibrium conditions, which can be locally satisfied if they are imposed for the coefficients that multiply each monomial. The steps involved in this procedure are detailed in the following.We first define our approximations for the stress vectors within an element using one of the following approximations:(35)S˜h=S˜β˜S(36)P˜h=P˜β˜P(37)σ˜h=Σ˜β˜σwhereS˜,P˜andΣ˜are the assumed second Piola–Kirchhoff, first Piola–Kirchhoff and Cauchy stress vectors, respectively. Their components constitute a polynomial basis expressed in terms of the local coordinates(ξ1,ξ2).β˜S,β˜Pandβ˜σare the element vectors of stress parameters. Note that, in general, these approximations do not represent self-equilibrated bases, first, because (15) is not satisfied in general, i.e. the basis are not divergence-free, and, second, the condition of equilibrium of moments,σ12−σ21=0, is not satisfied a priori if we selectP˜as the stress approximation. However, the latter condition will hold if we select eitherS˜orΣ˜, since they both represent symmetric stress tensors.In order to determine a divergence-free basis, we need to restrict (35), (36) or (37) to the equilibrium differential equations defined by (15), which are expressed in terms of the first Piola–Kirchhoff stress components.We next transformS˜handσ˜hinto their corresponding first Piola–Kirchhoff stresses. For the second Piola–Kirchhoff stress this is accomplished by using Eq. (13), which gives rise to(38)P̲Sh=F̲hS̲˜hAs for the Cauchy stress we make use of (11) to obtain(39)P̲σh=Jσ̲˜hF̲h−T=σ̲˜hadj(F̲hT)withadj(F̲hT)the adjoint ofF̲hT. The resulting first Piola–Kirchhoff stress components are always polynomial functions, regardless of the geometric mapping.As the determinant of the Jacobian, J, is always non-zero for non-degenerate geometries, the divergence-free conditions can be enforced using Eq. (15) as(40)DIV(P̲h)=0Each of these two polynomial equations can be decomposed into a set of equations corresponding to the non-zero expressions affecting each monomial of ξ1 and ξ2, which are linear combinations of the stress parameters (β˜S,β˜Porβ˜σ). The coefficients of these expressions are constant, and may depend on the element geometry. Hence, (40) is equivalent to the following system of equilibrium equations:(41)Bds˜=0withBdthe matrix of equilibrium constraints. Its number of rows is equal to twice the number of monomials in (40), whereas its number of columns is equal to the number of stress parameters.If the first Piola–Kirchhoff stresses are selected for the approximation basis, a simpler expression is obtained forBd. However, for a specific element geometry, an additional set of constraints must be considered to enforce the symmetry of the resulting Cauchy stress tensor in this case, i.e. the condition given byσ12−σ21=0, with σ12 and σ21 computed from (11). We note that, as the Jacobian determinant can be dropped from the symmetry condition, the resulting equations are also polynomial functions of the local coordinates. Therefore, the same approach of zeroing the expressions affecting each monomial leads to another constraint matrix, herein denoted byBs.To obtain an approximation basis that is divergence-free, and (if necessary) that leads to a symmetric Cauchy stress tensor, we use a matrix with all the non-zero rows of bothBdandBsas follows:(42)B=[BdBs]and compute all possible solutions of the following system of homogeneous equations:(43)Bs˜=0These solutions belong to the null space of B and can be characterized as right singular vectors corresponding to null singular values of B. To compute a basis of the solution space we perform the singular value decomposition of B, which gives(44)B=UTDV=[Ud1TUd0TUs1TUs0T][W000][V1V0]where D is a diagonal matrix. The columns of U are termed the left singular vectors, whereas the columns of V are termed the right singular vectors. Both U and V are orthogonal matrices.V0is an orthonormal basis for the null space of B, i.e.BV0T=0. Thus, a vector of independent stress parameterssobtained as(45)s=V0Ts˜leads to an approximation of the stresses which, by verifyingBs=BV0Ts˜=0, is self-equilibrated.SinceV0is orthonormal, the self-equilibrated stress approximation matrixΨintroduced in Eq. (26) is(46)Ψ=Ψ˜V0For the determination of a particular solution, and assumingJ≠0, we can rewrite (15) as(47)DIV(P̲)+Jb=0inΩIfbis a polynomial function of ξ1 and ξ2, which is always the case whenbis expressed as a polynomial function of the Cartesian coordinates, the resulting equilibrium equations are also polynomial. The coefficients affecting each monomial ofJbare constant and can be collected in a vectorbdwith the same number of rows asBd. Note that the existence of non-zero coefficients that affect the monomials ofJbbut that do not affect the monomials ofP̲, i.e., the existence of coefficients with no corresponding rows inBd, indicates that a particular solution associated with the given applied body loads cannot be represented by the assumed stress approximation and geometry.Imposing (47) locally is equivalent to(48)Bds˜+bd=0Making use of the singular value decomposition introduced in (44) gives(49)Ud1TWV1s˜+bd=0A set of stress approximation parameters that defines a particular solution can, therefore, be obtained as(50)s˜0=−V1TW−1Ud1bdUsing the resulting stress parameters in (35), (36) or (37) leads to the particular solution associated withbdas follows:(51)ψ0=Ψ˜s˜0=−Ψ˜V1TW−1Ud1bdFor a linear coordinate mapping,F̲is constant. In this case, the transformations (22) and (23) do not affect the degree of the approximations. Therefore, for the same approximation basis for stresses, the three alternative formulations lead to equivalent function spaces.For triangular elements, which use a complete basis, and are, therefore, invariant under a linear transformation, the approximation spaces are equivalent to the ones employed in the usual hybrid equilibrium approach [11], where the Cauchy stresses are expressed in terms of the Cartesian coordinates. In this case, the number of self-equilibrated stress modes is(dhef+1)(dhef+6)/2[19].For quadrilateral elements, an incomplete basis is used. In this case, the basis is not invariant under a rigid body rotation and, therefore, even for a linear coordinate mapping, the approximation in terms of local coordinates is not equivalent, in general, to a similar basis defined in Cartesian coordinates. This can be realized by considering an element under a rotation which is not multiple ofπ/2. While, in this new framework, the stress approximations along the element sides remain functions of degree dhef, in the standard hybrid equilibrium approach the stress approximations have degree up to2dhef. The dimensions of the approximation spaces are, nevertheless, the same: 3, fordhef=0, anddhef(dhef+2)+4, otherwise.As no analytical procedure was devised to obtain, for a general non-linear coordinate mapping, the number of self-equilibrated stress modes in an element, a numerical study was carried out to obtain some insight into this information. In this study we varied the position of the nodes of an element, so that they correspond to sane geometries, checking the corresponding number of modes obtained using the procedure described in Section 5.2. The obtained results are presented in Tables 2–4, along with the number of self-equilibrated stress modes used in the hybrid equilibrium formulation, nhef. The existence of other arrangements is not ruled out.Table 2 shows that, for quadrilateral elements with a bi-linear coordinate mapping, the number of self-equilibrated stress modes whenσis approximated, defined asnσ, is constant and equal to nhef. As for the approximation ofP, the obtained number of self-equilibrated stress modes, np, is again equal to nheffor parallelograms, although it is reduced by 2 for different element shapes. Finally, when considering the approximation ofS, three different cases were observed fords≥3. More specifically, for parallelograms, we obtained the same number of self-equilibrated stress modes as in the case ofPandσ. The number of self-equilibrated stress modes obtained for parallelograms is reduced differently when the elements have only two parallel sides or not.For elements with higher-order coordinate mappings, the relation between the element shape and the number of self-equilibrated stress modes becomes more involving. In this case, we opt to just list the number of self-equilibrated stress modes obtained in the tests. The characterization of the conditions under which they occur is beyond the scope of this work.Finally, we note that, as lower-order coordinate mappings are special cases of higher-order ones, all results in Table 2 are present in Table 4. Similarly, when triangular elements are considered, the results obtained for nhefare present in the results obtained fornΨ.The system of equations obtained by assembling (28) for all elements in a mesh may be singular. Clearly, since the flexibility matrix of each element,Fe, is positive-definite, the global matrix is not singular if and only if matrix A has full row rank. In this case the global system of equations has a unique solution.The conditions for a row-rank-deficient A are equivalent to require that the null space ofATis non-empty, i.e., that there are non-nullv0’sfor whichATv0=0. From a mechanical point of view, this means that there are non-zero combinations of the boundary displacement parameters that lead to zero equivalent strains and, as a result, the equivalent boundary tractions,f, with a non-zero projection in the null space ofATcannot be equilibrated by the model, i.e.,As=v0has no solutions. This can be shown by pre-multiplying both terms ofAs=v0byv0T. In this case, the loading is said to be inadmissible.Iffis orthogonal to a non-empty null space ofAT, then the system of equations exists, but is not unique, i.e. the displacement parameters in the null space ofATcan take arbitrary values. However, the solution in terms of the stress parameters is unique.A distinction is made between eventual rigid body modes of the domain, normally blocked if appropriate kinematic boundary conditions are imposed, and the remaining members of the null space, usually termed spurious kinematic modes (skm׳s). The condition for the admissibility offassociated with the rigid body modes implies global equilibrium of the applied loads, while the admissibility condition associated with an skm requires that the loading can be represented by the approximated stresses. This can be illustrated by considering one element with a free right angle corner where different shear tractions are applied, which represents a stress state that cannot be represented by the assumed continuous stress distribution.For triangular hybrid equilibrium elements, with approximate stresses expressed in Cartesian coordinates and withdhef=dv, the conditions under which these skm׳s may occur were already characterized in [19] for an isolated element, and in [20] for assemblies of triangular elements with linear sides. Given the aforementioned equivalences, the same conditions apply to our hybrid triangular elements with linear geometry.Therefore, fordhef=dv>2, we have the following: (i) one skm exists for each node on a straight boundary connected to only two elements (a degenerate node in [20]); (ii) one skm exists for each free corner node connected to only one element (the end of an open link), and (iii) one skm exists for each internal node connecting four elements with the adjacent sides placed as to form diagonals (the only special configuration that applies to membrane elements fordhef>2).These results can also be obtained from Eq. (5) of [20],nskm=(nv−nrbm−nhef)+(nhyp), which indicates that, by reducing dv, it is normally possible to eliminate at least some skm׳s. For all triangular elements with a linear geometry it was observed that, by settingdv=dΨ−1, all the resulting systems were generally free from skm׳s. We recall that, whendv<dΨ, the inter-element equilibrium is only satisfied in a weak form and, therefore, the solutions obtained are no longer strictly equilibrated.Triangular elements with a quadratic geometry are also affected by a reduction of the number of self-equilibrated stress modes as indicated in Table 3.The numerical results presented in Section 6, which are only a part of a larger set of tests that were performed, show that meshes of triangular elements with a regular quadratic approximation of the geometry are free from skm׳s when the first Piola–Kirchhoff stresses are approximated and the following condition holdsdΨ=dv. An approximation degree higher than 3 is generally sufficient. The increase in the minimum degree of approximation required to avoid skm׳s with respect to the hybrid equilibrium formulation can be explained by the decrease of the number of modes observed from columns 5–2 in Table 3. The different behaviours obtained when the other stress approximations are used may be explained by the smaller number of modes that they can represent for the same degree. In any case, this approximation may not imply a strict enforcement of equilibrium, as discussed in the following section.For quadrilateral elements with a bi-linear geometry mapping, the situation is significantly more complex. On one hand, meshes of the corresponding quadrilateral hybrid equilibrium elements normally have skm׳s. On the other hand, the use of different approximation spaces leads necessarily to solutions with different characteristics, usually with fewer self-equilibrated stress modes. The proposed framework solves the problem of having approximations that depend on the reference frame used, but, as for triangular elements, potentially increases the number of skm׳s by decreasing the number of self-equilibrated stress modes. In the numerical tests performed a variation of dvwas always considered. From the analysis of the obtained results we propose a rule of thumb which generally leads to results without spurious kinematic modes:dv=dΨ−2.It is not the goal of the present work to present the mathematical proofs of convergence, but rather to introduce the formulations and to give some practical (numerical) guidelines for their convergence. The necessary and sufficient conditions for convergence are governed by the Babuska–Brezzi conditions, as is always the case for hybrid/mixed finite element formulations. From a numerical point of view, these conditions are guaranteed as long as no spurious modes are present in the discrete problem. Although these conditions have already been studied in [20] for triangular elements with straight edges, further studies will be needed for the determination of the stability conditions of the proposed elements with curved edges.We note however that, even when spurious kinematic modes exist, convergence of the stresses is always achieved whenever the loads are admissible, whereas the boundary displacements do not converge since they are not uniquely defined.Another alternative, which may be considered in the future, is to approximate various stress fields simultaneously. This requires an additional step for the removal of linearly dependent approximations, which can be implemented using, for instance, a procedure similar to the one described in Section 5.2, by taking advantage of the polynomial nature of the first Piola–Kirchhoff stresses for all the approximations considered. The functions in such an approximation space would obviously be included in a higher-order basis forP, but we conjecture that this approach may provide sufficient information, without requiring a much larger basis.For all triangular hybrid equilibrium elements with linear geometry, the imposition of the weak form of boundary equilibrium (27b) implies that the strong form is also verified since both the boundary tractions and the displacements belong to the same space of polynomial functions.As stated in the previous section, for triangular elements with a quadratic geometry, the most promising approach corresponds to approximating the first Piola–Kirchhoff stresses. Nevertheless, we note that, in this case, the variation of the Cauchy stresses on the boundary is described by a rational function, because of the term1/J. The tractions have an additional complexity, because the normal vector is also a rational function.As will be shown in Section 6.3, in practical problems with regular geometries, particularly for highdΨanddv=dΨ, the tractions can be exactly balanced. For irregular geometries, or when dvis slightly lower thandΨ, the lack of equilibrium introduced has no significant effect on the stress distribution and, therefore, the obtained solutions may be termed “quasi-equilibrated”.To validate and assess the accuracy and effectiveness of the proposed hybrid stress elements, some benchmark problems are analyzed and their solutions compared with those obtained using hybrid equilibrium elements. The obtained results are also compared with the exact analytical solutions when they exist. Only the results associated with solutions corresponding to residuals of less than 10−12 have been indicated.All meshes and stress plots presented were generated using gmsh[21].Several other problems proposed in the literature were tested. Among these, we mention for instance the beam in pure bending problem studied in [22]. The corresponding results are not presented in this work, since problems where the exact stress fields can be represented by a polynomial stress basis are solved exactly using the proposed formulation. In the case of the beam in pure bending problem, the horizontal stress field is linear in the vertical direction. Therefore, our formulation is capable of exactly reproducing it, simply by using a linear first Piola–Kirchhoff stress basis.The patch test was performed for the 5-element mesh proposed by Robinson and Blackham [23] under plane stress conditions, see Fig. 3. The geometrical and material data were taken as a=0.12, b=0.24,E=106andν=0.25. The coordinates of the inner nodes of the patch are(0.04,0.02),(0.18,0.03),(0.16,0.08)and(0.08,0.08).The obtained results indicate that the three constant stress states can be reproduced exactly only if we select either the first Piola–Kirchhoff stresses or the Cauchy stresses as the fundamental approximate variables. It is worth noting however that, in case we select the first Piola–Kirchhoff stress approximations, the stress components must be at least of order one, so that the constant Cauchy stresses can be retrieved. In other words, both the first Piola–Kirchhoff and the Cauchy stress approximations include the three constant Cauchy stress modes on their bases, in the former case if at least linear stresses are employed, whereas the second Piola–Kirchhoff approximation does not. The reason for this is that, when using polynomial functions to approximate the second Piola–Kirchhoff stresses, the resulting Cauchy stresses come out as rational functions, and therefore do not contain the constant stresses.The results rendered by the proposed formulation with the second Piola–Kirchhoff stress approximation are displayed in Table 5. The displayed results correspond to the stress errors defined aseσ=max(σ11)−min(σ11), obtained for the constant stress mode in the x1-direction (σ11=1) for each combination of stress/boundary displacement approximation. Table 6displays the norms of the residuals of the solutions of the governing system of equations assembled from (28).The contour plots of σ11 obtained using two different sets of second Piola–Kirchhoff stress/displacement approximations, more specifically, second Piola–Kirchhoff stresses of degree 4 and displacements of degree 2, and second Piola–Kirchhoff stresses of degree 8 and displacements of degree 6, are shown in Fig. 4. As can be seen, although the second Piola–Kirchhoff stress approximation does not pass the patch test, as the approximation degrees are consistently increased, an increasingly accurate approximation of the constant stress mode in the x1-direction is obtained. Further investigation into the response of the second Piola–Kirchhoff stress formulation will be given in Section 6.3 through the analysis of a thick cylinder problem. As it will be seen, although this formulation does not pass the patch test, it still produces fairly accurate solutions if appropriate combinations of stress/displacement approximations are selected.Finally, as a linear stress patch test, we have considered the 5-element mesh under the action of the projection on the boundary of the following compatible and equilibrated linear stress field:[σ11σ22σ12]=[x1−b20a2−x2]The obtained results lead to conclusions similar to those drawn from the constant stress patch test: the second Piola–Kirchhoff stress formulation cannot represent the linear stress patch test, whereas both the first Piola–Kirchhoff and the Cauchy stress formulations satisfy the linear stress patch test fordp≥2anddσ≥1, respectively.Conventional displacement-based finite element formulations for 2D plane strain problems fail when Poisson׳s ratio approaches 0.5, i.e., when the material becomes incompressible. This phenomenon is referred in the literature to as incompressible (or volumetric) locking. The displacement fields may be inaccurately computed and highly oscillatory stresses may be obtained. There have been many attempts to suppress or at least alleviate locking, see e.g.[24]. Hybrid stress finite element methods are known to naturally overcome incompressible locking [25], as they use the flexibility form of the constitutive relations.In order to ascertain the sensitivity of the proposed finite element formulation to incompressible locking, the 5-element mesh was analyzed considering plane strain conditions. No deterioration of either the displacements or the stresses was found even for a Poisson׳s ratio of 0.5.We have performed the same type of numerical test to all the remaining examples and no deterioration of the obtained results was found as well. This indicates that, as is commonly the case of hybrid stress formulations, the present finite element formulation is not sensitive to incompressible locking.The Cook׳s membrane problem was first introduced in [26] and has been widely used since then as a benchmark test to check the performance of finite element formulations. This is a classical bending dominated test consisting of a tapered panel clamped on one side and subject to a shear load on the opposite side. The two other sides are traction-free. The geometry, loading and boundary conditions are given in Fig. 5. The shear load is taken to be parabolic, with resultant F, as depicted in Fig. 5. This is assumed in order to avoid the load induced singularities at the right-hand corners, which are introduced by uniform shear distributions. We note that such singularities cannot be locally equilibrated by a continuous stress field and, therefore, meshes of equilibrium finite elements where only one element is present at the corner cannot solve the problem, i.e. the uniform load is inadmissible for such meshes.We are particularly interested in studying the convergence of the following quantities: (i) vertical displacement at the middle of the right-hand side of the panel, vC, (ii) maximum principal stress at the midpoint of the bottom side, σmaxA, and (iii) minimum principal stress at the midpoint of the top side, σminB, as indicated in Fig. 5. The membrane is assumed to be under plane stress conditions.The following geometrical, material and loading parameters are assumed: a=44.0, b=48.0, c=44.0, d=16.0, E=1,ν=13and F=1.The adopted refinement scheme consists of “uniform” refinements of the non-uniform regular mesh obtained by splitting the membrane into four quadrilaterals, as illustrated in Fig. 5.The reference solutions were obtained using triangular hybrid equilibrium elements of degree 5 on a non-uniform mesh with 4504 elements, which was adaptively refined using the procedure described in [27]. For the parabolic shear load the obtained reference solutions arevCpref=24.14074,σApref,max=0.2368851andσBpref,min=−0.2036426.We first consider a p-refinement study of the membrane on the 4×4 mesh, i.e., using different stress and displacement approximations. In this case, we have only adopted the first Piola–Kirchhoff stress approximation. The obtained results for vC, σmaxAand σminBare displayed in Tables 7–9, respectively. We note that the displacement vcwas obtained as the average of the displacements computed at the three edges that share point C. Since a mesh with 36 free edges is always used, the condensed governing system has dimension72×(dv+1). For the sake of comparison, the solutions obtained using standard isoparametric displacement-based elements are also indicated in these tables.The deformed configurations of the membrane on the 2×2 mesh for the combined approximation degrees(dP,dv)=(2,0),(3,1),(4,2),(5,3)are depicted in Fig. 6along with the initial configuration of the membrane. The deformed configurations were constructed using the displacements obtained for the edges of the elements. We note that, although the solutions are not strictly compatible, i.e., the inter-element displacements are not continuous at the element vertices, the discontinuities tend to zero with increasing approximation degrees.We finally perform an h-refinement study. The selected degrees for stresses and displacements are 4 and 2, respectively. The obtained results for vC, σmaxAand σminB, as well as the dimension of the corresponding system, are displayed in Table 10. As it can be seen, the results are converging to the reference solutions. For the sake of comparison, the solutions obtained using standard isoparametric displacement-based elements are also indicated in the table.Contour plots of the three stress distributions σ11, σ22 and σ12 on the 4×4 and 32×32 meshes are presented in Fig. 7.The equivalence between the three proposed formulations and the hybrid stress equilibrium formulation [11] for meshes of triangular elements with a linear geometry was numerically checked in this problem. The same results were produced by all formulations at least up to the 6th figure. We attribute the non-perfect matching of the results to numerical integration and round-off errors.The analysis of a thick-walled elastic cylinder subjected to internal pressure is carried out in this section. This problem has the advantage that closed-form solutions exist for the stresses and displacements. Due to symmetry conditions, only a quarter of the cylinder is analyzed. The cylinder geometry, loading and boundary conditions are given in Fig. 8. The cylinder is assumed to be under a plane strain state. The geometrical, material and loading parameters are taken in this case as Ri=0.5, Re=1.0, E=1,ν=0.3and p=1.The exact solution of the present problem is given as, see e.g.[28](52)σrr(r,θ)=pc2−1(1−b2r2),σθθ(r,θ)=pc2−1(1+b2r2),σrθ(r,θ)=0witha=Ri,b=Reand c=b/a.The adopted finite element mesh consists of bi-quadratic triangular elements as shown in Fig. 8. We note that, since we are using a fixed mesh of triangular elements with bi-quadratic geometry, we cannot exactly represent the circular edges. Therefore, our numerical solutions are not converging to the exact solution of the problem under analysis. Hence, regardless of the selected stress/displacement approximation degrees, the errors with respect to the exact solution will never converge to zero. For reference, an almost exact solution for the geometry represented by the adopted mesh, obtained withdp=dv=8, is characterized by the following complementary strain energy: 0.3743548. Since the same mesh is always used, the dimension of the system to be solved depends only on the degree of the approximation of the displacements, which is equal to104×(dv+1).The complementary strain energies obtained using the three stress approximations are presented in Table 11. Clearly, the results produced by the formulation based on the approximation of the first Piola–Kirchhoff stresses are more accurate than those rendered by the formulations based on the second Piola–Kirchhoff or Cauchy stresses. Notably, although the second Piola–Kirchhoff stress formulation does not pass the patch test, it still renders fairly accurate results.Maps of the exact errors measured in the complementary strain energy density, obtained for the three stress approximations,P,Sandσ, are presented in Fig. 9.The horizontal and vertical equilibrium defaults on the tractions, obtained with the first Piola–Kirchhoff approximations of degree 4 and displacements of degree 3 for the inner and outer boundaries represented in Fig. 8, are shown in Fig. 10. As can be seen, these equilibrium defaults are non-zero, with values below 0.001, much smaller than the stresses involved, which have values around unity. In this example, for boundary displacements of degree 4, the equilibrium defaults are of the order of magnitude of the round-off error, i.e. the solution is strictly equilibrated.As mentioned before, the quadratic geometry approximation used by the proposed formulation introduces an error in the representation of the circular domain. This is inconvenient for convergence studies, as either a p- or an h-refinement scheme used in the framework of the isoparametric displacement elements simultaneously reduces the errors in the solution and geometry. Hence, in order to isolate the convergence characteristics of the finite element solution, a modified problem is considered. More specifically, we consider a quadratic geometry such that the free edges are normal to the sliding supports, thus removing a potential singularity. This geometry is given byx=18(4−ξ)ξ(1+η);y=18(4−ξ2)(1+η);withξ∈[0,2]andη∈[0,1]and it can be exactly represented by all the adopted elements. This allows us to directly compare the results obtained with the new elements against those produced by the standard displacement-based elements, as both types of elements can exactly reproduce a quadratic geometry. We note that, unlike the isoparametric displacement elements, the proposed elements are associated with a fixed geometry when a p-refinement scheme is considered.The initial mesh of quadrilaterals consists of two elements dividing the domain atθ=45°. The initial mesh of triangles consists of eight elements, corresponding to the subdivision of each quadrilateral into four elements. A quadratic mapping is applied to all elements, i.e., edges that are not radial are quadratic in all cases. The maximum element size h is the length of the element sides on the outer edge. The reference value considered for the strain energy is 0.402956325945, which, for the given precision, is a converged solution.The convergence results are given in Figs. 11 and 12. As it can be seen, the hybrid stress elements are “comparable” in terms of convergence rates to their displacement counterparts when the approximations of the Piola–Kirchhoff stress elements are one degree higher than the approximations of the isoparametric displacement elements.In this example, we analyze an infinite plate with a circular hole under constant in-plane tension at infinity, a problem with exact analytical solution, see e.g.[28](53a)σrr(r,θ)=Tx12(1−R2r2)+Tx12(1−4R2r2+3R4r4)cos(2θ)(53b)σθθ(r,θ)=Tx12(1+R2r2)−Tx12(1+3R4r4)cos(2θ)(53c)σrθ(r,θ)=−Tx12(1+2R2r2−3R4r4)sin(2θ)whereTx1is the magnitude of the applied stress at infinity.The infinite plate is modeled by a finite quarter plate, with the exact solution, evaluated at its boundary, applied as a Neumann boundary condition. The setup is illustrated in Fig. 13. R is the radius of the hole and L is the edge length of the finite quarter plate. The geometrical and material parameters were taken as R=1, L=4,E=105andν=0.3. The applied stress was assumed to beTx1=10.The meshes used in the analysis are shown in Fig. 14.The convergence results obtained for σ11 at(r,θ)=(R,π/2)using quartic stresses and quadratic displacements are displayed in Table 12. Clearly, the second Piola–Kirchhoff formulation did not prove to be as accurate as the two other formulations. It can also be seen that the first Piola–Kirchhoff formulation is more accurate than the Cauchy formulation.Contour plots of results obtained on the various meshes with quartic first Piola–Kirchhoff stresses and quadratic displacements are presented in Fig. 15. The contours show that the stress concentration ofσ11=30at the edge of the hole (i.e., at(r,θ)=(R,π/2)) is obtained as the mesh is refined.The deformed configuration of the plate computed using first Piola–Kirchhoff stresses of degree 4 and displacements of degree 2 on the last mesh of Fig. 14 is depicted in Fig. 16along with the initial configuration of the plate. The deformed configurations were constructed using the displacements obtained for the edges of the elements. We note that, although the solution obtained is not strictly compatible, i.e., the numerical displacements are not continuous at the element vertices, the discontinuities are so small that cannot be detected at the adopted scale.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
We have introduced a new framework for the development of hybrid stress finite elements with arbitrary curved edges. This framework makes use of a Piola transformation that maps stresses from parent space to physical space. Three alternative formulations based on this framework have been proposed, more specifically, the first and second Piola–Kirchhoff formulations and the Cauchy formulation. The three formulations employ divergence-free stress approximations. The obtained numerical results confirm that, as a consequence of using the flexibility format of the constitutive relations, the three formulations are free from incompressible locking when Poisson׳s ratio reaches 0.5. The numerical results also showed that, while the first Piola–Kirchhoff and Cauchy formulations satisfy both the constant and linear stress patch tests, the second Piola–Kirchhoff formulation does not. Further research studies are required to determine the conditions for static admissibility, as well as mathematical proofs of the numerical stability of the new elements. Further research studies are required to determine the conditions for static admissibility, numerically verified in this work for curved triangular elements, as well as the mathematical proofs for the numerical stability of the new elements. The computational cost of the proposed approach is similar to that of other hybrid stress approaches, with the additional cost, although linear in the dimension of the problem, of performing independent SVD׳s that depend on the geometry of each element.It is our goal to extend this new framework to both elastodynamics and non-linear elastostatics.