@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Experimental and numerical study of laser-assisted machining of Ti6Al4V titanium alloy

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
The understanding of the physical phenomena during laser assisted machining and the optimization of this process.Shear band formation.Significant reduction in the cutting force up to 55%.An increase in the width of the chip and in the shear angle when machining with laser assistance.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Laser assisted machining,Numerical simulation,Chip formation,Titanium machining,Adiabatic shear band,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
Laser-assisted machining combines several experimental parameters such as cutting speed, feed rate, depth of cut, laser power and distance between tool rake face and the laser beam axis. The optimization of these parameters is necessary to ensure the efficiency of assistance and to increase productivity. This paper focuses on the understanding of the physical phenomena during laser-assisted machining, and on optimising this process. This contribution is based on an experimental and a numerical study. The experimentalpart highlights the effects of the laser power as well as the distance between the tool rake face and the axis of the laser beam. As for the numerical part, it was performed on the ABAQUS/Explicit software.The proposed model improves the understanding of the physical phenomena of chip formation and the cutting force reduction when machining with laser assistance. In addition, this model allows a better optimization of laser and cutting parameters.Numerical findings generally corroborate experimental results and can lead to some other information difficult to catch experimentally.The main contention in the paper is that the distance between the axis of the laser beam and the tool rake face is the most important parameter that controls the reduction of the cutting force. This cutting force reduction can exceed 50%.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Titanium alloys are known for their high mechanical characteristics even at high temperatures and for their corrosion resistance. Besides, some of them are biologically compatible with the human body. The combination of high mechanical properties, low density and corrosion resistance presents interesting advantages for titanium alloys. However, they are difficult to machine. This is mainly due to the significant release of heat in the cutting area and the high chemical reactivity of titanium alloys that not only cause a rapid wear of cutting tools, but also generate very high cutting forces.Therefore, research has been oriented to machining assistance in order to improve the machinability of these alloys and increase productivity. Skvarenina and Shin [1] studied the laser assisted-machining of graphite iron. The study shown an increase in tool life up to 60% and a saving in economic cost around 20%. The microstructure of the finished surface was not affected. Chang and Kuo [2] found that laser assistance contributes to the improvement of surface roughness and leads to a higher material removal rate when machining an aluminum oxide ceramic.The study done by Ding and Shin [3] proves that there is an improvement in surface roughness and that there is no microstructural change. In addition there is more compressive surface axial residual stress and about 20% of reduction in the cutting force [4]. The numerical simulation of laser-assisted micro-milling process done by [4] shows that the flow stress drops by 20–25% and that there is a reduction in tool wear.Numerical simulation of assisted machining processes is even more complex because it involves the coupling of multi-physic phenomena. Lesourd [5] was among the first to develop a finite element model for laser-assisted machining (LAM). This model takes into account laser heating by a uniform initial temperature imposed on the workpiece depending on the laser power used. His model predicted the morphology of the chip, the shear angle and temperature fields for the titanium alloy Ti6Al4V. A new model taking into account the temperature field induced by the laser beam has been developed by Germain [6]. This model allows the heating of the workpiece by a moving heat source, then the removal of material by a cutting tool. This new model allows the prediction of the stress levels, strain rates and temperature fields in the cutting zone in conventional machining (CM) and in LAM.Based on the research carried out by Mabrouki [7,8], the model proposed by Germain can begreatly improved. Thus, the understanding of laser heating on the chip formation becomes more relevant. The main objective of this study is to determine the effects of cutting parameters and those of the laser source on the chip formation and the cutting force.The geometric model proposed consists of a carbide cutting tool and a part made of Titanium alloy Ti6Al4V.The adopted geometric model for the workpiece (length=5mm), presented in Fig. 1, follows the main geometric multi-part model suggested in [7]. It has different parts: part one (1) it is transformed into a chip during machining, part two (2) represents the material separation zone, part three (3) is the area of the part remaining after machining. The tungsten carbide tool is considered deformable, flank angle α=7°, rake angle γ=−7° and nose radiusrβ=30μm.A master-slave contact algorithm is used. Frictional behavior of the interface is modelled according to the identification done by [9]. This model is meshed by 4-node quadrangle elements (CPE4RT) of about 12μm in the cutting area (according to [9]). The total number of elements is about 9200. The calculation type is Explicit Coupled-Temperature-Displacement under the assumption of plane strain condition (2D).The workpiece behavior law must take into account all physical aspects that may occur during machining (high strain rates and high temperatures). The tool is modelled by an elastic law. The physical parameters of the workpiece and the tool are given by Table 1.In a cutting operation, strain rates are important, their estimation by analytical and experimental methods is of the order of103s1–105s1[18,19]. When the strain rate increases, the flow stress also increases leading to the generation of heat due to plastic deformation. It is, therefore, crucial to choose a constitutive equation which takes into account the influence of strain hardening, strain rate and temperature. One of the most widely used behavior laws is the Johnson–Cook constitutive equation (1)[10].(1)σ=(A+Bε¯̇n)︸1(1+Cln(ε¯̇ε¯̇0))︸2(1−(T−TroomTfusion−Troom)m)︸3The first term in Eq. (1) corresponds to the hardening, A is the yield stress, B and n are the hardening parameters. The second term represents the effect of the strain rate as a function of the parameter C. The third term refers to the thermal softening where m is the temperature sensitivity. The determination of these five parameters requires quasi-static and dynamic tests at different strain rates and temperatures. In the current study, these parameters are taken from bibliography [12].Johnson and Cook [11] have developed in the mid 1980s a damage model which takes into account the sensitivity to strain rate, temperature and hydrostatic pressure . That law is described in Eqs. (2) and (3).(2)D=∑Δεεf(3)εf=(D1+D2exp(D3σ⁎))︸1(1+D4ln(ε¯̇ε¯̇0))︸2(1+D5(T−TroomTfusion−Troom))︸3Δεis the increment of the equivalent plastic strain, εf is the equivalent strain at fracture. The variable D is calculated at each increment for each mesh element, the initiation of damage occurs when D=1.The first term in Eq. (3) is based on the calculation of the rate of tri-axiality. Indeed, when the hydrostatic pressure increases, the fracture strain decreases. The second term and the third term represent, respectively, the sensitivity to the strain rate and temperature. The damage is based on the stiffness degradation of the material until failure point. Table 2illustrates the parameters of the behavior and the damage law used.The model allows, among others, to simulate the formation of shear bands during chip genesis. Fig. 2shows the steps of the formation of a shear band. The variation of the temperature and the von Mises stress during the formation of a shear band are plotted at point P. Point P is positioned in the middle of the shear band (it is attached to the Lagrangian mesh (Fig. 2).Poulachon et al. [14] studied the formation of shear bands for a AISI 52100 steel basing on an instability criterion. He concluded that the instability of shear is more sensitive to an increase in flow stress than changes in thermal properties. Delalondre [15] explains the occurrence of adiabatic shear bands (ASB) by three phases:1.A period of plastic deformation: During this phase the distribution of plastic deformation is homogeneous and the phenomenon of hardening outweighs the softening phenomenon. At the end of this phase the maximum stress is reached.A period of initiation of the ASB: The hardening and softening phenomena have comparable intensities.A period of establishment of the ASB: The equivalent stress drops abruptly under the influence of the thermal softening that dominates it. At this stage, the temperature rises sharply in the ASB. For the ASB that is formed, the temperature reaches its maximum and the stress reaches its minimum.These three phases correspond to the results found (Fig. 2). Indeed, phase 1 corresponds to Step 1. Phase 2 represents the transition from Step 1 to Step 2. Phase 3 corresponds to Step 2. Step 3 corresponds to the shear propagation throughout the shear band.Physically, laser heating is carried out by the absorption of the laser beam on only few nanometers. Laser heating modeling can be performed by applying a surface heat flux. In fact, the energy of the laser used is not completely absorbed by the material: a fraction is reflected and a complementary fraction is absorbed. The absorptivity depends on several factors: the nature of the machined material, the laser wavelength, its intensity, the workpiece roughness and surface oxidation [16]. The heat flux will be imposed equally to the heat absorbed by the part.A moving heat flux using the DFLUX subroutine is applied to the same workpiece used in the cutting model in order to keep the same geometry and the same mesh. Eq. (4) presents the programmed heat flux.(4)Q(r)=3Pπr12exp(−3r2r1)•r1: radius of the laser spotP: laser powerQ: heat generated by the laser sourcer=x2+y2(x and y axes)The laser produces an intense and a localized heat. The temperature field depends mainly on the speed, power, and diameter of the incident beam. Fig. 3illustrates the temperature fields at different speeds and different laser powers for a laser beam of 0.8mm in diameter (all temperatures are in °C).Temperature fields (a) and (c) have the same power level but with different speeds respectively 0.66m/s and 1.3m/s. The affected depth and the maximum temperature reached decrease when the speed increases. In fact, the increase in displacement speed decreases the laser-material interaction time. Temperature fields (a) and (b) correspond to the results for the same speed but with different laser powers. In this case, it is found that the maximum temperature increases with the laser power. The interaction time is identical for both simulations but power density is larger which allows to reach higher temperatures with a higher energy intensity. By contrast, the heat-affected depth is almost identical.The efficiency of the laser heating depends essentially on the distance between the axis of the laser beam and the tool rake face. In fact, the purely thermal simulation described previously, allows us to know the optimal distance between the tool and the laser beam. The distance is considered to be optimal when the reduction of the cutting force is maximized and the affected depth by the laser beam is removed by the cutting tool.The depth affected by the heating depends mainly on the speed of the laser beam, its power and the distance a between the cutting face of the tool and the beam axis. For this, heating simulations were made by varying the distance a and the power of the laser source. For example, for a speed of 0.66m/s, Fig. 4illustrates the variation in temperature as a function of the affected depth.This demonstrates that a larger gain in cutting force is expected for all cutting depths below 0.15mm if a distance of 3mm and a laser power of 1000W are chosen. However, for the cutting depths up to 0.2mm a slight reduction is expected when using a laser power of 500W. This reduction will not be significant because the temperature levels are not enough to soften the material. Thus, for higher cutting depths, the laser power must be upgraded.The modelisation of LAM is the result of coupling the two previous models. Thus, it requires a simulation of the laser heating then the introduction of the thermal field obtained as an initial condition for the orthogonal cutting model. The contact between the tool and the workpiece is handled by a master–slave algorithm. A frictional heating has been taken into account [9]. Fig. 5illustrates the LAM model.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
