@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Ill-loaded layout optimization of bi-modulus material

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Compliance design for a bi-modulus structure under multiple ill-loads is studied.Fractional norm objective function is presented and sensitive analysis is derivated.Material replacement approach is suggested to simplify update of design variables.Typical multiple ill-loaded designs are discussed numerically.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Layout optimization,Bi-modulus,Multiple loading cases,Q-norm weighting scheme,Ill-loading cases,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In topology optimization of a continuum under multiple loading cases (MLC), if the magnitudes of loads are different obviously, it is hard to obtain a clear component to support the weaker loads. Such MLC are called ill-loading cases (ILC). A new method is presented to solve the layout optimization of a continuum with bi-modulus material under multiple loading conditions (MLC) by using a Q-norm weighting objective which is formed with the Q-norm of weighted structural compliances of MLC. The effects both of the value of Q and bi-modulus behavior of material on the final material distribution are studied. Both of validity and efficiency of the present algorithm are discussed numerically. Results show that the optimal bi-modulus material distribution of a structure under serious ILC can be found if using a small positive value of Q within interval of [0.1, 0.2] and the computational efficiency is very close to that of traditional isotropic material layout optimization.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Layout/topology optimization is a powerful tool for the conceptual design of a structure/composite material. In topology optimization the layout of material in structure can change, which is the essential difference from the traditional detailed design approaches, e.g., size/shape optimization. However, the computational cost of topology optimization is usually very heavy as comparing with size/shape optimization. Therefore, the popularity of the method in practical design [1] owe to two aspects, i.e., the development of computer technology and related computational methods. The most successful solution methods are as homogenization design based method (HDM) by Bendsøe and Kikuchi [2], solid isotropic material with penalization method (SIMP) by Rozvany et al. [3], evolutionary structural optimization method (ESO) by Xie and Steven [4] and level set method (LST) by Wang et al. [5].In practical engineering, such materials as concrete, cast iron, plastic and rubber, are used popularly. Mechanical experiments show that the tensile and compressive moduli of the materials are different under linear elastic deformation along the same direction. In general, the materials are called bi-modulus materials. The mechanical property of a bi-modulus material is stress dependent which results in many times of structural reanalysis for obtaining the accurate deformation of a structure with such material [6]. To avoid the behavior of stress-dependent of a bi-modulus material, approximation schemes are presented [7–10]. In such approximation, the original piecewise linear constitutive curve is approximated with a continuous differentiable curve. On the other hand, material replacement methods are also suggested [11–16] in layout optimization of a continuum as the different behavior in tension and compression exists.In practical engineering, a structure is generally subjected to multiple loading cases (MLC) [17–22]. In the work by Sui et al. [19], they presented a multiple-level weighting scheme to deal with the topology optimization under ill-loading cases. In their work, the loading cases were divided into two groups according to the magnitudes of the loads. Topology optimization of structure under the higher loads was firstly carried out. And the second level of topology optimization of structure under lower loads was implemented on the results of previous level of topology optimization. In 2006, they [20] proposed a new method to select the weight functions of loads by considering strain energy constraints in optimization.The approach to deal with ILC design is still complicated. Besides, the stiffness design of a continuum under MLC discussed in above works does not consider material nonlinear, e.g., bi-modulus material in structure. That is the motivation of our present work. Simultaneously, in the present work, the power exponent weighting scheme of objective functioin is adopted. The value of the power exponent is in the interval of (0, 1) to deal with ill-loading cases. Further, the effects of both the value of the power exponent and bi-modulus behavior of material on the optimal topologies are to be discussed numerically.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
From numerical discussions given above, the present method can be used to find the optimal stiffness design for a structure under MLC when the material in design domain shows bi-modulus. Simultaneously, the topology optimization of a continuum under ill-loading cases is successfully dealt with using a Q-norm weighting scheme. The effective value of Q is also suggested. The efficiency of the present method is shown through the comparison between bi-modulus stiffness design and traditional isotropic design for the same structural optimization. Some conclusions are given below.(1)For a symmetric structure subjected to weighted symmetric loading conditions (e.g., right columns in Figs. 6 and 8), if the ratio between forces is inversely proportional to the ratio between their weighting coefficients, the value of Q has no effect on final optimal material distribution.For the stiffness design with serious ill-loading cases (e.g., rP=pmax/pmin≈100), the practical optimal design can be found as the value of Q is in the interval of [0.1, 0.2]; the interval of Q is actually suggested with respective to two factors, but not limited to the problems in the present paper. One is that the upper bound should be valid for dealing with the common ill-loaded structural topology optimization, in which the minimal load is about 0.01 to 0.1 times of the maximal load. The lower bound of interval is determined by the practical requirements. It is known that the less of Q, the more seriously ill-loaded topology optimization can be solved well. However, if the value of Q is too close to zero, the difference between the load magnitudes will be covered, i.e., the importance of the components to support both of the weaker loads and the stronger is not clear. An engineer will not accept such design. For example, Q=0.1 can be adopted to effectively solve the structure with rP=1000. If rPis far greater than 1000, the weakest load is commonly ignored in design process.Bi-modulus stiffness design is commonly different from the same structure with isotropic material because the difference between ETand ECleads to the redistribution of stiffness and further to the redistribution of material.The computational efficiency of bi-modulus stiffness design using the present method is slightly lower than that of the same structural topology optimization with isotropic material. The difference is mainly caused by computational cost on the modulus selection of elements.