@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Improving the work efficiency of healthcare-associated infection surveillance using electronic medical records

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
We develop an integrated surveillance system (called iHAUTISIS) for improving the work efficiency of infection control.The iHAUTISIS can automatically collect surveillance data from EMRs and detect infected cases.Compare to the existing surveillance system, the iHAUTISIS can reduce 39% of an ICP's surveillance time for each patient.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Healthcare-associated infection,Urinary tract infection,Electronic medical records,Electronic health records,Surveillance information system,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this study, we developed an integrated hospital-associated urinary tract infection (HAUTI) surveillance information system (called iHAUTISIS) based on existing electronic medical records (EMR) systems for improving the work efficiency of infection control professionals (ICPs) in a 730-bed, tertiary-care teaching hospital in Taiwan. The iHAUTISIS can automatically collect data relevant to HAUTI surveillance from the different EMR systems, and provides a visualization dashboard that helps ICPs make better surveillance plans and facilitates their surveillance work. In order to measure the system performance, we also created a generic model for comparing the ICPs’ work efficiency when using existing electronic culture-based surveillance information system (eCBSIS) and iHAUTISIS, respectively. This model can demonstrate a patient's state (unsuspected, suspected, and confirmed) and corresponding time spent on surveillance tasks performed by ICPs for the patient in that state. The study results showed that the iHAUTISIS performed better than the eCBSIS in terms of ICPs’ time cost. It reduced the time by 73.27s, when using iHAUTISIS (114.26s) and eCBSIS (187.53s), for each patient on average. With increased adoption of EMR systems, the development of the integrated HAI surveillance information systems would be more and more cost-effective. Moreover, the iHAUTISIS adopted web-based technology that enables ICPs to online access patient's surveillance information using laptops or mobile devices. Therefore, our system can further facilitate the HAI surveillance and reduce ICPs’ surveillance workloads.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Healthcare-associated infections (HAIs) are infections that patients acquire during the course of receiving treatment for other conditions within a healthcare setting [1]. Mostly, HAIs only appear in patients hospitalized for 48h or longer (refer to the 48h criterion). It estimates that approximately 1.7 million HAIs occur in hospitals, and 99,000 associated deaths occur each year in the US [2]. According to World Health Organization report, HAIs are major worldwide causes of death and disability [3,4]. Thus, HAIs are critical patient safety and healthcare quality issues [5]. Prevention and reduction of such infection has become one of the top priorities for health care.The US Centers for Disease Control (CDC) has published guidelines to define HAI and surveillance criteria for specific types of HAI in acute care settings [6–8]. One of the most effective approaches to prevention and reducing HAIs is intensive surveillance that detects changes in clinical signs that require frequent, repeated and detailed bedside assessment on a patient by patient basis [7,9]. It is time-consuming, labor-intensive, and expensive to implement [10]. Most hospitals cannot afford to conduct such comprehensive surveillance activities. Based on the CDC's case definitions of healthcare-associated urinary tract infection (HAUTI) [8], the criteria involve the use of combination of signs, symptoms, and laboratory findings. Thus, making a firm diagnosis of HAUTI was not always straightforward because of the inconsistent relationship between symptoms, pyuria, and bacteriuria [11–13]. Therefore, infection control professionals (ICPs) spend most of time on patient data collection, suspected cases finding, medical records review, bedside investigation, and so on. They can hardly free up their valuable time for proactive preventive activities that may reduce HAIs [14–16].The electronic medical records (EMR) are records about patient care that can be processed by a computer [17,18]. With increased adoption of EMR systems in recent years [10,14,19], more and more sophisticated HAI surveillance data are made available in the electronic medical records. Thus, hospital-wide surveillance data on HAIs can be collected in a cost-effective way. There have been computerized HAI surveillance information systems (HAISISs) that rely on culture-based information systems [20–23], or on predictive models to improve infection control and disease surveillance [24–26]. Although the electronic culture-based surveillance systems can help ICPs saving their time in HAI surveillance work as well as for case management (e.g. follow-up of isolation procedures), there lacks a formal model for measuring the work efficiency between different types of electronic surveillance systems. Our aims were to develop an integrated HAI surveillance information system based on existing EMR systems for improving the work efficiency of ICPs, and create a generic model as a common platform for comparing ICPs’ work efficiency when using different electronic HAISISs. In this paper, we focused on HAUTI to illustrate the settings and methods for evaluating the work efficiency of two different types of electronic HAUTI surveillance systems.HAI surveillance involves active case-finding by infection control teams and clinicians, uses clinical case definitions, and requires the collection of additional data to determine the infection source. ICPs need to routinely collect patients’ clinical data and laboratory tests results, and then analyze the data based on the CDC's guidelines to determine whether the patients are HAI cases. In general, patients may have experienced three states from the time of hospital admission to the time of hospital discharge: unsuspected, suspected, and confirmed. Thus, we can use a state transition diagram to model the workflow of HAI surveillance (Fig. 1) [27]. A circle represents a patient state, and the arrow that connects two states represents a transition from one state to another, i.e., from the state at the tail end of the arrow to the state at the arrow head end. Each state may be associated with a group of patients whose states are the same as that state, and a set of surveillance tasks that should be performed to the patients with that state. The performance of the HAI surveillance tasks on an individual patient may lead to trigger the patient's state change. The trigger is labeled on the edge between a “from state” and a “to state”.Patients admitted to a hospital are supposed to be non-HAI cases. They are assigned to “unsuspected” state. For a patient in “unsuspected” state, ICPs collect and analyze his/her data relevant to HAI. If the patient's conditions are likely to meet the HAI case definitions, and meet the 48h criterion, then he/she is suspected with HAUTI. The patient's state is changed from state “unsuspected” to “suspected”.For each patient in “suspected” state, ICPs usually check the collected data, review the patients’ medical records in more details, and further conduct bedside/onsite investigation to see whether the patient's conditions truly meet the CDC's HAUTI case definitions. If the patient is confirmed to be a true HAUTI case, then his/her state is changed from “suspected” to “confirmed” state. Similarly, if the patient is determined not to be a true HAUTI case, his/her state is changed to the state “unsuspected”. For each patient in “confirmed” state, the ICPs must complete his/her infection card for follow-up or prevention procedures, and report the confirmed cases to the Taiwan CDC [28]. All the patients’ conditions are continuously monitored. Moreover, if the patient still stays in the hospital because of other conditions, his/her state is changed to the state “unsuspected”. The surveillance workflow ends when the patient is discharged after treatment. The ICPs handle the changes to patients’ states and coordinate surveillance tasks using pen and paper, or with the help of computer systems.The study was conducted at Taipei Medical University Wan Fang Hospital (TMUWFH), which is a 730-bed, tertiary-care teaching hospital in Taiwan. The Infection Control Department (ICD) is responsible for HAI surveillance and control and has an existing culture-based electronic surveillance information system (eCBSIS) to help ICPs performing HAI surveillance tasks. The ICD consisted of six ICPs including one infection control physician, one medical technologist, and four infection control nurses. The four infection control nurses were certified by the Infection Control Society of Taiwan [29]. We developed an information system for integrating the information relevant to HAI surveillance and control, particularly for HAUTI, from existing EMR systems at the hospital. We called the system Integrated HAUTI Surveillance Information System (iHAUTISIS). To compare the work efficiency between the eCBSIS and iHAUTISIS, we used the generic model for HAI surveillance, presented in Section 2.The electronic culture-based surveillance information system (eCBSIS) used at TMUWFH includes several independent systems such as a laboratory information management system (LIS), inpatient management information system (IMIS), nursing information system (NIS), and other types of EMR systems, as shown in Fig. 2. These systems partially support HAUTI surveillance information that can be accessed by ICPs just one at a time.ICPs use the LIS to collect patients’ urine/blood culture tests and results. If the patients’ culture results are positive, they are suspected to be HAUTI. The suspected patients are assigned to the ICPs for further investigation. In order to rule out the community-associated urinary tract infection (CAUTI), the ICPs can access the IMIS to acquire the patients’ hospital admission records and the EMR systems to acquire their clinical data. The suspected patients are under comprehensive medical review and bedside investigation. If the patients’ conditions meet the CDC's HAUTI case definitions, they are confirmed to be true HAUTI cases. The ICPs complete the true HAUTI patients’ HAI cards for follow-up and prevention procedures. The required information can be acquired from the EMR systems. During hospitalization, all patients are routinely monitored by ICPs to ensure that HAI cases can be detected.The iHAUTISIS consists of case detection, data services, case management, and visualization dashboard modules, as shown in Fig. 3. It is designed for integration of HAUTI surveillance data from existing EMR systems to support HAUTI surveillance practice.The case detection module is primarily designed based on a discriminant function with six variables (fever, urine culture, blood culture, routine urinalysis, antibiotic use, and invasive devices) for detection of suspected HAUTI cases [30]. A patient's discriminant score can be computed with the values of variables. If the patient's score is less than a cut-off point, then he/she is classified to a non-HAUTI case; otherwise he/she is classified to a HAUTI case.The data services module, which consists of data collection service functions, is used to extract required surveillance data from EMR systems, and transform them into standardized formats. Each data service is associated with a specific task for data retrieval and has standard interfaces to access the underlying EMR systems. There are six data collection service functions corresponding to the six surveillance variables (fever, urine culture, blood culture, routine urinalysis, antibiotic use, and invasive devices) as indicated in [30]. In addition, each patient's signs and symptoms, and clinical data, such as patient profile, multiple drug resistance (MDR) reports, and radiology images and reports, are also collected. All data are integrated into the surveillance information database, as shown in Fig. 3.The case management module handles a patient's state change based on the patient state transition diagram (Fig. 1). There are five major steps involved in the case management module as follows:(i)When a patient is admitted, the case management module assigns “unsuspected” state to the patient, and initiates the HAUTI case detection module to monitor the patient's conditions.When a patient is changed to “suspected” state, the case management module assigns “suspected” state to the patient, and sends an email and a short-message to the responsible ICP to conduct further chart review and bedside investigation.When a patient is changed to “confirmed” state, the case management module assigns “confirmed” state to the patient, and sends a reminder to the responsible ICP to complete the patient's infection card by providing the patient's HAUTI related information such as clinical data, microbiology reports of culture results, and antibiogram, etc.When a patient is excluded from a “suspected” case, the case management module assigns “unsuspected” state to the patient, and initiates the HAUTI case detection module to monitor the patient's conditions.After treatment, if a patient is discharged from the hospital, the case management module removes the patient from the state. However, if the patient still stays in the hospital because of other conditions, the case management module moves the patient to the “unsuspected” state.To facilitate the ICPs for better management of patients and their states change during their hospitalization, we designed an integrated tabular view as a visualization dashboard (Fig. 4). At the top of Fig. 4, patients’ clinical data are presented as variables displayed on “Application services” list. In this example, there are six variables fever, urine culture (culture order (U)), blood culture (culture order (B)), routine urinalysis (Urine routine), antibiotic use (Anti), and invasive devices (UTI devices). ICPs can select appropriate variables by dragging the variable tabs from the “Application services” list to the “Selected items” list. In this example, the selected items are fever and antibiotic use. The variables are then integrated with other patient information such as name, gender, bed number, etc., and displayed in the mid table area of the dashboard. If a variable is at a high/low risk of HAUTI, it is presented as a red icon ()/green icon (). For example, if a patient's temperature >38°C, then the variable, fever, is presented as a red icon (), as shown in Fig. 4.At the very top of Fig. 4, the patients are grouped into “unsuspected”, “suspected”, and “confirmed”. For example, if “suspected” tab is clicked, all the patients in “suspected” state are listed in the table. An ICP can browse an individual patient's detailed clinical data by clicking the tab (). A window is then popped up, as shown in Fig. 5, to show more detailed surveillance information, including patient profile, antibiotic treatments, fever records, white blood cell count (WBC) results, invasive device use records, culture and MDR reports, and chest images/reports. If the tab “culture reports and MDR” is clicked, the popup window presents the patient's culture tests history. If we want to know the detailed MDR report of a test, we can click the “detail” tab (under MDR column) associated with that test.Although the system can automatically detect a suspected HAUTI case, the ICPs still need to make decision on whether the suspected case is a true case. Thus, if ICPs confirm a suspected HAUTI case to be a true case, the ICP can click theicon to move the patient to the “confirmed” group, or otherwise click theicon to move the patient to the “unsuspected” group.We adopted Adobe Flex technology to implement the visualization of surveillance information, which can run on all major browsers using Adobe Flash Player software [31]. Therefore, ICPs can use a laptop or mobile devices to access the system and the patients’ HAUTI related information to perform HAUTI surveillance tasks at any time and anywhere.With the support of different systems, ICPs may perform varied tasks for their HAI surveillance practice. Thus, we used the generic HAI model presented in Section 2 as a common ground to compare the surveillance tasks required to perform when using the two different systems. When using the eCBSIS and iHAUTISIS to support HAUTI surveillance, we can compare the surveillance tasks performed by ICPs for each patient state. Table 1summarizes three surveillance task groups corresponding to the three patient states when using the eCBSIS and iHAUTISIS, respectively. For example, to detect a suspected patient from the unsuspected group, an ICP has to check the patient's culture tests results when using the eCBSIS; however, the ICP does not need to do anything when using the iHAUTISIS because the system can detect the suspected cases automatically.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this study, we developed an iHAUTISIS with a visualization dashboard for facilitating the HAUTI surveillance tasks and reducing ICPs’ workload. The system can collect data relevant to HAUTI surveillance from the different EMR systems automatically. We also proposed a generic model as a common ground for comparisons between different systems, in terms of a patient's state and the time spent on the surveillance tasks performed by ICPs for the patient in that state. This makes comparisons more precise and understandable.With increased adoption of EMR systems of EMR systems, the development of the integrated HAI surveillance information systems would be more and more cost-effective. Moreover, the iHAUTISIS adopted web-based technology that enables ICPs to online access patient's surveillance information using laptops or mobile devices. Thus, the system can further facilitate the HAI surveillance.The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.