@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Topology optimization of frequency responses of fluid–structure interaction systems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Topology optimization is applied to fluid–structure interaction systems.A displacement/pressure formulation is used to analyse the coupled systems.The proposed optimization procedure is based on the BESO method.The objective is to minimize the frequency response of the coupled systems.The proposed method proves to be effective and efficient for 2D and 3D problems.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Topology optimization,Fluid–structure interaction,Frequency response,BESO,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
This paper presents a topology optimization method for the frequency response of a multiphysics system involving fluid–structure interaction. The finite element analysis of the system is carried out based on theus/pfformulation. The structural domain is governed by the linear equation of elasticity and expressed in terms of the displacement,us, and the fluid domain is described by Helmholtz equation via the primary variable of pressure, pf. The coupling conditions are the equilibrium and kinematic compatibilities at the fluid–structure interface. The optimization procedure used in this work is based on the bi-directional evolutionary structural optimization (BESO). Due to the binary characteristics of the BESO method of adding/removing material, the methodology proposed here circumvents some problems faced by the traditional density based optimization methods, especially concerning the fluid–structure interface during the optimization process. The proposed methodology can be applied to various engineering problems such as noise reduction in passenger compartments in automobiles and aircraft, and vibration control of submerged structures. Several numerical examples are presented demonstrating that the proposed BESO method can be used for the topology optimization of these kinds of multiphysics problems effectively and efficiently for 2D and 3D cases.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
In the past few decades topology optimization has been used to improve the characteristics and increase the performance of a wide variety of systems. The basic idea is to find an optimal distribution of material in a structural design domain, considering the objective function and design constraints. A number of different topology optimization approaches have been developed including the homogenization method [1], the solid isotropic material with penalization (SIMP) method [2,3], the evolutionary structural optimization (ESO) method [4,5], and the level set method [6,7].Topology optimization has been extended to various dynamic design problems. Among early works of topology optimization considering dynamic response are those by Diaz and Kikuchi [8], Ma et al. [9,10] and Xie and Steven [11,12]. Since then, many other studies have been carried out to develop topology optimization techniques for dynamic problems [13–22].Although structural optimization involving dynamic response has been investigated by many researchers, only a few have explored the frequency response problems involving fluid–structure interaction systems, e.g. Duhring et al. [23], Akl et al. [24], Yoon [25,26], Niu et al. [27], Zhang et al. [28,29] and Shu et al. [30]. Optimization of the frequency response of fluid–structure systems is of great importance in many practical engineering problems such as noise reduction in automobiles and aircraft, fatigue of offshore structures, and performance of musical instruments.Du and Olhoff [31,32] have considered vibrating structures in a surrounding acoustic medium and conducted the topological design with respect to optimum sound pressure characteristics. In these works, the elastic structure is placed in an acoustic medium and both structural and acoustic domains do not change their locations. However, when coupled problems are considered and the acoustic-structure interfaces can change their locations during the optimization process, the classical density based topology optimization methods become arduous [25]. In these methods, the interfaces are not explicitly defined due to the existence of intermediate density elements and the coupling boundary conditions cannot be modelled straightforwardly. In order to circumvent this problem, Yoon et al. [25] have proposed mixed finite elements, where the structural and acoustic domains are overlapped and the acoustic medium is approximated by equating the elastic shear modulus to zero. More recently, Shu et al. [30] have extended the level set based topology optimization to a class of acoustic-structural problems, in order to minimize the response (pressure/displacement) of the coupled systems.In this context, the aim of this work is to develop a topology optimization procedure to minimize frequency responses of coupled fluid–structure systems using the evolutionary topology optimization methodology. An alternative approach to topology optimization of acoustic-structural interaction systems using an extended BESO method [33,34] for the frequency response function is presented. Previous works on ESO/BESO methods for dynamic problems have been mainly focused on the frequency optimization [12,35–38].In the present work, the classical displacement–pressure(us/pf)formulation [39,40] is used for the analysis of the fluid–structure interaction. The solid domain is governed by the elasticity equation and the fluid domain by Helmholtz equation. The two separate fields are fully coupled by the surface-coupling integral in each step of the optimization process, which guarantees equilibrium conditions on the acoustic-structural interface. The main advantage of thisus/pfformulation is the reduced number of the degree of freedom necessary to describe the fluid domain – only one is required per node. For the three-dimensional cases this feature leads to a significant saving on the computational time. This formulation has as primal variables the displacement,us, and the pressure, pf, which are the same variables of interesting in the optimization process. Detailed descriptions of this formulation and various other for coupled fluid–structure systems can be found in the articles contained in Sandberg and Ohayon [41].This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the governing equations and the finite element model for the acoustic-structural coupled system. In Section 3, the topology optimization problem for the frequency response minimization is formulated and the sensitivity analysis is carried out. Section 4 shows the numerical results achieved with the proposed methodology. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section 5.A sketch of the coupled fluid–structure system to be optimized in this work is shown in Fig. 1, whereΩsis the structure domain;Ωfis the fluid domain; Γsfis the interface between the domains;nsandnfare the boundaries unit normal vectors pointing outward from the structural and fluid domain, respectively;nis the unit normal vector at the interface pointing outward from the fluid domain.Some assumptions are made in order to model the coupled fluid–structure system [42,43]. The structural part of the system is considered to be homogeneous, isotropic and undertaking small deformation. Thus, the classical linear elastodynamic equation for a continuum medium is used:(1)∇·σs−ρs∂2us∂t2=0inΩswhere∇·σsis the divergence of the Cauchy stress tensor;usis the displacement vector field of the structure andρsis the mass density of the structure.In this paper the fluid medium is considered to be inviscid, irrotational and having only small translation, the wave equation for the medium can be derived in terms of the sound pressure:(2)1c02∂2pf∂t2−∇2pf=0inΩfwherepfis the pressure scalar field andc0is the constant speed of sound in the fluid.In the structural domain, the Dirichlet boundary condition is considered:(3)us=0inΓsdand the Neumann boundary conditions:(4)σsns=fsinΓsc(5)σsns=pfnfinΓsfEq. (3) represents the structural displacement constraint applied to the structure; Eq. (4) is the prescribed external load,fs, applied to the structure; Eq. (5) indicates the action of pressure forces exerted by the fluid on the structure and represents the equilibrium condition at the interface between the domains.In the fluid domain, the following Dirichlet boundary condition is considered:(6)pf=p¯finΓfdand the Neumann boundary conditions:(7)∇pfnf=0inΓfr(8)∇pfnf=ρf∂2us∂t2nsinΓsfwhereρfis the mass density of the fluid medium.Eq. (6) is the prescribed pressure applied to fluid; Eq. (7) expresses the rigid wall boundary condition; Eq. (8) represents the kinematic compatibility of the normal displacements at the interface of the fluid and structural domains.In order to obtain the finite element discretization of the system, the weak form of the differential equilibrium equations is derived [44–46].In the weighted residual approximation of the structural domain, Eq. (1) is multiplied by a set of weight functions,ws, and integrated over the structural domain Ωs(9)∫ΩswsT(∇·σs−ρs∂2us∂t2)dV=0Using Green׳s theorem, the weak form of the equilibrium equation for the structural domain can be written as(10)∫Ωs(ws)Tρs∂2us∂t2dV+∫Ωs(∇ws)TσsdV=∫Γsf(ws)TpfnfdS+∫Γsc(ws)TfsdSSimilarly, the weak form of the fluid domain can be achieved. Eq. (2) is multiplied by a set of weight functions,wf, and integrated over the fluid domain Ωf(11)∫Ωfwf(1c02∂2pf∂t2−∇2pf)dV=0and by Green׳s theorem the weak form of the wave equation for the fluid domain becomes(12)∫Ωfwf1c02∂2pf∂t2dV+∫Ωf∇wf∇pfdV=∫Γsfρfwf∂2us∂t2nsdSIntroducing a discretization of the structural and fluid domains in finite elements and proposing a nodal approximation of the displacement and pressure fields using Galerkin method, the structural domain can be described as a continuum medium(13)∫ΩsNsTρsNsdVu˜¨s+∫Ωs(∇Ns)TDs∇NsdVu˜s=∫ΓsfNsTnNfdSp˜f+∫ΓscNsTfsdSand the fluid domain written as(14)∫Ωf1c02NfTNfdVp˜¨f+∫Ωf(∇Nf)T∇NfdVp˜f=−∫ΓsfρfNfTnTNsdSu˜¨swhereNsandNfare the shape functions for the structural and fluid domains, respectively, (Ns=wsandNf=wf),Dsis the constitutive matrix for the isotropic structure material,u˜sandp˜fare the nodal approximations of the displacement and pressure, respectively.The finite element matrices can be written as(15)Ks=∫Ωs(∇Ns)TDs∇NsdV(16)Ms=ρs∫ΩsNsTNsdV(17)Kf=∫Ωf(∇Nf)T∇NfdV(18)Mf=1c02∫ΩfNfTNfdV(19)f=∫ΓscNsTfsdSwhereKsandMsare the stiffness and mass matrices of the structural domain;KfandMfare the stiffness and mass matrices of the fluid domain;fis the nodal vector of the external forces applied to structure.Then, defining the spatial coupling matrix as(20)Lsf=∫ΓsfNsTnNfdSThe system of equations for the coupled fluid–structure model, Eqs. (13) and (14), can be stated in a matrix form as(21)[Ms0ρfLsfTMf]{u˜¨sp˜¨f}+[Ks−Lsf0Kf]{u˜sp˜f}={f0}Considering that the external excitation load is applied harmonically in the system,fs=|fs|ejωt, the response of the system is considered to be in the form ofus=|us|ejωtandpf=|pf|ejωt, where ω is the excitation frequency of the system.For the harmonically applied loads, Eq. (1) can be written in the classical form of the elastodynamic equation as(22)∇·σs+ω2ρsus=0inΩsand Eq. (2) becomes Helmholtz equation for a fluid domain(23)∇2pf+ω2c02pf=0inΩfThen, the matrix system of equations in Eq. (21) for a harmonic case becomes(24)[Ks−ω2Ms−Lsf−ρfLsfTω2Kf−ω2Mf]{u˜sp˜f}={f0}Eq. (24) represents the linear system which describes the fluid–structure interaction problem.In this section the optimization problem is stated, the sensitivity analysis is derived and the evolutionary procedure is described.In the evolutionary topology optimization methods for structural problems, the design variable, xi, is restricted to discrete values 1 or 0 (0 for hard-kill or xminfor the soft-kill procedure), which corresponds to solid and void elements, respectively. Then, no intermediate density elements are allowed during the optimization procedures [34]. Herein, it is proposed that the extended BESO method can substitute the solid elements by fluid or void ones. With no intermediate densities; solid, void and fluid regions as well as the interface between the domains are explicitly defined.In this work, the objective is to minimize the amplitude of the fluid-structural frequency responses of the coupled system by changing the topology of the design domain. Considering structural volume constraints, the evolutionary optimization problem for frequency response minimization can be stated as(25)Minimize|ufs|Subjectto:Zfsufs=ffsVf−∑i=1nelvixi=0xi=xminor1whereufs={u˜sp˜f}Tis the vector containing the displacement and pressure responses;Zfsufs=ffsstands for the equilibrium equation of the coupled system, Eq. (24); viis the volume of an individual structural element, Vfthe prescribed final structural volume and nel is the total number of structural elements in the design domain. The binary design variable xideclares the presence of a completely solid element, xi=1, or a void/fluid element,xi=xmin(e.g.xmin=10−4).In the evolutionary procedure, the sensitivity of the objective function is required in order to rank the efficiency of the elements after the finite element analysis of the model. The sensitivity of the system׳s responses due to a structural element removal can be obtained by deriving the equilibrium equation with respect to the design variables(26)∂(Zfsufs)∂xi=∂ffs∂xiApplying the chain rule and considering that the vector of external loadsffsdoes not change during the optimization process, the previous equation becomes(27)∂Zfs∂xiufs+Zfs∂ufs∂xi=0Isolating the derivative of the system׳s response, we have(28)∂ufs∂xi=−Zfs−1∂Zfs∂xiufsIn order to determine the change of the response in specific degrees of freedom ujof the system due to the ith element removal, a vectorfjis introduced. This location vector is a unity force vector with value in the jth degree of freedom and 0 in all the other positions [47]. Multiplying the derivative of the system׳s response, (Eq. (28)), byfj(29)∂uj∂xi=fjT∂ufs∂xiThe substitution of Eq. (28) in Eq. (29) results in(30)∂uj∂xi=−fjTZfs−1∂Zfs∂xiufsThe equilibrium equation of the coupled system in which only the location vectorfjacts is expressed as(31)Zfsuj=fjwhereuj={u˜sp˜f}Tis the response of the system considering only the location vector as external force.The response of the coupled system under the location vector load can be written as(32)uj=Zfs−1fjWith the substitution of Eq. (32) in Eq. (30), the sensitivity of the jth degree of freedom ujdue to the ith element removal is obtained:(33)∂uj∂xi=−ujT∂Zfs∂xiufsNeglecting the alteration inKf,MfandLfsglobal matrices due to the modification of the density of the ith element in the design domain, Eq. (33) can be rewritten as(34)∂uj∂xi=−ujT∂(Ks−ω2·Ms)Zfs∂xiufsAn interpolation of the material is necessary in order to obtain the gradient information of the design variable. A number of different schemes are presented in the literature considering the interpolation of the material between xminand 1. Huang and Xie [48] presented an efficient interpolation scheme for frequency optimization problems in order to avoid artificial localized modes in areas with low-densities. In this interpolation, the material density, ρ, and Young׳s modulus, E, are functions of the design variable, xi, as(35)ρ(xi)=xiρE(xi)=[xmin−xminp1−xminp(1−xip)+xip]E0<xmin≤xi≤1where p is the penalty exponent factor.Following this interpolation, the derivative of the global matricesKsandMswith respect to the density variable, xi, can be expressed as(36)∂Ms∂xi=Msi∂Ks∂xi=1−xmin1−xminppxip−1KsiwhereMsiandKsiare the elemental mass matrix and stiffness matrix, respectively, for the structural elements.The sensitivity number is used in order to rank the elemental sensitivities on the design domain in the evolutionary procedure [49,37].Using the proposed material interpolation and the sensitivity of the objective function expressed in Eq. (34), the sensitivity number, αi, for minimizing the objective function can be stated as(37)αi=−∂uj∂xi=(uji)T(1−xmin1−xminppxip−1Ksi−ω2Msi)ufsiConsidering the design variable for the solid, (xi=1), void and fluid elements,(xi=xmin):(38)αi={(uji)T(1−xmin1−xminppKsi−ω2Msi)ufsi,xi=1(uji)T(xminp−1−xminp1−xminppKsi−ω2Msi)ufsi,xi=xminConsidering thatxmin→0(in this workxmin=10−4), Eq. (38) becomes(39)αi={(uji)T(pKsi−ω2Msi)ufsi,xi=1−(uji)T(ω2Msi)ufsi,xi=xminFor some problems the excitation frequency may vary in a certain range. Several approaches are used in the literature to deal with this matter, Yoon [26] uses an integral function to calculate the objective function for excitation frequency varying in an interval range. Zhang and Kang [50] calculate the objective function for the dynamic compliance in a frequency range using the Kreisselmeier–Steinhauser (KS) aggregated function and take sampling frequencies in the interval of interest. In the present work, a number of discrete frequencies equally distributed within the frequency range are considered for the objective function calculation. Then, the sensitivity number given in Eq. (39) is calculated for each frequency and the arithmetic mean of the sensitivity numbers is used in the sensitivity analysis. In the examples considered in this work, 10 uniformly distributed sampling frequencies are selected to represent the interval range.A filter scheme can be applied over the mesh in order to smooth the sensitivity number to avoid the checkerboard problem during the optimization [51].The procedure used here to smooth the sensitivity number is described in detail by Huang and Xie [33]. The filter starts averaging the elemental sensitivity numbers, Eq. (39), to the mesh nodes according to their nodal connectivity, as follows:(40)αjn=∑i=1nnoViαi∑i=1nnoViwhere αjnis the nodal sensitivity number and nno is the total number of elements connected to the node j.These nodal sensitivity numbers must be transformed back into elemental sensitivities by projecting a sub-domain Ψi(see Fig. 2) with length scale rminand centred in the ith element. All the nodes inside Ψimust have their nodal sensitivity numbers averaged back to the ith elemental level as(41)αis=∑j=1nodw(rij)αjn∑j=1nodw(rij)where αisis the smoothed sensitivity number for each element, rijis the distance between the node j and the centre of the element i, nod is the total number of nodes inside the design domain andw(rij)is a weight factor that values (rmin−rij) for nodes inside Ψiand 0 for outside nodes.Huang and Xie [33] have showed that the above sensitivity numbers can be averaged with their previous iteration numbers to help in the stabilization of the optimization process, as follows:(42)αif=(αis)k+(αis)k−12where k is the current iteration number and αifis the actual sensitivity number used to ranking the elements. This procedure was demonstrated to be an effective way to avoid convergence problems.In the beginning of the optimization process, the initial guess design may start with 100% of the design domain, Vi=1.0, or with a percentage of the design domain,Vi<1.0. For some cases, the optimization process is carried out with a constant structural volume, in this case Vi=Vf. Then, the structural material is only replaced in the design domain. In the case where the final volume is different from the initial volume, structural material should be added or removed until the target volume is reached. In the BESO method, the parameter ER indicates the percentage of the volume that increase or decrease in each interaction. In order to keep the integrity of the system, other important parameter of the BESO method is AR, which declares the maximum allowable structural volume addition per iteration. Details about the definition and implementation of these parameters can be found in [33,37].The BESO method allows structural material to be removed and added in the initial domain covered by a finite element mesh until a solution is found. After the sensitivity analysis the elements in the design domain are sorted in a crescent order according to their sensitivity number values, αif(Eq. (42)), making a sensitivity list. In order to minimize the objective function, an update scheme is adopted. Based on the ER and AR parameters two limits are established in the sensitivity list, a removing limit and an adding limit. Elements with the sensitivity number lower than the removing limit are removed,xi=xmin, elements above the adding limit became structural elements,xi=1, and elements in between these limits remain with the same propertyxi.In the update scheme, if a structural element must be removed, it is replaced by a void or a fluid element. Depending on the design problem, if a void cavity is not allowed to exist, all structural elements are replaced by fluid ones. If a void cavity is allowed to exist, if the structural element to be removed has at least one fluid element neighbour it is replaced by a fluid element, otherwise, it becomes a void element. This scheme allows the optimization process to be set to have a final topology with three phases (structure, void and fluid) or only two phases (structure and fluid).After the topology update in the system, the interface coupling matrix,Lsf, is calculated again considering all alterations in the properties of the elements. Thus, in the next iteration, the boundary between the fluid and structural domain are defined properly for the finite element analysis.Once the prescribed final volume Vfis achieved, the target volume remains constant. The algorithm evolves until a convergence criterion with a predefined error tolerance τ is satisfied and a minimum number of iterations related to a parameter N are reached. This convergence error is estimated as(43)error=|∑k=1NCn−k+1−∑k=1NCn−N−k+1|∑i=1NCn−k+1≤τThe main steps of the present BESO methodology are given as follows:1.Discretize the fluid–structure system using the finite element method, define loads and boundary conditions.Define the optimization parameters: Vi, Vf, ER, ARmaxand p.Carry out the finite element analysis for the coupled problem.Calculate the elemental sensitivity numbers.Apply the filter scheme, use the historical information to average the sensitivity number.Determine the target volume for the next iteration. Adding and removing elements according to the procedure described previously.Repeat steps 2–7 until the volume constraint Vfis reached and the convergence criterion, Eq. (43), is satisfied.In this section, some examples of optimization considering the presented fluid–structure model are solved using the extended BESO method. The first example is about the displacement minimization of one vibrating structure inside a fluid cavity. In the second example is examined the sound pressure minimization in the edge of a fluid cavity. The third example is for minimization of the displacement in the central point of a clamped beam vibrating between two fluid cavities. The last example is the generalization of the methodology for a three-dimensional cases.This first example considers a T-shape structure vibrating inside a fluid cavity with an external load applied harmonically to the structure, Fig. 3. This model was investigated for Yoon et al. [25], using for the optimization process the RAMP interpolation, [52]. The optimization process aims to minimize the amplitude of the vertical displacement in the bottom of the structure for a certain frequency of the applied external load. For the optimization analysis, this example uses similar parameters for the geometry model and material properties of those used in [25].The structural domain is divided into two parts, the non-design part, in which the external load is applied and the design domain which should be optimized. In the fluid medium the rigid wall boundary condition is applied to all external boundaries.The material properties of the structural domain (steel) are Young׳s modulus of 200GPa, density of 7700kg/m3 and Poisson׳s ratio of 0.3. The fluid domain (mercury) has density of 13,600kg/m3 and the speed of sound in the medium of 1450m/s.The coupled system is optimized for three different cases. In all cases, the initial guess design starts at 60% of the structural domain and the optimization process is conducted at a constant structural volume fraction.The BESO parameters used for the three cases areVi=Vf=0.60, ER=0.015,ARmax=0.015,rmin=0.06m, τ=0.002, N=5 and p=1.5. The finite element mesh used has 180,600 four-node quadrilateral elements.The objective function is the response of the system considering the mean vertical displacement at the bottom of the structural domain.In the first case, the BESO method is applied to optimize the system considering the excitation frequency of the external load of ω=20Hz.The update scheme of removing and adding element allows the presence of three phases in the design domain. After the sensitivity analysis if a structural element should be removed, it is replaced for a fluid element when it has at least one fluid element neighbour; otherwise, it becomes a void element.Fig. 4shows the pressure distribution for the initial design and the pressure distribution for the optimized topology found with the BESO method.The evolution histories of the objective function and the structural topology can be observed in Fig. 5. The volume fraction is constant at 60% of the design domain. Thus, all the minimization of the mean displacement at the bottom of the structure is due to the redistribution of the structural material in the design domain.Fig. 6shows the frequency response of the system, considering the mean displacement in the region of the applied external load. The excitation frequency for optimization, (ω=20Hz), is located at the left side of the fundamental frequency of the coupled system. Therefore, as a consequence of the optimization process the fundamental frequency is shifted up from 25Hz to 42Hz approximately, avoiding the resonance.Due to the proximity of the excitation frequency (20Hz) and the fundamental frequency, approximately 25Hz, the optimization process is able to reduce more than 80% the objective function by redistributing the material in the design domain.In the second case the BESO method is applied to optimize the system considering the excitation frequency of the external load of ω=120Hz. Two different update schemes of the topology are applied. The first one is the same removing/adding scheme from the first case. The second one is an alternative update scheme, in which all removed structural elements from the design domain become a fluid element. Thus, the design domain using this scheme presents only two phases at any time of the optimization process. No void phase is present in this case.In order to compare the results, the optimization is done considering the same parameters for the two cases and the external load harmonically applied with the frequency of ω=120Hz.Fig. 7shows the pressure distribution for the initial design and the pressure distribution for the two final optimized topologies considering the two different update schemes.The alternative update scheme has a practical importance considering that in many engineering problems the fluid can go inside the submerged structures.For these cases, the volume fraction of the structure remains constant at 60% during the optimization. The optimization process continues until the objective function satisfies the convergence criterion. The evolution histories of the objective function and the structural topologies can be seen in Fig. 8.In Fig. 8 it is possible to observe that the colour map of the sensitivity numbers of the elements is more uniformly smoothed in the final topology than in the intermediary ones, indicating that the material is more equally contributing to the structural integrity.Despite the fact that the optimized topologies are noticeably different, the final value of the objective functions for the two case are very close,0.665×10−5m(three phases) and0.671×10−5m(two phases).The optimization case with the presence of fluid inside the structure shows a topology without internal bars, what can be desirable for the practical situation in engineering.The frequency response of the system is shown in Fig. 9for the initial and optimized designs. For the excitation frequency of ω=120Hz it is possible to observe that the reduction of the objective function after the optimization is lower than the reduction for the frequency of ω=20Hz. This result is expected once the frequency of excitation is away from any natural frequency, and the responses of the system are already smaller in comparison with the responses closer to the fundamental frequency.The frequency response curves for the final topologies are similar in the range analysed (0–150Hz). For both cases the methodology is able to reduce the objective function in approximately 34%.The interface between the fluid and the structure is well defined during the optimization progress for all cases analysed. This directed delimitation between fluid and structure is one of the shortcomings of traditional topology optimization methods based on gradient when applied to this category of multiphysics problems.The minimization of the sound pressure in a specific region is investigated in this example. Fig. 10presents the coupled system which consists of an inner fluid cavity where a harmonically pressure is applied with amplitude ofPin=1Pa. A clamped curved beam should be designed to minimize the sound pressure in the top line of the outer fluid cavity.The two fluid cavities combined are the fluid domain of the system. In the bottom of the fluid domain is applied the boundary condition of p=0 and in the other external walls are applied the rigid wall boundary conditionn·∇p=0.For the optimization process, the full structural domain is considered as the design domain. The optimization starts at full design domain and the final volume fraction restriction is 92%.The objective function is the mean sound pressure in the top line of the system considering an excitation frequency range starting in ω=6Hz until ω=7Hz. The problem can be physically interpreted as a loudspeaker located in the inner cavity and the objective is to design the structural domain for minimizing the noise at the top line at the outer cavity.In terms of material properties, the structural domain has Young׳s modulus of 100kPa, density of 100kg/m3 and Poisson׳s ratio of 0.3. The fluid domain has density of 1.21kg/m3 and the speed of sound in the media is 343m/s.The BESO parameters used are Vi=1.00, Vf=0.92, ER=0.005,ARmax=0.005,rmin=0.05m, τ=0.001, N=5 and p=1.5. The finite element mesh used has 129,240 four-node quadrilateral elements.In this case, the update scheme of removing/adding element allows the presence of three phases in the design domain. Fig. 11shows the pressure distribution for the initial design and the pressure distribution for the optimized topology found with the BESO method.Fig. 12shows the colour maps of the displacement in the structural domain for the initial and the optimized design. The displacement is enlarged by 1000 times in both figures.The evolution history of the objective function is shown in Fig. 13. During the first 18th iterations the optimization process removes/adds elements in a rate that the volume fraction reducing at 0.5% for iteration. After reaching the prescribed final volume, 0.92%, the optimization process continues with constant volume until the convergence criterion is reached at the 26th iteration.The frequency response of the system is shown in Fig. 14for the initial and optimized designs. The frequency range of optimization is located before the second natural frequency of the original coupled system. As a consequence of the optimization process, the gap between the first and second natural frequencies has increased in the optimized system.By moving the position of the natural frequencies of the coupled system, the proposed methodology is able to reduce the objective function in 93% in the frequency range analysed in this case.This third example investigates a clamped beam (structural domain) vibrating between two fluid cavities (fluid domain), the coupled system is shown in Fig. 15. The pressure is imposed harmonically in the top and in the bottom of the system,Pin=1.0cosωtPa, and it is transmitted to the beam by the interface. The objective function is to minimize the amplitude of the vertical displacement in the central point of the beam for a frequency range of the applied pressure,ω=(30–50)Hz.In all external walls of the fluid domain are applied the rigid wall boundary condition,n·∇p=0.The material properties of the structure are Young׳s modulus of 1.0GPa, density of 2700kg/m3 and Poisson׳s ratio of 0.3. And the fluid has density of 1.2kg/m3 and the speed of sound in the media is 343m/s.The whole structure is considered to be the design domain. Considering that only 80% of the structural domain volume material can be used, the optimization is done at a constant volume. The initial guess design with 80% of the structural domain is shown at Fig. 15.In the optimization process, the following parameters are used:Vi=Vf=0.80, ER=0.005,rmin=0.02m,ARmax=0.005,τ=0.001, N=5 and p=1.5. The finite element mesh used for the analysis of the coupled system has 360,000 four-node quadrilateral elements.The interface between the domains can be modified during the optimization process. The pressure distribution in the fluid domain can be seen in Fig. 16for the initial design and the optimized topology found with the BESO method.The sensitivity number distributions can be seen atFig. 17 for the initial guess design and for the final topology after the convergence.The frequency responses of the system, considering the amplitude of the vertical displacement in the central point of the beam, are shown in Fig. 18for the initial and the final design. The fundamental frequency of the coupled system is included in the frequency range of optimization for the initial guess design. During the optimization process, the fundamental frequency is shifted up and after the optimization it is away from the frequency range of optimization, as can be seen in Fig. 18.The evolution history of the objective function is shown in Fig. 19. After 48 iterations, the convergence criterion is reached and the process ends with a reduction of the objective function by 82% of its initial value.In this example, the proposed methodology is extended to a three dimensional case. Fig. 20shows a 3D version of the system analysed in the first example, Fig. 3. The coupled system presented intends to be a more realistic model of a T-shape structure vibrating inside a fluid domain. The external load is applied harmonically to the bottom of the structure and the upper part of the nondesign domain is clamped like showed in Fig. 20. As in the first example, the objective function is to minimize the mean amplitude of the vertical displacement in the bottom area of the structure.The structural domain consists of the non-design part and the design domain which is designed in order to minimize the objective function. The structural and the fluid domains are coupled by the interface which can be modified during the optimization process. In the fluid medium, the rigid wall boundary condition is applied to all external boundaries.The material properties of the structural domain (steel) are the Young׳s modulus of 200GPa, density of 7700kg/m3 and Poisson׳s ratio of 0.3. And the fluid domain (mercury) has density of 13,600kg/m3 and the speed of sound in the media is 1450m/s.The initial guess design starts at 59% of the structural domain and it is considered that the final structure is restricted to 40% of the complete structural domain volume.The BESO parameters used in this 3D case are Vi=0.59, Vf=0.40, ER=0.01,ARmax=0.01,rmin=0.035m, τ=0.005, N=5 and p=1.5. The finite element mesh used has 264,600 eight-node brick elements. The BESO method is applied to optimize the system considering the excitation frequency of the external load of ω=50Hz.The update scheme of removing and adding elements is set to allow the presence of three phases in the design domain. Fig. 21shows the pressure distribution for the initial design and the pressure distribution for the optimized topology found with the BESO method.For better visualization of the structural topology, the structural domain is plotted in Fig. 22with the sensitivity number distribution.Fig. 23shows the frequency response of the system for the initial and optimized design. As observed in the 2D case, the optimization frequency is in the left side of the fundamental frequency in the FRF for the initial system. During the optimization, the fundamental frequency is shifted up avoiding the resonance and decreasing the objective functionThe evolution histories of the objective function and the volume fraction are showed in Fig. 24. The minimum value of the objective function is verified in the 33rd iteration. Nevertheless, since the final volume is not reached, the process should continue decreasing the structural volume fraction. After the optimization process reaches the final prescribed volume, 40%, at the 40th iteration, the process continues until the 59th iteration at a constant volume when the convergence criterion is achieved.For the frequency analysed (ω=50Hz), the optimization procedure has reduced the objective function by approximately 60% compared with the initial value.The update scheme of adding/removing material for the three-dimensional model has kept the interface between the fluid and structure well defined during the optimization progress. As happened for the 2D cases for this 3D model the proposed methodology does not require any special function to interpolate the fluid and structure in order to determine the interface.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper we have extended the BESO method to a class of fluid–structure interaction systems considering frequency response minimization. The displacement/pressure(us/pf)formulation is used for the finite element analysis of the coupled systems. A new sensitivity analysis is presented for the coupled systems. Topology optimization problems with two different objectives have been considered: the pressure minimization in certain output points in the fluid domain and the minimization of the displacement at some specific points in the structural domain. For a number of different boundary conditions and excitation frequencies, the extended BESO method is capable of minimizing the objective function and converging to optimized topologies. Due to the characteristics of theus/pfformulation and the BESO method, the proposed methodology does not require any special interpolation scheme to define the interface between the fluid and the structure during the optimization process. This feature leads to a significant saving on the computational time, especially for 3D cases. The effectiveness of the proposed methodology has been demonstrated by a series of 2D and 3D systems. The high efficiency of the extended BESO method is proven by the fact that, for all 2D and 3D examples considered in this study, well converged solutions are obtained in less than 60 iterations.