@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
On the numerical implementation of the higher-order strain gradient-dependent plasticity theory and its non-classical boundary conditions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Finite element implementation of higher-order gradient plasticity theory is presented.Numerical implementation of higher-order boundary conditions at interfaces.Plastic strain gradients are calculated using weighted meshless method.Application to various size-dependent plasticity problems with surface effects.Special numerical treatment of a moving elastic-plastic boundary is proposed.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Gradient-dependent models,Microscopic boundary conditions,Size effect,Meshless methods,Finite element method,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
The higher-order gradient plasticity theory is successful in explaining the size effects encountered at the micron and submicron length scale. Due to the incorporation of spatial gradients of one or more internal variables in these theories and the associated non-classical boundary conditions, special types of elements in the finite element method maybe necessary. This makes the numerical implementation of this higher-order theory not straightforward. In this paper, a robust but straightforward numerical implementation of higher-order gradient-dependent plasticity theories is presented. The novelty of this paper is in (1) the application of the meshless methods, particularly the moving weighted least square method, combined with the finite element method for the numerical computation of plastic strain gradients, and (2) the numerical implementation of different types of higher-order microscopic boundary conditions at internal/external surfaces, interfaces, and moving elastic–plastic boundaries. The proposed numerical implementation algorithms can be easily adapted in the implementation of any form of higher-order gradient-dependent constitutive models. Examples of applying the current numerical approach is demonstrated for capturing mesh-objective shear band formation and size effect and boundary layer formation in thin films on elastic substrates and metal matrix composites with embedded elastic inclusions through the consideration of stiff, intermediate, and soft interfaces.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
There are numerous experimental results that indicate a size-dependent mechanical behavior of materials at the micron and submicron length scales, in the sense that “smaller is stronger”. Examples are increase in strength by decreasing: (a) the particle size of particle-reinforced composites while keeping the volume fraction constant e.g. [1–5]; (b) the diameter of micro-wires under torsion [6,7]; (c) the thickness of thin films under bending or uniaxial tension e.g. [8–12]; (d) the indentation depth in micro/nano-indentation tests e.g. [13–20]; and (e) the grain size of crystalline materials (the well-known Hall–Petch effect); the void size in porous media; and several others that have been convincingly demonstrated through small-scale mechanical testing techniques.Classical (local) continuum-based theories are size-independent and, therefore, fail to capture the aforementioned size effects. On the other hand, nonlocal higher-order gradient-dependent plasticity theories have been successful in predicting size effects. A large and increasing number of gradient-dependent plasticity theories with various mathematical structures have been proposed until now e.g. [21–37]. A critical overview of higher-order gradient plasticity theories as of 2004 was given by Gudmundson [30]. Recently, Hutchinson [38] has provided a profound analysis of the basis of strain gradient plasticity. An elegant thermodynamic framework for formulating higher-order gradient plasticity theories, in which the principle of virtual power is the central theme, have been thoroughly discussed in the recent monograph of Gurtin et al. [39] for small and large deformation problems and for polycrystalline and single crystal plasticity. Most of the gradient plasticity models have been founded based on the notion of geometrically necessary dislocations (GNDs) that scale with the plastic strain gradient e.g. [7,12,16].Although higher-order gradient-enhanced theories have provided many useful results, their numerical implementation is not straightforward, which is one of the most difficult tasks that hinder the wide use of such theories in solving various engineering problems. In gradient-dependent plasticity theory, the nonlocal yield condition and nonlocal flow rule are no longer algebraic equations but become higher-order partial differential equations. Therefore, most of the studies related to the numerical implementation of such theories have been done by introducing the plastic strains (or the equivalent plastic strain) as additional degrees of freedom besides the displacements. For this type of implementation, which can be identified as a mixed-type formulation, one should formulate new elements when using the finite element method, which results in solving a very large size of linear algebraic system of equations. Computational difficulties also arise due to the higher-order boundary conditions that are necessary from the mathematical point of view and have to be prescribed on the moving elastic-plastic boundary and external/internal boundaries e.g. [40–44]. Unlike C0-continuous elements suitable for commonly second-order classical differential equations of solid mechanics (e.g. local elasticity, local plasticity, and local damage), the governing equations of gradient-dependent models may enforce the need for interpolation functions that are C1-continuous. Even higher continuity is needed if fourth-order or higher-order gradient terms are incorporated, otherwise the gradient terms lose their presence [40–42,45,46]. The lack of robust C1-continuous elements motivated the development of various penalty-enhanced C0-continuous class functions, discontinuous and continuous/discontinuous Galerkin methods for the interpolation of the plastic/damage multipliers or other field variables such as stress and strain in the finite element context [47–50]. In this case, nodal degrees of freedom include nodal displacements and corresponding gradients, and kinematic constraints between displacement gradients are enforced via the Lagrange multiplier method.On the other hand, meshless methods (MMs), which are constructed in the sense that the approximation is entirely captured through nodes and not elements, have been used extensively to solve various engineering problems [51]. Similar to the finite element method (FEM), MMs approximates a scalar function, for example the effective (equivalent) plastic strain p, in terms of the material (Lagrangian) coordinates as(1)p(x,t)=∑m∈Sϕm(x)pm(t)whereϕmis the interpolation function andpmis the effective plastic strain value at nodal point m within the subdomain S. However, contrary to FEM,pm≠p(xm)in MMs such that the interpolation functions in Eq. (1) are only approximations and not interpolations. Generally, the approximation introduced in Eq. (1) is not complete in the desired order k, as such MMs can be divided into (1) those that increase the order of completeness by increasing the completeness of the interpolation functions intrinsically (i.e. increasing the order of the interpolation functions directly), and (2) those that modify the lower-order interpolation functions by introducing additional interpolation functions [52]. Among the first group, one can find several methods such as Smooth Particle Hydrodynamic (SPH), Reproduced Kernel Particle Method (RKPM), Least Square Method (LSM), and Moving Weighted Least Square Method (MWLSM). Whereas, in the second group, one can name methods like Partition of Unity Finite Element Method (PUFEM) and hp-clouds [51].For gradient-dependent plasticity models, the MWLSM can provide higher-order continuity which is solely dependent on the continuity of the weight function that is applied for defining the interpolation functions. In fact, this is the key motivation for using MMs as it is essential for a proper representation and integration of higher-order derivatives [53]. The application of MMs is exploited to analyze the gradient plasticity theories [53,54]. The application of MWLSM for approximating the two weak form equations governing the stress equilibrium condition and the plastic consistency condition in stress and strain spaces has been shown by Pamin et al. [54]. The application of two-dimensional LSM for implementing the gradient-enhanced plasticity models to capture shear bands was shown by Abu Al-Rub and Voyiadjis [45] through a staggered discretization approach. In the staggered approach, two levels of computation are introduced; outer (global) and inner (local) levels. In the outer-level the displacements are considered as nodal degrees of freedom and are determined in a classical manner by solving the stress equilibrium equation, while in the inner-level the effective plastic strain is considered as a nodal degree of freedom and is determined by solving the plastic consistency condition by applying the LSM. It is shown in Abu Al-Rub and Voyiadjis [45] that this method of implementation avoids using the numerically expensive C1-continuous condition on the interpolation function and penalty-enhanced C0 class functions for the interpolation of the plastic multipliers in the FEM context and also eliminates large modification of existing finite element codes. In this approach, the nonlocal consistency condition is transformed into a linear set of algebraic equations that depend on the material parameters and the current coordinates of the integration points (here we call them nodes). These sets of linear equations are solved for the plastic multiplier (Lagrange multiplier) at all nodes. This method of implementation later extended to 3D gradient-dependent damage models in Abu Al-Rub et al. [55]. Recently, Gan and Akin [56] have proposed based on LSM a novel finite element technique for computing the Laplacian of equivalent strains with C0 linear elements using the super-convergent patch second derivative recovery methods for structured and unstructured meshes. However, one of the major difficulties in the numerical implementation using MMs is the non-interpolatory character of the approximation. This means, unlike FEM interpolations, the approximation does not pass through the nodal parameter values [51], which can be stated as(2)ϕm(xn)≠δmnwhereϕmis themthinterpolation function evaluated at a nodal pointxn, andδmnis the Kronecker delta. Therefore, imposing boundary conditions whether natural or essential types cannot be enforced straightforward like the way it is done in the FEM [51,54]. Another issue with MMs is the sensitivity of results to certain parameters such as the nodal spacing and distribution, the order of approximation polynomials, and the size of domain where the interpolation function is defined (the domain for defining the interpolation function for each node was introduced as a super-element in Abu Al-Rub and Voyiadjis [45]).The objective of this paper is the straightforward numerical implementation of higher-order (not lower-order) gradient-dependent plasticity theory using a combination of finite element and meshless methods through the staggered approach (i.e., finite element at the structural or outer level and meshless at the material or inner level) with special emphasis placed on the numerical implementation of non-classical higher-order boundary conditions at internal and external surfaces. Therefore, it should be emphasized that the novelty of this paper is in presenting an easy numerical algorithm that employs both the finite element method and the meshless method for implementing the higher-order gradient plasticity theory. The finite element method is used to solve the linear momentum equation (structural level) whereas the meshlesss method is used to solve the gradient-dependent bulk plasticity condition and yield-like condition at interfaces (material level). To the authors׳ best knowledge, this approach has not been presented before. The main advantages of this implementation are (1) breaking down the system of equations into two smaller sub-systems with much smaller sizes; (2) no need to define new elements where both displacements and local effective plastic strain are degrees of freedom; (3) displacements and effective plastic strain are defined as the only independent variables in the outer- and inner-levels, respectively; and (4) the simplicity in imposing higher-order elastic–plastic boundary conditions and in a more accurate way. In the current approach, the initial approximated moving elastic-plastic boundary can be traced from the outer-level computations and thereby the inner-level computations will be applied to the approximated plastic domain. Then, the updated plastic domain and related plastic strain values will be determined by local iterations through the inner-level. It will be shown that, due to the lack of interpolatory property of the interpolation functions in MMs, the approximated solution for the gradient-enhanced plastic consistency condition rapidly deteriorates if the number of nodal points inside the domain, which is used for defining the interpolation functions, largely exceeds that of the number of the polynomial terms forpmin Eq. (1). By introducing the moving weighted functions that control the impact of neighboring points (i.e. using the MWLSM), one can obtain more stabilized solutions. The solutions by applying LSM presented in Abu Al-Rub and Voyiadjis [45] can be retrieved by imposing a constant weight function through the influence domain (super-element) in which the interpolation functions are defined for each nodal points.The layout of this paper is as follows: In Section 2, a summary of the main equations of a simple higher-order gradient plasticity theory is presented. Section 3 focuses on the numerical discretization issues of the gradient-dependent constitutive equations by applying the MWLSM to the nonlocal plasticity yield condition and the surface/interface yield-like condition. In Section 4, in order to verify the numerical implementation, the results from an exact solution for the application of higher-order gradient plasticity to shear band formation and size effects in metallic thin films on elastic substrates is compared to the numerical solution. Also, the application of the implemented method is shown for simulating several unit cells with hard circular inclusions with special emphasis placed on the effects of higher-order boundary conditions at free surfaces and interfaces. Finally, main conclusions are presented in Section 5.Notation: Hereafter, double vertical bars||||denote the Euclidean norm of a tensor, the superimposed dot indicates the differentiation with respect to timet, and a comma followed by an indexidenotes differentiation with respect toxi, the summation convention is utilized in tensor equations, andδis the standard variational parameter which is used to designate a virtual quantity.For simplicity in demonstrating the current numerical implementation technique, the simplest possible phenomenological higher-order gradient plasticity theory is summarized here and used as an example in the numerical implementation section. One can refer to Abu Al-Rub and Ettehad [57] for the details of the constitutive model and its formulation based on the principle of virtual power and laws of thermodynamics. This gradient plasticity theory considers only the effective (equivalent) plastic strain, p, and its gradient,∇p, as the plasticity internal state variables. However, it should be emphasized that the current numerical implementation technique is general and can be used for formulating and implementing more complex higher-order strain gradient plasticity models.Fig. 1 shows a schematic view of material body under elastic-plastic deformation where, based on deformation mode, the body domainΓcan be divided into regions where elasticΓeland plasticΓpldeformations develop. There might be a domainΓrigidwhere the plastic deformation is suppressed in this region (e.g. a rigid inclusion or an elastic material with a higher yield strength). Based on the elastic–plastic deformation insideΓdifferent surfaces with different deformation characteristics are developed; these can be surfaces where elastic-plastic deformation extends to external surfaces,∂Γpl, internal moving elastic-plastic boundaries,∂Γep, and interfaces between two different phases,∂Γinterface.Assuming small deformations, the total strain rate tensorε̇(3)ε̇ij=(u̇i,j+u̇j,i)/2can be decomposed into elasticε̇eand plasticε̇pparts, such that:(4)ε̇ij=ε̇ije+ε̇ijpwhereu̇is the velocity vector andε̇pis given by the following flow rule(5)ε̇ijp=ṗNij=λ̇Nijwhereṗ=2ε̇p:ε̇p/3is the rate of effective plastic strain where incompressible plastic flow (i.e.ε̇kkp=0) is assumed,λ̇=ṗbeing the plastic Lagrange multiplier, and N being the direction of the plastic flow, which is assumed co-directional to the deviatoric partτof the Cauchy stress tensorσ(i.e.,τij=σij−13σkkδijwhereδijis the Kronecker delta).Assuming linear elastic solid, the stress–strain relationship is given by the generalized Hooke׳s law, such that(6)σij=Eijklεkle=Eijkl(εkl−εklp)whereEis the fourth-order elasticity tensor and is expressed as follows for isotropic materials:(7)Eijkl=G(δikδjl+δilδjk)+ƛδijδklwhereG=E/2(1+ν)is the shear modulus,ƛ=2νG/(1−2ν)is the Lamé׳s constant withEbeing the Young׳s modulus andνthe Poisson׳s ratio. The Cauchy stress should satisfy the following macroscopic stress equilibrium equation and the corresponding macroscopic boundary traction conditions:(8)σij,j=0inΓ,ti=σijnjon∂Γwhere t is the macroscopic surface traction vector that is prescribed at the external surface boundary∂Γwith an outward unit normal vector n (Fig. 1). Notice that body and inertial forces are neglected in writing first part of Eq. (8).The plastic flow is governed by the following microscopic nonlocal yield condition, f, and the corresponding higher-order (non-classical) microscopic boundary condition,fI:(9)f=‖32τij‖−σY−hpΜ+cB∇2p=0inΓpl(10)fI=cBp,kInkI+χ+βpI=0on∂ΓinterfacewhereσYis the size-independent yield strength,his the bulk hardening,Μis the plastic strain hardening exponent,cB=2hℓ2>0is the plastic strain gradient coefficient whereℓis the material length scale,∇2=∂2/∂xi∂xidesignates the Laplacian operator,pIis the effective plastic strains at the interfaces,χis the interfacial yield strength,βis the interfacial hardening, andnIdenotes the normal vector to the surface/interface∂Γinterfacepointing outwards to deforming phases. Abu Al-Rub [58] argued that one can also scaleχandβwith the bulk yield strength,σY, and the interface hardening modulus,zh, by introducing an interfacial length scale,ℓΓ, such thatχ=ℓΓσYandβ=ℓΓzhwithℓΓbeing another microstructural length scale parameter that is related to the boundary layer thickness. See Abu Al-Rub and Voyiadjis [21] and Abu Al-Rub [58–60] for a discussion on the physical interpretation and experimental measurement ofℓandℓΓ. Moreover, only interfaces where one of the interacting phases is elastic are considered in this paper.One can define the nonlocal yield stress as(11)Y=σY+hpΜ−2hℓ2∇2pThe nonlocal yield condition should satisfy the Kuhn–Tucker loading/unloading conditions:(12)λ̇≥0,ḟ≤0,λ̇f=0Note that Eq. (9) is the Aifantis gradient plasticity yield condition [23] such that in the absence of plastic strain gradients, the classical von Mises condition is retrieved. Also, Eq. (10) is a yield-like condition that governs the plastic behavior across surfaces and interfaces, and is a higher-order boundary condition augmented by the interaction of dislocations across surfaces/interfaces. The solution of Eq. (9) for p requires the satisfaction of the higher-order boundary condition in Eq. (10). Therefore, the novel part of this paper is to propose a numerical algorithm to solve those two equations numerically using MWLSM without the need to use expensive higher-order elements when using the finite element method. Eqs. (9) and (10) will be numerically discretized and solved simultaneously in a coupled manner as is detailed in Section 3.Finally, for more meaningful presentation of the effect of plastic strain gradients through the numerical simulations in Section 4, the density of geometrically necessary dislocations,ρG, will be shown, which can be approximated using the following simple relation [61]:(13)ρG=||p,k||bwhere b is the magnitude of Burgers vector.In this Section, we switch to using the tensor notation for convenience. For the time interval from the previous time t to the current timet+Δt, the backward Euler method enables the proposed constitutive model to be discretized. Eqs. (6) and (9) can be discretized as follows:(14)Δσ=E:(Δε−ΔλNt+Δt)(15)32||τt+Δt||−σY−hpt+ΔtΜ+2hℓ2∇2pt+Δt=0inΓpwhereΔp=ΔλwithΔλbeing the plasticity Lagrange multiplier defined in Eq. (5). The effective plastic strain att+Δtcan be written as(16)pt+Δt=pt+Δp=pt+ΔλFrom the above equation, one can writept+Δt,∇pt+Δt, and∇2pt+Δtas(17)∇pt+Δt=∇pt+∇Δλ(18)∇2pt+Δt=∇2pt+∇2ΔλTherefore, one can notice that the problem in gradient plasticity implementation can be reduced to computingΔλ,∇Δλ, and∇2Δλ. To accomplish this, the elastic-predictor and plastic-corrector method is adopted as a return mapping algorithm [62]. Therefore, if the variables at time t, such asσt,εt, andptare known, then one can use the value ofΔε, which is obtained from the outer-level computations (i.e. from solving the macroscopic equilibrium and boundary conditions, Eq. (8)), in order to calculateσt+Δtandpt+Δtafter solving forΔλfrom the inner-level computations (i.e. by simultaneously satisfying the nonlocal yield condition and the corresponding higher-order boundary conditions, Eqs. (9) and (10)). Therefore, one can write from Eqs. (6) and (14):(19)σt+Δt=E:(εt+Δt−εt+Δtp)=σt+Δttr−ΔλE:Νt+Δtwhereσt+Δttris the trial stress tensor and can be expressed as(20)σt+Δttr=σt+E:Δε=E:(εte+Δε)Due to the assumption of elastic isotropy and plastic incompressibility along with substituting Eq. (7), one can write the deviatoric expression of Eq. (19) as(21)τt+Δt=τt+Δttr−2GΔλΝt+ΔtBy using the equalityτ=23||τ||N, which is obtained through the assumption that the plastic flow direction is co-directional to the Cauchy stress tensor, one can write Eq. (21) as follows:(22)23‖τt+Δt‖Nt+Δt=23||τt+Δttr||Nt+Δttr−2GΔλNt+ΔtBy taking the tensor product of this equation withNt+Δt, assumingNt+Δt=Nt+Δttr, which is the main assumption in the radial-return algorithm [62], and considering the equalityNt+Δt:Nt+Δt=3/2, one can rewrite Eq. (22) as(23)32‖τt+Δt‖=32||τt+Δttr||−3GΔλSubstituting Eqs. (16)–(18) and (23) into the nonlocal yield condition, Eq. (15), one can write(24)Rt+Δttr−3GΔλ−σY−h(pt+Δλ)Μ+2hℓ2(∇2pt+∇2Δλ)=0whereRt+Δttr=32||τt+Δttr||in Eq. (24), which is a second-order partial differential equation in each time increment and identified as the gradient-enhanced plasticity model in the form of the incremental plastic Lagrange multiplier at timet+Δt.Appropriate and consistent higher-order boundary conditions should accompany the solution of Eq. (24) in order to obtain a unique solution. Referring to Fig. 1, different types of higher-order boundary conditions can be described as follows:Type I: Internal moving elastic-plastic boundary,∂Γintep, which is the moving boundary between plastically deforming region and the instantaneously elastic region (i.e. a plastic region encroaching into a virgin elastic region). Peerlings [44] has thoroughly discussed the conditions on this non-stationary boundary for various types of gradient plasticity theories. Although an appropriate condition for this boundary is still under debate, de Borst and Pamin [41], Peerlings [44], Abu Al-Rub and Voyiadjis [45], and Polizzoto [63] suggested that a proper boundary condition on an internal moving elastic–plastic boundary should be expressed in the following incremental form (i.e.∂Γintepis moving):(25)Δλ=0andΔλ,kn^k=0forxi→∂Γintepsuch thatΔλis assumed C1-continuous overΓ. These conditions imply that the moving elastic–plastic boundary can act as either an instantaneous micro-rigid boundary where dislocations are not allowed to flow or as an instantaneous micro-free boundary where there is no resistance for dislocation flow through the boundary. The Dirichlet type,Δλ=0, mathematically arises from the fact that, in general, the stress rateσ̇should be continuous across∂Γintep. The Nuemann type boundary condition,(∇Δλ)Tn^=0, mathematically stems from zero microtraction (i.e.m=0in second part of Eq. (8)) and physically assumes the free movement of dislocations across the boundary. Hutchinson (2012) has argued that bothΔλ=0and(∇Δλ)Tn^=0are satisfied at an internal moving elastic–plastic boundary. In fact, the assumptions of vanishing plastic strain and plastic strain gradients at a moving elastic-plastic boundary is supported by the nanoindentation experiments by Kysar et al. [64] where it is shown that GNDs are minimum within the material׳s bulk where moving elastic-plastic boundaries are located. However, this fundamental issue needs further evidences using novel experimental characterization and discrete dislocation dynamics. On the other hand, Peerlings [44] has argued that in his implicit version of gradient plasticity theory, the question how to define boundary conditions at a moving elastic–plastic boundary never arises, which is physically unjustifiable. Also, it can be argued that such boundary conditions could be avoided in case of rate-dependent plasticity (viscoplasticity) since a moving elastic–plastic boundary does not exist.Type II: When the plastic zone extends to an external boundary of the body,∂Γextp, where the plastic sub-domain boundary is decomposed into external and internal parts,∂Γp=∂Γextp∪∂Γintp, one can consider one of the conditions in Eq. (25) such that a free surface that does not possess any resistance to dislocations (whether statistically stored or geometrically necessary dislocations) motion can satisfy the following micro-free boundary condition:(26)Δλ,kn^k=0forxi→∂Γextp⊆∂Γpwhereas, an external rigid boundary that completely suppresses the dislocation motion should satisfy the following plastically micro-hard (or micro-clamped) boundary condition:(27)Δλ=0forxi→∂Γextp⊆∂ΓpType III: The intermediate-type boundary condition that arises at the interface of two non-homogenous deforming phases where the material behavior at the interface depends on the interfacial energy through the interfacial yield-like condition in Eq. (10)[58]. One can write the discretized form of Eq. (10) as(28)2hℓ2∇pt+ΔtInI+χ+βpt+ΔtI=0on∂ΓinterfaceThis condition is identified as the intermediate type higher-order boundary condition where two cases are easily identified; the free condition where the dislocations can pass the interface to the second phase without any resistance (i.e. forχ=β=0) and fully clamped condition where dislocations are completely blocked (i.e. forχ→∞and/orβ→∞). Therefore, Type II boundary condition can also be enforced using Type III condition. For the intermediate case, the interfacial length scale,ℓΓ, controls the magnitude of both the interfacial yield strength (i.e.χ=ℓΓσy) and interfacial hardening (i.e.β=ℓΓzh) such that one can correctly predict the overall material behavior at small length scales as argued by Abu Al-Rub [58] by varying bothχandβsimultaneously through varyingℓΓ.Substituting Eqs. (16) and (17) into Eq. (28) along with using Eq. (10) at time t, one can write(29)2hℓ2∇ΔλInI+βΔλI=0on∂ΓinterfaceIt is noteworthy that since the plastic domain (i.e. elastic–plastic boundary) is unknown a priori, an iterative method should be applied to solve Eqs. (24) and (29) through inner-level (local) computations. Therefore, in order to satisfy Eqs. (24) and (29), the value ofΔλwill be calculated in a distributed sense by satisfying Eqs. (24) and (29). It will also be shown that, for the strong form where the nonlocal yield condition should be satisfied at each node, at least C2-continuous interpolation functions are necessary when using the meshless method approximation. In the following, the meshless method is used for calculating the gradient terms in Eqs. (24) and (29).In this Section, we will focus on calculating the increment of the plastic multiplier,Δλ, through the discretized nonlocal yield function, Eq. (24), and the unloading/loading conditions, Eq. (12), that should be satisfied strongly at each node m for MMs approximation. This can be compared with the classical computations in local theories that are used to determine the current value ofΔλfrom algebraic computations. The application of MWLSM for solving the gradient-dependent plasticity model has been shown thoroughly by Pamin et al. [54], where the plastic (inelastic) multipliers and the global displacement variables have been assumed as degrees of freedom. Here, we will apply the MWLSM following the approach presented by Abu Al-Rub and Voyiadjis [45] in the sense that the plastic multipliers are considered as independent variables in the local (inner-level) computations while the displacement is obtained from the global (outer-level) computations. The rest of this section will be devoted to approximating the gradient terms∇Δλand∇2Δλat the nodal point m for the inner-level computations. Basically, similar to FEM, in MMs one can approximate the scalar effective plastic strain in terms of the material (Lagrangian) coordinates as(30)p^(x,t)=∑n∈Sϕn(x)p˜n(t)whereϕnare the interpolation functions, S is the set of nodes n for whichϕn(x)≠0,p˜n(t)is the unknown effective plastic strain value at node n with the positionxn, andp^(x,t)is the approximated function that is obtained by imposing the desired boundary conditions. It should be mentioned that Eq. (30) is identical to the FEM approximation, but in contrast, in MMs the interpolation functions are interpolants not approximants [51,52,54,65]. The problem here now is how one should define the interpolation functionϕn(xm)at the nodal point m as related to its neighbors (i.e.n∈{1,…,nN}wherenNis the number of nodal points considered in the computations). In fact, this can be achieved through using the MWLSM, which is the main subject of this paper for implementing the current higher-order gradient plasticity model and its corresponding higher-order boundary conditions. The main feature of the MWLSM is a kernel function (weight function) that is used in defining the interpolation functions,ϕn, for each nodal point. The number and impact of neighboring points (i.e.nN) will be controlled by this weighting function and, unlike the FEM, this generally yields the conditionpm≠p^(xm)such that the parameterpmcannot be treated exactly as a nodal value [66]. Therefore, special care should be considered when applying the boundary conditions in MMs. Here, the weight function has a compact support in the sense that the sub-domainΩmfor node m is nonzero and small relative to the rest of the domain.Fig. 2 shows a typical overlapping circle-shape sub-domain with an exponential weight function with a radius of influenceRdom. In the following subsections, first the definition of the interpolation function and its gradient obtained from the LSM is presented and then the enhancement of LSM through the MWLSM will be shown by introducing a weight function inside the approximation function. Also special emphasis will be placed on the role of different boundary conditions and interfacial effects in the higher-order gradient plasticity model presented in Section 2.This section briefly presents the least squares method (LSM) as outlined by Abu Al-Rub and Voyiadjis [45] for computing the higher-order gradient terms. Then, the subsequent subsection will show the extension of this method by incorporating the weight function in defining the approximation functions. In order to determine the interpolation functions in Eq. (30), a set of linearly independent polynomial functions can be used to evaluate the plastic multipliers, such that(31)Δλ^(x)=∑k=1nNvk(x)ak≡vawherevis a set of linearly independent polynomial functions,ais the set of parameters that should be determined. For two dimensional problems and a second-order continuous approximation, one can write the following expressions:aT=[a1a2a3a4a5a6]andv=[1xyxyx2y2]where the superimposed T designates the transpose. LSM is applied to perform the fit, which turns to the following minimization:(32)J=12∑k=1nN(Δλ^(xk)−Δλ˜k)2=minwhereΔλ^andΔλ˜are the local values of the approximated plastic multiplier and the unknown nodal values, respectively, inside a domain which containsnNnodal points. These two values do not generally fit, and after findingΔλ˜one should obtain the approximated solution from Eq. (30) using:(33)Δλ^(x)=∑nnNϕn(x)Δλ˜nBy substituting Eq. (31) into Eq. (32) and minimizing with respect toa, one obtains the parameters of the polynomial as(34)a=H−1VTΔλ˜whereVT=[vT(x1)vT(x2)...vT(xnN)]andHis a symmetrical square matrix and is defined asH=∑k=1nNvkTvk=VTVandΔλ˜is a vector that contains the nodal values of the plastic multiplier asΔλ˜=[Δλ˜1Δλ˜2…Δλ˜nN]. Finally, one obtains the interpolation function at pointxin Eq. (33) for the LSM as(35)ϕn(x)=v(x)H−1vT(xn)As discussed before, unlike the interpolation functions in FEM, Eq. (35) does not show the interpolatory property in the sense thatϕn(xm)=δnm. Therefore, one should take care in determining the number of neighbors that are used in defining the interpolation function for a specific nodal point in order to obtain a stable and accurate solution [51,54]. In the following subsection, we focus on defining the interpolation function when adding a weight function to Eq. (32) by using the MWLSM. This is necessary for (1) increasing the accuracy of the approximated valuesΔλ^where they will be fitted with the unknown valuesΔλ^; and (2) for decreasing the sensitivity of the results to the number of neighbors used in defining the interpolation function at point m.Following the work presented in Zienkiewicz [67], in order to increase the accuracy and stability of an approximated increment of plastic multiplierΔλ^, a weight function can be introduced in the LSM minimization presented in Eq. (32), such that(36)J(xm)=12∑k=1nNwk(xk−xm)(Δλ^(xk)−Δλ˜k)2=minwherewkis the value of the weight function atxkfor the pointxm. The weight function is a monotonically decreasing function, i.e. the more distanced a neighbor to the point of interest the lower contribution in the minimization equation. Exponential, cubic spline, and quadratic spline are three commonly forms of weight functions [51]. Through this paper, the following exponential form for the weight function will be used (see Fig. 2):(37)w(r)={exp(−ςr2)−exp(−ςRdom2)1−exp(−ςRdom2);ς>0and0≤r≤Rdom0;r>RdomHere the domain of influence can well be defined by making sure that any point located beyond a certain distanceRdomis weighted by zero and therefore is not taken into account. The parameterςin Eq. (37) controls the weighting of the nodal neighbors inside the influence domain. Note that one retrieves the LSM by settingς=0. Fig. 2(b) and (c) shows the shape of the exponential weight function and its second-order gradient with respect to x-direction for the middle nodal point. It is noteworthy that the weight function can provide C1-continiuity or higher as it also ensures the higher-order continuity of the interpolation functions in the MWLSM. This is why MWLSM is suitable for gradient-enhanced plasticity models as it easily satisfies the requirement of higher-order continuity that the FEM enforces when implementing gradient-dependent plasticity models. The difference between the interpolation functions in the MWLSM and that in the FEM can be denoted asCq0(Rdom), where the superscript stands for the boundary value and the subscript is the highest derivative for which C0-continuity is achieved. As mentioned in Section 1, unlike the FEM׳s interpolation function, continuity is controlled by the continuity of weight function only and this can be another reason for selecting the exponential type of the weight function expressed in Eq. (37).To highlight the differences between the LSM and the MWLSM,Fig. 3 shows the effect of introducing a weight function in Eq. (36) in order to accurately capture the plastic strain distribution and the corresponding Laplacian. In Fig. 3(a), the analytical solution of the plastic strain distribution in a one-dimensional localization problem and the approximated distribution by varying theςparameter and keepingRdom=Lare shown. Varying the parameterςcontrols the effect of the neighboring points as shown through the distribution of the weight function in Fig. 3(c), where forς=0the LSM is recovered. Obviously, assuming the whole domain (i.e. forς=0) in defining the interpolation functions without selecting a proper value forςsignificantly affects the accuracy in capturing the effective plastic strain distribution and its Laplacian. This is obvious from Fig. 3(b) where the Laplacian has approximately a constant and a negative value when using the LSM such that the gradient׳s effect is not incorporated properly. Therefore, choosing a proper domain for approximating the Laplacian term, which is controlled by the weight function, is critical and special care should be taken in selecting the value ofς. The results in Fig. 3 are also valid for the case whereRdomis varied whileςis set constant.Based on the above discussion, one might wonder if the parametersRdomandςare associated with some underling physical length scales. In fact, both parameters are merely numerical parameters that can be varied to achieve convergence. This means that their values are varied based on the type of the differential equation and the density and spatial distribution of nodal points. In the case where the domain of influence has the size of the first neighboring nodal points, the shape functions, similar to the finite element method, will be retrieved while increasing this size makes more smooth shape functions. Also, increasing the size of domain of influence increases the computational cost. Therefore, the choice of the weight function parameters is arbitrary if one satisfies some favorite properties, such as continuity to the desired order, stability, and convergence properties.In order to study the numerical convergence related to the sensitivity ofRdomandςparameters, one can, for example, defineς^=ςRdom2and choose for a givenςdifferentRdomvalues. It is easy to observe, by numerical testing, that forς^>7, the difference between the weight functions is less than 0.1%. This suggest that for a particularςthere is a maximum value ofRdomafter which no change will be noticed for changingRdom. This sensitivity analysis has already been performed by Pamin et al. [54]. Moreover, the impact of node distribution (regular versus non-regular) onRdomandςhas been presented in, for example, [52,68,69].By applying the procedure stated above by considering the minimization function with the moving weight functions in Eq. (36), one gets the new interpolation function for pointmas follows:(38)ϕn(x)=v(x)H−1gn(x)where(39)H=VTw(Δx)V,gn(x)=wn(xn−x)vT(xn)and the weight matrix at point m (i.e.w(Δx)) is defined as follows:(40)w(Δx)=(w1(x−x1)…0⋮⋱⋮0⋯wnN(x−xnN))where the magnitude ofΔxrepresents the distance of neighbors from the point m. Eq. (33)along with the use of the interpolation function in Eq. (38) and its second-order gradient can then be substituted into the nonlocal plasticity yield condition, Eq. (24), in order to calculate the nonlocal plastic strain as will be shown in the next Section. By comparing the interpolation functions in Eqs. (35) and (38), one can see that the weight function defined at each pointxcontrols the contribution of the neighbors. In general these “interpolation functions” do not possess the noninterpolatory character which is essential in the FEM, i.e.(41)Δλ˜m≠Δλ^(xm)which means that the local values of the approximating function do not fit the point׳s unknown.In order to calculate the gradients of the plastic multiplier, Eq. (38) can be rearranged as follows:(42)ϕm(x)=v(x)qm(x),H(x)qm(x)=gm(x)such that the first-order gradient of the interpolation function is obtained as(43)∂ϕm(x)∂x=∂v(x)∂xqm(x)+v(x)∂qm(x)∂x,∂gm(x)∂x=H(x)∂qm(x)∂x+∂H(x)∂xqm(x)where(44)∂H(x)∂x=∑k=1nN∂wk(x−xk)∂xv(xk)Tv(xk),∂gm(x)∂x=∂wm(x−xm)∂xv(xm)The second-order gradient of the interpolation function can be obtained as(45)∂2ϕm(x)∂x2=∂2v(x)∂x2qm(x)+v(x)∂2qm(x)∂x2+2∂v(x)∂x∂qm(x)∂x(46)∂2gm(x)∂x2=H(x)∂2qm(x)∂x2+∂2H(x)∂x2qm(x)+2∂H(x)∂x∂qm(x)∂xwith(47)∂2H(x)∂x2=∑k=1N∂2wk(x−xk)∂x2v(xk)Tv(xk),∂2gm∂x2=∂2wm(x−xm)∂x2v(xk)Fig. 4 shows for the current MWLSM the geometrical representation of the interpolation function and its corresponding first- and second-order gradients with respect to x-direction that are calculated using Eqs. (42), (43), and (45). The interpolation function shown in Fig. 4(a), unlike the conventional ones in the FEM, provides higher-order continuity that is needed for the discretization of the strong form of the nonlocal yield condition in Eq. (24) such that these interpolation functions can also be used in calculating higher-order gradients (i.e. higher than the second-order gradient).In this section, the procedure needed to calculate the nonlocal incremental plastic Lagrange multipliers through using Eqs. (42)–(47) is discussed. The nonlinearity of governing gradient-dependent yield and interfacial conditions, Eqs. (24) and (28), arises due to uncertainty of the location of the moving elastic-plastic boundary as the exact plastic domain is unknown a priori and also the existence of nonlinear effective plastic hardening. Considering Eq. (18) and (24), the nonlocal yield condition at nodal pointmcan be expressed as(48)f(Δλ^m,∇2Δλ^m)=f(Δλ^m,{Δλ^n,m≠n,n∈1,…,nN})=0Due to the use of the staggered method [i.e. solving the stress equilibrium equation at the structural (outer-level) and the nonlocal yield and interfacial conditions at the material (inner-level) level], the total strain field obtained from the outer-level computations by solving the global stress equilibrium equation at time incrementk+1and the converged effective plastic strain field at time increment k can be used in the nonlocal yield condition to approximate the initial plastic domain at the current time increment. This is followed by local iterationsj+1through inner-level computation in order to obtain the converged plastic domain for a given displacement field(Γk+1epj+1). This procedure is repeated in order to get the final converged values of the displacement and effective plastic strain fields at the current time increment.For the time incrementk+1, Eq. (48) reduces to the following form(49)f(Δj+1λ^m,∇2j+1Δλ^m)=0onΓpj+1where by utilizing Eq. (33) into Eq. (24), the nonlocal yield condition at iterationj+1for the current time increment can be written as(50)Rmtr−σY−(3G+h)p^Μ−1j∑nnNϕn(xm)(p˜nk+1j+Δj+1λ˜n)+2hℓ2∑nnN∇2ϕn(xm)(p˜nj+Δj+1λ˜n)=0Note that the value of effective plastic strain is already known from the previous iteration j, such that by defining(51)Fm=Rmtr−σY−(3G+h)jp^mΜ−1∑nnNϕn(xm)jp˜n+2hℓ2∑nnN∇2ϕn(xm)jp˜none can obtain the following system of equations that can be used to compute the increment of plastic multiplier,Δλ˜, for all nodal points inside the bulk domain as(52)ΚΛ=Fwhere(53)Κ=[(3G+h)p^1Μ−1ϕ1(x1)−2hℓ2∇2ϕ1(x1)⋯(3G+h)p^1Μ−1ϕ1(xnN)−2hℓ2∇2ϕ1(xnN)⋮⋮⋱⋮(3G+h)p^nNΜ−1ϕnN(x1)−2hℓ2∇2ϕnN(x1)⋯(3G+h)p^nNΜ−1ϕnN(xnN)−2hℓ2∇2ϕnN(xnN)](54)Λ=[Δλ˜1Δλ˜2…Δλ˜nN](55)F=[F1F2...FnN]where the matrixΚis presented for the bulk material domain that experiences plastic deformation during the current time increment. The terms∇2ϕj(j=1,2,...,nN) are calculated from Eqs. (45)–(47). The size ofΚin Eq. (53) depends on the current plastic domain size. The solution of Eq. (52) yields the nodal point values of the plastic multiplier increment,Δλ˜, such that the local approximated values at any nodal points,Δλ^, should be calculated from Eq. (33) by utilizing the derived interpolation functions.We show here how the higher order-boundary conditions listed in Subsection 3.2, Types I, II, and III, are imposed using the current numerical algorithm. Due to the non-interpolatory character of the shape functions in the MMs [see Eq. (2)], imposing Type I boundary condition is not straightforward {e.g. see [51,54] for a detailed discussion on how to impose boundary conditions using the MMs}. In the work of Pamin et al. [54], Type I boundary condition has been imposed by applying a kinematic constrain using the Lagrange multiplier, whereas here the approximated value of the plastic strain multiplier,Δλ^, is used in enforcing the different types of boundary conditions. Therefore, a proper condition for elastic nodes can be applied by enforcingΔλ^=0, such that:(56)Δλ^(x)=∑nnNϕn(x)Δλ˜n=0On the other hand, Types II and III boundary conditions can be imposed through solving the system of equations in Eq. (52) similar to imposing conventional boundary conditions since the locations of these boundaries are fixed and do not change during the course of plastic deformation. Type II higher-order boundary condition can be written in a discretized form as(57)Δλ^,k(x)n^k=∑nnN∇kϕn(x)n^kΔλ˜n=0on…∂ΓextpFor imposing the Type III boundary condition, the interface yield condition, Eq. (10), should be checked first at the interface. If the interface yields, thenΔλI(or the increment in the effective plastic strain at the interface) can be calculated from Eqs. (29) and (33), such that(58)2hℓ2∑nnN∇kϕn(x)Δλ˜nnkI+β∑nnNϕn(x)Δλ˜n=0on∂ΓinterfaceIf the interface does not yield, then Eq. (56) is enforced at the interfacial nodal points. The values ofΔλthat are obtained from enforcing the higher-order boundary conditions at the interfacial nodal points are substituted in Eq. (52) in order to solve forΔλwithin the plastically deforming bulk of the material.This section demonstrates the numerical implementation of the higher-order gradient plasticity theory and its non-classical boundary conditions in successfully simulating the plastic strain localization problem and the size and boundary layer effects in small scale systems.In order to demonstrate the proposed numerical implementation method, one- and two-dimensional plastic strain localization problems are simulated.Fig. 1(a) shows the geometry of one-dimensional bar with length L, which is supported at one end and loaded under displacement control at the other end. The middle region of the bar(−w/2≤x1≤w/2)is assumed to have an initial yield strength 10% lower than the remaining part in order to trigger plastic strain localization. The geometrical and material properties adapted in this example areL=100mm,w=10mm,Δ=0.02mm, the Young׳s modulusE=20GPa, Poisson׳s ratioυ=0.3, yield strengthσY=2MPa, hardening modulush=0.1E, strain hardening exponentM=1, and length scaleℓ=0.1L.The formation of localized plastic deformation zone makes the displacement pattern discontinuous for the classical plasticity model.Fig. 5(a) and (b) compare the displacement distribution along the bar axis for classical plasticity model (i.e., forℓ=0) and the gradient enhanced plasticity model for two different mesh densities. It is seen that although the classical plasticity model shows discontinuity atx1=±w/2, but the gradient plasticity model shows smooth transition from the localized plastic zone to the neighboring region. Also, mesh objective results are obtained when using the gradient plasticity theory. The similarity of the results for both two methods of implementation shows the application of the proposed implementation method.This example will demonstrate the performance of the proposed implementation method in obtaining mesh-objective results when simulating a plane strain two-dimensional specimen with geometric imperfection under uniaxial tension (Fig. 6). The strip is constrained at the bottom and its upper edge is constrained to remain horizontal while a vertical displacement is applied. The following material parameter values are adopted;E=12GPa,υ=0.49,σY=100MPa,h=−0.1E,M=1, andℓ=0.5mm. The results for two different triangular meshes (400 and 800 elements) are presented for both classical plasticity and the gradient plasticity.Fig. 7 shows the deformation patterns for the two meshes when using the classical plasticity and the gradient plasticity. This figure shows that the gradient plasticity gives mesh objective results. Comparing the deformation patterns in Fig. 7(c) and (d), it is obvious that by incorporating the material length scale in a nonlocal yield function, the displacement patterns converge to the unique solution for all mesh densities. The solution is now mesh independent and the localization zone are to a great extending independent of the mesh density when compared with the local model. The deformation pattern shows discontinuity along the elastic region to localized zone for the classical model while incorporating material length scale in gradient-enhanced model removes this discontinuity and smooth transition happens between these two regions. Removing the spurious mesh size dependency by using gradient plasticity is more obvious from the distribution of effective plastic strain as shown inFig. 8. For the classical model the shear band width decreases by mesh refinement which results in a higher plastic strain value. Also, unlike the local model where discontinuity observed in the plastic strain within the shear band, the nonlocal model yields smooth transition within the band.InFig. 9, the distribution of gradient terms is shown for the finest discretized model. It is obvious from Fig. 9(a) and (b) that the first-order gradient of effective plastic strain in both x and y directions has a zero value at the center of the localized zone and the elastic-plastic boundary. Fig. 9(c) shows the distribution of the Laplacian of effective plastic strain which is the main reason for spreading the localization zone (plastification). The negative value at the center of shear band limits the increase in effective plastic strain while the positive values at the elastic-plastic boundary spreads the width of localization zone towards the elastic region.This subsection demonstrates the capability of the proposed numerical implementation algorithm of both the bulk gradient-dependent yield condition and the yield-like interfacial condition for capturing size and boundary layer effects. Also, the role of different higher-order boundary conditions on the strengthening and strain hardening of small scale systems is demonstrated. Lower-order gradient plasticity models (e.g., [22]) are unable to capture these effects [33]. First, the numerical implementation of proposed higher-order strain gradient plasticity model will be compared to an analytical solution for a thin film on a thick substrate under shear loading and different boundary conditions. This is followed by investigating the size effect of different unit cells with hard elastic circular inclusions under uniaxial loading with different sizes and interface conditions while keeping the volume fraction of the inclusions constant. Hereafter, for the thin film and the matrix material in the unit cell, the following material parameter values are adopted; the Young׳s modulusE=200GPa, Poisson׳s ratioυ=0.3, yield strengthσY=160MPa, hardening modulush=0.1E, strain hardening exponentM=1, and magnitude of Burgers vectorb=0.25nm, while for the elastic inclusion Young׳s modulusE=417GPaand Poisson׳s ratioυ=0.17are selected.The schematic inFig. 10(a) shows an elastic–plastic thin film with a thickness t bonded to an elastic substrate under pure shear loading. In fact, the substrate can be any other constraint such as a very thin oxide layer. The bottom surface of the film is held fixed and shear displacementΔuis applied to the top surface in the x1-direction. The only non-vanishing plastic strain component is the shear strainγ. Fig. 10(b) shows schematically the formation of the boundary layer due to the dislocation pile-up at the film-substrate interface. The formation of the boundary layer can be described through imposing the higher-order boundary condition that is expressed in terms of the interfacial energy as in Eq. (10). As emphasized before, a micro-hard film-substrate interface can be described by settingχ→∞orβ→∞(or equivalently by settingℓΓ→∞), which results in a zero plastic strain at the interface. On the other hand, a micro-free boundary condition can be imposed on the top surface of the film through settingγ=β=0, which yields a zero plastic strain gradient at the micro-free surface. In order to validate the current numerical implementation in Section 3, the numerical results are compared to the analytical solution for the aforementioned micro-hard and micro-free boundary conditions at the film-substrate interface and the thin film top surface, respectively. Many authors have solved this problem analytically for different forms of strain gradient plasticity e.g. [58,70–73]. The analytical solution for this example using the current strain gradient plasticity model is presented in the Appendix A.Fig. 11 shows the comparison between the analytical and the numerical solutions for the distribution of the normalized plastic shear strain through the thickness of the thin film for an average strain ofγ/γy=8, whereγyis the shear yield strain, for differentℓ/tratios. The numerical solution matches the analytical solution indicating the accuracy of the implementation. One can see from Fig. 11, unlike the solution from classical plasticity theory or lower-order gradient plasticity theory (i.e. gradient plasticity theory without enforcing the higher-order boundary conditions), the plastic shear strain decreases towards the interface. Forℓ/t→0, the results approach the classical plasticity solution which yields a homogenous plastic strain distribution within the film thickness. Whereas, due to the assumption of a micro-hard film-substrate interface, zero plastic strain is obtained such that a boundary layer is seen that extends progressively through the film thickness as the thin film decreases or equivalently as the bulk length scale,ℓ, increases.However, it should be mentioned that the parametersRdom/t=0.2andς=200for the MWLSM are assumed so that a close match between the analytical and the numerical solutions is obtained.Fig. 12(a) shows that unstable result will be yielded if inappropriate parameters forRdomandςare assumed. In order to obtain a stable solution, the nonlocal yield condition along with the imposed higher-order boundary conditions should be satisfied globally and locally. If not, unstable solution is obtained as shown in Fig. 12(a). Fig. 12(b) shows the calculated values ofγ^pandγ˜pthat are identified respectively as the approximated and nodal magnitude of the plastic shear strain for the MWLSM. Unlike the FEM approximation, where due to non-interpolatory character of MWLSM, these two values may not coincide such that the approximated solution should be obtained by using Eq. (30). ChoosingRdomandςfor defining the interpolation functions depends on the nodal distribution and spacing and special care should be taken in selecting them in order to get a converged solution.Fig. 13 shows the contours of normalized plastic strain, first-order gradient of effective plastic strain, and magnitude of GNDs׳ density computed using Eq. (13) for the caseℓ/t=1andχ→∞(or equivalentlyℓΓ/ℓ→∞). One can clearly see from Fig. 13 the formation of the boundary layer and its partial extension through the film thickness. The plastic strain gradient and GNDs׳ density are maximum at the film-substrate interface, whereas the plastic strain is zero there.InFig. 14, the effect of interfacial hardening, which is represented by the dimensionless variableδ2=β/2hℓ, is shown for different film thicknesses while it is assumed that the interface yields at the same time as the bulk (i.e.δ1=0). Fig. 14(a) and (b) shows the effective plastic strain distribution along the film thickness for soft(δ2=0.5)and intermediate(δ2=5)interfaces, respectively. By comparison with the plastic strain distribution for a hard (or rigid) interface (see Fig. 11), it is obvious that the plastic deformation at the interface (i.e.z=0) is controlled by the interfacial hardening property while varying the film thickness does not change the plastic strain values at the interface noticeably. The bulk material length scale and its interaction with the interface properties shows its controlling effect on the plastic strain distribution far from film-substrate interface in the sense that for specificℓ/tthe soft interface deforms more plastically in a more diffused manner as compared with the intermediate and stiff (or rigid) interfaces. Therefore, interfacial hardening has a significant effect on the plastic strain distribution through the film thickness such that the boundary layer thickness is more pronounced for thinner films or for higher values of the bulk length scale. Fig. 14(c) and (d) shows the effects of the interface hardening on the overall strain hardening rate for both soft and intermediate interfaces, respectively. It is seen that either increasing the interface hardening or decreasing the film thickness causes strong size dependency on both tangent hardening modulus and flow stress, while the onset of yielding does not change due to the assumption that the interface yields at the same time with the bulk(δ1=0). Moreover, it is obvious from Figs. 11 and 14 that the rate of strain hardening is controlled by the weakest link of interface and bulk in the sense that for a stiff interface the bulk material length scale controls the overall size effect, while for a soft interface the interfacial length scale parameter controls the overall size effect [58].In order to study the effect of the interface yield strength, represented by the dimensionless parameterδ1=χ/hℓγY, separately from the interface hardening, and also its interaction with the bulk material length scale, the stress-strain response for soft, intermediate, and stiff interfaces are studied for differentℓ/tratios while settingδ2=0. It should be noticed that the stiff interface is characterized by a very high value of either the interfacial yield strength (i.e.δ1→∞) or the interfacial hardening(δ2→∞).Fig. 15(a) and (b) shows the stress–strain responses for a soft interface(δ1=1)and an intermediate interface(δ1=5), respectively, as compared with the stress-strain response from a stiff interface for different film thicknesses (represented by differentℓ/tratios). These figures show the onset of interface yielding, whereas the interface did not yield for the case of a stiff interface. Furthermore, for a specificℓ/tratio, the stress-strain response follows the stiff interface behavior (i.e. with the same hardening tangent modulus) after interface yielding such that the hardening modulus is the same as the hardening modulus of the bulk since interfacial hardening is not considered for this case. Also, for the case of a stiff interface and for a constantℓ/tratio, one can notice that the plastic strain is zero at the interface (Fig. 11) and the strain hardening rate does not change after yielding of the bulk material. Therefore, introducing the interface yield strength means that the interface may not yield at the same time as the bulk material such that the higher the interfacial yield strength the higher the critical stress needed for initiation of plastic deformation at the interface. As it is obvious from Fig. 15, the macroscopic critical stress needed for the interface to yield depends on both interfacial yield strength and the bulk material length scale or film׳s thickness.As it is shown in Fig. 15, for the case of intermediate interfaces, the interface yield strength controls the overall macroscopic yield strength of the film-substrate system, while the interface hardening controls its overall rate of hardening.Fig. 16 shows the combining effect on the stress-strain response for the case ofℓ/t=4,δ1=0.5, andδ1=5whileδ2is varied. It is very obvious again that the stress-strain response follows that of the stiff interface until interfacial yielding where the material hardening rate is then controlled by the interface hardening. This trend is more pronounced in Fig. 16(b) forδ1=5. Therefore, the properties of the interface have a significant effect on the overall stress-strain response of the film-substrate system.It is well-known that the mechanical properties of metallic materials can be effectively enhanced by incorporating dispersed particles of different types, sizes, shapes, and volume fractions to form the so-called metal matrix composites. In this section, the current gradient plasticity model and numerical implementation are applied for predicting the particle size effect in particle reinforced metal matrix composites with special emphasis placed on applying the higher order-boundary conditions on the particle-matrix interface. The enhanced strength and strain hardening of metals that contain micron and submicron sized inclusions is attributed to the indirect strengthening due to evolution of GNDs at the particle-matrix interface as well as the conventional direct strengthening from the load transfer from the matrix to the particle e.g. [1,74,75]. A composite material having a periodical distribution of inclusions is analyzed using a plane strain unit cell subjected to a monotonic tensile stress in thex2-direction and periodic boundary conditions at the right and left edges. Thus, the results presented in this study approximate a composite of rather long, almost aligned, stiff inclusions embedded in a homogenized matrix.Fig. 17(a) shows the overall inhomogeneous material with periodically distributed circular inclusions, and Fig. 17(b) and (c) shows the corresponding unit cell that undergoes a displacement-controlled loading. The unit cell is square with a dimension of d (see Fig. 17).It is noteworthy that this case represents a situation where the inclusion is embedded in a polycrystalline matrix with the grain size being much larger than the particle׳s size such that the role of the grain boundary property and its interaction with the inclusions are neglected and; therefore, a homogenized matrix is assumed e.g. [2,76,77]. For the following simulations, the volume fraction of the inclusion in the unit cell, given byfp=πa02/4d2, is kept constant of 10% (see Fig. 17). Accordingly, for a fixedfp, the ratio ofa0/dis fixed such that as the particle sizea0increases/decreases the interparticle spacing d increases/decreases too. The effect of different values for the inclusion-matrix interface hardening, which is governed byδ2=β/2hℓ, is simulated. For a rigid interface, whereδ2→∞, the plastic strain is zero at the interface, whereas for intermediate and soft interfaces with a finite value forδ2a jump in the plastic strain at the interface is obtained. However, one should notice that although the effective plastic strain, p, is zero at rigid interfaces (i.e. zero density of SSDs), the generalized total accumulation of plastic strain,p¯, which is a measure of the total dislocation density (i.e. both SSDs and GNDs) e.g. [7,21,58] has a finite value, which is defined as(59)p¯=∫0tṗ2+ℓ2ṗ,kṗkdtFig. 18(a)–(d) compares contours of effective von Mises stress and effective plastic strain for classical plasticity (i.e.ℓ=0) and gradient-enhanced plasticity model for a unit cell with a ratio ofℓ/d=1at 1% applied strain. Converged numerical results are obtained by settingRdom/d=0.2andς=200. As one can see from Fig. 18(a) and (c), the effective von Mises stress distribution is significantly higher once plastic strain gradients are considered; notably more localized in the matrix material around the inclusion where the magnitude of effective plastic strain gradient (or equivalently the density of GNDs) is significantly higher. A comparison between these contours reveals that, unlike the classical plasticity model׳s prediction (Fig. 18(a)) where strengthening results from the load transfer from the metal matrix to the stiff reinforcing inclusion, strengthening also results from changes in the deformation mode in the matrix material near the inclusion-matrix interface due to the high strain gradient effect [1,76]. In this figure, one can also see that the plastic strain gradient effect changes the whole plastic strain distribution as compared to the results from classical plasticity such that the value of plastic strain reduces to zero at and near the inclusion׳s interface due to dislocation blocking.Fig. 19(a) shows the contours of nonlocal effective plastic strain presented in Eq. (59). Comparing Figs. 18(d) and 19(a) one can see that the plastic strain gradient has a substantial effect on the total density of dislocations. This measure of total dislocation density at the interface is critical for predicting void nucleation and growth in metal matrix composites with micro, submicro, and nano particles. Fig. 19(b) and (c) shows the distribution of GNDs as described by Eq. (13) and the distribution of the Laplacian of effective plastic strain, respectively. As expected, the maximum value of GNDs occurs around the inclusion where dislocation blocking has been occurred. Therefore, changes seen in the von Mises stress and effective plastic strain distributions, originate from considering gradient-hardening effects. The value of the Laplacian contributes to additional isotropic hardening in the nonlocal yield function, Eq. (13).Fig. 20 shows the average stress–strain responses from both classical and the gradient-dependent plasticity theory for different unit cell sizes (characterized by valuesℓ/d=0.5,1,1.5,2) while keeping the same volume fraction of the inclusions. It is seen that decreasing the unit cell size manifests itself more notably in the strain hardening response rather than at initial yielding.The effect of the interface hardening (characterized by the normalized ratioδ2or equivalently byβ) on the distribution of von Mises stress and effective plastic strain are presented inFig. 21 for a soft interface(δ2=0.5)and an intermediate interface(δ2=2). Comparing the results in Fig. 21 with those in Fig. 18(c) and (d) one can see that as the interface becomes harder the penetration of dislocations to the interface is suppressed more. This causes a lower effective plastic strain p and a higher stress value at the interface due to the plastic strain gradient effect. Also, this causes the stress to distribute more within the matrix material.Finally,Fig. 22(a)–(d) shows the distributions of effective nonlocal plastic strain, Eq. (59), and density of GNDs, Eq. (13), for the simulated soft and intermediate interfaces, respectively. By comparing with the results in Fig. 19(a) and (b), it is obvious that the interface hardening has a significant effect on the GNDs׳ density and thereby on the effective nonlocal plastic strain. One can notice that as the interfacial hardening increases, the effective nonlocal plastic strain and GNDs׳ density localize more around the particle-matrix interface. This is attributed to the increase in the plastic strain gradients around the interface as the interfacial hardening increases.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In this paper, the numerical implementation of higher-order gradient plasticity is achieved by introducing two levels of computations. The global (outer-level) computation where the classical finite element method with displacement nodal degrees of freedom are enforced to solve the stress equilibrium condition with the prescribed macroscopic boundary conditions. This is followed by a local (inner-level) computation where the nonlocal plastic consistency condition subjected to the microscopic (non-classical) boundary conditions is solved by considering the effective plastic strain as a degree of freedom. For the inner-level computations, a meshless approximation method, the moving weighted least square method, which satisfies at least C2-continuity or higher has been formulated. Adapting this two-level computations significantly simplifies the numerical implementation of higher-order gradient-dependent theories, especially in enforcing different types of higher-order boundary conditions. In fact, the proposed numerical implementation technique is straightforward and can be used easily and effectively in the numerical implementation of various higher/lower-order gradient-dependent plasticity (and even damage) constitutive models. However, one disadvantage of the employed numerical scheme is that one should be careful in selecting proper values for the numerical parameters associated with the moving weighted least square method in order to get a stable solution.The successful application of the formulated higher-order gradient plasticity model and its numerical implementation to capture size effect has been shown for examples including shear deformation of a thin film on an elastic substrate and uniaxial loading of a unit cell with elastic circular inclusions. The results show how the implementation of gradient enhanced plasticity model by incorporating interface energy could be able to capture the formation of a boundary layer and size dependency of the overall strain hardening of a thin film which is initially subjected to macroscopically uniform stress or strain. The size dependency observed is related to gradient effect and by incorporating the interface energy. In the absence of the interfacial energy, uniform plastic strain similar to classical plasticity has been observed. Comparing the simulation results from classical plasticity and higher-order gradient plasticity by considering hard interface condition for the effect of inter-particle spacing and particle size shows that the von Mises stress and effective plastic strain distributions in metal matrix around the inclusion are significantly altered due to the evolution of plastic strain gradient that scale with the density of GNDs. While the plastic strain has the zero value at interface due to dislocation blocking for hard interface in gradient enhanced model, this magnitude is high for the classical model and more confined within a small region near the inclusion. It is shown that by assuming soft and intermediate interfaces the plastic strain has finite value at interface which represents the cases where dislocation can pass through interface. It is shown that the total accumulation of plastic strain which represents the total density of SSDs and GNDs has a high value at interface and the application of this will be investigated for the possibility of matrix-inclusion debonding and thereby formation of voids through damage model in the forthcoming paper.