@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
Finite element analysis of a tire using an equivalent cord model

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
An accurate wire cord finite element model was developed.Two equivalent cord models were proposed.Global–local analyses were conducted to calculate the strains at the belt edge.The two equivalent cord models resulted in different shear strains.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Finite element analysis,Cord–rubber composite,Rebar element,Wire cord model,Equivalent cord model,Global–local analysis,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In tires, cracks usually nucleate at the belt edge and grow along the belt–rubber interface. Therefore, to assess the durability of a tire a method of analysis that can accurately simulate the belt is needed. However, in previous studies, a belt cord model that could represent both tension and bending well was not used. Therefore, in this study, to simulate the behavior of the cords in the belt, a wire cord finite element model was developed to accurately model the geometry of cords, and the validity of the model was verified through comparisons of tensile and bending simulation results with test results. However, the configuration of the wire cord model was too complicated and involved too many elements to be used to model the whole tire. Therefore, two equivalent cord models capable of simulating the behavior of the wire cord model were proposed. One was a cord model with solid and truss elements, and the other was a cord model with solid elements that have bilinear material property. Global–local analyses were conducted using a solid element cord model, a rebar element cord model, and the equivalent cord models to obtain the strains at the belt edge. The comparison of the results demonstrated that more appropriate strains could be obtained using the equivalent cord models than the solid element cord model or the rebar element model.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
Tires are the only part of an automobile which makes a contact with the road, and their characteristics affect the performance of an automobile, such as comfort, fuel efficiency, handling, and safety.Fig. 1 shows the structure and main components of a radial tire [1]. Cracks usually nucleate and grow near the belt edge due to material inhomogeneity and consequent severe strains, and a tire may rupture causing a severe accident especially when cracks grow quite long.Thus, accurate belt modeling is particularly important in studies of durability [2,3] because the maximum shear strain occurs at the belt edge [4]. Modeling the belt behavior is also necessary when studying tire structure [1,5], the interaction between the tire and ground [7–12], the temperature distribution in the tire [1,9], and the effect of blast waves [13]. Because the cords and rubber that make up the belt have very different Young׳s moduli, and because anisotropy occurs due to the angles of the cords, constructing a constitutive equation for the belt is difficult. Even if only the cords are considered, expressing their behavior in an equation is difficult because of the complicated structure resulting from the twisting of many wires. However, several researchers have proposed theoretical approaches to assess the behavior of belts or cords.Moghe [14] obtained the Young׳s modulus of a single wire in the direction of tension and used the result to determine the Young׳s modulus of the cord. However, the Young׳s modulus was obtained by considering only tensile deformation with no consideration of bending deformation. Due to their twisted structure, cords have a lower bending stiffness than other structures with similar tensile stiffness. Therefore, when assessing the behavior of cords, bending deformation must be also considered. Walter et al. [15] included the angle of cord construction in the Gough–Tangorra relations to obtain the elastic constant of a cord–rubber composite. Clark [16] presented a method of obtaining the elastic constant for a cord–rubber composite using the strain energy method. However, the methods proposed by Walter et al. [15] and Clark [16] cannot be applied to 3D tire models because these methods assume 2D models. Peng [17] proposed an anisotropic hyperelastic constitutive model using the strain energy of the rubber, cord, shear interaction and normal interaction, but he verified the method only for the tensile behavior.When belts are modeled using finite element analysis (FEA), the physical properties of the rubber and cords are combined to yield the resulting physical behavior of the belts [1,5,9,18,19], the internal cords are modeled using beam elements [13] or using rebar elements [2,3,6,7,8,10,11,12,20–25]. Studies that have modeled belts based on a single physical behavior have defined the behavior using isotropic elasticity [1], hyperelasticity [5], the Halpin–Tsai composite equation [9], or theoretically derived belt constitutive equations [18,19]. Consideration of the interface between the cords and the rubber is important when determining the strain near the belt edge. If the belt layer behavior is expressed based on only one type of loading and consequent deformation, the interface between the cords and the rubber will not be correctly modeled, and thus the accurate strain cannot be predicted. In a study conducted by Baranowski et al. [13] in which cords were modeled using beam elements, the material properties of steel were used as those of the cords. However, actual cords have a lower bending stiffness than other structures with a similar tensile stiffness because cords are made of many wires twisted together. This characteristic cannot be reproduced when beam elements are used to represent cords. In other studies [2,3,6,7,8,10,11,12,20–25], rebar elements were used to represent the cords in belts. However, rebar elements cannot duplicate the bending behavior of cords either because rebar elements are used to define uniaxial reinforcement. Consequently, in previous studies, the methods used to simulate belt tensile and bending behavior were not accurate.In this paper, methods are proposed for accurate belt modeling not only for tensile behavior but also for bending behavior. First, the truck and bus radial (TBR) tires were selected as the object of study. To accurately represent cord behavior, a wire cord FE model that accurately implemented the geometry of actual cords was developed, and this model was verified through comparison between tensile and bending simulations and tests. This wire cord model represented the tensile and bending characteristics of cords well, but it could not be used to model the whole tire because its configuration was too complicated and it had too many elements. Consequently, two equivalent cord models were proposed as a substitute for the wire cord model. One was a cord model with solid and truss elements, and the other was a cord model with solid elements that have bilinear material property. The accuracy of the equivalent cord models was verified by comparing the tensile and bending deformation produced by the wire cord model and the equivalent cord models. Although fewer elements are used in the equivalent cord models than in the wire cord model, the number of elements required is still large when all the equivalent cord models are inserted in a whole tire model. To solve this problem, a global–local analysis [3,22–25] was conducted. The global model used rebar elements in the belt to reduce the number of required elements when modeling the whole tire, and the local model used one of the equivalent cord models proposed in the present study to implement the second and third layers of the tire belt. Finally, the strains obtained using the equivalent cord models were compared with the strains obtained using other models.The material used in the cords in this study is steel, and each of the cords consists of two 0.25mm diameter wires and five 0.35mm diameter wires. The wires form a helical shape twisted once every 16mm. The following Eq. (1) is used to describe the geometry of this cord:(1){x=rcos(at+θ)y=rsin(at+θ)z=Lt,0≤t≤1where r is the distance from the center of the cord to the center of the wire; a is the number of times the wire is twisted; θ is the phase, which is used to adjust the location of individual wires, and L is the length of the entire cord. From the wire cord geometry, an FE model was created as shown inFig. 2.Tensile and bending tests were conducted on actual cords. To verify the accuracy of the wire cord model, the tests were simulated using the wire cord model. The tensile test was conducted using an Instron 4301 machine, as shown inFig. 3. The stress–strain curve obtained while stretching the cord until it broke was compared with the stress–strain curve obtained using the wire cord model. The bending test was conducted using a Teledyne Taber 150-D machine, as shown inFig. 4. A cord of 70mm long was fixed to the center of the tester, and the disk was rotated 15° to obtain the reaction moment generated by the rotation. The same boundary condition was applied in the FEA of the wire cord model, and the reaction moment generated during the analysis was compared with the reaction moment obtained in the test.Fig. 5 shows the stress–strain curves obtained from the tensile test of the cord and the tensile analysis of the wire cord model. In the simulation, a penalty contact was defined to prevent severe penetration between wires. In the plot, a nonlinear section appears at low strain levels due to the gap between the wires. As the tension increases, the gap narrows, and the wires come into contact with one another; the nonlinear section disappears, and the stress increases linearly until the cord is plastically deformed. In the wire cord model, nonlinear behavior at low strain levels was implemented by adjusting the spaces between the wires, and plastic deformation was implemented by defining a flow stress in the materials. The wire cord model results show a difference of 55.5MPa at 1.10% strain when compared to the test results.The reaction moment obtained from the bending test equipment shown in Fig. 4 was also compared with that of the FEA. The moment obtained from the analysis was 0.012945Nm, which was 2.22% different from the test result of 0.013239Nm.To conduct an FEA of the whole tire, if the belt cords were represented by using the verified wire cord model, about 2 million elements (each wire cord model needs about 20,000 elements, and there are about 1370 cords in the whole tire) would be necessary only to model belt cords, making the whole tire analysis practically impossible. To solve this problem, an equivalent cord model must be developed that behaves the same as the wire cord model, but has a simpler configuration. The tension behavior of the cords is similar to that of solid cylindrical cords with the same effective cross-sectional area, but their bending behavior is more flexible than solid cylindrical cords. Therefore, to simulate the behavior of cords, in the present study, a truss cord model was developed using solid elements and truss elements as shown inFig. 6. The solid elements were assumed to be linear elastic and isotropic, and the truss elements were created at the center of the cord.Because a truss element can produce only axial force, it affects the tension characteristics of the truss cord model but not the bending characteristics. Therefore, the Young׳s modulus of the solid elements can be obtained from the equation for the deformation of a beam during bending. The deflection occurring at one end of a beam with the other end fixed to a wall when a load P is imposed is shown in Eq. (2).(2)v=PL33EIwhere L is the length of the beam, E is the Young׳s modulus, and I is the second moment of inertia of the cross-section. If the values of P and v obtained from the cord bending analysis are substituted into Eq. (2), the Young׳s modulus of the solid element necessary to represent the bending behavior of the wire cord model can be obtained.The Young׳s modulus of the truss elements can be obtained from the equation modeling the tensile behavior. The wire cord model and the truss cord model should generate the same tensile force when the same amount of tensile strain is applied, and the tensile force that the cord carries is the sum of the tensile forces that solid elements and truss elements carry. Thus, it can be easily proved that Young׳s modulus of the cord is also the sum of that of solid elements and that of truss elements, as shown in Eq. (3).(3)Ecord=Esolid+EtrussWhen the Young׳s modulus of the solid elements obtained earlier is subtracted from the Young׳s modulus of the wire cord model, the Young׳s modulus of the truss element is obtained. In this way, the Young׳s modulus can be obtained for the solid and truss elements of the truss cord model to produce the same tension and bending behavior as the wire cord model. Although the effect of the truss elements was ignored in the bending deformation, in the actual bending analysis, the truss elements deform along with the solid elements, altering the slope of the shaft of the trusses and thereby affecting the bending behavior slightly. Therefore, the Young׳s modulus of the solid elements as determined above was decreased slightly, and the Young׳s modulus of the truss elements was increased slightly.In order to realize the low bending stiffness another equivalent cord model in which the solid elements have different tensile and compressive Young׳s moduli was proposed in this paper; tensile Young׳s modulus is higher than compressive Young׳s modulus. Under bending the location of the neutral axis is off centered, and the tensile region is smaller than the compressive region as shown inFig. 7.In this beam the moment can be obtained from Eq. (4).(4)M=∫AσxydA=∫tenσxydA+∫compσxydA=κ(Eten∫teny2dA+Eten∫compy2dA)=κ(EtenIten+EcompIcomp)where κ is the curvature, and Eq. (5) is valid if the deflection v is not very large.(5)κ=d2vdx2Plugging Eq. (5) into Eq. (4) results in Eq. (6).(6)(EtenIten+EcompIcomp)d2vdx2=MIntegrating Eq. (6) twice results in the relation between the load P and the deflection v as in Eq. (7).(7)P=3(EtenIten+EcompIcomp)L3vEtenin Eq. (7) could be determined from the stiffness of the linear region of Fig. 5, and Ecompcould be determined from the bending analysis and Eq. (9). As Ecompchanges, so do the tensile region, the compressive region, Itenand Icomp. However, the force equilibrium along the axial direction should be satisfied as shown in Eq. (8) from which the ratio of Ecompto Etencould be obtained as a function of θnas in Eq. (9). As shown in Fig. 7, θnis the angle of the neutral axis location from the horizontal axis.(8)∫tenσxdA+∫compσxdA=∫tenEtenκydA+∫compEcompκydA=0(9)EcompEten=∫θnπ2(sinθ−sinθn)cos2θdθ−∫−π2θn(sinθ−sinθn)cos2θdθItenand Icompcan be also expressed as a function of θnas Eqs. (10) and (11).(10)Iten=∫teny2dA=2r4{π16−θn8+sin4θn32−23sinθncos3θn+sin2θn[π4−θn2−sin2θn4]}(11)Icomp=∫compy2dA=2r4{π16+θn8−sin4θn32+23sinθncos3θn+sin2θn[π4+θn2+sin2θn4]}(12)P=3EtenIten(θn)L3v(1+h(θn))h(θn)=Ecomp(θn)Icomp(θn)EtenIten(θn)Plugging Eqs. (9)–(11) into Eq. (7) results in a relation between the load P and the deflection v as a function of θnas in Eq. (12). Thus, θncould be determined by plugging the load P and deflection v obtained from the bending analysis, and subsequently, Ecompcould be determined from Eq. (9). θnturned out to be 32.3° by plugging Eten, which was 164.8GPa from wire cord model, into Eq. (12). With θnand Eten, Ecompcould be easily determined to be 9.78GPa from Eq. (9).However, if the compressive Young׳s modulus and the tensile Young׳s modulus were defined as two different values, a numerical instability would occur. Thus, from a strain of −0.0001 to 0.0, Young׳s modulus was defined to vary linearly. Since this bilinear cord model could not realized by any built-in material model in ABAQUS, it was defined through a user material subroutine UMAT.To verify the accuracy of the equivalent cord models, tension and bending analyses were conducted, and the results were compared with those of the wire cord model. The cords are subjected to tension when they are inserted into the tire during manufacture, and because the wires come into contact with one another, the nonlinear behavior in the initial section in Fig. 5 does not occur [14]. Additionally, no plastic deformation occurs in the cords because the amount of deformation in the cords inside the tire is limited. Thus, only the slope of the linear section of the stress–strain curves obtained using the wire cord model and the equivalent cord models was compared. The slopes obtained from the truss cord model, the bilinear cord model and the wire cord model were 166.4GPa, 162.7GPa, and 164.8GPa, respectively: the difference in the slope of the two equivalent cord models from that of the wire cord model was only 0.98% and 1.29%.In bending analysis, the truss cord model and the wire cord model showed a linear load-deflection behavior, but the bilinear cord model showed a non-linear load-deflection behavior in the initial load stage due to the continuously varying Young׳s modulus. The difference in load of the two equivalent models from that of the wire cord model was only 0.000461N and 0.00304N.Note that the truss cord model and the bilinear cord model result in the same tensile and bending behaviors as the wire cord model in terms of the force-deflection or moment-rotation relation, but the local behavior near the surface of the truss cord model is slightly different from that of the bilinear cord model because the tensile elastic modulus of the truss cord model is the same as its compressive elastic modulus but the tensile modulus of the bilinear cord model is larger than its compressive elastic modulus.The analysis of the whole tire would be still difficult even when the equivalent cord models are used. A truss cord model and a bilinear cord model needs only 630 elements and 1120 elements, respectively, which are a lot less than 20,000 elements in a wire cord model. However, a whole tire model needs about 50 million elements because rubber in the tire needs to be fine meshed, especially around the belt edge to obtain the strains accurately. To solve this problem, a global–local analysis was conducted using the submodeling technique in ABAQUS. In the present study, the whole tire was used in the global model, and the 5° section of the tire belt shown inFig. 8 was used in the local model. The x-axis is the radial direction, and the z-axis is the forward direction, and the y-axis is in the going-into the page direction as shown in Fig. 8. Because rebar elements can be used to describe the overall behavior of a belt [4], the belt in the global model was modeled using rebar elements. The slope of the linear section of the wire cord model tension curve was used to define the Young׳s modulus of the rebar elements. In the local model, the belt was modeled using one of the equivalent cord models proposed in Sections 3.1 and 3.2. For comparison with the equivalent cord models, a local model was also constructed based on a solid cord model consisting only of solid elements.The solid cord model was the same as the truss cord model shown in Fig. 6 but without the truss elements at the center, and its Young׳s modulus was determined to be the slope of the linear part of the force-deflection curve shown in Fig. 5. Thus, the solid cord model was expected to show almost the same tensile behavior as the wire cord model, but to show stiffer bending behavior than the wire cord model. After a rolling analysis for 120° rotation was conducted using the global model, a local model analysis was conducted using the submodeling technique, using the displacements obtained in the global model as the boundary conditions for the local model.Fig. 9 shows the strains obtained from the global model analysis using rebar elements. The strain components are shown based on the coordinate system shown in Fig. 8. In the global analysis results, the shear strain was high in the zx-plane, especially around 1s when the local model went through the contact zone, but the other strain components were relatively small. This is the same strain pattern that has generally been found in the belt edges of tires [4]. The strains obtained from the truss cord model are shown inFig. 10. As in the results of the global analysis, the zx shear strain was the highest, and the other strain components were relatively small. The zx shear strain obtained using the truss cord model was found to be approximately 74.5% greater on average than the zx shear strain obtained from the global model using the rebar elements. This is because the rebar element belt model used in the global model cannot represent bending behavior. The strains obtained from the bilinear cord model are shown inFig. 11. As in the previous case, the zx shear strain component was highest, and it was 87.2% larger than that obtained from the global analysis using the rebar elements.Fig. 12 shows the strains obtained from the local analysis using the solid cord model. As in the above two cases, the zx shear strain is highest, and the other strains are relatively small. However, the zx shear strain was 108.7% larger than that obtained from the global analysis using the rebar elements. This result occurs because the solid element cord model has a higher bending stiffness than the actual cords. The importance of accurately modeling the cords is confirmed by the fact that the calculated zx shear strain varies significantly due to the different cord modeling methods. The strains shown in Figs. 9–12 cannot be verified by tests because it is impossible to measure the strains inside the tire. However, it is noteworthy that the wire cord model was verified by comparing the tensile and bending test results and simulation results using the wire cord model. Additionally, it was proven that the truss cord model and bilinear model resulted in almost the same tensile and bending behaviors as the wire cord model. Therefore, it can be said that the strains obtained by using the truss cord model and the bilinear cord model shown in Figs. 10 and 11 are more accurate than those obtained by using the solid element cord model and the rebar element cord model.In tires, cracks usually form at the belt edges; these cracks grow, eventually leading to fracture. To access the possibility of fracture due to crack formation and growth at the belt edges, predicting the zx shear strain near the belt edges is very important. Therefore, by determining the zx shear strain at the belt edges using one of the two equivalent cord models proposed in the present study, the belt design can be altered to reduce the zx shear strain, and consequently the durability of tires can be improved.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
In the present study, a wire cord model representing the behavior of actual cords was developed based on tensile and bending test results. However, because this model was too complicated in configuration and had too many elements to be used for tire rolling analysis, two equivalent cord models were developed with the same tension and bending behaviors as the wire cord model.Global–local analyses were conducted using the equivalent cord models to calculate the strain occurring in a 5° region of the tire belt. The strains obtained from the local model using the two equivalent cord models (the truss element model and the bilinear element model) and the solid cord model were compared with those obtained from the global model using the rebar elements. The zx shear strain was highest at the belt edges regardless of the cord model. However, the zx shear strain using the solid element cord model was highest, followed by the bilinear cord model, the truss cord model, and the rebar element model. However, the strains obtained from the truss cord model were similar to those obtained from the bilinear cord model.The bending behavior of actual cords cannot be simulated using a solid element cord model and rebar element cord model because a solid element cord model shows stiffer bending behavior and a rebar element cord model does not show any bending stiffness, and thus the strains occurring at the belt edges cannot be accurately predicted. When a rolling tire is analyzed using one of the two equivalent models developed in the present study, the strains occurring at the belt edges can be more accurately predicted than using the solid element cord model or the rebar element cord model, and consequently the durability of a tire could be improved by reducing the strains through modification of the design or material properties of parts in a tire.