@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
On the FE modeling of soil–blade interaction in tillage operations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#
Finite element investigation of tillage tools and soil interaction.3D nonlinear finite element analysis model behavior of moving blade in soil.Contact elements to model connection between soil–blade and soil–soil surfaces.Deformation of soil in front of the blade during soil–blade interaction.Comparing the FEA results with analytical soil mechanics results.

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#
Finite element analysis,Soil–blade contact modeling,Blade force,

@&#ABSTRACT@&#
In this manuscript a finite element (FE) investigation of soil–blade interaction is presented. The soil is considered as an elastic–plastic material with the non-associated Drucker–Prager constitutive law. A separation procedure to model the cutting of soil and a method of calculating the forces acting on the blade are proposed and discussed in detail. The procedure uses a separation criterion that becomes active at consecutive nodes on the predefined separation surfaces. In order to mimic soil–blade sliding and soil–soil cutting phenomena contact elements with different properties are applied. Only rectangular shape blades are used in the simulation in order to verify the methodology by comparing the FE results with available analytical predictions, and examine the model׳s convergence. It is believed that the approach presented can be used to investigate the soil–tool interactions of real and more complex blade geometries and soil conditions and ultimately for improving design of blades used in tillage operations.

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#
According to [1], about half of energy used for crop production in farming is consumed by tillage operation because of high draft force generated when breaking and loosening of the soil occur. Most soil–blade interaction research [2] were focused on developing models to predict the draft force for different soil conditions, tool geometry, and operating parameters such as depth of operation, tool direction, etc. Rather significant effects of these conditions and parameters on the force prediction have been demonstrated experimentally in several research works [3–6].Analytical considerations of soil–blade interaction are typically restricted to straight blades and are based on a simplified limit analysis. Nevertheless, when combined with experimental findings, they are widely used in design. The resulting formulas defining forces on blades during tillage operation can be found in [7] for two dimensional problems, and in [8] for three dimensional problems.The blade shape obviously affects the form and size of the soil failure zone and consequently forces on the blade. Therefore, blades of more complicated geometries should be considered in optimization of the tillage operation. In particular, it is known that curved blades work better than straight blades. However, as already mentioned, any prediction of forces using analytical models would be limited to only a straight rectangular blade shape, and therefore not particularly useful in improving efficiency of tillage operations.The FE method has obviously a potential of modeling the interaction between soil and blades of arbitrary shapes and to find the blade force during this interaction. Also, such techniques can be used to obtain information about the failure zone, field of stress, soil deformation, acting forces, etc. for any condition of soil. Several models based on FE to simulate soil–tool interaction and to obtain response of tools during these interactions have been presented in [9–18].Two major challenges to be considered in the FE approach are the mechanical behavior of soil and the criteria for soil separation due to the cutting action of the blade [19]. Several models were proposed for simulating the constitutive law for soil; one of them is the Drucker–Prager model that assumes a non-associated elastic plastic behavior [1]. From the numerical viewpoint soil separation is somewhat similar to the problem of cutting chips in machining operations [20–22], where various geometrical and physical separation criteria were developed based on critical values of displacements, strains, stresses, or strain energy to estimate the beginning of separation. A new criterion that uses the limit compacting strains in the direction of cutting is proposed here. When using this criterion to the FE model the soil particles are separated ‘discretely’ at consecutive nodes starting from the node that is nearest to the cutting edge of the blade.The overall objective of this research work is to develop a simulation procedure for modeling the soil–tool interaction for arbitrary shape of the blade. Here the proposed procedure is tested on the straight blades in order to compare it with available analytical/experimental results [7–8]. In particular, the use of contact elements, modeling sliding and cutting as the blade moves through the soil is explained in detail, as well as the method of calculating the draft force for the separation process that in fact takes place discretely at successive nodes.The soil selected for this study is the type of soil commonly found in Saskatchewan. The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, theoretical background and FE modeling is explained, Section 3 provides results and discussion, and Section 4 is the conclusion.In this section, first the plasticity based constitutive law for soil is briefly outlined. Then the FE modeling and handling of the soil–blade interaction is explained. In particular, the procedure of simulating the cutting process (which is continuous) through the soil (described by a discrete FE mesh) is discussed in more details.The material behavior in the theory of plasticity is governed by the yielding function (or the yield criterion) and the plastic flow rule typically derived from the plastic potential. If the plastic potential is the same as the yield function, then the plastic flow rule is called associated, with the increments of plastic strains normal to the yield surface. Otherwise, the flow rule is called non-associated with the direction of increments of plastic strains normal to the surface representing the plastic potential, but not to the yield function.Drucker–Prager and Mohr–Coulomb are the two most commonly used failure criteria for soil in a plastic stress–strain region. There is a main difference between these two criteria which makes Drucker–Prager a preferred criterion in soil analysis: the Mohr–Coulomb criterion is difficult to use for plastic finite element analysis in 3D, since it is not a smooth continuous function, and has several sharp corners. On the other hand, the Drucker–Prager criterion has a conical surface in 3D and has smooth surface which is more suitable to be used.The Drucker–Prager yield function (also referred to as extended/modified Drucker–Prager criteria, for example in [23]) is pressure dependent, which makes it applicable for geotechnical materials. It can be expressed as follows:(1)f(σ)=βI1+J2−k=0wherekandβare material constants, andI1is the first invariant of the stress tensor (alsoI1=3σm, whereσmis mean or hydrostatic pressure) whileJ2is the second invariant of the stress deviator tensor defined using the principal stresses(σ1,σ2,σ3)as follows:(2)I1=σ1+σ2+σ3(3)J2=16[(σ1−σ2)2+(σ1−σ3)2+(σ3−σ2)2]For soil the constantskandβare defined in terms ofcandϕ, the soil cohesion and the angle of internal friction respectively, as(4)k=6ccosϕ3(3−sinϕ)(5)β=2sinϕ3(3−sinϕ)The values ofcandϕcan be determined from triaxial test, in which the maximum shear stressτ′in the presence of normal stressσ′is recorded and graphed as sketched inFig. 1. The stressesτ′andσ′, which are shown in the inset, are often related to the minimum and maximum principal stresses (σ1andσ3respectively) via 2D stress transformations. In our case these stresses will typically be in the plane of the blade׳s motion. The limit values ofτ′andσ′, which are usually related linearly, can be interpreted asJ2and−I1respectively. The direction of inelastic slidingθis dependent on the internal friction through the relationshipθ≈45∘−ϕ/2. It should be noticed that the thick-solid line represents the yield criterion (1) for the mean stress in compression.In this research, the soil–blade interaction is modeled by the Drucker–Prager criteria with a non-associate flow rule controlled by the value of dilatancy angleν, which represents the volumetric expansion and frictional-dilatancy behavior of the material. If there is no volumetric expansion, thenν=0(shear type of deformation only), which corresponds the direction 3 (vertical) of the increments of plastic strain. On the other hand, for the flow rule associated with criterion (1) the increments of plastic strains would have direction 1 that contains shear deformation and dilatations characterized by the dilatancy angleν=ϕ. According to [19] for real materials angleνis usually less thanϕand should be within the limits0<ν<ϕas indicated by direction 2 (the values of parameters used in the paper are listed inTable 1).In the numerical analysis with the external load increasing a typical material behavior defined by this law is plotted with dotted curve. It starts with elastic deformations until the yield criterion is reached and then the curve lines up with the yield surface (pointsTiare on this surface). Plastic deformations generated along the yield surface may be considered as compacting.It should be noted that the yield criterion is not related to separation, which should be defined independently (but the stresses must be on the yield surface for the separation to happen). Since the separation status in FE can only be defined at nodes, the simulated separation process is ‘discrete’ in this sense that there would be some stress relieve when the status at a particular node is changed from initially connected to separated. For example if just before the first separation the stress state is defined byT1then just after separation it will be lowered and back in the elastic region. In this region the highest stress state, defined byB1, will be typically at the opening׳s tip, i.e., at the node to be separated next. Then after a further load increase (controlled here by the forced blade׳s displacement) the stress state is observed at the node that would separate next. This stress state must first reach the yield surface again and then followed it until arriving at pointT2where the separation criterion is met again. After separating at the subsequent node the stress state drops toB2, and so on (pointsB1,B2.. are further interpreted and discussed in Sections 2.2.3 and 2.2.4 and shown in Figs. 6 and 7). Therefore in the FE analysis the constitutive law for soil being cut is represented to be a line coinciding with the yield line and elastic ‘incisions’ inwards (T1B1in Fig. 1). This elastic line is representing separation at the consecutive nodal point. More details of the separation procedure are explained in the next section after the geometry of the FE model and the separation surfaces are presented.As mentioned in Section 1, the type of soil used in this research is sandy clay loam soil, which is commonly found in Saskatchewan farms. The soil behavior and subsequent modeling will depend on the soil properties; however the effects of soil volume changes cannot be neglected. As mentioned in [24], based on relative motion among soil particle during soil deformation, volumetric changes should be considered for soil modeling and any prediction of soil behavior. In FE modeling, this volume change behavior is controlled by the dilatancy angle which varies by soil density and its packing pressure. The typical range of dilatancy angle for granular soil is between 12° and −20° [25]. As shown in Table 1, in this research paper based on high density of soil and low packing pressure, the dilatancy angle is set at 20°.The properties of soil as given by [26] and steel blade that are used in this study are listed in Table 1. The elastic–plastic behavior of soil is completely defined by cohesion, internal friction angle, dilatancy angle, modulus of elasticity, specific weight, and Poisson׳s ratio. It should be mentioned that the water content has a significant effect on the soil cohesion which results from electrostatic bonds between soil particles. By increasing water content of soil, lubricating effect of moisture layers on soil particles increases, which will result in decreasing particular tensile resistance, and consequently decreasing soil cohesion [27]. The results will be affected by changing the properties of soil especially cohesion and internal friction angle and would be different if the values were different.In the FE general 3D model both soil and blade are represented by the hexahedral elements SOLID45 from the ANSYS [23] library of elements, which have 8 nodes and 3 degree of freedoms (DOF) at each node. The soil–blade connection is modeled by the contact elements CONTACT173 and TARGET170 placed along the separation surfaces as discussed in the next section. The model with the elasto-plastic constitutive law, the separation procedure, and with elastic incisions (see Fig. 1) requires a relatively large number of equilibrium iterations for convergence, therefore the calculations are generally long (typically lasting several hours). Therefore a number of meshing patterns (with high mesh density near the contact areas) were tried for balancing computational effort with accuracy of calculations. The effects of the element sizes on accuracy and convergence are discussed in the section presenting the results. In general only the models that can be considered converged are shown in this study.The so-called wide blades (with width about 10 times greater than the cutting depth) can be represented by 2-D models that obviously are much more numerically efficient and easier to interpret. In such models SOLID45 was replaced by the quadrilateral PLANE42 elements with the plane strain option, and for contact the CONTACT171 and TARGET169 elements were used. For wide blades the 2D models produced similar results as the corresponding 3D model, but at a fraction of the computational effort.Geometry of the 3D model is sketched inFig. 2. The model is parametric with several parameters defining the geometry of soil and tool. The soil block is Ls=300mm long, ws=300mm wide, and do=150mm deep. These dimensions were selected in such a way that the solution in the vicinity of the blade is not sensitive to the block׳s size. The block is divided into sub-blocks that can be meshed with different mesh densities. The maximum distance blade can travel while cutting the soil, also the length of contacts between upper and lower blocks of soil, is Lf=50mm (this dimension will be justified later). Parameter w1 is the width of cut soil (also the width of blade), w2 is the side width of soil block (andw1+2w2=ws). The depth of cut soil isd1, which is also the cutting depth of blade. Tilting of the blade with respect to the soil is defined by α, the rake angle.The starting point of blade׳s travel inside the soil block is denoted by Le=50mm+d1cosα. The blade׳s total height is h1=100mm. This parameter does not affect the cutting process. The ranges of d1=25–50mm, w1=20–160mm, and α=30–90° were examined.In the 2D models the geometry of soil and tool was defined by identical values ofLs,Lfandds. When comparing to 3D models the same values ofd1andαwere used in both models.A typical meshing pattern is indicated inFig. 3. Boundary conditions for such a model are as follows:1.Bottom nodes, atY=0, are fixed.Nodes on vertical boundaries parallel to the Y–X plane, atZ=0andZ=−(2w2+w1), are fixed.Nodes on vertical boundaries parallel to the Y–Z plane, at X=0 except cutting soil area are fixed.Nodes on vertical boundaries parallel to the Y–Z plane and X=Lsare fixed.The blade is fixed in Y and Z directions in order to limit blade motion in the X direction.The meshing shown in Fig. 3 (which can be considered typical) uses a total number of 3548 hexagonal elements and 392 contact elements. For comparison the corresponding 2D model uses 408 quadrilateral elements and 36 contact elementsThe soil is in contact with the blade on four surfaces shown inFig. 4. The soil separation takes place along surfaces 1 and 3 (the vertical cuts) and along surface 2 (the horizontal cut). These surfaces will be referred to as the separation surfaces, and the contact elements with bonding and sliding options are used to model these connections. On surface 4, however, the soil should be allowed to slide along the blade without separation. Therefore the contact elements with only sliding option should be used there. This surface will be referred to as the sliding surface.It should be noted that the separation surfaces are parallel to the direction of the blade׳s motion, while the sliding surface is parallel to the front of blade. For the numerical purposes the separation and sliding surfaces are actually modeled by two surfaces connected via the contact elements (and initially the nodes belonging to these two surfaces coincide). Such a configuration is indicated inFig. 5 (this picture is not to scale and only the line representing the horizontal separation surface is shown). Any relative soil motion takes place on these surfaces during the soil–blade interaction.The separation process is similar to the process of cutting chips in machining operations [20–22] or to the crack propagation process, i.e., there is always a small crack moving in front of the blade that allows the blade to travel through the soil (such a crack can be observed on the deformation pattern shown in Fig. 8). The nodes on the separation surface can move apart if a specified separation criterion is met. The distance u traveled by the blade׳s tip is measured fromLe, and its maximum value isLf.The elements above and below the expected separation surface are connected at nodes using the contact elements that allow to activate or deactivate the bonding forces between them. The highest stress/deformation level is observed always in the element which is at the tip of the opening and is of a particular interest during the whole simulation. At the beginning all bonding forces are active and this element (to be referred to as the tip element) is adjacent to the tip of blade. As the blade starts to move, stresses go through the elastic phase (see the broken line in Fig. 1) until the solid line representing the yielding condition (1) is reached (where the Drucker–Prager plasticity rules are followed). In the tip element the strain componentεx(in the direction of the blade׳s motion) is monitored continuously. The elasto-plastic process will continue untilεxreaches a predefined magnitude ofεc(which may be referred to as the limiting compacting strain) with the stress state reaching pointT1in Fig. 1. At this instant the force bonding the nodes at the opening׳s tip (of the tip element) is deactivated, and the node separate generating the first opening of length equal to the size of the element׳s side. This is also associated with the stresses being relieved to the state denoted by pointB1, which will again be inside the elastic range (i.e., inside the surface defined by the yielding condition), and a drop in the value ofεxbelowεc. With the blade moving forward the stress state will be increasing to reach the yielding condition again but at the new tip of opening that is now away from the blade׳s tip. The strainεxwill become equal toεcatT2and the node separate at this tip increasing the opening׳s length by the size of that element and causing the stress (and strain) relieve indicated by pointB2, and so on.As discussed in the next sections, the numerical experimentations indicate that for this type of soil ifεc≈0.3then the resultant draft force (the procedure to determine this force is discussed in the next section) was best matching the results obtained from the ‘engineering’ formulas presented in [7–8], and often used by the designers of tools for tillage operations. However the choice of limiting strain,εcis dependent on internal friction angle. By increasing internal friction angle the value of limiting strain increases almost linearly.Since the continuous process of cutting the soil is modeled ‘discretely’ (by disjoining consecutive nodes on the separation surface), the local stiffness in the vicinity of the opening׳s tip changes abruptly with the system appearing to be slightly stiffer before the separation and slightly softer after separation. Such effects will be taken into account in the next section that presents the method of calculating the draft force required to move the blade through soil.The separation procedure also affects how the stress state in soil follows the Drucker–Prager criterion (1), which in theσ1,σ3coordinates (i.e., inσmin,σmaxrespectively and assumingσ2at the instant of separation) can be represented by ellipsoidal yielding curves growing or shrinking dependently on the magnitude of the current pressure. Such curves for soil are significantly affected by the internal frictionϕ, and generally shift towards compressive stress components.For the case of the rake angleα=90∘, and for the tip element at the nodes about to be separated (i.e., corresponding to pointsT1,T2,T3, andT4in Fig. 1) such curves are plotted inFig. 6a. Only a relatively small portion of the curves in the location A–A and redrawn in Fig. 6b were used in this case. For comparison the curve forϕ=0(independent of the pressure and intersecting theσ1,σ3coordinates at±2c) is also indicated. The figure shows some details of the stress state history for particular material points due to a continuous quasi-static motion of the blade.For the point that initially is at the blade׳s tip the history starts at Origin (no stress) and ends atT1(just before the first separation). Then for the next point to separate the history starts atB1(just after the first separation) and ends atT2(just before the second separation, and so on).It should be noted that the curves for the statesTiare in general relatively close to each other (especially in the scale shown in Fig. 6b), and are getting closer with consecutive separations. Such curves essentially coincide after about five separations indicating that the simulation of the cutting process stabilizes, i.e., it becomes independent of the preliminary phase that starts from the unloaded state (this will be used in calculating the draft force from the plots as discussed inFig. 7).From the numerical point of view, the simulation with such stress histories demands larger number of equilibrium iterations (we used the standard updated Newton–Raphson method) and a very careful monitoring of the convergence at each load step.As already mentioned the analysis is quasi-static, the stress–strain states in the whole FE model are calculated for increasing horizontal distance traveled by the blade (denoted by u in Fig. 5). The forces (draft and lift) acting on the blade are determined by properly integrating the stress components. The increments of u are assumed in steps (representing as the ‘load’ steps in ANSYS), which are larger between the separation instances and smaller around the separation. The size of each subsequent step can be estimated from theεxreadings of the previous step. The values of such steps are quite important from the numerical viewpoint since too small steps may result in a substantial increase of the time of calculations.For an assumed mesh size a typical calculated draft force depends on the distance traveled as shown in Fig. 7. The calculations start as elastic (OE range) with all the bonding forces active (and therefore all the soil elements still connected), enter the plastic deformation at some point E, and then go to inelastic phase until deformation in the vicinity of the tip of the blade (point A) measured asεx, reaches the value ofεc. This happens when the blade׳s displacement and the corresponding draft force reach the level defined as pointT1.Then the bonding force in the first node is deactivated (or the elements above and below the separation plane closest to the blade are allowed to separate) that brings about a drop in the magnitude of the draft force to the value corresponding to pointB1.The opening equal to the element size along the separation surface is created and the stresses and deformation in its vicinity are reduced enough (see the explanations in the previous section) for the analysis to start atB1from an elastic level. Then first the yielding condition is reached, and next the instant whenεxincreases again toεc, which takes place at the blade׳s displacement and the draft force denoted by pointT2. Deactivating the bonding force in the second node bring the draft force to the level indicated by pointB2(in the elastic range), and so on. The elements separated in the first and second deactivations are indicated with the broken lines.Fig. 7 represents a typical relationship for the draft force versus the blade׳s displacement covering five separations (i.e., the cutting/opening runs through five elements) as obtained from the simulation.Some details of the meshing and opening after three separations are shown inFig. 8. One can note in the enlarged picture that the elements above the separation line have shrunk about 30% in the horizontal direction, which is the consequence of assuming εc=0.3.The separation simulated by the FE model takes place sequentially at the nodes on the separation surfaces, as already discussed. When the bonding force at a particular node is deactivated the system suddenly changes its overall stiffness resulting in the draft force drop indicated by a jumpTi−Bi. It should be noted that in the ‘discrete’ modeling the separation forceF(Ti)is calculated for an underestimated length of the opening in front of the blade (i.e., shorter than for continues separation), and for an overestimated bonding force in the node to separate. Similarly, forceF(Bi)is calculated for an overestimated length of the opening and for an underestimated bonding force at the same node. Therefore one may interpretF(Ti)as an upper limit of the draft force calculated continuously, whileF(Bi)as a lower limit of that force.How much the draft force is over- and underestimated (or the differenceF(Ti)−F(Bi)) depends on the element size e on the separation plane (see Fig. 8). However, as our numerical experimentations will indicate (to be presented in the next section), the average forceF¯=[(F(Ti)+F(Bi)]/2for e small enough appears to be essentially independent of meshing. Therefore it can be considered as an approximation of the draft force for the blade׳s displacement u at the instant of a particular separation. This force is plotted as a broken line,F¯in Fig. 7; note that it becomes almost constant even after one or two separation. Such a force is denoted byFD, and it should represent the draft force to characterize the soil–tool interaction for particular conditions assumed in the simulation.Since the shape of nonlinear portionsE−T1andBi−Ti+1of the draft force–displacement characteristic are of less importance, the plots in the next sections will be simplified to show only pointsTiandBi(to demonstrate how they are getting closer with smaller e), and thenF¯and the value ofFD.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#
